Maine Community 
College System 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 t Fax (207) 629-4048 t mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Curry, Representative Roberts 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business 
FROM: Dr. Janet Sortor, Vice President and Chief Academic Officer 
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 1713 
DATE: May 12, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, I am Janet Sortor, the Vice President and Chief 
Academic Officer for the Maine Community College System, and I am providing testimony in support 
of LD 1713 on behalf of the Maine Community College System. 
Educating the skilled trades workforce has been a central part of the mission of Maine’s community 
colleges since our inception as vocational technical institutes. All seven colleges provide some form of 
electrical technology education and six of the colleges have programs that speciﬁcally educate 
residential, commercial, and industrial electricians, providing the 576 hours of classroom and hands-on 
education within their curriculum that qualiﬁes graduates to sit for the exam and pursue licensure. In the 
last 20 years, 2,051 students have graduated from these certiﬁcate, diploma, and associate degree 
electrical programs. Currently, there are 506 students enrolled in these programs. Our electrical 
programs are a critical educational resource for Maine. 
Recently the Electricians ’ Examining Board began to apply a new interpretation of the language in the 
original statute in determining which of our students were qualiﬁed to sit for the exam and would be 
credited with the 4,000 hours of work experience. That new interpretation differed signiﬁcantly from the 
interpretation that had been consistently applied for the last forty plus years. At issue was basically a 
question based on a grammatical error in the statute: what does the word accredited modify, program or 
college? In terms of regional accreditation in higher education, there was no question: the electrical 
programs of the colleges are not, and have never been, accredited; it is the college that is accredited. 
Moreover, while the statute was enacted at a time when only diploma and associate degrees in applied 
science were offered by the colleges and certiﬁcate electrical programs were added in the early 1990s to 
expand our capacity to educate electricians, all of these programs fall under the colleges ’ accreditation, 
deliver the 576 hours within their curriculum, and were understood by the EEB to be a “community 
college electrical program. ” This reinterpretation would have signiﬁcantly impacted our students, our 
programs, and our ability to meet the workforce needs of employers in Maine. 
It was determined through our great collaborative work with Commissioner Head and the staff at OPOR 
that the best way to ensure that MCCS can continue to train electricians prepared for and able to sit for 
the exam as we have for the last forty plus years is to ﬁx the language so that there is no room for 
confusion. That is what the proposed legislation does: it makes it clear that accredited modiﬁes 
community college. We are proud of our electrical programs and the faculty who lead them. They 
deliver a high-quality education that meets the 576-hour course of study adopted by the board and enjoy 
consistently high student pass rates on the EEB exam. These programs are a critical resource in training 
the residential, commercial, and industrial electricians that are in such high demand by employers in 
Maine. Thank you.
