STATE 0F MAINE 
,9 A DEPARTMENT or PROFESSIONAL- 
S ‘ 
AND FINANCEAL REGULATION “'0 
‘gs , OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
7 REGULATION e’ 
.~ -,_. .. 
35 STATE HOUSE STATION Arms L Head 
Jana T Mms AUGUSTA> MAINE Conimissioner, DPFR 
@<>v@m<>r 04333-0035 i)ir€CtOi' , OPOR 
TESTIMONY OF JOAN COHEN 
DEPUTY, DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
IN SUPPORT OF 
LD 1713 “AN AC T T O UPDATE ELECTRICAL EDUCATION AND OTHER LICENSURE 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICIANS” 
SPONSORED BY REPRESENTATIVE TIFFANY ROBERTS 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS 
PUBLIC HEARING: MAY 12, 2023, 9:30 AM 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Joan Cohen andI 
am the Deputy at the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation (DPF R). The 
Electricians ’ Examining Board is one of the regulatory boards within the Ofﬁce of Professional and 
Occupational Regulation (OPOR). I am here to speak in support of LD 1713 on behalf of DPFR. 
This is a Department bill that is primarily an effort to make the licensing section of the statute 
more understandable for applicants, licensees, and regulators. 
By way of history, the impetus of the bill was to resolve an ambiguous statute that resulted in 
conﬂicting statutory interpretations. In Spring of 2022, OPOR hired and trained a new staff for 
the EEB board. Once the new staff began reviewing and processing applications for the 
journeyman examination, there was a question as to whether the statute permitted graduates from 
a one-year certiﬁcate program to satisfy the education requirement in the same was as graduates 
from a two-year associate degree (“AD”) program. 
Staff met with representatives of the community colleges who made the case that the graduates of 
these condensed programs had been approved for licensure for decades and that the condensed 
certiﬁcate programs met all of the electrical education requirements while not having to meet the 
rest of the academic requirements of the AD program. 
As regulators we follow the letter of the statute ~ but we also recognized that the statute was 
OFHCES: GARDNER ANNEX, 76 N()R'I‘HERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 
iiaomi; (207)624~8500 (V0¥CIi} Tyyusgrs; cwmaéne RCMY71; FAXI (207)624 8690 
W\‘\"W.MAINR.G()\//PPR/PROFESSIONAl,l,lCI €NSl?\3G/
ambiguous, and a strict reading would lead to an undesirable conclusion — given the growth of 
these community college certiﬁcate programs and given the need for producing more electricians. 
To that end, we mutually agreed to propose a statutory change. 
Separately, we met with our colleagues at the Department of Labor, and in the course of our 
discussions identiﬁed a mutual confusion over the approval process for DOL apprenticeship 
program curricula. Again, in the interest of clarity and also responding to the need to train and 
license more electricians, we agreed to propose a statutory ﬁx. 
In the process of drafting a bill to address those speciﬁc issues, staff realized that due to a series 
of amendments over multiple decades, the licensing section of the statute was not organized ina 
logical and understandable way and desperately needed an overhaul. 
Now that you have that background, I want to make clear what this bill does not do. The bill does 
not change the scope of practice of any license category. It does not change the requirements for 
licensure. It does not create new types of licenses. Nor does it change who can supervise or who 
can be supervised. Our goal is to keep this bill primarily reﬂective of current law except in a few 
small, and hopefully non-controversial, ways. 
We reorganized each of the licensing categories as follows: 
1. Scope of practice 
2. The requirements to qualify to sit for the examination 
3. The requirements needed to qualify for a license. 
To address the community college certiﬁcate program issue, the bill clariﬁes that individual who 
completes an electrical program at an accredited community college consisting of a 576-hour 
course of study as adopted by the board is credited 4,000 hours of work experience, the same as 
an individual completing an AD program in electrical education. 
To address the apprenticeship issue, the bill clariﬁes that the board will issue an apprentice 
electrician license to an individual who provides evidence of being registered in any apprenticeship 
program approved and validated by the US DOL, and that any individual applying for the 
journeyman electrician license who completed an apprenticeship program can qualify by 
completing a course of study approved by the board or one approved as part of a DOL-approved 
National Guideline for Apprenticeship Standards. These changes afﬁrms that graduates from out 
of state DOL approved apprenticeship programs may qualify for licensure. 
The bill defers the establishment of minimum curriculum requirements to the Board’s rulemaking 
authority. OPOR believes this will permit the Board to be nimble in reacting to changes in the 
curriculum as technology evolves. Additionally, it is burdensome and time consuming for the 
Board to approve each individual program’s course of study. Establishing a minimum curriculum 
in rule will free up Board meeting time to address other pressing business such as addressing 
consumer and inspector-generated complaints. 
Section 6 (C) of the bill gives the Board explicit authority to require an examination to obtaina 
limited electrician license. Such authority is explicit for the other categories of licensure— 
journeyman-in-training, journeyman and master. Currently the board relies on its general statutory
2
authority] but aﬁer consultation with agency legal counsel OPOR determined it would be best that 
this authority be stated explicitly. 
The bill also clariﬁes the requirement that an applicant for licensure must submit evidence of 
completion of a “current” National Electrical Code course to mean that an applicant had completed 
the course within two (2) years of applying for licensure. The law today does not defne “current, ” 
and this has caused some confusion for applicants, educators and the regulated community. 
Finally, I want to point out one section to the Committee that has caused us some confusion and 
we are hoping that the stakeholders in this room may be able to help us better understand. 
Section 1202-B(4)(B)(2) of the bill relates to licensure to become a journeyman and is word for 
word current law. It reads as follows. 
Z) Completion of at least 8,000 work hours in the ﬁeld of electrical installations asa 
licensed helper electrician or completion of at least 8,000 work hours in electrical 
installations and completion of a 576-hour course of study as adopted by the board; 
The “or” can be read to say that a person can become a journeyman with only 8,000 work hours 
as a licensed helper and no education. In an effort to not eliminate any current pathways to 
licensure we kept that language exactly as it was in statute. However, we welcome input from 
stakeholders. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions now or at the work 
session. We will have the board manager and other staff available to answer questions at the 
work session. 
1 
32 M.R.S. §§ 1153-B(l) and 1203 sets forth the Board’s general authority to require an approved examination for 
applicants for licensure.
3
