KENNEBEC VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
YOUR BRIDGE TO A BRIGHTER FUTURE 
TO: Senator Cuny, Representative Roberts 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business 
FROM: Paul Davis Jr., Chair of the Electrical Technology Program, KVCC 
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 1713 
DATE: May 12, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, I am Paul Davis Jr, a full-time 
faculty member and department chair of the Electrical Technology program at Kennebec Valley 
Community College. I have trained over 500 electricians in my tenure as an electrical instructor 
at Kennebec Valley Community College and have served in the past as a board member on the 
Maine Electricians Examining board. I am providing testimony in support of LD 1713 on behalf 
of Kennebec Valley Community College. 
Thank you for your volunteerism and service to our state. Also, thank you for the opportunity to 
heard today regarding LD 1713. 
Clarifying the language around the requirements for electrical licensure is essential. 
Part B of §1202-B — 3, the issuance of the Journeyman in Training License should be supported 
as proposed by LD 1713. The proposed changes will encourage graduates of electrical 
teclmology programs throughout the state to take advantage of the trainee license, in turn putting 
more electricians in the workforce. History is that most graduates do not take advantage of the 
Journeyman in Training option, they instead wait until they qualify for the full J ourneyman ’s 
License. For the beneﬁt of the committee, here is a brief clariﬁcation - a Journeyman in training 
can work unsupervised while being employed by a Master electrician, but a Journeyman in 
training cannot supervise others, such as helpers. A full Journeyman can work unsupervised as 
well while in the employment of a Master electrician but may supervise helpers. Maintaining 
these two separate licensing is essential to public safety. The supervision of electrical installation 
should only be left to those with solid experience in the ﬁeld and proven competency through 
full licensure. Public safety must come ﬁrst. 
Lastly, I will discuss the Journeyman ’s license requirements. Part B of §1202-B — 4, it also 
should be supported as Written. 
Students who are enrolled in Electrical Technology programs throughout the state are required to 
complete a very rigorous curriculum. Awarding these graduates 4000 hours towards the 
Joumeyman ’s license is an appropriate measure. As a reminder, the full Journeyman work 
experience requirement is 8000 hours. 
The responsibility of electrical installations is enormous. Incorrectly installed electrical systems 
can result in ﬁre or electrocution. Proper training and licensure are one way to keep the public
‘
and property safe. With full conﬁdence I can say that graduates of Electrical Technology programs 
Within the Maine Community College System are ready for the workforce with the equivalency of two 
years of experience in their career portfolio. We provide a strong theo1y/ lab-based environment for 
introductory electrical courses as well as real life lab environments for residential, commercial, and 
industrial wiring courses. 
Thank you, committee members, for the opportunity to be heard today. It is without hesitation that feel 
the committee should support LD 1713 as Written.
