 
TO: Senator Curry, Representative Roberts  
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
FROM: Richard Reardon, PE, Department Chair of Electrical Programs at Eastern Maine Community College  
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 1713  
DATE: May 12, 2023  
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business, I am Richard Reardon, the Department Chair of Electrical Programs at East ern 
Maine Community College, and I am providing testimony in  support of LD 1713 . 
As a lifelong resident of the greater Bangor area, a former hiring manager of EMCC graduates, a licensed Master 
Electrician, a license d Professional Engineer, and an educator with over 50 years of electrical experience I feel uniquely 
qualified to provide testimony related to LD 1713.  Having taught at EMCC for the last 23 years I can confidently say that 
our graduates are well prepared to enter the workforce and install electri cal systems in a safe and workmanship -like 
manor adhering to all codes and standards.  
Educating electricians to serve the greater Bangor area has been a central part of the mission of Eastern Maine 
Community College since its inception in the mid 1960’s. G raduates of EMCCs electrical programs are highly sought by 
employers across the state because these graduates are known to have recei ved a quality education. T he famous W. 
Edwards Deming defined “quality” as “conformance to requirements”.   
For Maine Commu nity College electrical programs,  the electrical education “requirements” are set by the State of Maine 
Electricians Examining Board and the respective program Advisory Committees. The “conformance” relates to the 
matter at hand. An “accredited” institution  is one that has provided documentation to an accrediting agency that clearly 
shows programs are teaching and assessing the objectives specified in their program documentation. Eastern Maine 
Community College is a NECHE accredited institution.  
It was  determined through our great collaborative work with OP OR that the best way to ensure that EMCC and the 
MCCS can continue to provide well trained electr icians for the future needs of the State of Maine as we have for the last 
forty plus years is to fix the language so that there is no room for confusion. That is what the proposed legislation does: 
it makes it clear that “accredited” modifies community college.  
Thank you for the  opportunity to provide testimony in support of  LD 1713.  
Sincerely,  
 
Richard K Reardon , P.E. 
Department Chair of Electrical Programs  
Eastern Maine Community College  
 
 
 

