Amy Fuller
Augusta
LD 257
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
I'm writing in favor of LD 257. High schools (and middle schools too, if need be) 
changing to a later start time before my children reach this age has been one of my top
educational wishes/priorities as a parent. I'm thrilled to see this bill being proposed. 
When I moved to Augusta a few years ago, I was shocked to learn that the local high 
school starts at 7 am. I couldn't believe it, as I'd read all the studies showing teenage 
brains are just not awake and ready to learn at this hour. I have children in the local 
school system, and I have to admit I've already lost sleep stressing over the early start 
time, as I know it's going to negatively affect their learning and grades (and 
subsequently, their chances of getting into college and qualifying for scholarships to 
pay for it). 
I'm sure the committee is aware that California has already made the change, and that 
New York and New Jersey want to as well. I'm sure you've seen all the statistics and 
studies about the benefits of more sleep for teens - better grades, fewer mental health 
problems, less substance abuse, fewer disciplinary problems, etc. - and that school 
systems are even saving money thanks to consolidating drivers for bus routes. I think 
the proposed start time of 8:30 am by the American Academy of Pediatrics would 
streamline things for many parents too - this is already the starting time for my 
children's elementary school. We already have a routine in place for getting to school 
on time.
I know many parents and students may gripe about conflicts with sports or jobs, but 
health and education should always take priority over extracurriculars and side 
income. If parents need their children to work more hours on school days to pay their 
bills, that's a problem with society and our economic system - not our educational 
system. Growing up in Massachusetts, I attended a high school that started after 8 am.
Students had no problem balancing academics - including honors and AP classes - 
and sports, or academics and jobs. It's absolutely feasible. I'm sure more sleep would 
confer athletic benefits as well.
Thank you for your time,
Amy Fuller

