Maine Medical 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President l Paul R. Cain, MD, President —Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO l Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
I SUPPORT Maine Physicians 0 ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine 0 PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
TO: Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director of Communications and Government Affairs 
DATE: Thursday, February 9, 2023 
SUPPORT - M7; An Act to Provide for a Later Starting Time for High Schools 
The Maine Medical Association appreciates the opportunity to submit the following comments in 
support of LD 257. The bill will direct school administrative units to implement start times at 
secondary schools, defined as grades 9 through 12 (secondary school defined, 20-A §1-32), no 
earlier than 8:30 a.m. starting with the 2024-2025 school year. 
According to Stanford Medicine Children ’s Health, 
0 Poor sleep can limit teens’ ability to focus and learn. Additionally, insufficient sleep is 
associated with increased risk for chronic conditions such as diabetes, obesity and poor 
mental health. 
o Teens have the unique challenge of a biological shift in their circadian clock, causing them 
to struggle to fall asleep before 11 pm. 
This is not a new issue of interest for physicians. A 2014 statement by the American Academy 
of Pediatrics outlines, “/ifestyle choices, and academic demands, negatively affect middle and 
high school students ’ ability to obtain sufﬂcient sleep, the evidence strongly implicates earlier 
school start times (ie, before 8:30 am) as a key modiﬁable contributor to insufﬁcient sleep, as 
well as circadian rhythm disruption, in this population." CDC data from 2015 reveals about 7 out 
of 10 (72.7%) did not get enough sleep on school nights. 
The American Medical Association (AMA) also supports later school start times and encourages 
middle schools and high schools to start no earlier than 8:30 a.m. The policy also encouraged 
physicians to actively educate parents, school administrators, teachers, and other community 
members about the importance of sleep for adolescent mental and physical health based on 
their proven biological needs. Inadequate sleep often leads to poor memory performance and 
mood disorders. Symptoms of depression and anxiety are also more evident with those who get 
less than six hours of sleep each night. 
The American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) supports initiatives calling on schools to 
implement start times of 8:30 AM or later for middle schools and high schools. An AASM School 
Start Times Health Advisory (attached) states, “/n puberty a natural shift occurs in the timing of 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
the b0dy’s internal “circadian ” clock, causing most teens to have a biological preference fora 
late-night bedtime. It is important that parents and local school boards work together to 
implement high school start times that allow teens to get the healthy sleep they need to meet 
their full potential." The AASM position statement is also attached to our testimony. 
The AMA media release announcing its positions closes with the following Board member 
statement, “While implementing a delayed school start time can be an emotional and potentially 
stressful issue for school districts, families, and members of the community, the health beneﬁts 
for adolescents far outweigh any potential negative consequences." 
We urge your support of the bill. Thank you for the opportunity to offer these comments. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
