 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 257 
 
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR A LATER START ING TIME FOR HIGH SCHOOLS  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of Mai ne School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School  Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association  in opposition  to L.D. 257.  
 
School Board members and Superintendents oppose this bill n ot because they disagree with the benefits of 
having well -rested students, but because under our current system this would create a ripple effect  on 
everything from bus -runs to after -schools activities, including sports  and after -school jobs.  
 
To have the state mandate 8:30 a.m. start time  takes away local control and does not acknowledge what 
currently is happeni ng in many schools.  
 
Starting school later  would take away time from the end of the day, when many students are engaged in after -
school activities, including participation in after -school clubs, which is an important part of school life . Those 
participating in sports would miss more instructional time due to travel times to the away  games or meets . 
 
Changing start times also would impact school schedules that align with extended learning opportunities, like 
dual enrollment programs as we ll as coordinating with Career and Technical Education.  
 
And this change would cost money . 
 
Altering start times for students for those districts with single bus runs will require them to conduct double 
bus runs  and that will  increase the cost of transport ation. 
 
This should be a local decision informed by conversations with the community about what is best for the ir 
students and not be legislated from Augusta.  
