Hello, my name is Lila Ouellette. I’m an 8th grade student at Orono Middle School in Orono, Maine and
I am here to testify in support of LD 257.
As a growing teenager, there are many times that I feel like life is against me. Keeping up with friends,
family, school, social media, and sports is all incredibly hard. But what makes it all worse? Doing all these
mentally draining tasks with—what feels like—no sleep. Five out of the seven days of the week, my body feels
mentally and physically slumped. At 14-years old, I’m expected to fall asleep at a reasonable hour, to wake up
early, to get to school at 7:45 or earlier, to stay attentive in all my classes and sports practices, to go home and
visit with my family or do my homework, and then to do it all over again. The fact is, however, that
most
teenagers physically cannot fall asleep until ten or 11 PM
or later when going through puberty. So,
asking us to
work our brains completely raw on seven to eight hours of sleep—on a good day—is unreasonable. Even an
hour extra of sleep every night would be instrumental to keeping a high-school teen’s mental and physical
performance higher throughout the weekdays.
Furthermore,
resear ch suppor ts later star t times
.
According to both
The American Academy of Sleep
Medicine and the American Academy of Pediatrics
, high
schools should start no earlier than 8:30 AM. I attend
Orono Middle School in Orono, Maine, where we are fortunate enough to have both a middle school and high
school in the same district. This means that our middle and high school start times are the same. Currently, the
first bell rings at 7:50 in the morning. If our district changed and met the 8:30 AM recommended start time, that
would mean that students could potentially obtain an extra 40 minutes of sleep every night. According to a
study done by the CDC in 2018
, only one-fourth of
high school students get the recommended eight hours of
sleep per night. I can only imagine how that number would increase if students were allowed to sleep in an
extra hour each day.
We can even look to California for some guidance. In fall of 2022,
California became the first state
to
mandate later start times.
No high school classes
were allowed to start before 8:30 AM. Though this is only the
first year these mandates have been enforced, California schools have already noticed an increase in both
grades and attendance. Other studies have shown benefits that include…(list the varied benefits that are in
your research below). Overall, the science is there, the need is there, the chance for change is there. If we as a
state don’t do something about this growing sleep epidemic, to what extent would teenagers need to suffer
f o r
a change to be made? Forcing teens to function at a time and pace when their bodies biologically can’t, is
unfair, unjust, and simply not right. We need to take action now for the sake of our growing youth. Thank you
for your time. I am happy to answer any questions.

