Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director .3‘ "iii 
Testimo "Y 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 257: An Act to Provide for a Later Starting Time for High Schools 
Mallory Cook, Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement, 
Maine Education Association 
Before the Committ ee on Education and Cultu ral Affairs 
February 9,2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association, and a certiﬁed English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am here to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 257: An Act to Provide fora 
Later Starting Time for High Schools. 
MEA understands that students learn best when their physiological needs are met, and that a majority of 
teenagers do not get the recommended 8-10 hours of sleep per night. The consequences of not 
consistently meeting this recommendation include depressive symptoms, poor academic performance, 
and a decrease in physical activity — problems that have already been exacerbated by the Covid-19 
pandemic. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advocates for secondary schools to begin no earlier than 
8:30, but the majority of US schools start at 8:03, while the average Maine school starts at 7:53. This 
recommendation is based on a shift in adolescent biology; at the onset of puberty, adolescents fall asleep 
and Wake later, as their internal clock can shift back by about two hours. That means a school start time 
of 7:53 would intemally register as 5:53 fora middle or high school student. 
With all this in mind, other states, and some districts in Maine, have shifted schoolstait times. In 
Washington state, a study revealed that a later school start time increased average student sleep time by 
34 minutes per night and grades increased by 4.5 percent. ‘ Other studies have shown more modest 
academic beneﬁts but still believe the increased sleep time to be beneﬁcial. A Southem New England 
study demonstrated an increase in the consumption of healthy foods at breakfast and ﬁrst period 
absences and tardies decreased by half.2 
I 
Gideon Dunster et al. “Sleepmore in Seatle 
in high school stud : Later school starti 
ents.” 
r 
Mary Ann Mo “ times are associated with more sleep and better performance 
on, Later school start time reduced depressive symptoms. ” 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 06736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive,S 
207-622 outh Portland ME OM06 
-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I ww' 
w.mameea.org
* 
Maine Education Association 
‘ Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
This research is certainly compelling and emphasizes the need for a change; however, we understand 
this legislation would present signiﬁcant operational and logistical challenges for the diverse 
communities our schools serve and would require tremendous planning and input from the stakeholders 
within those communities. With a start time of 7:53 at my previous district, it was not uncommon to see 
high school students sitting in the school lobby at 6:45. Our schools serve students whose parents do not 
have the workplace ﬂexibility for a later drop off, and their experiences and schedules must be 
considered. We must also consider our elementary students starting earlier, which might require some of 
our youngest students to wait for their buses in the dark on cold winter mornings. 
MEA would like the committee to consider the physiological needs of our secondary students and the 
impacts sleep has on their health, wellness, and academics, but we also ask that We do not neglect the 
important voices of the communities the schools serve. If the Committee decides to move forward with 
this bill, we suggest the Committee consider a mechanism that allows districts to opt out of the 
prescribed start times, if they are unable to make such a plan work. In other bills in the recent past, the 
Education Committee has included a "safety valve" that requires school boards to have a public vote if 
they are unable to meet the requirements of the new law. Such votes could provide an opportunity for 
school districts to have ﬂexibility if they are simply unable to ﬁnd a way to meet the starting time 
requirements put in law. We recommend such votes should occur annually as part of the local school 
board‘s calendar adoption process. 
Thank you for your time, and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
