Canoec4.nc@gmail.com  
 
  
Nancy Cronin, MA  
Fayette, ME  
 
February 9, 2023  
 
Testimony IN FAVOR OF LD 257 :  An Act to Provide for a Later Starting Time for High Schools  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and the distinguished members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs , my name is Nancy Cronin .  Please accept this testimony In Favor Of : An Act to Provide for a 
Later Starting Time for High Schools  
 
As a mother of a 13-year-old boy I appreciate this bill.  To meet the bus my son gets up at 5: 15AM to be at the 
bus stop at 6:15AM.  He also enjoys playing seasonal sports like hockey and lacrosse which are in the evening 
and sometimes gets home as late as 10:00pm at night.  His schedule is not unusual.  
 
I have watched my son’s  circadian rhythm shift from naturally waking up at 6AM to wanting to get up no later 
than 7:30.  This internal sleep schedule is developm entally appropriate for youth his1.  We have known that the 
stage of adolescents  bring s a shift in sleep  times .  This happens at the same time that vast neurological changes 
occur in young people’s  brains.2   
 
The medical evidence is clear that later start times make a difference. Based on the clear research, t he Centers 
for Disease Control recommend s that secondary school should not start before 8:30  because the benefit of later 
start time s include better academic performance, better physical health, and better mental health.3  Why 
wouldn’t we do this?   Because we have always done it this way?  Because bus schedules are too hard?   Are 
those reasonable arguments for the adults to make?  
 
We are not going to change adolescent neurological development;  it is time to adapt to allow our systems to 
best support their growth.  
 
Thank you for considering my thoughts.  
 
Nancy Cronin  
 
1 Crowley SJ, Acebo C, Carskadon MA.  (2007) Sleep, circadian rhythms, and delayed phase in adolescence . Sleep Med . 2007;8:602 –
12 
2 Abrams, Zara (2022) What neuroscience tells us about the teenage brain  American Psychological Association Vol. 53. No. 5 Pg 66  
3 Center for Disease Control and Prevention (2022) Schools Start To Early  Sleep and Sleep Disorders Accessed at 
https://www.cdc.gov/sleep/features/schools -start-too-early.html  on February 8, 2023  
