Nina Mitchell
Orono
LD 257
Hello, my name is Nina Mitchell and I am an 8th-grade student at Orono Middle School. 
Today I am here to testify in support of LD 257, “An Act to Provide for a Later Starting Time 
for High Schools.”
 
Every day at exactly 6:30 a.m., I’m awoken by a blaring alarm that is telling me it’s time to go 
to get ready for school. Trying to balance homework, sports, and friends makes going to bed 
early very difficult, so when I do get to bed, there isn’t enough time to get a solid night of 
sleep that will energize me for a whole day of doing it all again. In the journal Science 
Advances, a paper published shows research done by the University of Washington and Salk 
Institute for Biological Studies announcing that teens at two schools in Seattle got an average
increase of 34 more minutes of sleep when their start time got pushed later. These extra 
minutes sleeping are crucial for those, like me, who have very busy schedules keeping them 
up late at night. 
Over the years, more and more research has been gathered to help prove the physical 
and mental benefits a whole night of sleep can create for a teen going to school are 
incredible. According to the American Academy of Sleep Medicine teens, ages 13 to 
18, should be getting 8 to 10 hours of sleep daily to stay healthy. The alarming effects
that sleep deprivation causes on teens vary from performing poorly at school, 
drinking, using drugs, depression, being overweight, and not participating in enough 
physical activity. 
Caused by changes in biological rhythms, teens going through puberty become tired 
later at night and therefore need to sleep in later. Across the country, most of our 
public high schools start before 8:00 a.m. The majority of Maine’s public high 
schools start at 7:30 a.m. Having teens try to get to school before their brains have 
turned on is not setting us up for success. As a teenager, I know it's not easy when I 
haven’t been able to fully rest myself - to wake up early, to get ready, to arrive at 
school on time, to stay focused during all of my classes, to go to hours of practices 
and games, to get home, to eat, to see my family, and then to do my homework!
Starting high school at a later time is also very important to create a healthy 
environment for students dealing with stress and mental health challenges. 
Post-COVID especially, the number of teens struggling with mental health has 
skyrocketed, impacting one in every five teens. In Maine, because of not having 
enough trained professionals, this has been a problem causing huge waitlists for 
mental health professionals leaving most teens alone and stuck. If giving teens an 
extra hour in the morning to sleep in is a way we can help take the pressure off of 
them, then that seems like an easy solution to a much bigger problem. 
One argument against later high school start times is related to jobs and sports 
schedules. How will schools fit sports into their schedules? How will teens find time 
to work if school doesn’t get out until later? Regarding sports, schools are going to 
need to step up and work on this in some unique ways. For some schools this may be 
putting practices in the morning, considering sports are voluntary. This could also be 
switching free periods to the end of the day to practice then or taking their sport as a 
physical education credit and practicing during the day. Having a later start time is 
even more crucial for teens working. Teens with jobs are found to have an even larger
problem with sleep deprivation which can become a hazard at work. There aren’t any 
brilliant solutions to teens working but prioritizing health at a young age will set them
up for more success later in life. Teens can also work with employers to find a 
schedule that can fit into their later start times. After-school activities will cause 
schools to be creative when it comes to things like extra-curricular but that should not 
stop them from focusing on kids' sleep.    
In conclusion, I urge you to vote to pass LD 257 because I care about my friends and my 
11-year-old brother, and our future and I hope that you can help all of us, teens, to succeed at
school and in life. Thank you so much for your time. I am happy to answer any questions.     

