122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Support of : 
LD 257: An Act to Provide for a Later Starting Time for High Schools  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Room 208, Cross State Office Building Thursday, February 9, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty , Representative Brenner , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and  most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health pr omotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously. 
 This bill would require s econdary s chools in Maine to start no earlier than 8:30am, beginning with the 2 024-
2025 school year. MPHA is in support of this bill.  
According to a consensus  statement
 from the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, youth aged  13 to 18 years  
old should regularly sleep 8 to 10 hours each night for good health. During puberty, youth’s biological rhythms 
change such that they  stay up later at night and s leep late r in the morning.1 Following t his natural sleep rhyt hm 
is challenging for youth, as school  starts earlier than when they may naturally awaken, reducing the amount of 
quality sleep youth receive each night. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , 
insufficient sleep can increase youth’s  risk for dev eloping obesity, symptoms of depression, and engaging in 
unhealthy behaviors , such as  tobacco  and alcoh ol use . Insufficient sleep can also reduce physical  activity and 
worsen  academic performance and behavior.  
We understand there are challenges with a later start time, including bussing, sports practices  and other extra-
curricular activities, and considerations  for teachers and school staff , such as caregiving responsibilities . We 
also reco gnize there are wide -reaching benefits for youth, including better physical and mental health and 
improved academic performance  and behavior. As such, w e are supportive of this legislation.  Thank you for 
considering our  testimony.  
 
 
1 Crowley SJ, Acebo C, Carskadon MA. Sleep, circadian rhythms, and delayed phase in adolescence. Sleep Med . 2007;8:602– 12. 
