Amelia Forman-Stiles
Blue Hill
LD 632
Dear Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the committee. 
My name is Amelia Forman-Stiles, and I live in Blue Hill. I am writing today to ask you to 
support LD 632. 
I am graduating from University of Maine this May with my master’s in social work 
after which I intend to join a local agency as a therapist to provide my community 
with much needed mental health services. There are two reasons I am urging you to 
support this bill—one is personal and the other extends beyond myself and my 
personal circumstances. I will start with the personal. I am a 45-year-old, divorced, 
single parent of two lovely teenagers. I moved to Hancock County twelve years ago 
and have both joined and created amazing community in my years here. I just bought 
my first home in East Blue Hill which, until it happened, seemed like an impossible 
dream for someone like me making below $40,000 a year with no savings. At the age 
of 36 I decided to get my bachelor’s degree. I started at University of Maine and 
finished at College of the Atlantic with a degree in Human Ecology. I started working
for Aroostook Mental Health Agency as a sexual assault advocate and rural educator 
the same week I graduated. A year and a half later I transitioned to mobile crisis 
services and have been doing that for three and a half years now. Within the past three
years, I entered the MSW program and now, at the age of 46, will be poised to finally 
have the career I am meant for as a therapist. I will have somewhere around $140,000 
in debt from my undergrad and masters combined and will likely be making around 
$45,000 t0 $50,000 a year. Satisfaction but not security is awaiting me on the other 
side of graduation. My debt, including my mortgage, will ensure that I will not at long
last, break the cycle of financial fear and insecurity I have been struggling to get past 
all these years of single parenting and pursuing a higher education. 
As for the other reason I implore you to vote yes for LD 632; I know firsthand the 
enormous, crippling mental health needs that exist in Maine today. Our state is 
grappling with an opioid epidemic, a pandemic that has tremendously impacted the 
mental health of our children who missed critical years of psychosocial development, 
our teenagers who missed critical years of social interaction and self-realization 
amongst peers, all the way to our elderly who suffered greatly from the isolation. The 
impact of this pandemic will be developing for a generation or more to come and it 
will be significant. We have a burgeoning aging population who will be needing 
social services more than ever and the societal stress of a divided country and 
government that impacts nearly every one of us who is paying attention. And let us 
not forget the poverty that so many rural Mainers are faced with.
 As a crisis worker it is my job to support individuals in our communities who are 
struggling, to provide immediate support, assess risk and to ultimately connect them 
with services. Can you imagine meeting someone in their darkest hour and having to 
tell them that there is a 6- 9 month wait for a therapist? Even longer sometimes for a 
specialist? It is demoralizing and depressing and defeating. Maine desperately needs 
social workers so that systems can function as they are meant to, so we lose less 
beloved community members to substance misuse, depression, and hopelessness. 
Schools are struggling with unprecedented numbers of students with extreme 
behavioral and mental health issues, understaffed and under qualified hospitals and 
jails are the new holding facilities for individuals needing intensive mental health and 
substance use services and it isn’t working. We social workers are needed. 
Please, make Maine a state that social workers want to stay in, want to move to. Make it a 
state where social workers can do this incredibly meaningful work and thrive in their personal 
and financial lives- so that our communities can thrive. 
I thank you for your time, 
Amelia Forman-Stiles MHRT-CSP
University of Maine MSW candidate, 2023

