Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
c/o Legislative Information Of fice
Cross Building, Room 206
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD 632:
Testimony in Support of LD 632
Dear Senator Curry , Representative Craft, and other members of the Committee on Innovation,
Development, Economic Advancement and Business,
My name is Ashley Ames and I am a Junior Social Work major at the University of Maine in
Orono. I am a concerned student
in favor
of LD 632
for two reasons — one is specific to myself
and my circumstances, while the other is more generalized. I am a 21 year old full time student
who works very hard to do well in school without my family's assistance. Last semester I
achieved a 4.0 GP A, but I am worried about my future grades as I am solely responsible for my
own finances and it has been very stressful. With another year to go, I have found myself in
almost $100,000 worth of debt. According to Educationdata.or g, the average borrower in the
state of Maine is over $33,000 in debt and the average social worker in the state makes around
$55,000 a year . The problem of student loan debt and lack of pay drives young individuals and
social workers to seek opportunities outside of Maine and severely restricts those who stay .
After I graduate, I am very eager to start working as a social worker , but am concerned that I will
have to find employment in a higher earning industry . I have personal experience with Maine's
massive, incapacitating mental health crisis that is currently taking over . Social services are
needed to help with this crisis and our state already has a huge lack of social workers. Many
graduates are considering other careers until they can pay of f their debt and I am concerned for
people in need. Life has not been easy for anyone lately , and the ef fects of this mental health
epidemic will be felt, and they will be profound.
Please consider supporting LD632. If not for the Social Workers of Maine, vote
“
yes”
for Maine
residents as a whole.
Respectfully submitted,
Ashley Ames
School of Social Work
University of Maine
ashley .r.ames@maine.edu
Overton, P . (2022, February 19).
Maine considers $42 million plan to Lighten College
Graduates' debt load
. Press Herald. Retrieved March
12, 2023, from
https://www .pressherald.com/2022/02/18/maine-considers-42m-plan-to-lighten-college-debt-loa
d/#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20U.S.%20Department,than%20the%20New%20England
%20average.
