Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and the good members of the IDEA Committee,
My name is Betsy Sweet and I am testifying in favor of LD 632 on behalf of the 
Behavioral Health Community Collaborative.  The Collaborative is comprised of 8 
nonprofit, community based behavioral health agencies who, collectively, serve over 70% 
of the people in Maine seeking mental health and SUD services.  We include Sweetser, 
Spurwink, the Opportunity Alliance, Shalom House, KidsPeace, Oxford County Mental 
Health Services, Volunteers of America, and Gateway Community Services.
Please do this.  
This committee is well aware of the workforce shortages in all sectors here in Maine.  In 
the behavioral health sector, the crisis is severe and results in people not having access 
to critical services for their recovery, well-being and safety.  
The workforce shortage in the behavioral health sector was severe before the COVID 
epidemic, and has intensified since in two ways- first, the number of people working in 
this field has diminished and two, the need for mental health services has increased 
significantly as a result of the epidemic.
Now, our agencies are reporting anywhere from 25-35 % of their positions, clinical 
positions, are unfilled.   This has resulted in programs closing, clients having to wait for 
up to six months to see an outpatient therapist, 2-4 months for in home services for 
children, months for Medication management treatment, and in many rural areas there 
are simply no services available.  As a result, we see a huge surge in behavioral health 
clients showing up, untreated, in hospital emergency rooms and in our jails.    
Unfortunately, the rates Maine agencies have been able to pay social workers and 
clinicians is one of the lowest in New England.   This has two consequences – it makes it 
almost impossible for service providers to attract and retain social workers.   From the 
social worker side, our low rates make it challenging for them to find housing and pay for 
basic expenses. The requirement to pay off the significant student loans they have had to 
take out just to get through undergraduate and graduate school makes in financially 
impossible.  As a result , we have graduates of our excellent schools of social work leave 
the state so they can find better pay elsewhere.  In a class of masters level social 
workers where I guest lectured last year I asked how many of the 22 students intended to 
stay in Maine to work and only 6 students raised their hands. 
We are losing talent and access to desperately needed services.  You have heard about 
the debt burden.  We are working at the same time to increase wages and encourage 
young people to enter this field to help some of our most vulnerable citizens, but even 
that is not enough to make it possible to meet expenses.  
By relieving the debt burden, Maine can, for a relatively small amount of money, increase 
access to critically needed services and retain some of Maine’s best  and most needed 
talent right here.
Please do this – Pass LD 632 unanimously.  
Thank you.  
