Innovation, Development, Economic, Advancement, and Business Committees, attn: Kristen
Bowker
c/o Legislative Information Of fice
Cross Building, Room
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD #:632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Dear Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and
Business,
My name is Cat Sabourin and I am a senior student majoring in social work and minoring
in disability studies at the University of Maine, Orono. Although I am originally from
Massachusetts, my love for Maine has grown after beginning my college education here in 2019.
I began here as an education major though that shortly changed to social work as I realized I
desired to make changes and help people outside of the classroom, and rather in their homes. A
very lar ge portion of work as a social worker is to be present, mentally
and
physically , to engage
in people’ s active lives, as it can make all the dif ference to be physically present when working
with others’  mental health.
Just about three years ago, we were hit with the coronavirus pandemic. During this time
my freshman year of college was about two months away from coming to an end. Along with
this, I was also in the process of switching my major from education to social work.
Transitioning all learning platforms to be online created much confusion and we heard of many
students struggling to keep moving forward. Thus, the fall of 2020 came around and a very
decent amount of the student body had decided to either transfer or drop out due to remote
education. During this time, I knew I had a passion for social work though it was dif ficult to put
it into perspective as I could not build a relationship with my professors as we were distanced by
Zoom calls and terrible internet connection. Many students became discouraged during this time
of frustration as what was coming for us was unknown, no one knew what our futures would
look like with an online degree, especially social work students. I say this because in order to be
an influential social worker , one must be present. Sitting behind a phone or a camera, and talking
to someone does not have the same impact as being face-to-face, having the ability to see, feel,
and understand every emotion present. This being said, I believe that with this legislation, social
work students that had struggled during this time of confusion may receive back the money that
was paid for these remote classes and put it towards more education and possibly a master ’s
degree. I give recognition to those that remained students during the uncertainty of the pandemic
as a lot of those who struggled may end up being our future social workers’  clients. With
receiving money back to help pay for student loans, one may find more interest in staying in
Maine due to access to housing as well as to find the reasoning to go back to school for a
master's in social work. This loan for giveness may increase the percentage of social workers in
Maine as students are more likely to be able to af ford to live here as well as have a better
opportunity for finding social work jobs. An increase in the number of social workers in Maine
will benefit the community as waitlists for services will be shortened as staf fing will increase.
This generation of social workers will be very understanding and influential as we all were
during the time of the pandemic.
Please vote “Y es” on LD 632
Thank you for your time.
With Respect,
Cat Sabourin
