 
Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement , and Business  
Legislative Offices  
Cross Building, Room 206  
Augusta, Maine  04333  
c/o Kristen Bowker, Committee Clerk  
 
Re: LD 632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program  
Dear Senator  Chip Curry, Representative Tif fany Roberts  and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business,  
    We represent the staff and Board of Directors of the National Association of Social Workers  - Maine 
Chapter (NASW ME), testifying in support of modifying and funding the current Social Work Education 
Loan Repayment Program in Maine.  W e would like to see a meaningful loan replacement program be 
funded for Maine social workers  to ke ep up  with , if not rebuild , the present behavioral health 
workforce.  Th e present behavioral health workforce shortage  has reached a critical point during COVID, 
where waitlists are untenable (7 -9+ months for outpatient counseling), services are closing, and youth of 
all ages  are spending prolonged periods in emergency rooms , only to be  eventually  sent out -of-state for 
treatment given lack of services in Maine.    
                                                                                                                                                         
    The following points are covered in more detail in our official document in support of this bill.  
Behavioral health reimbursement and wages have  not kept  up with inflation and educational debt . 
• Student loan debt hampers recruitment and retention efforts of  Maine’s behavioral health 
network and schools of social work.  
• Behavioral health needs are going unmet .  
• The behavioral health workforce in Maine is shrinking, whereas projected growth in social work 
employment is expected to grow by 9% in the next decade (BLS, 2023) .  
• Lack of  proper  treatment of behavioral health disorders is bad for our economy  (Carneval, 
2021) . 
 
    We believe the follow principles  are essential to the Social Work Educat ion Loan Repayment Program :  
• Focus on Maine Social Workers: Based on the 2022 awards, the proposed 2023 Health 
Professions Education Loan Repayment Program in the Governor’s Budget would fund 12 social 
workers.  
• Broaden eligibility : To clinicians  with a deg ree from an accredited school of social work or in 
private practice who provide a percentage of their care to MaineCare clients.   
• Meaningful level of funding : Results from a  2022 survey of social workers in Maine reflects  that 
423 social workers reported having , and being stressed about , their student loan debt , with t he 
average debt  levels to be:  
o Bachelor ’s level  social  worker:   $50,624 
o Master ’s level  social  worker:   $74,557 
o Doctoral  level  social  worker:   $117,500  
 
 
The impact of years of high  education loan debt s and low wages is portrayed in the multiple testimonies 
provided by our board members (below) and testimony submitted from several of the almost 7,000 
licensed social workers and additional students in Maine.  
We urge you to vote “yes” o n LD 632 to provide meaningful educational loan repayment for  Maine 
social workers.  A representative from NASW ME will be in attendance at the work  session should you 
have any additional questions . Please contact NASW ME Executive Director C hris McLaughlin (207 -478-
0884 and cmclaughlin.na swme@ socialworkers.org ) for any follow up.  Thank you for your time.  
Sincerely,  
The NASW ME Board of Directors  and Sta ff 
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW , President  
(Falmouth, ME ) 
Cynthia Cus hing, MSW student and 1st Vice 
President  (Readfield, ME)  
Moriah  Geer, LMSW  (Old Town, ME)  
Jamie -Lynn Kane, LMSW -CC, Secretary  (Old 
Town, ME)  
Amy Blake, LCSW  (Augusta, ME)  Sharon Fowler, LCSW  (Oakland, ME)  
Kerstin Kirchner, LMSW -CC (Alfred , ME ) 
Katrina Ladd , LMSW -CC (Farmington, ME)  
Katie McCoy , LCSW (Cape Elizabeth, ME)  
Kassandra Pierce , MSW  (Topsham, ME)  
Cindy Sturm, LCSW  (Bangor, ME)  
Sarah Benesi, MSW Student  (Portland, ME)  
Lori Pelk ey, MSW Student  (Enfield, ME)  
 
  Chris McLaughlin, LCSW, Executive Director, NASW ME (Hermon, ME)  
  Megan Hartman, MSW Student, University of Maine (Bangor, ME)  
 
References:  
§1038 Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program, Maine Revised Statutes, Title 10: Commerce and 
Trade, Part 2: Building and Developm ent: Chapter 110: Finance Authority of Maine. Title 10, §1038:  Social 
Work Education Loan Repayment Program (mainelegislature.org)  
NASW Maine.  LD 632 Social Work Education Loan Repayment Talking Points. 
https://naswme.socialworkers.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=x0D9FKQmzzA%3d&portalid= 27 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor,  Occupational Outlook Handbook , Social Workers,  
at https://www.bls.go v/ooh/community -and-social -service/social -workers.htm  (visited  February 14, 
2023 ). 
Carnevale, AP, Gulish, A. Campbell, KP. (2021) If Not Now, When? The Urgent Need for an All -One-System 
Approach to Youth Policy. Center o n Education and the Workforce. Georgetown University.  Washington, 
DC.  Accessed on October 9, 2022. https://1gyhoq479ufd3yna29x7ubjn -wpengi ne.netdna -ssl.com/wp -
content/uploads/cew -all_one_system -fr.pdf  
 
 
LD 632:  Social  Work  Education  Loan  Repayment  Program  
 
The time  is now  to fund  the Social  Work  Education  Loan  Repayment  Program  (Maine  Statute:  
§1038 ), which  was legislated  in 2011,  but has not yet been  funded.  Behavioral  heal th workforce and 
service shortages have been increasing exponentially since its passage, with the COVID and behavioral 
health pandemics, stagnant reimbursement rates, and an aging social work workforce in Maine.  
 
• There is lack of access to  behavioral health services in Maine. Anxiety and depression rates 
have tripled during COVID, at the same time that social workers are leaving the field and 
services are closing due to staffing shortages. There are 7 -month wait lists  for outpatient 
mental health, long emergency room stays waiting  for treatment, teens  going  out of state  for 
residential  care,  and agencies  shutting  down  services  due to the workforce shortage.  
 
Maine has an aging social work workforce, with a smaller proportion of new social workers  
entering  the field  to replace  persons  retiring.  Since  COVID,  older  social  workers are choosing 
retirement over relying on tele -behavioral health services as a way of providing care.  
 
• Untreated behavioral health disorders is bad for our economy through its deleterious 
consequences, such as productivity losses, heavier use of all health care resources, and greater 
dependence on employer and government disability programs . Although several behavioral 
health disorders disqualify a person from entering the military,  6% (non -deployed)  to 13%  
(deployed)  military  personnel  experience  depression and many others develop PTSD, playing an 
important role in our military readiness an d national security. 
https://www.army.mil/article/191921/depression_impacts_readiness_how_mental_health  
_issues_affect_soldiers_particularly_women  
 
• Behavioral  health  reimbursement  and wages  are not keeping  up with  inflation  and 
educational debt:  MaineCare rates  for behavioral  health  have  not increased  for over a decade. 
Current MaineCare rates for outpatient counseling are one -third to one -half of neighboring 
states, c reating difficulties for agencies to pay fair wages and disincentivizing private clinicians 
to provide care to MaineCare clients.  
 
Potential  and actualized  student  loan  debt  hampers  recruitment  and retention  efforts  of 
Maine’s schools of social work. Since 2008, our country has trended toward state de - 
investment in educational support, tuition, fees, and room and board costs for higher 
education have increased by 169%. 57% of the total debt is due by persons under the ag e of 
40, meaning that over 43% would not even qualify for many of the Maine programs recently 
passed to help with educational debt. (Carnevale, 2021)  
 
• Accountability is essential: This bill links eligibility for the social work repayment program  to 
social  workers  providing  at least 15%  of their  care  to MaineCare  clients,  thus improving  access  
to behavioral  health  services  for our most  underserved  population.  
 
 
 
 
To reinforce  social  work  patient  panel  “habits”  and their  dedication  to Maine,  the bill 
distributes the funds over a four -year period . 
 
Our response to any concerns you m ay have : 
• Assisting with loan repayment for social workers is a slap in the face to those who 
sacrificed to pay off their educational loan debt: A recent poll of over 470  social  workers  in 
Maine indicates  that social  workers are sacrificing  to pay  off their  debt. Multiple social 
workers report having to choose between immediate needs (groceries, housing,  child care , 
car repairs)  over  loan  payments.  Over  40%  of social  workers  report that their debt 
contributes to increased stress and them considering leaving  the field or move out -of-state.  
 
Social workers go into the field to make difference and make the world a better place. They  
work  to provide  care  to our most  vulnerable  populations,  ensuring  access  to safe and 
affirming  health and  behavioral health care.  Social workers do not start out in the field to 
make huge amounts of money. Yet they do expect  fair wages that can support themselves, 
their families and a decent standard of living. This has become more difficult as tuition costs 
outstrip wage increases.  
 
• Funding the program is not a direct elimination of social work debt.  It will be giving a hand 
up to a group of highly trained and skil led professionals who care for our most  vulnerable  
populations.  The cost of funding  this social  work  repayment  program  is much less than the 
tax breaks available to corporations and Mainers with wages falling in the higher income 
brackets.  
 
• We already  addressed  student  loan  debt:  Several  bills were  passed  in the 2021 -2022 
Legislature, which certainly helps some, yet excludes many social workers, such as those with 
educational debt from out -of-state schools (Educational Opportunity Tax Credit); persons 
who graduated before 2007 (Student Loan Tax Credit); or persons  working for not -for-profit 
or for -profit agencies (Public Service Funded Loan repayment program).  The new Biden 
Educational Loan Tax credit program helps, but only puts a dent in the $70,000 plus loans 
incurred by graduate level social workers. Of the 17 persons who received awards through 
the 2022 funding of the Health Professions Student Loan Repayment program, only  three  
were social workers.  In a 2022 survey of social workers in Maine, 518 social workers 
responded . Of those who resp onded,  91% reported having and being stressed about their 
current student loan debt. The average debt for Maine social workers is listed below.  
▪ Bachelor ’s level  social  worker:   $50,624 
▪ Master ’s level  social  worker:   $74,557 
▪ Doctoral  level  social  worker:   $117,500  
 
