Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
c/o Legislative Information Of fice
Cross Building, Room 206
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD 632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Dear Senator Curry , Representative Craft, and other members of the Committee on Innovation,
Development, Economic Advancement and Business,
My name is Hannah Lindstrom and I am a senior at The University of Maine, Orono. I
am majoring in social work and pursuing a minor in interdisciplinary disability studies. I have
been a student at The University of Maine, Orono since 2018. I am from North Attleboro,
Massachusetts. However , I spent my summers at my family's home in Hartland, Maine. I will be
completing my under graduate degree in May 2023. I have spent an excessive amount of time
recently trying to plan for my postgraduate degree life. My hope would be to move to Portland,
ME and work as a social worker . However , based on the recent inflation of rent and the fact that I
have over $60,000 worth of student loans hanging over my head, this seems like an unrealistic
goal. This loan for giveness could change my life. It could change my peers' lives.
As some of you may know , social work is an extremely rewarding career . However , there
are not many options for job positions that will pay me enough to af ford my normal living
expenses and my monthly student loan payments. While being a full time college student, I am
working 3 part time jobs which averages to about 25 hours a week, I have an unpaid social work
internship that I average 16 hours a week at, and I also spend many weekends out of the year
traveling back and forth from Massachusetts to care for my mother with Multiple Sclerosis.
I know that my passion is to be a social worker . I have been doing my internship at The
Yellow Tulip Project which is based out of Portland, ME. The Yellow Tulip Project focuses on
smashing the stigma surrounding mental illness, advocating for suicide prevention and creating
positive mental health based arts programming for students in Maine. My hope is to eventually
work for The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention. However , I know that I will not be
able to make the amount of money as a social worker that I could make as a bartender in a busy
area like Portland, ME. However , I would like to make a meaningful dif ference to the residents
of the state of Maine and assist with the mental health crisis right in front of us.
I am in
favor
of LD 632 and I ur ge you to
vote “yes”
on LD 632
too.
Thank you for your time.
With respect,
Hannah Lindstrom
Social Work Student at The University of Maine, Orono
