Lydia V. Crafts
19 Timber Lane 
Newcastle, ME 04553 
Phone: (207) 593-2664 
Lydia.Crafts@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
Tuesday, February 28, 2023 
Good Afternoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Join Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Bussiness. I am Representative 
Lydia Crafts and I come before you today to testify in support of LD 632, “An Act to Amend the Social 
Work Education Loan Repayment Program.
This program, in its original form, provided three annual awards of $5,000 and was never funded. Our 
amendment language presented today expands the program to serve 100 annual awards of $20,000. 
This expansion, along with broadening the qualifying roles, is designed to help address the shortage of 
social workers across our state.
As any Mainer will tell you, our state is facing a labor shortage of mighty proportions. Mental health 
service providers are not imune. In a state with over 6,000 licensed social workers, agencies and job 
boards report hundreds of openings, often in some of the most critical roles working with Maine’s most 
vulnerable residents.
Simultaneously, young people, adults, and older Mainers are struggling to manage and maintain their 
mental health. Recent reports indicate 1 in 3 high school females has considered suicide, our drug and 
alcohol related overdose fatalities continue to shatter heartbreaking records each year, and local mental 
health agencies report that they have thousands of Mainers on their waitlists going unserved. A family in 
Washington County will spend on average 435 days on a waiting list for Home and Community based 
mental health treatment. As families try to survive without services, as our loved ones overdose from 
poisonings, and as our schools and law enforcement agencies are left to pick up the pieces, we have to 
find practical solutions that prevent disastrous crises.
This legislation before you provides a direct avenue to recruit and retain professionals in the state of 
Maine. Social workers, many of whom are educated (like myself) at a Maine institution, provide the most 
efficient and cost effective direct services to people in their communities. Most Mainers seeking mental 
health support will begin in  outpatient counseling or case management, the majority of both services 
provided by social workers. This entry point is crucial in reducing or minimizing the need for 
hospitalizations, law enforcement involvement, and child protective services.
Unfortunately, clinical social workers carry an average debt of $74,000. In a field with relatively low wages 
compared with other healthcare professions, they have some of the highest debt to income ratios in the 
field. This burden weighs heavily on many individuals as they decide whether to leave the field for higher 
paying jobs, especially in our current labor market.
Finally, for every behavioral health bill that comes before our body, we will have to ask, “Where do we find 
employees to staff these life saving programs?” LD 632 sets Maine on a path to attract and retain a 
critical segment of our workforce. I hope you will support this effort and I’ll be more than happy to answer 
any questions. 
Sincerely,
Lydia Crafts, LCSW 
State Representative
District 46 Bristol, Damariscotta, Newcastle, Nobleboro and Monhegan Plantation

