Written Testimony: Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
Re: LD 632:An Act to Amend the Social Work EducationLoan Repayment Program
Chairpersons Curry and Roberts, and members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, EconomicAdvancement and Business,
I am a first generation college student at the University of Maine in support of LD 632. I am expected tograduate with my Bachelor of Social Work degree in May 2023. I am a resident of Howland, butcurrently live in Orono for school. I am a full-time student while also interning at the Department ofHealth and Human Services and working a part-time job. At this time, I owe approximately 30K instudent loans and am concerned as to how I am going to be able to pay this back. I have a strong desireto further my education by attending graduate school but am unsure if I will be able to do so due tofinancial insecurity. I come from a low-income background, therefore, I am solely responsible for my debtand do not receive any financial assistance from family members. Although I receive SNAP benefitswhich enables me to afford groceries, I still struggle to make ends meet. My current income is notsufficient to cover all of my essential monthly expenses such as rent, utilities, car insurance, gasoline, etc.This greatly hinders my ability to provide for myself and also limits the work that I will be able to do withmy degree.
Social workers play a crucial role in the overall functioning of society. The passing of this bill wouldgreatly benefit current social workers, as well as future one’s such as myself, and allow them to betterserve our community. Because of this, I urge you all to vote “Yes” on LD 632. Thank you for considering.
Respectfully submitted,
Madison LavinSchool of Social WorkUniversity of MaineMadison.lavin@maine.edu
Madison Lavin
Howland
LD 632
Written Testimony: Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business
Re: LD 632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Chairpersons Curry and Roberts, and members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business,
I am a first generation college student at the University of Maine in support of LD 
632. I am expected to graduate with my Bachelor of Social Work degree in May 
2023. I am a resident of Howland, but  currently live in Orono for school. I am a 
full-time student while also interning at the Department of Health and Human 
Services and working a part-time job. At this time, I owe approximately 30K in 
student loans and am concerned as to how I am going to be able to pay this back. I 
have a strong desire to further my education by attending graduate school but am 
unsure if I will be able to do so due to financial insecurity. I come from a low-income 
background, therefore, I am solely responsible for my debt and do not receive any 
financial assistance from family members. Although I receive SNAP benefits which 
enables me to afford groceries, I still struggle to make ends meet. My current income 
is not sufficient to cover all of my essential monthly expenses such as rent, utilities, 
car insurance, gasoline, etc. This greatly hinders my ability to provide for myself and 
also limits the work that I will be able to do with my degree.
Social workers play a crucial role in the overall functioning of society. The passing of
this bill would greatly benefit current social workers, as well as future one’s such as 
myself, and allow them to better serve our community. Because of this, I urge you all 
to vote “Yes” on LD 632. Thank you for considering. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Madison Lavin 
School of Social Work
University of Maine
Madison.lavin@maine.edu
