Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
Cross Building, Room 206
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD 632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Dear Senator Curry, Representative Craft, and other members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, 
My name is Madison Courtois and I am a senior social work student at The University of Maine at Orono. 
I am from Old Orchard Beach and currently live in Orono while I’m in school. I am a concerned citizen 
that is in favor of LD 632. Please consider the following:
●In Maine, the average amount of student debt is more than $33,000. This is the sixth-highest 
average in America (AP News)
●The issue of student loan debt, unfortunately, forces young individuals to pursue opportunities 
outside of Maine and significantly limits those who stay from doing this such as buying cars, 
homes, and fully participating in our economy (Maine Center for Economic Policy).   
I live in a one-parent household where I have little to no financial support, specifically in regard to my 
education and student loans. Throughout the year I work two jobs that allow me to have barely enough 
money to meet my basic needs, let alone enough to pay student loans once I graduate. 
Thus far in my education as a senior and to begin a professional career as a social worker, I have had an 
internship at Community Care, a non-profit organization that provides community-based services to 
promote the well-being of individuals and families. At this internship, I am an Adult Case Manager that 
works directly with clients to address various areas of support including housing, transportation, financial, 
mental and physical health, and building a support system. 
Once I graduate with my Bachelor of Social Work, I hope to continue to do similar work in Southern 
Maine where I assist those of the community directly to address their needs, specifically mental health 
needs, and promote their overall well-being. With that being said, I hope to continue living and working 
in Maine but financially I am unsure about whether or not it will be possible for me. According to 
NASW, they view “student loan debt relief as a social justice priority – especially when placed within the 
context of a professional field in which the high educational debt burden intersects with historically low 
salaries..” (NASW Blog). Due to student loan debt and low pay in this line of work, I will be faced with 
the difficult decision of whether or not I should go to another state or profession with better pay.  
If this bill is passed and such a program is implemented, it would substantially help individuals with a 
BSW from the State of Maine. The state of Maine has a huge need for social workers to help our 
communities and social workers need financial support. 
I strongly urge you to vote “Yes” on LD 632. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Madison Courtois, MHRT/C
madison.courtois@maine.edu 
Exact References: 
AP News:
https://apnews.com/article/maine-5d9e73518e98b28f738fcbbfe51091ce 
Maine Center for Economic Policy: https://www.mecep.org/education/in-maine-higher-education-tuition-
hikes-and-reduced-quality-threaten-economic-future/ 
NASW Blog: http://www.socialworkblog.org/advocacy/2022/05/nasw-continues-to-advocate-for-student-
loan-debt-relief/ 
