Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business Committees, attn: Kristen
Bowker
c/o Legislative Information Of fice
Cross Building, Room
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD #:632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Dear Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and 
Business,
My name is Makenzie Handley , and I am a senior social work student at the University of
Maine in Orono. I am from Maine, and I have lived here my entire life. I reside in Bangor , ME,
and graduated from John Bapst High School in Bangor , Maine. This is the place where I found
out I wanted to help people. The teachers and educators there always supported their students; I
wanted to pass this on. However , I am coming to the end of my education for my bachelor ’s
degree, and I am faced with a financial crisis.
When I started college, the gas price was around $ 2.30-2.50 per gallon. While going
through college, it got up to almost $5-6 dollars per gallon. Being a full-time student, working
part-time, and more recently going to my internship part-time, I have had to take out loans to pay
for school. This year in looking for a job, I have become stressed and shocked at the pay rate I
am looking at getting. The prices of everything have risen quite significantly since the start of
my schooling. With the rate of pay , the cost of living, and the student loan payment, I would have
an immense amount of trouble trying to af ford to live. I am not alone in this thought process.
Many of my classmates feel the same. We have set ourselves up to become individuals that strive
to advocate for and help others. But these obstacles make it almost impossible for us to stay in
the field of social work. With this legislation, the social work community will be able to solve
staff retention problems by helping newly graduated students remain in the state of Maine. Many
agencies struggle to get new employees or keep the ones they have due to the rate of pay and the
rise in living costs. Being able to help students with loan debt will increase the number of people
that stay in the state. Which in turn allows more people who can retrieve help in our social work
community . Many places have very long waitlists to get social services due to low staf fing. Not
only is this beneficial to social workers, but it increases the quality of lives of Maine citizens in
need.
Please vote “Y es” on LD 632
Respectfully submitted,
Makenzie Handley
