295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Allia nce for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 632 
An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment 
Program  
Sponsored by Representative Crafts  
3/14 /2023  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business . I am Jennifer Christian , a resident of  
Dresden , and here on behalf of the A lliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s safety net community -based  mental health and substance use 
treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation o f sound 
policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system . 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here to speak in support of LD 632, “ An Act 
to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Rep ayment Program .” Maine is in 
the middle of a serious mental health crisis. Maine people struggling with 
mental health issues are currently  facing 7-month  waitlists for outpatient 
treatment , the ineffective and expensive use of  emergency room s for 
months at  a time  waiting for residential treatment,  and young people being 
sent out of sta te for care , all while the agencies  that provide these  much -
needed  services are being forced to eliminate programming due to  
workforce shortage s.  
 
Additionally, according to Maine’s child welfare ombudsman, “… there is  a 
need for an increase in mental health and substance use services for adults 
and children in Maine.  Lack of services can strongly affect the safety of 
children. ” http://cwombudsman.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/01/2022 -
Annual -Report -Maine -Child -Welfare -Ombudsman.pdf  
 
Clearly, Maine needs more social workers. LD 632 aims to improve and fund 
loan for giveness for social workers. We need to be creating pathways to 
recruit students into these fields of study and to lure credentialed social 
workers to move to and practice in Maine. Funding the program is not a 
direct elimination of social work debt. Instead, it is an incentive to a group 
of highly trained and skilled professionals who care for our  most vulnerable 
populations. I ask that you vote ought to pass on LD 632  and further 
consider others within the behavioral health field we might include in 
subsequent sessions.  
 
Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions you have for me.  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

