Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Businessc/o Legislative Information OﬃceCross Building, Room 206100 State House StationAugusta, ME 04333
February 28, 2023
Re: LD 632 An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Dear Senators, Representatives, and members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, EconomicAdvancement and Business,
My name is Mary Moynihan and I reside in Old Town, Maine. I am writing to ask you to support LD 632An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program.
In 2016 I moved to Maine from Oregon with the intention of pursuing higher education and entering intoa sustainable profession and career. In 2019 I earned a Master of Social Work (MSW) and have sinceworked with Northern Light Acadia Hospital as a Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW). Serving anunderprivileged population, I also identify as an underprivileged person who is breaking through thebarriers and suﬀering that arises from prolonged exposure to childhood and adolescent trauma. The abilityto break through these barriers is shaped by a variety of factors, one being the incentives made available tothose striving to transform not only their own lives, but those that we serve and the communities we callhome. Actions that ﬁnancially incentivize building a necessary workforce and keeping people in Maineare vital to the sustainability of our state’s health. The following are two programs successful in recruitingand retaining professional social workers needed in underserved areas and those adversely aﬀected bybehavioral health crises including drug overdose:
●Maine’s Educational Opportunity Tax Credit (EOTC)
●Health Resources and Service Administration’s National Health Service Corps Loan RepaymentProgram
These ﬁnancial incentives have allowed me to climb above the federal poverty level, to donate back intomy community, and to continue to advocate for the needs of my neighbors. They have improved myquality of life and allowed a sense of safety and stability that I was not privileged to for the ﬁrst decade ofmy life. And although I still have $40,000 in federal loans, I am conﬁdent that programs like the SocialWork Education Loan Repayment Program make it possible to attract and retain essential social workprofessionals to meet the growing and evolving needs of Maine’s citizens and future success.
Please support LD 632 An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program.
Thank you for your time,
Mary Moynihan15 Sewall DriveOld Town, ME 04468
Mary Moynihan
Old Town
LD 632
In the chance the attached pdf does not open:
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business
c/o Legislative Information Office 
Cross Building, Room 206
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
February 28, 2023
Re: LD 632 An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program
Dear Senators, Representatives, and members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business,
My name is Mary Moynihan and I reside in Old Town, Maine. I am writing to ask 
you to support LD 632 An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan 
Repayment Program.
In 2016 I moved to Maine from Oregon with the intention of pursuing higher education and 
entering into a sustainable profession and career. In 2019 I earned a Master of Social Work 
(MSW) and have since worked with Northern Light Acadia Hospital as a Licensed Clinical 
Social Worker (LCSW). Serving an underprivileged population, I also identify as an 
underprivileged person who is breaking through the barriers and suffering that arises from 
prolonged exposure to childhood and adolescent trauma. The ability to break through these 
barriers is shaped by a variety of factors, one being the incentives made available to those 
striving to transform not only their own lives, but those that we serve and the communities we 
call home. Actions that financially incentivize building a necessary workforce and keeping 
people in Maine are vital to the sustainability of our state’s health. The following are two 
programs successful in recruiting and retaining professional social workers needed in 
underserved areas and those adversely affected by behavioral health crises including drug 
overdose:
Maine’s Educational Opportunity Tax Credit (EOTC) 
Health Resources and Service Administration’s National Health Service Corps Loan 
Repayment Program
These financial incentives have allowed me to climb above the federal poverty level, 
to donate back into my community, and to continue to advocate for the needs of my 
neighbors. They have improved my quality of life and allowed a sense of safety and 
stability that I was not privileged to for the first decade of my life. And although I still
have $40,000 in federal loans, I am confident that programs like the Social Work 
Education Loan Repayment Program make it possible to attract and retain essential 
social work professionals to meet the growing and evolving needs of Maine’s citizens 
and future success.
Please support LD 632 An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan 
Repayment Program.
Thank you for your time,
Mary Moynihan
15 Sewall Drive
Old Town, ME 04468
