Good afternoon,
My name is Molly LeBlanc and I am from Howland Maine, which is in Penobscot County. I am
writing today as I will be unable to attend in person due to being at work. Growing up I thought
my family was well off. We always had new school clothes, the sports equipment we needed,
and food on the table every night. As I got older I came to the realization that my three siblings
and I were taken care of because my parents worked countless hours, multiple jobs, and would
often have to take out small loans in order for us to have the things we needed. I also realized I
was not alone. So many of my peers and their families worked so hard to get what they needed
just to get by. Great work ethic is something I am very thankful my parents instilled in me. My
three sisters and I all had jobs by our senior year in high school in order to save up for vehicles.
We also pay for our college ourselves. My parents often feel guilty that they are not able to
afford to put us through schooling, however they remind us how important it is to have a trade or
a degree in order to advance our adult careers. They have always been so helpful and
supportive, however as a young adult in my first two years of college I had to have two jobs and
go to school full time just to be able to afford to attend. I am currently a senior in the Social work
program, and I am thankful that I had to work hard to get to where I am at. It gave me drive to
work harder and it made me thankful for every opportunity my school had for myself. However, I
am still over $40,000 in debt because of school on top of having to pay on average $5,000 per
semester out of pocket. I like to think of myself as a hard worker and I am very blessed in life
however the financial stress that school has put on me took a severe toll on my mental health. I
faced many days where I would contemplate giving up; questioning if it was worth it. I often
wonder about all the amazing people out there that were not as fortunate as I am, and have had
to drop out/not attend school due to the financial hardships. There could potentially be amazing
social workers, nurses, engineers etc. out there but won't ever know that due to not being able
to go to school. I am here to give you all a perspective of a small, limited resourced town girl
who could among many others be greatly benefited by the decisions made today. Thank you for
your time and I hope you think of people like me, and those who could possibly have great
impact in the future when making your final decisions.
Best wishes,
Molly LeBlanc
