 
 
Testi mony in Support of LD 632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment 
Program  
Good Afternoon  Senator  Curry, Representative Roberts  and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business,  
My name is Moriah Geer, I am a member of the Board of Directors of the National Association of Social 
Workers - Maine Chapter (NASW ME)  and I  live in Old Town, ME . I have a Master ’s degree in Social work 
from the University of Mai ne, and I work at Maine Equal Justic e. Thank you for the opportunity to testify 
today in support of LD  632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program . 
NASW -ME has submitted testimony  with supporting documents  and there you will find all the important 
points that the board and membership would  like to make regarding this legislation and the data to back 
them up . Since you will be able to read that information for yourselves , I’d like to use this opportunity to 
tell you about my own experience relying on st udent loan s to pursu e higher education and th at of so 
many of the people that I speak with every  day through my work  as the direc tor of a p roject that is 
focused on helping low -income parents pursue higher edu cation and training and fill important 
workforce needs for our state.  
In 201 0 I found myself and my 2 toddlers alone and homeless and se eking assist ance from the local 
domestic viole nce project. I knew at that time that I wanted to pick a path forward that would create a 
very different life for myself and my children  and that I wanted to make sur e that whatever I did I would 
be able to help others who had experien ced the kind s of issues that I was experiencing. In my work with 
low-income families,  I’ve seen tha t many of us who have li ved experien ce with p over ty and trauma 
choose to go into helping pro fessions, like social work, to  try and make positive changes so that others 
won ’t have to experience what we went through . When I talk about my experiences,  I feel confident in 
saying that the re are many social workers in Maine with similar stories .  
I enrolled at the University of Maine and turned to the TANF progra m for help . TANF helped a lot, but at 
the time the monthly  TANF benefit  for a family of 3 was $585 and my rent was $1000 . Currentl y a family 
of 3 on TANF could get up to $965 per month, but of course rents has substantially inc reased . Bec ause 
of this deficit in my  budget,  I would tak e the full loans offered each semester and use t he funds to pay 
my ren t, utilities and other basic needs  for the semester . It’s my experien ce in the work that I do that 
this is often how p eople in poverty manage to achieve higher education . For this reason, I finished my 
master’s  degree with pretty mu ch the maximum amount of student loans that a  person ca n receive , 
with interest it’s now around $170,000.  I am set up with income -based repayments  so that I can afford 
them, but I likely never will be finished paying these  loans off. Add itionally, th is high amount of student 
debt  has kept me from being able to get a home loan . So, while I did succeed in  moving my family out of 
poverty, we still live as though we ’re low -income in many way s.  
 
As stated before, my exper ience mirro rs the experience o f many of the people that I talk with ever day 
in my work. It ’s not at all uncommon for a low income individual to have to take out student loans to be 
able to survive while going to school, even if they  are working while going to school. While social 
workers serve an e ssential role in soci ety, our pay is often very modest. On average, a social worker with 
a bachelor’s  degree will earn around $5 1,000 annually  and a master’s  degree will earn around $75,000. I 
am forever grateful to be able to do the work that I do , but social work is hard work and it ’s difficult to 
be what our clients need us to be when our own financial insecurity is constan tly han ging over our 
heads.  
I appreciate the  opportunity to share my story with you today, thank you. I hope that you will support 
LD 632. A representa tive from NASW - ME will be in attend ance at the work s ession to answer any 
questions that we can be help ful with. I am also happy to answer any questions you may have at this 
time.  
                                                                                                                                                         
 
 
