l0 Amherst Shoal, Augusto, ME 04330 
207.622.7592 » nuswmainacl: encom . 
N A S W: MMNE CHAPTER 
“ — NulionolAstociixlioiiofSocinlworkezsI 
5;;.;_=?:,_"11'::;=»»-V -» 
V/QH
‘ -~» .»».,-1:.»-» 1
. - 
w,,;;t:w 
LD 632: Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program 
The time is now to fund the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program (Maine Statute: §1038), which was 
legislated in 2011, but has yet to be ever funded. Behavioral health workforce and service shortages have been 
increasing exponentially since its passage, with the COVID-19 and behavioral health pandemics, stagnant 
reimbursement rates, and an aging social work workforce in Maine. 
The Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment Program (LD 632) aims to provide funds to award 
100 social workers up to $20,000 over three years. in addition, this amendment expands coverage to include 
social workers who provide a portion of care to MaineCare clients. We are asking Governor Mills and the 
Appropriations Committee to include funding for this program in the upcoming budget in the amount of 
$666,667/year for three-years. 
Strong messages: 
0 There is lack of access to behavioral health services in Maine. Rates of anxiety, depression, and other 
behavioral health concerns have tripled during the COVID-19 global pandemic, at the same time that 
social workers are leaving the field and services are closing due to staffing shortages. There are 7+- 
month wait lists for outpatient mental health services, long emergency room stays while waiting for 
treatment, teens going out of state for residential care, and agencies shutting down services due to the 
workforce shortage. Without trained clinicians to provide care, patients are relying more on emergency 
rooms, which is becoming a major component of Maine's de facto behavioral health system. In 2021, 
the average emergency room stay was 49 hours for the 4,209 patients waiting for psychiatric admission 
(Bangor Daily News, March 13, 2023). 
Maine has an aging social work workforce with a smaller proportion of new social workers entering the 
field to replace persons retiring. Since COVID-19, many older social workers are choosing retirement 
over relying on tele—behavioral health services as a way of providing care. 
0 Clients with untreated behavioral health disorders are bad for our economy. Through the deleterious 
consequences associated with employee behavioral health needs going unmet, such as productivity 
losses, heavier use of all health care resources, and greater dependence on employer and government 
disability programs, organizations are struggling to stay afloat. Although several behavioral health 
disorders disqualify a person from entering the military, 6% (non-deployed) to 13% (deployed) military 
personnel experience depression and many others develop PTSD, playing an important role in our 
military readiness and national security. 
0 Behavioral health reimbursement and wages are not keeping up with inflation and educational debt. 
MaineCare rates for behavioral health have not increased for over a decade. Current MaineCare rates 
for outpatient counseling are one-third to one-half of neighboring states, creating difficulties for 
agencies to pay fair wages and disincentivizing private clinicians to provide care to MaineCare clients. 
Potential and actualized student loan debt hampers recruitment and retention efforts of Maine's 
schools of social work. Since 2008, our country has trended toward state de-investment in educational 
support as tuition, fees, and room and board costs for higher education have increased by 169%. 57% of%
the total debt is due by persons under the age of 40, meaning that over 43% would not even qualify for 
many of the Maine programs recently passed to help with educational debt (Carnevale, 2021). 
0 Accountability is essential. This bill links eligibility for the social work repayment program to social 
workers providing at least 15% of their care to MaineCare clients, thus improving access to behavioral 
health services for our most underserved and vulnerable populations. To reinforce social worker client 
panel "habits" and a dedication to our State, the bill distributes the funds over a three-year period. 
Our response to concerns that you may have: ~ 
1 Assisting with loan repayment for social workers is a “slap in the face" to those who have sacrificed 
to pay off their educational loan debt: A recent poll of over 500 social workers in Maine indicates that 
social workers are sacrificing to pay off their debt. Multiple social workers report having to choose 
between immediate needs (groceries, housing, childcare, car repairs, etc...) over loan payments. Over 
40% of social workers report that their debt contributes to increased stress as well as considerations of 
leaving the field or moving out-of-state for higher payingjobs or to states where loan repayment is 
possible. 
Social workers go into the field to make difference and make the world a better place. They work to 
provide care to our most vulnerable populations, ensuring access to safe and affirming health and 
behavioral health care. Social workers do not start out in the field to make huge amounts of money. 
Yet they do expect fair wages that can support themselves, their families, and a decent standard of 
living. This has become more difficult as tuition costs outstrip wage increases. 
0 Funding the program is not a direct elimination of social work debt. If passed and funded, LD 632 will 
be giving a hand-up to a group of highly trained and skilled professionals who care for our most 
vulnerable populations. The cost of funding this social work repayment program is much less than the 
tax breaks available to corporations and Mainers with wages falling in the higher income brackets. 
0 We have already addressed student loan debt. Several bills were passed in the 2021-2022 Legislature 
which certainly helps some, yet excludes many social workers, such as those with educational debt 
from out-of-state schools (Educational Opportunity Tax Credit), persons who graduated before 2007 
(Student Loan Tax Credit), or persons working for not~for-profit or for—profit agencies (Public Service 
Funded Loan repayment program). The new Biden Educational Loan Tax credit program helps as well 
but only puts a dent in the $70,000 plus loans incurred by graduate level social workers. Of the 17 
persons who received awards through the 2022 funding of Maine's Health Professions Student Loan 
Repayment program, only three were social workers. ln the above-mentioned survey of social workers 
in Maine, 91% reported having, and being stressed about, student loan debt. The average debt for 
Maine social workers is listed below. 
0 Bachelor's level social worker: $50,624 
0 Master's level social worker: $74,557 
0 Doctoral level social worker: $117,500 
References: 
https://www.armv.mil/article/191921/depression impacts readiness how mental health issues affect soldiers particularly women 
Carnevale, AP, Gulish, A. Campbell, KP. (2021) If Not Now, When? The Urgent Need for an All-One~System Approach to Youth Policy. 
Center on Education and the Workforce. Georgetown University. Washington, DC. Accessed on October 9, 2022. 
httns://lgyhoq479ufd3yna29x7ubin-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/W0-contentgploads/cew-all one system-fr.pdf
