Commi%ee on Innova,on, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, a%n: Commitee Clerk c/o Legisla,ve Informa,on Oﬃce 100 State House Sta,on Augusta, ME 04333 Re: LD 632, The Social Work Educa,on Loan Repayment Program  Dear Senator Curry, Representa1ve Roberts and members of the Commi9ee on Innova1on, Development, Economic Advancement and Business,  I am a licensed clinical social worker and alcohol and drug counselor in private prac,ce in Southern Maine, and currently the only clinician oﬀering co-occurring treatment in Spanish for La,nx Mainers. I support LD 632, legisla,on that would increase the ability for a diverse popula,on of social workers struggling ﬁnancially to stay in the ﬁeld, providing more access to behavioral health and substance use services across our state. Please consider the following:  • Maine has a desperate need for more mental health services.  The pandemic increased the need for support and social workers have been ﬁrst responders in the housing crisis, supported Mainers seeking treatment from opioid misuse and logged countless hours counseling teens in crisis. I personally receive more referrals than I can manage and oXen have no one to refer to. I hear the urgency on the other end of my phone, “you are the only person who called me back.”   •Maine’s reimbursement rates are not keeping up with the economy.  The majority of my clients are insured through Mainecare, and those rates are much lower than for other insurance or in other states. Loan repayment makes it possible for social workers such as myself to con,nue providing mental health and addic,on services to Mainers insured though Mainecare.   I owe over $100,000 in student loan debt. Currently these loans are on hold due to pandemic relief, but that will soon end. The bilingual trauma and substance use services I provide are essen,al and raise the quality of life for an underserved part of our state’s popula,on,  yet the amount of my debt overwhelms me as I make decisions about how I will work in the 
future, and con,nue to support both my family and oﬀer equitable services to my clients. I urge you to vote “YES” on LD 632.   Respec_ully submi%ed,  Sarah Harden, LCSW, LADC Valen,a, LLC Portland, Maine  Sarah.harden@spurwink.org                     
