BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.orgHello Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. My name is Taylor Cray, 
and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Advocacy at Preble Street. I am writing to you today 
to ask that you please vote in favor of LD632: An Act to Amend the Social Work Education 
Loan Repayment Program. 
Each day when I come to work, I do so alongside countless other individuals who dedicate 
their time and energy to the care and stability of others. Preble Street is just one of the many 
social service providers across Maine that supports people experiencing homelessness, 
hunger, and poverty in our communities. Oftentimes, folks within these communities are also 
struggling with a variety of other difficulties, all of which must be addressed with compassion, 
empathy, and care. Food insecurity, substance abuse, mental illness, and myriad other issues 
compound to create barriers that can seem insurmountable. Trained, professional social 
workers at Preble Street and other organizations are a critical resource for folks who might 
otherwise be without access to what is frequently life-saving care. While this work can be 
incredibly rewarding, there is also a very real emotional and psychological toll that social 
workers must bear when consistently providing such a breadth of care. 
Many social workers go above and beyond each day simply because they do not want to see 
their clients suffer any more than necessary while navigating the broken social systems that 
exist in our society. As the cost of living continues to rise, more and more social workers must 
take on multiple jobs to remain stably housed and fed, while also attempting to pay off 
student debt and other expenses. The exhaustion that results from this kind of exertion 
cannot be understated. Social workers cannot show up for their clients, their coworkers, and 
their communities if they do not have the time they need to rest and recuperate. 
The State of Maine cannot afford to lose any more social workers; Preble Street currently has 
62 open positions and is continuously looking to fill them with qualified, professional social 
workers.  As our population ages, our rates of homelessness rise, substance use continues to 
take the lives of Mainers, and our mental health crises continue to grow, we need social 
workers more than ever. 
Providing student loan relief to those who have graduated with a degree in the field is a vital 
step in ensuring that Maine continues to retain qualified social workers who will continue to 
assist individuals, families, and communities across Maine. Reducing the burden of 
educational loans on social workers will help social services agencies to retain staff, maintain 
supportive and consistent relationships with clients, and allow programs providing critical 
services to our most vulnerable Mainers to operate at full capacity. As a state, we must see an 
investment in social workers as an investment in the future of Maine. This bill is a long-
overdue step to ensure that this investment continues. Please vote to support LD632. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray
Advocacy Outreach Team Leader
Preble Street 
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger


