_ STATE or MAINE HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE 
"wt-Q‘ AUGUSTA. MAINE 043330002 Ol‘l\lC€Z (:(l7l:$7-l —l4(l 
AMYBARATA ten; (207)333-1817 
ASSISTANT HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER F:1\: (Z07) _2\/~14-l (J 
E — Mail: Am) Arzilzi-:1] lc< __'isluiurc.mum<: gm 
February 7, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 170 
An Act to Clarify the Authority of the Director of the Real Estate Commission to Dismiss 
Certain Claims That Do Not Allege Violations of Law or Rules 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Amy Arata andI 
represent House District 104. I'm pleased to present LD 170, ”An Act to Clarify the Authority of 
the Director of the Real Estate Commission." 
This bill is simple and relatively straight forward, and not controversial. Please note that the 
cosponsors are licensed Realtors from both parties. The intent is simply to codify the current 
practice ofthe Real Estate Commission into statute. Currently, when the Real Estate 
Commission receives a complaint against a licensee, the Director or the staff to reviews the 
complaint and determines whether an investigation is warranted. This provides an opportunity 
to filter out any frivolous complaints, as well as complaints that may be earnest in nature, but 
do not allege a violation of a rule or law that the Real Estate Commission is responsible for. This 
saves precious time and resources when a formal investigation is not warranted. 
Current statute provides that the director "may" investigate upon the receipt of a complaint. 
However, I've heard from a real estate licensee that in years past, the former staff of the 
Commission interpreted the statute as requiring that an investigation "shall" be conducted for 
every complaint because the only language in statute speaking to “dismissal ” of a complaint fell 
in the section "after an investigation. ” This caused a lot of wasted time and resources for the 
real estate agent, and l believe he's here via Zoom to testify about his experience. My hope is 
that by clarifying the statute, the Real Estate Commission won't go back to their previous 
' 
interpretation if their staff ever changes.' 
After submitting this bill, I had the opportunity to meet with Director ofthe Real Estate 
Commission, Catherine Pendergast, and with Joan Cohen, Deputy to the Commissioner of the 
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation. ln our meeting, we agreed upon a small 
language change that will help to clarify the intent of this bill, which I have included here with 
my testimony, and which l believe the Commission and/or Department will speak to in their
testimony. I'd like to thank Director Pendergast and Deputy Director Cohen for their assistance 
on this bill and their commitment to managing the limited resources of the Commission to 
ensure that the most important matters receive the most attention and time, and that matters 
that are outside of Commission's scope are able to be disposed of in an efficient manner. 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions.
6. Investigations. The director may investigate the actions of any licensee under this chapter, or any 
person or entity who assumes to act in a capacity requiring a license under this chapter, upon receipt of 
a verified written complaint or in accordance with the guidelines prescribed by commission rule. EE director determines that a complaint does not allege a violation of a law or rule that relates to the 
commission's enforcement authority or does not merit further investigation or action, the director may 
elect not to pursue the complaint Upon 
completion ofthe an investigation, the director shall take one of the following actions: 
A. With the commission's approval, dismiss the complaint; 
B. With the consent of the parties and subject to approval of the commission and commission counsel, 
execute a consent agreement; or 
C. Issue a staff petition for hearing before the commission, which may include a recommended 
disposition.
