TESTIMONY OF CATHERINE E. PENDERGAST 
DIRECTOR, REAL ESTATE COMMISSION 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
_ IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 170 
“An Act to Clarify the Authority of the Director of the Real Estate Commission to Dismiss 
Certain Claims That D0 Not Allege Violations of Law or Rules” 
Sponsored by Representative Amy Arata 
BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC 
ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS 
Public Hearing: February 7, 2023, at 1:00 p.m. 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and Members of the Committee, my name is Catherine 
Pendergast, and I am the Director of the Maine Real Estate Commission. I am here to speak in 
favor of LD 170 “An Act to Clarify the Authority of the Director of the Real Estate Commission 
to Dismiss Certain Claims That Do Not Allege Violations of Law or Rules” , as amended by the 
bill’s sponsor. 
About half of all complaints received by the Commission in a year contain allegations that, even 
if true, would not constitute violations of the Commission ’s laws or rules. 
Currently, when written complaints are received that do not address violations of the 
Commission ’s laws or rules and/or are outside of the Commission ’s jurisdiction, the director 
determines they will not be processed and presented to the Commission. Instead, the individual is 
notiﬁed that the allegations contained in the complaint will not be pursued unless additional 
evidence is provided that indicates if the allegations are true, they would consist of violations of 
statute or rule. 
Examples of complaints that are not within the Commission ’s jurisdiction include 
landlord/tenant disputes or complaints about rude behavior by a licensee. 
As originally drafted, the bill appeared to require all complaints, whether or not they were Within 
the Commission ’s jurisdiction or alleged violations of the Commission ’s laws or rules, to be 
presented to the Commission, which would have been very time-consuming and costly. 
We have been in contact with the bill sponsor and understand that the intent of the bill is to 
clarify the director ’s authority to quickly and efficiently respond to complaints that do not allege 
violations of the Commission ’s laws or rules and/or that are outside the Commission ’s 
jurisdiction. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of the amended bill. I am happy to answer any 
questions from the Committee now or at the Work session.
