"H 
4:1
" 5." 
t I
n ~ I-—,~. 
Harold “Trey” Stewart III 130"‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 2 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Harold “Trey” Stewart’ 
Presenting L.D. 203, An Act to Exempt Certain Motor Vehicle Dealers 
from Display Area Size Requirements 
Before the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business Committee 
February 7, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement, and Business Committee: I am Trey Stewart and I have the honor of representing 
the people of Senate District 2, which includes communities in Aroostook and Penobscot 
counties. I am before you today to present L.D. 203, An Act to Exempt Certain Motor Vehicle 
Dealers ﬁ'0m Display Area Size Requirements. 
Motor vehicle and auto body shops have served our communities as consistent and reliable small 
businesses for generations. Moreover, many of them are small in terms of both scale and actual 
size, and therefore do not meet the state of Maine’s current statute requiring them to possess a 
5,000 square foot large display area. This law appears to have been loosely enforced, at least 
until recent years, and that is why I am proposing this change after a recent incident in my 
district. 
For some background, I was contacted by a constituent who has been in business over 20 years 
and was recently told he needed to increase his lot size. If he did not increase the display area 
size, he would lose his license to sell vehicles. This is completely unfair and an unrealistic 
ultimatum, given the features of the property his business is located on in Aroostook County. He 
is here today to provide more context to the situation, and I will allow him to explain more on 
What happened. 
In my opinion the current statute is too wide-spanning and lacks nuance for smaller dealerships. 
To remedy this problem, I am proposing exemptions for dealerships that sell fewer than 50 cars 
annually. This would cover individuals such as my constituent and dare I say many other auto 
mechanics who sell a handful of vehicles from their lot each year. 
Thank you for your consideration of this important legislation that will help small businesses and 
allow my hard-working constituent to get back to the Work he’s been doing for decades.
