CO/\/\C/\ST 
Comcast Testimony on LD396 
An Act to Preserve the 207 Area Code and Impede So-called Robocalling 
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Ziegler, and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to offer the following testimony neither for nor against 
LD 396. My name is Jim Mitchell here today on behalf of my client Comcast. Comcast serves l6 
Maine communities in the Mid Coast region from Freeport to Woolwich and along the New 
Hampshire border from Kittery to Sanford. We currently offer our broadband, video, voice and 
mobile services to more than 63,000 Maine homes, businesses and institutions. 
Comcast supports the Public Utility Commission ’s (“Commission ”) mission of preventing 
exhaustion of the 207 Area Code. Comcast will continue to engage with the Commission and its 
Staff in its efforts to preserve the 207 Area Code. Comcast believes that LD 396 can be improved 
with the addition of clarifying amendments described below and looks forward to working with 
the Commission and stakeholders on drafting amended language for the proposed legislation. 
As a starting point, under federal law, the North American Numbering Plan Administrator 
(NANPA) manages telephone number resources. NANPA has mandatory reporting requirements 
for reporting voice providers (wireless, POTS(traditional telephone), VolP) on telephone number 
utilization, including forecasts. A reporting voice provider is an entity that gets numbers from 
NANPA or another voice provider. States have access to a service provider ’s applications for 
numbering resources and can investigate whether service providers have assigned and activated 
numbers in a timely manner. If not, the numbers can be reclaimed. 
States have a major role, one that the Commission already has used effectively. We note the 
Commission has conducted several dockets on telephone number utilization resulting in the 
reclamation of 785,000 numbers and has opened an investigation on the consolidation of 
Consolidated ’s rate centers which also should yield signiﬁcant results. States also have access to 
the data reported to NANPA provided they have appropriate protections in place to prevent 
disclosure of disaggregated, carrier-speci ﬁc information. 
Turning to speciﬁc sections of LD 396. The Commission already has access to provider speciﬁc reports 
on number utilization making additional state registration of those entities unnecessary. Ifthe goal here is 
to examine the practices of websites that sell and license telephone numbers, the term “number broker” 
should be deﬁned as “Number Broker: An entity ineligible to obtain telephone numbers directly 
from the North American Numbering Plan Administrator (“NANPA ”) that does not directly
use Maine numbering resources but sells or licenses those numbers to third parties via 
consignment arrangements with service providers entitled to obtain numbers from the NANPA. 
Number broker does not include transactions between ajjiliates. ” Only entities falling within this 
deﬁnition would be required to register. To Comcast’s knowledge, no authorization is required for 
these websites to sell or license local telephone numbers (federal law prohibits the brokering of toll-free 
numbers). 
Comcast oﬂ°ers an additional point. ILECs, CLECs, providers of interconnected VoIP including Comcast, 
and mobile caniers including Comcast’s Xﬁnity Mobile that provide service to retail end users in the state 
are required to provide reports and contribute to the MTEAF (Chapter 285 Rules) and MUSF (Chapter 288 
Rules). “Nomadic VoIP” is not covered. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments regarding LD 396. We look forward to 
working with the proponents and other stakeholders to improve this legislation. I would be happy 
to answer any questions that you may have.
