    
               
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
Testimony of Charter Communications  
 
LD 396 An Act to Preserve the 207 Area Code and Impede So -called Robocalling  
3/7/2023  
 
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler , and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee, 
my name is Kate Gore , representing Charter Communications . 
 
Charter provide s broadband services to 295 communities in Maine serving  466,000 customers .  As a 
result of significant network investments  by Charter , we offer residential customers  Gigabit  services, 
with  download speeds of 1000 Megabits per second (Mbps) . Charter  is proud to employ over 7 50 
workers in Maine , an increase of our workforce of nearly 150 people  since last year .  In 20 22 Charter 
extended our network to an additional 10,000 homes and businesses in Maine and made a $73 million 
capital investment.  
Part of  the suite of services offered by Charter Communications is a fully featured competitive voice 
service, VoIP or Voice Over Internet Protocol, which utilizes Charter’s network to provide a low-cost, 
high -quality  product. As written, LD 396 will have a detri mental impact on VoIP services in Maine.   
VoIP is currently deregulated in Maine. The policy of deregulation has brought tangible benefits to the 
state, and it shouldn’t be reversed (even in part) without clear justification.   As drafted, LD 396 would 
make a significant policy change . 
Additionally, we are concerned that the bill assigns the P UC data -gathering powers . We hope to work 
with the PUC to ensure clarity on what types of information  that the P UC could obtain .  
Lastly, we hope to understand  who certain provisions  of this bill  are intended to apply to. While the bill 
refers to “authorized brokers” of numbers , it is unclear what the definition of “authorized brokers” is for 
the purposes of this legislation.   
We look forward to working with the sponsor of this bill and continu ing to work with the Public Utilities 
Commission to ensure this bill meets their policy goals of preventing the exhaustion of the state’s 207 
area code and  ensuring that the legislation  will not negatively i mpact the benefits of VoIP.   
Thank you and I look forward to submitting amendment suggestions to the sponsor and Public Utilities 
Commission prior to the work session.  
 
 

