Z an STATE OF MAINE 
3» , PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll 
CHAIRMAN Harry Lanphear 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scuiiy 
COMMISSKONERS 
_ Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
- 
In Support of 
LD 396, An Act to Preserve the 207 Area Code and Impede Soecalled Robocalling 
(Commission Bill) 
_ March 7, 2023 _ 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and'Technology (Committee), my name is Michael Johnson, testifying in support of 
LD 396, "An Act to Preserve the 207 Area Code and Impede So-called Robocalling. ”
~ 
At its core, this bill aims to bring more parity between communications entities who have obligations to 
support the Maine Universal Service Fund (MU SF) under Title 35-A Section 7104 and Maine 
Telecommunications Education Access Fund (MTEAF) under Title 35-A Section 7104-B. 
The MUSF and MTEAF support important programs and services like universal phone service; 
telecommunications relay services for people who are deaf, hard-of-hearing, or speech-disabled; and the 
Maine School and Library Network. 
Chapter 288 and Chapter 285 of the Commission ’s rules provide guidance for the MUSF and MTEAF. 
Funding for these programs is based on assessments by communications entities on customer phone bills. 
Simply put, if a communication entity has a customer with an active phone number, then the 
communication entity should be supporting the fund. Most communications entities include a surcharge 
on customer phone bills to recover these funds.‘ 
How does the MUSF and MTEAF impact the life of the 207 Area Code? According to the North 
American Number Planning Administration, there are over 3 .5 million numbers actively in use by 
communications entities, but records from Solix, the administrator of the MUSF and MTEAF, suggest 
that there are only about 1.5 million telephone numbers contributing to these funds. 
While the Commission believes traditional landline and wireless companies are complying with state 
law, there appear to be brokers of telephone numbers who are not. This non—compliance by brokers 
means that the communications entities and their customers who are contributing to the MUSF and 
MTEAF are paying more than they should. Ifbrokers or their customers contributed to these funds as 
they are required, then a likely outcome would be a decrease in the MUSF and MTEAF surcharges on all 
customer phone bills. 
Whﬂe the primary beneﬁt of a registration process for brokers would be for the Commission to have 
better tools to communicate with brokers to ensure that l\/IUSF and MTEAF funds are collected, it may 
also curb unwanted robocalls and extend the life of the 207 Area Code. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowcll, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018
PUC Testimony — LD 396 March 7, 2023 
While customers of traditional phone and wireless providers are almost exclusively located in Maine, 
brokers of telephone numbers routinely market Maine telephone numbers for sale and use for businesses 
and customers outside of Maine. ' 
The Maine Commission serves as a co-regulator with the FCC to 
ensure that numbering resources are maximized under federal law. Bringing greater accountability to 
number brokers who fail to comply with state laws and rules also aids the Commission in its role to 
ensure that numbering resources are used efficiently._ 
The Commission is aware that some interested parties are concerned with the breadth of the bill as 
drafted. The Commission, in conversations With these parties, has indicated we are willing to Work with 
these entities to ﬁgure out a pathway forward that balances the Commission ’s needs to address this issue,“ 
with providing assurance that the Commission is not seeking to add a layer of broad regulatory authority 
over these entities.C 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session.
2.
