Consolidated ‘? 
- ceranzunicatlions 
Testimony in Support of LD 396 
“An Act to Preserve the 207 Area Code and impede So-called Robocalling ” 
Tuesday, March 7, 2023 . . 
Good morning, Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. My name is Simon Thorne and l live in 
Farmington, Maine. l am the Senior Manager of Government Relations for Consolidated 
Communications. On behalf of Consolidated, I'm here today to offer the following comments in 
favor of LD 396: 
As a voice network service provider, offering both VolP and traditional plain old telephone 
service in the State of Maine, Consolidated Communications has an interest in the continued 
viability ofthe 207 area code as well as ensuring that all companies are assessed in an equitable 
manner for the services they provide. 
Consolidated believes that the registration requirement outlined within the bill will help deter 
certain VolP providers that obtain far too many valuable numbering resources and never put 
them into service (i.e. there is never an actual customer at the end). Deterring these types of 
providers that obtain large quantities of numbers and sell them to others should help to reduce 
the troublesome robocalls. lt should also help preserve Maine's beloved ”207" area code into 
the future as these resources are limited. By registering, the Public Utilities Commission will, at 
a minimum, have confirmation that the entity registering has a point of contact for regulatory 
matters, and is an authorized broker of numbering resources. 
Companies that obtain a large number of resources but never place them in service put our 
"207" area code at risk. Registering as a provider and ensuring the registered providers pay 
their fair assessment should not only deter bad actors, but it is also necessary as a matter of 
fairness. All the major wireless providers as well as all the landline companies, pay their fair 
portion of the assessments, so too should all VolP providers. if they are not actually putting 
lines in service, then they should be asked why they are using those valuable resources. 
For all the reasons stated above, Consolidated respectfully offers this testimony in support off 
LD 396. I'm happy to answer questions you may have, or bring supplemental information to 
the work session at your request. Thank you for your consideration. y
