' 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
o 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support- 
LD 1702: Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Improve the Educational Experience of 
People Who Are Resettling in Maine 
Mallory Cook, Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement, 
Maine Education Association 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Mallory Cook (she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early Educator 
Engagement at the Maine Education Association. I am also a certiﬁed English teacher and building 
administrator. On behalf of MEA, a labor union representing almost 24,000 educators, I am here to 
testify in support of LD 1702: Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Improve the Educational 
Experience of People Who Are Resettling in Maine. 
Early this winter, along with other team MEA members, I sat in one of the most memorable meetings I 
have attended since taking on this role. The Maine Immigrants ‘ Rights coalition sat before us sharing the 
challenges faced by newcomers — instability in housing, language barriers, access to healthcare, and 
many others, but we speciﬁcally focused on the challenges for new Maine children attending our public 
schools. Under federal law, state and local educational agencies are required to provide all children with 
equal access to elementary and secondary education, but as data and the experiences they shared 
suggest, we are not yet consistently providing an equitable experience for those resettling in Maine. As 
was explained during the meeting, we are using “traditional education to meet the needs of an 
untraditional group” . What I remember most about this meeting was a stern demand: the system is 
falling behind. Not the kids. We have to slow down. We have to change. 
Last week, I sat before this committee as we heard-hours of testimony around literacy — that it isa 
human right; that it has implications on an individual ’s health, success, income, and relationships. Data 
was shared demonstrating that in the 21-22 school year, 49.3% of Multi-Lingual Learners were below or 
well-below the state average in English Language Arts. Even more concerning is that 61.2% of Multi- 
Lingual Learners were below or well-below the state average in Math, and 96.5% were below or well- 
below the state average in Science. The MEA’s vision is a great public school for every Maine student, 
and these numbers show there is work to be done. We know there are districts in our state that have 
dedicated time and resources to meeting the needs of our multi-lingual learners, and their expertise will 
be of great value as we seek to expand those supports across the state. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I i349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I Www.maineea.org
,,,%hh 
’ 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
,,, 
While circumstances for resettling in Maine vary, asylum seekers and refugees have a much higher rate 
of adverse experiences, which impact their ability to perform in school and have ramiﬁcations on their 
mental and physical health. In addition to these experiences and navigating a new culture and school, 
these students are met with feelings of failure and defeat when curricula are inaccessible. As students 
with Dyslexia made clear last week, this can have substantial impacts on mental health and conﬁdence. 
Much like other bills this session, we know solutions to such complex challenges cannot be solved 
instantaneously; however, there is urgency in addressing this inequity. That’s why, as called for in this 
bill, we believe a commission of 16 members would be beneﬁcial in developing a report with ﬁndings 
and recommendations to support students resettling in Maine. You will notice the composition of the 
commission includes families and students with ﬁrst-hand experience of the barriers that exist, 
professionals with an understanding of available supports, educators, and legislators; this diverse body 
of experiences and knowledge will be essential in producing sound recommendations that are feasible. 
Thank you for your time, and l’l1 do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330l1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207~888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
