STATE OF MAINE 
._, , HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 237-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Tuesday, May 9th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 1 702, Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Improve the Educational 
Experience of People Who Are Resettling in Maine 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs, I am Rachel Talbot 
Ross. I represent House District ll8 which is the Portland peninsula. I also have 
the distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am here today to 
present LD 1702, Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Improve the 
Educational Experience of People Who Are Resettling in Maine. 
As you are no doubt aware, Maine has seen an uptick in the number of 
asylum seekers, refugees and immigrants coming to our great state. This bill is an 
attempt to get the stakeholders together to better understand ways public schools 
can help meet the needs of these populations. 
Asylum seekers and refugees are coming from all over the world to Maine- 
Afghanistan, Iraq, Angola, Congo, South America and beyond. Many are leaving 
unstable and unsafe environments, ﬂeeing war or unrest and they come here 
seeking peace and freedom. Their journey to get here may be full of trauma — the 
leaving their homeland, the often-harrowing journey itself, and the may experience 
all along the way. 
LD 1702 would establish a Commission to improve the educational 
experience for many new permanent residents in Maine who will be sitting next to 
many of our students in our classrooms. The Commission is tasked with removing 
barriers to participate and transition successfully into our public schools, and to 
also develop recommendations to improve their experience so that they are able to 
succeed in joining our next bright generation of young leaders. 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods ofParkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
Asylum seekers, refuges and new immigrants bring with them new 
challenges and public schools and educators in our schools need more support to 
help these students overcome their challenges. Some as obvious and isolating as 
not knowing the language everyone in the room is speaking. Others can be 
technological, cultural, social, or even getting used to a new and rigorous daily 
schedule. Schools will need better help and supports to help navigate with students 
and their families as we welcome more people from all over the world. 
I hope this Commission will center the voices of those families resettling 
here, along with the voices of educators in the ﬁeld and organizations that support 
asylum seekers and new Mainers. We need the key stakeholders - students, 
parents, educators, school boards, community organizations — telling us about their 
real lived experiences so we can better fashion tools and proposals to help them. 
This challenge is not new. Some school districts have been working on 
meeting the needs of new immigrants for years. Of course, we can learn from the 
experience of big city school districts like Portland and Lewiston who have an 
established understanding of what more we can and should be doing. But, we 
should also be looking to Sanford and Narraguagus who are also working non- 
traditional student populations. 
I have one minor edit to the bill. On line 1, at the top of page 2 of the bill, 
you will see: 
A. One member with expertise in issues aﬂecting maternity and postpartum 
care for asylum seekers, refugees, and immigrants," 
We feel this may not be needed and suggest the Committee remove that 
appointment to the Commission. Considering the number of adults who participate 
in adult education centers in our public schools, we would prefer that this member 
be replaced with: 
A. One member who is a teacher in a public school with expertise as an 
adult education instructor with a population of people who have resettled 
in the State, selected from a list of nominees by a statewide labor 
organization representing teachers in the State. 
I thank you for your time and attention this afternoon and ask that you act 
favorably on LD 1702. I am happy to answer any questions you might have.
