Hello Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and other esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, my name is Ash Hebert. I am a resident of Waterville Maine and I 
am here to testify in opposition to LD445. 
While I strongly believe in the expansion of comprehensive healthcare coverage for low-income 
Mainers, I also strongly resist what could set a precedent for increased involuntary treatment in 
Maine. If this is a matter of securing emergency, last-resort options to help stabilize people, then 
any energy devoted to addressing the aftermath of someone’s crisis must be devoted three 
times as hard to building more just, equitable, accessible, and humanized systems that cause 
most harm in the first place. This means implementing a less invasive, money-driven, and 
disempowering paradigm into our healthcare as well as justice systems. A priority to fund, 
facilitate, and adopt noncoercive recovery models which encourage people to remain in their 
communities would absolutely transform how we perceive mental “illness” and the appropriate 
ways to approach our differences. Examples of alternative mental health options exist today, 
and they will continue to flourish throughout Maine with financial and legislative support. These 
include a wide range of peer services (peer support centers, respite houses, warm lines), 
mental health advance directives, and more. 
I am someone who has lifelong challenges with mental health and I am a survivor of chronic 
child abuse. While I was a Ward of the State, I was involuntarily hospitalized twice, and neither 
instance alleviated my suicidal ideation. In fact, those experiences instilled a deeper mistrust 
and the only reason I did not try to escape was for fear of what security guards, typically 
equipped with something to prevent my leaving, would do to deter my actions. I am so elated to 
see movement behind building peer respite programs here, because I know deep in my heart 
that a less hierarchical, force-based environment would have fostered healthier outcomes for 
me. 
While I consider the horrors of my childhood to be both an indictment of intergenerational, 
systemic disparities as well as a great contributor to my mental health challenges, I also see 
how their negative impacts are exacerbated by an underfunding of appropriate community-
based care networks in Maine. I strongly believe that we should not only consider but also allow 
history to guide us toward the least harmful options, now as well as in the future. Forced 
treatment always violates someone’s informed consent and as such, is deemed an act of 
medical mistreatment. Please listen to peers when we urge you away from a slippery slope of 
historical institutionalization. We cannot afford to backslide, and in fact our only option is to 
move forward together with a commitment to institute more dignified systems. 
In closing, I urge you to not pass LD445. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Ash Hebert
Waterville 
