Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human 
Services to Apply for a Waiver from the Federal 
Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment toa 
Facility with More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric 
Treatment LD 445 
Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, thank you for you time in listening to our 
Testimony from the Intentional Peer Support Advisory 
Committee (IPSAC) IN OPPOSITION TO LD 445 
The Intentional Peer Support Advisory Committee 
(IPSAC) is a group of Certiﬁed Intentional Peer Support 
Specialists who advise and support the Department of 
Health and Human Services in the continued development 
and ﬁdelity of the Intentional Peer Support (IPS) program in 
Maine. 
»My name is Carly Mahaffey. I am an advocate with 
Disability Rights Maine. I am the chair of IPSAC and I am 
reading this testimony from IPSAC. 
There is still no data that reports how many psychiatric 
beds in Maine are actually available at a given time. 
So how can people say there are not enough beds when 
We do not know how many available bedsthere are in the 
ﬁrst place?
How can people say more institutions need to be built 
when there is no data telling us what the daily capacity is of 
the institutions we do have? 
When hospitals report they can’t accept patients 
because they lack staff, then why would we think building 
another institution would be any different? 
Right now, people are struggling just to get their basic 
needs met. When a person is hospitalized their life is 
interrupted. All the things they were Working on to build 
support and resources for themselves in the community are 
put on hold, and will most likely disappear. 
In thinking about Writing testimony for this bill and 
for the peer respite bill LD 540, for IPSAC, it's already 
obvious to us Why we would oppose this bill and support that 
bill. 
However, we have to consider that is it not obvious to 
everyone, and that maybe the supporters of this bill, and 
maybe the members of this committee, probably don’t know 
what it's like to be hospitalized. Have not had the ﬁrst hand 
experience of being taken from your home, told you are 
dangerous, have your sense of safety ripped away from you,
be locked away, forced into treatment you don’t want or 
agree to, told to talk when you want to be quiet, and silenced 
when you want to talk. 
From our experiences, and from the countless ﬁrst 
hand experiences we’ve heard from others, we know that 
when people are supported and listened to, not pathologized, 
or forced or coerced and locked up in a hospital, a person 
can get the help that a_d;¢_zz _ﬂy helps and they won’t need 
Emergency Departments or institutions. 
From our knowledge and experience, we know that 
building additional inpatient units will not alleviate the crisis 
in the emergency departments. And how investing in the 
community, like LD 540, will help alleviate 
It is difﬁcult for us to read and hear bills like this 
because it's written and acted on, and policies are made, 
based on the perspectives of those who have no personal ﬁrst 
hand experience of being hospitalized, and who will not be 
directly impacted by it. 
We know behavioral health emergency departments 
are full and no one wants patients stuck there. We are not 
condoning or excusing any violence. We are sorry to hear
about the pain these families have experienced. These are 
personal tragedies being acted out on public center stage. 
We can understand that pain. 
That is Why we are saying to bring us into the 
conversation. Listen to us because we offer a different 
perspective. Because what you’re talking about here, that 
impacts me and other IPSAC members, and the people in 
our community personally. It impacts so many peopleI 
know who are scared to ask for help for fear of being 
involuntarily hospitalized and silenced. 
Thank you for your time and again We ask you to 
oppose this bill and vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS. 
-Carly Mahaffey Chair of IPSAC Intentional Peer 
Support Advisory Committee 
evvloil‘ 
- carv»M~9~\ @§W\@<l1'¢@W\ 
pl/lo»/lei 207 ' 
,Z\5 ' ?§L<5’?'
