 
200  NORTH GLEBE ROAD , SUITE 801  
ARLINGTON , VIRGINIA 22203  
703 -294 -6001  
TREATMENTADVOCACYCENTER .ORG  
Testimony by Clara Keane , Legislative Advocacy Manager,  Treatment Advocacy Center  
Submitted to the Committee on Health and Human Services  
Hearing regarding LD 445  
March 1 7, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Committee on Health and Human Services , 
 
My name is Clara Keane, and I  am the Legislative Advocacy Manager at Treatment Advocacy Center, a national 
nonprofit dedicated t o making treatment  possi ble for people with severe mental illness . The Treatment Advocacy 
Center supports LD 445 and respectfully requests the Legislature to advance this bill so that Maine may apply for 
expenditure authority under Section 1115 of the Social Security Act  to cover adult Medicaid recipients receiving 
treatment for serious mental illness (SMI) in instit ution for mental disease s (IMDs) . The expansion of Maine’s 
1115 waiver to include psychiatric services for people with SMI will lead to greater access to inpatient psychiatric 
care. In addition to increasing access for inpatient care, LD 445 will strengthe n Maine’s continuum of care for 
mental health services .  
 
Although ten states currently have waivers for SMI/ SED  treatment, seven more are pending, including New York. 
California will soon be applying for a waiver with strong bipartisan support, and New Ha mpshire has expanded 
coverage for people with SMI under its Section 1115 waiver.  Vermont, o ne of the first states to take advantage 
of this Medicaid authority, is the strongest example of how Maine can use  federal fund participation (FFP) under 
an SMI waiv er to help people at all stages of medically necessary treatment.  
 
Vermont’s waiver contains several avenues of FFP, including both the SMI/SED IMD exclusion language and 
funds for outpatient care. Vermont has authority to use waiver funds to achieve a num ber of objectives, 
specifically:  
 
• Reduce the rate of uninsured and/or underinsured in Vermont;  
• Increase the access to quality health care for uninsured, underinsured, and Medicaid  beneficiaries;  
• Provide public health approaches and other innovative programs to improve the  health outcomes, health 
status and  quality of life for uninsured, underinsured and  Medicaid -eligible individuals in Vermont; and  
• Encourage the formation and maintenance of public -private partnerships in health  care, inclu ding 
initiatives to support and improve the health care delivery system and  promote transformation to value -
based and integrated models of care.  
 
To achieve that goal, Vermont is allowed to spend waiver funds on a number of services, including “MH 
outpatient services for adults.”  The state just has to make the case that the expenditures advance one of those 
listed objectives.  Maine can do the same w ith its waiver, but only after passage of LD 445.  
 
Thank you for considering these comments.  
