 
Caring and serving since 1883®  
 
 
Community Health and Counseling Services             
            Home Health, Hospice and Mental Health Services  
 
March 1 7, 2023  
 
     Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and distinguished members of the Health and Human 
Services  Committee, my name is Dale Hamilton and I am the executive director of Community 
Health and Counseling Services (CHCS). I am writing in support of LD 445, Resolve, Directing 
the Department of Health and Human Services to Apply for a Waiver from the Federal 
Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with More Than 16 Inpatient 
Beds for Psychiatric Treatment . 
 
     You will hear co mpelling testimony for and against this bill. I think it is important to enter 
this discussion by knowing t hat stakeholders share the opintion  that the right service , at the right 
time, needs to be available for individuals seek ing services to address brain disorder illnesses. 
This bill takes an important step to improve access to inpatient psychiatric care for individuals 
who are seeking th is level of care.  
 
     We must  acknowledge the valid  concerns that you will hear regarding involuntary 
commitment. It is understandable that a bill that seemingly expands inpatient beds could be 
construed as a movement back to institutionalization. I would share that concern if we had ample 
resources to pro vide this level of care when it is needed. The unfortunate reality is that many 
people who are seeking this level of care literally sit in emergency departments for days, weeks 
and months. Other individuals endure the negative effects of the illness in iso lation and others 
become a risk to themselves or others. Inpatient psychiatric care is not tantamount to 
institutionalization or involuntary commitment. It is an essential part of the healthcare system 
and we should eliminate barriers that prevent this res ource from being available.  
 
     I think it is important for our system to protect individual rights and continue to build on the 
successes we have made to support community -based services. To that end, I believe that this 
bill provides opportunities for both things to occur. I believe that this bill can be supported while 
also supporting concerns that may surface regarding involuntary commitment. In short, halting 
the development of a much -needed resource because of what might happen , is harmful to all. 
Moving this forward , while also providing an opportunity for continued discussion on how we 
will monitor access and utilization, provides an opportunity for the voices of all stakeholders to 
be respected and acknowledged.  
 
     Thank you for the opportunity to present my thoughts about this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Dale Hamilton  
Executive Director  
      
PO Box 425  
Bangor, Maine 04402 -0425  
Tel. 207 -947-0366  
TTY 207 -990-4730  
www.chcs -me.org  

