 
 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony in Support  of LD 445 – “Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Serv ices 
to Apply for a Waiver from the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a 
Facility with More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment ” 
March  17, 2023  
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services . I am  Deborah Laurie,  City Manager of the City of Bangor , and I am providing 
testimony in support  of LD 445, “Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Apply for a Waiver from the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility 
with More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment. ” 
The City of Bangor is home to two psychiatric hospitals, Northern Light Acadia Hospital and the Dorothea 
Dix Psychiatric Ce nter.   Both provide excellent care to Mainers experiencing psychiatric crisis.  They , and 
all psychiatric facilities across M aine, face many challenges  which could be effectively addressed by 
increased funding opportunities  such as those created by the waiver of the Medicaid  limitation on 
payments to facilities with more than 16 inpatient beds.  
Bangor is  also home to two hospitals, both of which routinely have emergency departments struggling 
under the burden of severely mentally ill patients with no appropriate placement.   In far too many 
instances, without placement options, these individuals are discharged with no plan for housing or the 
intensive psychiatric services they so desperately need.  They are essentially left to fend for themselves. 
Consequently, many join the growin g ranks of homeless adults and youth on the streets of Bangor and 
most service center communities across the state.   
Currently, federal  law prohibits states from using Medicaid to pay for care provided in “institutions for 
mental disease” (IMDs), which are psychiatric hospitals or other residential treatment facilities that have 
more than 16 b eds. This is the only part of federal Medicaid law that prohibits payment for the cost of 
providing medically necessary care because of the type of illness being treated  or the number of beds in 
a facility . This discriminatory exclusion has been in place since Medicaid’s enactment in 1965, a nd it has 
resulted in unequal coverage of mental health care.   It has also resulted in the inability of psychiatric 
providers  like those in our community  and throughout the state  to maintain or expand bed capacity in 
response to the ever -growing need.   
The need is acute and well documented.  Since deinstitutionalization in 1955, there has been a 93% 
reduction in the number of beds available to the severely mentally ill at state hospitals.  According to 
Northern Light Acadia Hospital, their average daily waitlist in January of this year was nearly thirty, and in  
2021, their average daily census was less than 60 for in a hospital licensed for 100 beds.   

 
 
We support any action the S tate can take to increase funding opportun ities that could greatly expand bed 
capacity and improve treatment options for some of our most vulnerable citizens.  No longer will 
psychiatric patients languish in emergency departments for d ays on end waiting for a bed in a facility that 
can provide the treatment they so desperately need.  With treatment capacity increase d, our jails will no 
longer serve as the largest de  facto psychiatric hospitals in the state.  And, perhaps, Bangor and oth er 
cities across Maine can begin to reverse the trend of increasing homelessness.  
On behalf of the Bangor City Council , I strongly urge you to pass LD 445 to improve the provision of 
psychiatr ic treatment across Maine.  
 
 
 
