Testimony of Doug Dunbar from Hermon, Maine
In Support of LD 445
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Apply for a Waiver 
from the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with 
More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment"
Public Hearing: March 17, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Committee, my name is Doug Dunbar. I am 
a resident of Hermon in Joe Baldacci’s district and appreciate the opportunity to testify in support of LD 
445. I have friends who support this legislation and others who oppose it. I appreciate everyone’s interest 
in this very important issue.
Since my earliest recollections as a child, I suffered from two mental illnesses—obsessive compulsive 
disorder (OCD) and anxiety. They made life a daily struggle. These illnesses were debilitating and often 
tormenting. Because of fear and stigma, I kept them concealed from everyone, even family members and 
closest friends.
Among other aspects of daily life, reading was terribly problematic, as I might read the same sentence, 
paragraph or page over and over and over again. Despite this, I somehow graduated from high school, 
college and even earned a master’s degree. My professors would be unhappy to know how little I read, 
but I managed to get by. That was life for me, managing in silence day-by-day.
As a young person, I also had a strong desire to help people and was interested in politics. In high school 
and college, I got involved in campaigns. It led to a 30-year career in government. Again, I simply found 
ways to manage through my career…until 9/11.
When the terrorist attacks occurred that horrible day, I was working on Capitol Hill in Washington as 
then-Congressman John Baldacci’s communications director. As the events unfolded, my OCD and 
anxiety spiraled out of control. The very next day, I began self-medicating with alcohol.
As the years went by, I moved back to Maine and worked as John’s press secretary in the Governor’s 
office and then served as Maine’s Chief Deputy Secretary of State. I went on to work in other capacities, 
all the while drinking myself to death in order to deal with mental illness.
About ten years ago, I began to have legal problems. Very poor decision-making caused by my alcohol 
use disorder led to six arrests, several months in three Maine jails and over a year in the Penobscot 
County Adult Treatment and Recovery Court. 
Although I had served in the Secretary of State’s office and understood the consequences well, I couldn’t 
stop drinking and driving. I kept drinking because I was an alcoholic. I kept driving, because I didn’t want 
anyone in my world to know problems were developing. Fortunately, I never harmed anyone.
Going to jail was the most fascinating and eye-opening experience of my life. I recommend it for my 
friends who are judges, attorneys, prosecutors, legislators and anyone who touches any aspect of the 
criminal legal system. I no longer call it the justice system, because there’s far too little justice for many 
parties, including the victims of crime.
These days, more than 5 years in recovery and working to assist others who have struggled with substance 
use disorder, mental illness or been incarcerated, I tell people of my two great regrets. First, putting the 
public at risk by regularly operating under the influence of alcohol. 
Second, paying little attention to the pervasive injustices and inequities within the criminal legal system. 
As a society, we’ve created and perpetuate a system that does tremendous harm. We’ve done so many 
things wrong as a state and nation, it’s breathtaking.
One of the most troubling, and what brings me here today, is the criminalization of mental illness. 
Due to our failure to create an appropriate community-based mental health care system after asylums 
were rightly closed, and because of lawmakers’ insatiable and misguided appetite to criminalize so many 
things, a staggering number of individuals suffering from mental health challenges and brain disorders are 
jailed and imprisoned.
According to research conducted by the Prison Policy Institute and many other organizations, an alarming 
percentage of people in our places of incarceration suffer from a mental health disorder 
(www.prisonpolicy.org/research/mental_health). Percentages vary, but whether it is 30, 40 or 50 percent, 
the figures should shock and disturb us all.
In a report last month, the Pew Charitable Trusts indicated over 1 in 9 individuals with co-occurring 
substance use and mental health disorders are arrested each year ( www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-
analysis/issue-briefs/2023/02/over-1-in-9-people-with-co-occurring-mental-illness-and-substance-use-
disorders-arrested-annually).
It was astonishing, at times horrifying, to watch the way many of these individuals were treated in Maine 
jails. I was released from incarceration determined to find ways to make sure far fewer people 
experiencing mental illness would be institutionalized in our jails and prisons.
That brings me to LD 445. I understand some opponents worry about returning to a time of large 
institutional settings for people suffering from mental illness. Like those opponents, I am working hard to 
ensure more community-based services are available We should all endeavor to make sure support and 
treatment are accessible across Maine.
However, I believe there’s a need for more resources and a way for people to get needed care in a variety 
of settings. Some individuals require treatment that may only be available in larger health care facilities. I 
don’t want them denied services because they’re poor and the federal government won’t cover the cost. 
Included below this testimony is a page from the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) website. I 
hope you’ll have time to read it below or here: www.nami.org/Advocacy/Policy-Priorities/Improving-
Health/Medicaid-IMD-Exclusion.
No, I don’t want people institutionalized and harmed as in the past, but that is essentially what’s 
happening today in our jails and prisons. We need more choices and funding. LD 445 will help in this 
regard. Thanks for your time and consideration of this testimony. If there are questions or additional 
information is desired, please contact me by e-mail ( dougdunbar@yahoo.com) or call (207) 299-5626.
Medicaid IMD Exclusion
Where We Stand
NAMI believes that health insurance should provide comprehensive mental health and 
substance use disorder coverage without arbitrary limits on treatment. NAMI opposes 
Medicaid’s discriminatory prohibition on paying for mental health treatment delivered in 
certain inpatient settings, known as “institutions for mental disease” (IMDs).
Why We Care
Currently, the law prohibits states from using Medicaid to pay for care provided in 
“institutions for mental disease” (IMDs), which are psychiatric hospitals or other 
residential treatment facilities that have more than 16 beds. This is the only part of 
federal Medicaid law that prohibits payment for the cost of providing medically 
necessary care because of the type of illness being treated. This discriminatory 
exclusion has been in place since Medicaid’s enactment in 1965, and it has resulted in 
unequal coverage of mental health care.
Recently, states were given the option to cover short-term stays in psychiatric hospitals 
by applying for a waiver from the federal government. While this option shows progress, 
we need to permanently remove the IMD exclusion. People with mental health 
conditions — just like people with any medical condition — need a range of care options 
from outpatient services to hospital care. Updating the IMD exclusion to allow for short-
term stays in psychiatric hospitals helps strengthen the mental health system and 
provides those who rely on Medicaid with more treatment options.
How We Talk About It
About one in eight visits to hospital emergency rooms involves a mental health or 
substance use condition. However, emergency departments are often not 
equipped to help people experiencing a mental health crisis.
Unfortunately, emergency department staff often have nowhere to send a person 
in crisis because of the limited number of inpatient psychiatric beds in the U.S., 
which have decreased significantly since the 1950s.
When there are not enough inpatient beds available, emergency departments 
often release people in crisis — leaving them to deal with their illness on their 
own.
We know what happens when people don’t get the treatment they need when 
they need it — they can end up in jail or on the streets — leading to worse 
outcomes for the person, greater pain for their families and a higher cost to the 
state and the federal government.
Federal Medicaid policy has contributed to the mental health system’s lack of a 
full range of treatment options, including inpatient care, for people with mental 
illness.
Medicaid doesn’t pay for care provided in “institutions for mental disease” (IMDs), 
which are psychiatric hospitals or other residential treatment facilities that have 
more than 16 beds. This is discriminatory.
This policy, known as the “IMD exclusion,” is the only part of the Medicaid 
program that doesn’t pay for medically necessary care simply because of the 
type of illness.
The IMD exclusion is discriminatory and has a real-life impact on people’s ability 
to access needed treatment.
Recently, states were given the option to cover short-term stays in psychiatric 
hospitals under Medicaid by applying for a waiver from the federal government. 
While this option shows progress, we need to permanently remove the IMD 
exclusion.
Every person who relies on Medicaid should have access to the full range of 
treatment options they need — bringing us one step closer towards full and equal 
treatment under the law.
Doug Dunbar
Hermon
LD 445
Testimony of Doug Dunbar from Hermon, Maine
In Support of LD 445
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Apply for a Waiver from
the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with More Than 
16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment"
Public Hearing: March 17, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Committee, my name is 
Doug Dunbar. I am a resident of Hermon in Joe Baldacci’s district and appreciate the 
opportunity to testify in support of LD 445. I have friends who support this legislation
and others who oppose it. I appreciate everyone’s interest in this very important issue.
Since my earliest recollections as a child, I suffered from two mental 
illnesses—obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and anxiety. They made life a daily 
struggle. These illnesses were debilitating and often tormenting. Because of fear and 
stigma, I kept them concealed from everyone, even family members and closest 
friends.
Among other aspects of daily life, reading was terribly problematic, as I might read 
the same sentence, paragraph or page over and over and over again. Despite this, I 
somehow graduated from high school, college and even earned a master’s degree. My
professors would be unhappy to know how little I read, but I managed to get by. That 
was life for me, managing in silence day-by-day.
As a young person, I also had a strong desire to help people and was interested in 
politics. In high school and college, I got involved in campaigns. It led to a 30-year 
career in government. Again, I simply found ways to manage through my 
career…until 9/11.
When the terrorist attacks occurred that horrible day, I was working on Capitol Hill in
Washington as then-Congressman John Baldacci’s communications director. As the 
events unfolded, my OCD and anxiety spiraled out of control. The very next day, I 
began self-medicating with alcohol.
As the years went by, I moved back to Maine and worked as John’s press secretary in 
the Governor’s office and then served as Maine’s Chief Deputy Secretary of State. I 
went on to work in other capacities, all the while drinking myself to death in order to 
deal with mental illness.
About ten years ago, I began to have legal problems. Very poor decision-making 
caused by my alcohol use disorder led to six arrests, several months in three Maine 
jails and over a year in the Penobscot County Adult Treatment and Recovery Court.
Although I had served in the Secretary of State’s office and understood the 
consequences well, I couldn’t stop drinking and driving. I kept drinking because I was
an alcoholic. I kept driving, because I didn’t want anyone in my world to know 
problems were developing. Fortunately, I never harmed anyone.
Going to jail was the most fascinating and eye-opening experience of my life. I 
recommend it for my friends who are judges, attorneys, prosecutors, legislators and 
anyone who touches any aspect of the criminal legal system. I no longer call it the 
justice system, because there’s far too little justice for many parties, including the 
victims of crime.
These days, more than 5 years in recovery and working to assist others who have 
struggled with substance use disorder, mental illness or been incarcerated, I tell 
people of my two great regrets. First, putting the public at risk by regularly operating 
under the influence of alcohol.
Second, paying little attention to the pervasive injustices and inequities within the 
criminal legal system. As a society, we’ve created and perpetuate a system that does 
tremendous harm. We’ve done so many things wrong as a state and nation, it’s 
breathtaking.
One of the most troubling, and what brings me here today, is the criminalization of 
mental illness.
Due to our failure to create an appropriate community-based mental health care 
system after asylums were rightly closed, and because of lawmakers’ insatiable and 
misguided appetite to criminalize so many things, a staggering number of individuals 
suffering from mental health challenges and brain disorders are jailed and imprisoned.
According to research conducted by the Prison Policy Institute and many other 
organizations, an alarming percentage of people in our places of incarceration suffer 
from a mental health disorder (www.prisonpolicy.org/research/mental_health). 
Percentages vary, but whether it is 30, 40 or 50 percent, the figures should shock and 
disturb us all.
In a report last month, the Pew Charitable Trusts indicated over 1 in 9 individuals 
with co-occurring substance use and mental health disorders are arrested each year 
(www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2023/02/over-1-in-9-peopl
e-with-co-occurring-mental-illness-and-substance-use-disorders-arrested-annually).
It was astonishing, at times horrifying, to watch the way many of these individuals 
were treated in Maine jails. I was released from incarceration determined to find ways
to make sure far fewer people experiencing mental illness would be institutionalized 
in our jails and prisons.
That brings me to LD 445. I understand some opponents worry about returning to a 
time of large institutional settings for people suffering from mental illness. Like those 
opponents, I am working hard to ensure more community-based services are available
We should all endeavor to make sure support and treatment are accessible across 
Maine.
However, I believe there’s a need for more resources and a way for people to get 
needed care in a variety of settings. Some individuals require treatment that may only 
be available in larger health care facilities. I don’t want them denied services because 
they’re poor and the federal government won’t cover the cost. Included below this 
testimony is a page from the National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) website. I 
hope you’ll have time to read it below or here: 
www.nami.org/Advocacy/Policy-Priorities/Improving-Health/Medicaid-IMD-Exclusi
on.
No, I don’t want people institutionalized and harmed as in the past, but that is 
essentially what’s happening today in our jails and prisons. We need more choices 
and funding. LD 445 will help in this regard. Thanks for your time and consideration 
of this testimony. If there are questions or additional information is desired, please 
contact me by e-mail (dougdunbar@yahoo.com) or call (207) 299-5626.
Medicaid IMD Exclusion
Where We Stand
NAMI believes that health insurance should provide comprehensive mental health and 
substance use disorder coverage without arbitrary limits on treatment. NAMI opposes 
Medicaid’s discriminatory prohibition on paying for mental health treatment delivered in 
certain inpatient settings, known as “institutions for mental disease” (IMDs).
Why We Care
Currently, the law prohibits states from using Medicaid to pay for care provided in “institutions 
for mental disease” (IMDs), which are psychiatric hospitals or other residential treatment 
facilities that have more than 16 beds. This is the only part of federal Medicaid law that 
prohibits payment for the cost of providing medically necessary care because of the type of 
illness being treated. This discriminatory exclusion has been in place since Medicaid’s 
enactment in 1965, and it has resulted in unequal coverage of mental health care.
Recently, states were given the option to cover short-term stays in psychiatric hospitals by 
applying for a waiver from the federal government. While this option shows progress, we 
need to permanently remove the IMD exclusion. People with mental health conditions — just 
like people with any medical condition — need a range of care options from outpatient 
services to hospital care. Updating the IMD exclusion to allow for short-term stays in 
psychiatric hospitals helps strengthen the mental health system and provides those who rely 
on Medicaid with more treatment options.
How We Talk About It
 About one in eight visits to hospital emergency rooms involves a mental health or substance 
use condition. However, emergency departments are often not equipped to help people 
experiencing a mental health crisis.
 Unfortunately, emergency department staff often have nowhere to send a person in crisis 
because of the limited number of inpatient psychiatric beds in the U.S., which have decreased
significantly since the 1950s.
 When there are not enough inpatient beds available, emergency departments often release 
people in crisis — leaving them to deal with their illness on their own.
 We know what happens when people don’t get the treatment they need when they need it —
they can end up in jail or on the streets — leading to worse outcomes for the person, greater 
pain for their families and a higher cost to the state and the federal government.

