Chairperson Baldacci, Chairperson Meyer, other distinguished members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee: 
My name is John Nutting from Leeds, and I'm here in strong support of LD 4H5. I want 
to thank Senator Baldacci for bringing this bill forward and its assurance that we have this 
very important discussion. 
In 2002, as a member of the Maine Senate, I was the prime sponsor of the progressive 
treatment plan bill (PTP) and I have served on the Riverview Hospital human rights committee 
for the last eight years. Maine has previously applied for the IMD waiver for substance abuse 
and for severe mental illness. It was approved for both by the federal government, but Maine 
chose only to accept funds for substance abuse. I have read in multiple papers that the 
reason given was “that the mental health funds had to be used for building hospital beds, and 
Maine had an adequate number currently ’! I will leave it up to others to debate hospital bed 
numbers. The point l want to make is that Illinois, Washington DC, Vermont, Massachusetts, 
Oklahoma, Utah, Idaho, Rhode Island, and Washington have all received IMD waiver monies 
for serious mental illness, and used a good percentage of them to strengthen their 
COMMUNITY mental health support systems! They have enhanced their mobile crisis 
response units, their peer supports, their community based services and their housing 
services. I do know that these are all things that Maine desperately needs to improve on in 
order to keep more people suffering from severe and persistent mental illness safely 
supported in a less restrictive setting in the community. 
Departments getting inaccurate or bad advice is nothing new, but the department not 
checking on this while three New England states already are benefiting from stronger 
community. supports is extremely disappointing. Of course, if other states can, so can Maine. 
In 2016, President Obama signed the “21 st Century Cures Act”; part of that bipartisan 
federal act established a grant program for assertive community treatment teams (ACT) - no 
state match required. Millions of dollars have gone to states for this funding over the last six 
years so that more people with “Anosignosia ” could be intensely and safely supported in the 
community on PTP programs rather than on a “cross your fingers" program. The state of 
Maine has never applied! 
Both of these issues beg the question, why isn’t the state ot Maine applying for all 
readily available sources of federal monies to strengthen our mental health system, both ina 
hospital and a community setting? The public and the press that is here today have been 
asking these questions for months and months and cannot even get a call back! We are all 
hoping that you the members of this committee today, and in the work session on LD 455, can 
get this question answered. 
Thank you. l’d be happy to answer any questions.
