Julie Potter
Gray
LD 445
My name is Julie Potter. I have had lived experience of having been a part of the 
Maine Mental Health system since 1992 as well as having had worked in the mental 
health field for 10 years. I am also a single parent to a beautiful 22-year-old girl who 
has struggled with trauma and her MH.  I have been a long-time advocate for 
children, adults, and families who are navigating the mental health system. I am 
writing to testify in opposition of LD 445 as I am unable to attend the Legislative 
session in Augusta this Tuesday. 
POINT #1:
Creating more psychiatric beds in the state of Maine will not decrease the congestion in our 
ER's nor aid in elevating the "mental health crisis". We currently have psychiatric beds in the 
state that are going unused due to the inability of hospitals to provide the staff needed to 
support hospitals in maintaining maximum capacities of "patients" in treatment wards.  Adding
more beds will not address the statewide staffing shortages that limits hospital's ability to fill 
the beds we currently have. The adding of more beds will not increase access to treatment of 
those who seek mental health support it will only bring more people to ERs in hopes of 
accessing treatment that cannot be provided due to inadequate staffing. This will cause more 
congestion in ER's rather than less and add to people's frustration, trauma, and 
disappointment when they cannot access what they need. This will denture many from 
seeking help further from a system that repeatedly disappoints them adding to this MH crisis 
situation. 
POINT #2:
If our goal is to increase psychiatric beds so we have space to accommodate increased 
involuntary hospitalizations and forced treatment this also, will not work to ease the current 
situation. In my personal and professional experience forced treatment rarely works and when
it does, wellness is rarely sustained due to lack of natural support systems in our families, 
relationships, and communities, as well as insufficient outpatient programing and/or positive 
spaces to practice new coping strategies that are learned in the hospital setting.  
POINT # 3
The unfortunate truth is that we cannot force people into change. I say this having been 
someone who has been forced into treatment and as a parent who has forced her beloved 
child into MH treatment, neither of which worked. In fact, in both situations, it escalated the 
resistance toward treatment/therapy/ medication management, created an ineffective but 
understandable distrust of helping professionals, and increased suicidal thoughts and 
attempts.  
POINT #4: Personal Experience of the ineffectiveness of forced treatment.
I had forced my daughter into treatment for depression several times. Each time she 
got released from the psych hospital and sent home having convinced professionals 
that she was "safe" at home. When she was between 17 and 19, I had sent her into 
treatment 4 consecutive times against her will. Each time she was released I was 
hopeful that she had gotten the help she needed. Each time she attempted to take her 
life in various different ways.  She withdrew from all the intensive outpatient clinical 
supports she had been provided with at home and became severely angry and 
distrustful of these helpers and the MH system as a whole. Each time she tried to end 
her life the next plan she created to take her life became more elaborate. After 
repeatedly calling 911, when I found her lifeless body after overdosing, or bloody 
from slit wrists, or from not eating or drinking for weeks on end, I surrendered to the 
painful fact that forcing her to go to the hospital was making things worse for her. It 
was only when I let go of her life and gave it back to her by offering her empathy, 
compassion, and listening to what she wanted and what she found to be helpful did 
she begin to move toward her own wellness. She became more open to working with 
a therapist and built up her confidence in herself. But her saving grace was that she 
was able to find a supportive and non-judgmental place in our community to practice 
her newly acquired skills. On the backbones of some new-found friends, she 
blossomed into a new person and is now successfully employed and planning to 
attend college within the next year. 
Ironically, I also was forced into treatment by a Clinical Social Worker after my 
daughter left the nest so to speak. I remember telling the people in the hospital what 
they wanted to hear all the while planning my death. When I was released, I attempted
to take my life by overdose. Why, you may ask?  Because I was trying to cope with 
the life-long feeling of powerlessness, lack of self-worth and confidence as well as 
loneliness that comes with being a survivor of emotional, physical and sexual abuse. 
At the time I was being prepared to be released back to an empty house, with no 
family, friends, or community to support me. Nobody asked me what I needed to feel 
safe at home or was even willing to listen to my story. They would tell me that "we 
don't deal with trauma in the hospital, we are just here to stabilize you on your 
medication so you can address that stuff at home with an outpatient trauma therapist".
The problem was there was a year wait list for this trauma therapy, I didn't believe 
that I could heal, and I had not natural supports to help me through the hard stuff. I 
did not start to heal until I could identify what I needed, found non-clinical people in 
my life that were willing to hear what I needed and helped me believe in ability and 
worthiness of healing. 
CONCLUSION: Less Institutionalized Psych treatment & More Community based 
Alternative treatment options/ Outpatient clinical treatment options where people can 
build a sustainable and meaningful life worth living while being supported by people 
in their own communities.
