March 17, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honorable members 
of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
My name is Kandie Cleaves, I live in Garland, and I wish to testify in opposition of 
LD 445 "Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Apply for a Waiver from the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on 
Payment to a Facility with More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric 
Treatment." 
I fully believe the intent of those behind this bill was meant to be helpful and get 
more services, that said it would be anything but that. What it would do is open 
the door to bring in more beds. We currently can't staff all the beds we already 
have. The limitation in place that you are wanting to have overlooked is what has 
helped protect my community from an even harder push to re-institutionalize. 
My biological family and I have a history of mental health issues. When I was at 
my lowest as an adult, I was helped by being referred to two different councilors a 
week, that lasted almost 4 yrs. I had signiﬁcant traumas than needed to be dealt 
with. That's not even possible to get today. That ability though ultimately saved 
signiﬁcant money for the state. Had I been sent to a Psychiatric hospital my 
children would have had to be placed into foster care; To get them back would 
have required evaluations, counselling, visitations, ongoing supervision etc. All of 
these would have added up to signiﬁcant costs. Instead, my needs were met by 
the councilors and a case manager. 
One of my children required in patient treatment twice as a child and once as an 
adult. Each stay lasted approximately a month. During which time they were able 
to help her get stabilized. After her ﬁnal time she was ﬁnally ready to participate 
in outside programs to help keep herself well. Because of so many cuts a few yrs. 
ago her number of services has dwindled, those of us closest can see the effects, 
thankfully what services she still has keeps her from falling to far, but they haven't 
allowed her to be all she could be if she had proper access to outside services. 
Many these days tell me their stays are just a few days, some as short as 2. That 
isn't about providing proper care or stabilizing it is about money. These people go 
back into the community frequently without proper supports.
One young woman in particular was desperately trying to get help. Each time the 
hospital either turned her away or admitted her short time and released while still 
in the middle of a mental health crisis. Her lack of care and supports led to being 
jailed, losing custody of a baby and never being given the supports needed to 
recover so that she could be in her child's life. 
When the Sherriff attempted to have her sent over for care, they claimed lack of 
beds. Yet when he asks how many beds are available he is required to ﬁle fora 
Freedom of Access. A life list of beds should be available to providers and to law 
enforcement at the very least. 
Rather than focusing on a bill like this my peers and our tax dollars would be far 
better served if you focus on the Ofﬁce of Behavioral Health's strategic plan 
efforts. 
In Closing I again ask you to vote “Ought Not to Pass" on LD 44-5. 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland
