295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 445 
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human 
Services to Apply for a Waiver from the Federal Government for 
the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with More Than 
16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment"  
Sponsored by Senator Joseph Baldacci  
March 1 7, 2023  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and hardworking  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and 
I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the sta tewide association representing the majority of Maine’s 
community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing 
services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for 
the implementation of sound policies a nd evidence -based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 445, "Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Apply for a Waiver from 
the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with 
More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment ." I also want to thank Senator 
Baldacci for presenting this bill as I know this is an issue  that has many me ntal health 
advocates  weighing in from differing perspectives. It is not always easy to step in to 
the middle of such a n important , and  yet divided  issue.  
 
The institutions for mental diseases (IMD) exclusion has been in place in Medicaid statute 
since 1965. An IMD is defined as a hospital, nursing  facility, or other institution of more 
than 16 beds  that is primarily engaged in providing diagnosis, treatment, or care of 
persons with mental diseases, which includes substance use disorders (SUDs).  However, 
Maine sought and successfully received the waiver for IMD for SUD ser vices in 201 9. This 
waiver , combined with the recent rate reform , is actuall y allow ing Maine to expand it s 
capacity  to serve  those  with substance  use disorder  in residential settings.    
 
Maine initially had sought the waiver for IMD for mental health as well, but due to the 
concerns expressed by many advocates with lived experience, Maine withdrew that 
request . The concerns by those advoca tes are important and compelling . There is a real 
fear of re -institutionalization  and of expanded involuntary hospitalizations given the 
history of how those with menta l illness or mental challenges were treated in the past.   
 
These are valid and i mportant concerns. The Alliance members , and I, would also never 
want to see what happened in the past to recur today. But that is not what is being asked 
for in this resolve.  
 
The Alliance s upport s this waiver of Medicaid’s IMD exclusion  for three  main reasons.  
 
First, and quite simply, there  is a need for more supported residential  and in-patient  beds 
for those with severe and persistent mental illness.  There is more need than capacity.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
 
We have all seen what happens when there are not enough inpatient beds available , people get stuck in 
emergency departments  for days, weeks or months. Up to one -third of MaineHealth’s emergency 
department beds have been filled by behavioral health patients waiting to receive care.   
 
Secondly, and most importantly, the intent of this waiver is to not only seek increased physical capacity, 
but to also bring in additional federal matching dollars. This would infuse more dollars  into our system 
of care . This is needed.  
 
And thirdly, this waiver could be also used to invest further in our community based mental heal th care 
continuum , not just residential or in -patient care . When M aine sought the IMD waiv er for SUD services, 
the application  also sought state flexibility to pilot four services focused on MaineCare -enrol led parents 
with SUD who are involved with or at risk of involvement with Child Protective Services. The proposed 
pilots include d testing community -based skill development, parenting interventions, bundled payments 
to address social determinants of health, and MaineCare eligibility changes intended to address 
coverage and service delivery gaps that impact the health and well -being of this target population and 
their families.  This type of expanded community service pilot  could also be sought with the mental 
health IMD waiver .  
 
We need to be ab le to move forward with expanding our capacity for treatment, but also keep the valid 
concerns about any movement to wards re -institutionaliza tion forefront in our minds.  We can do both 
of these things at the same ti me.  
 
I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 445. Thank you for your time and attention to t his important  
issue . I would be happy to get you additional information for the work session.  
