Mitch Degere 
58 maple wood Lane 
Durham, ME 04222 
Testimony in Opposition of LD445 
Dear Senator Balducci and honorable members of the joint standing committee on health and human 
services. My name is Mitch Degere, I am a resident of Durham ME and I am here today to testify in 
opposition against LD 445. I work as an Intentional Peer Support Specialist and co-facilitate a group that 
I initiated at my employment called "alternatives to suicide" (Alt2S) and have begun to initiate a group 
for moms that have had children taken by the state. My peers and I are creating a newspaper, the first 
edition to be published May 15‘. 
Intentional Peer Support is about Community and Social changg 
In 1990 my exhilaration to be in Ireland, seemed indescribable as my cab drove me down O'Connell 
Street through the center of Dublin. As my observations were keen, the grayness, and some sadness 
sunk in watching poor children chalk drawing on the sidewalk for coins. I stated to my driver " I hear the 
job market is bad right now. ”BAD! He says, I'll tell you how bad it is! Just the other day my mate Patrick 
was crossing the lively river bridge, for he had seen this poor sole of a man jump in. Patrick, being the 
brave man that he is, jumps in after your man. Our poor soul yelling out don't save me! don't save me! 
Patrick, taken by surprise, my god man I didn't jump in to save ya, I want to find out where ya work." 
In this experience is the human condition, people struggling to survive, little children hungry, the shame 
of poverty, Patrick taking advantage of another person's pain, and the fact that it took me two weeks to 
realize the cabby had pulled over to tell me this ditty, thus charging me for the story. 
Invest money and resources directly into the Community 
At the age of five a gentle small, rugged hand grabbed the inside of my arm and startled me. WhenI 
looked up, I relaxed. ”Oh, it’sjust smiler" . I was raped repeatedly by an elderly neighbor, we called 
”smiler" a trauma that remained silent for 25 years and created the inability to protect myself whenI 
was abducted at the age of 14, which also remained hidden. ”Most abuse is friendly fire" 
I lived with a loving family; Mom, Dad, two sisters and two brothers. Our neighborhood should have 
been in a Norman Rockwell painting. A 10- room farmhouse that was always breaking down, loading 
coal, carrying water from the well when the pump was down, rock and apple fights, countless 
adventures and every once and awhile a call to my mother, Mrs. Degere your boys are naked on the roof 
again. The home with love, but saturated with alcoholism and periods of dysfunction, some violence. 
My siblings and I LOVED IT! 
Families are in desperate need of help in dealing with their collective trouble 
Between 1991 and 1996 I went from being in a psychiatric ward (three times/each for six weeks) and 
several stays in day treatment to working as a mental health worker the at Austen Riggs Center for three
years. A psychiatric treatment center with seriously mentally ill patients that have a history of treatment 
resistance. lt is an ”open setting" , the freedom to come and go which puts the initiation and 
commitment of the treatment along with personal safety, where it belongs, "in their own hands" 
Involuntary Hospitalization should be very rare. Because forced treatment doesn't work as well 
ln freedom we experience anxiety, fear, shame, isolation. All us humans must manage our freedom 
throughout our lives, developing our own sense of security. This development begins when we have no 
control over our lives as infants/toddlers and young children. 
My personal experiences, research, and education brings me to the conclusion the task for us today is to 
oppose this Bill which will only continue to fuel inefficiency, instead let's bridge the emphatic gap 
between the powers that be and the people they are serving. This is backed by expert research from the 
APA shown through Meta-analysis that support for mental health into the community will influence the 
reduction in need of psychiatric beds. 
Recently, there are many states trying to make it easier for "involuntary" psychiatric bed admissions for 
inpatient and outpatient treatment. Please refrain from this, the cost is too high, and it feeds into the 
root causes that contribute to mental illness: humiliation, shame, and isolation. 
Dignity needs to be "imbedded" in the treatment of the mental health system.
