nancy boucher
WESTBROOK
LD 445
Maine's proud state motto adopted in 1820 is  Dirigo : I lead
Yet 
We are behind in Maine in applying for a waiver for IMD exclusions for the treatment
of serious brain illnesses.
The Medicaid Institutions for Mental Diseases (IMD) exclusion prohibits the use of 
federal Medicaid financing for care provided to most patients in mental health and 
substance use disorder residential treatment facilities larger than 16 beds.
Maine has applied and gotten a waiver for Medicaid financing for substance abuse 
disorder. 
Now let's get that waiver for serious brain disorders by passing L.D. 445 !
.
L.D.445 directs the Department of Health and Human Services to apply for a waiver 
for the discriminatory Medicaid limitation on payment to appropriate services.
If any members of the Maine Legislature are still asking why should I vote for 
L.D.445 ???---I can tell you that is so  easy  to answer if you have loved, cared for, 
worked with, or known  someone who got sick with a serious brain disorder.
It is way past time to offer proactive and more continuum  financially covered 
treatments for serious brain disorders. Sometimes our loved ones  need  
hospitalization with constant care ….and other times what they need is community 
support and care.
If you have never had to walk with someone you care about who had a serious brain disorder 
and you  had a lack of financial supported treatment options for their care,  please take time 
to read this piece that I wrote in support of another bill -LD 1994.  My learnings come  from 
over 28 years of personal experience with our son ,  with 2 of my siblings, and with my 
students whom I loved too!
Stand in my shoes
This is one of the practices that I developed and applied in my work as a behavior 
strategist in public schools with children with complex conditions who had a 
distressing conflict with an other. The practice was an exercise that I called stand in 
my shoes.  I had varied pairs of shoes available in my classroom that I had gotten 
from our families pile of shoes!. I always began the by having my student  stand first 
in his/ /her own shoes and tell descriptively who was involved, where they were, and 
what went down in the conflict- including how it impacted them – their emotions and 
their reactions. Then they would move to other pair(s) of shoes ( representing the 
person(s) he/she had the wipe out conflict with) and express what they thought was 
going down for each person. It was a substantive, powerful, and forward moving 
exercise . I try to practice it in my life daily. 
Here is an example of how I applied it in my written support of a bill ( LD 1994) in 
our state legislature:
An Act To Establish The Progressive Treatment Program Fund
 
As you consider how you will vote on funding LD 1994, please take a moment to 
stand in the shoes of those with first hand primary experience. Stand in my son with 
smi's shoes-my son  who has suffered losses unimaginably painful and profound and 
who gratefully is still with us . Stand in my mother shoes. I have been living with, 
standing by,  and feeling pain and sorrow without bounds from witnessing the 
devastation of my son's so serious brain based illness on his life for 28 years now. 
Then- if you have had  no experience with serious mental illness- imagine it like 
having  someone you love lose  all of their limbs and  still try to carry on- and yet 
with smi , their loss is not visible and thus less attended to or recognized or 
understood. Their  loss is a no fault  brain based illness and  more invisible . And so 
again I ask, please take a moment to stand in our shoes . Let kindness show you the 
way and vote to fund LD 1994. 
Let kindness show you the way again and vote for L.D. 445
Thank you. 
Nancy Pizzo Boucher
Westbrook, Maine
