526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478     833-713-2618    www.maineddc.org
March 13, 2023
Testimony opposing LD 445, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
to Apply for a Waiver from the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to 
a Facility with More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment. 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services:
My name is Rachel Dyer, and I am the associate director of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council. Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the 
Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD 
Council has been advocating with and for individuals with developmental disabilities for over 50 
years.  The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with members from 
across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of 
public and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for individuals 
with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, 
capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with 
developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated, and involved in 
their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.  
MDDC presents these thoughts from the long-term perspective of developmental disabilities 
services. We recognize that the silos inherent in the system mean that this proposal, if enacted, 
may not immediately impact people with DD. And, as Pineland Center opened in 1908 as the 
“Maine School for the Feeble Minded” and was built with the best of intentions “to ameliorate 
and better the condition of this unfortunate class”, we recognize that congregating people may 
have unintended outcomes. I invite you to learn more about Maine’s former institution for people 
with intellectual disabilities at  https://shadowsofpineland.org 
Over the years, MDDC has had heard from individuals with developmental disabilities and their 
family members about ongoing challenges accessing local, timely, adequate, high quality mental 
health services across the lifespan. With the stresses experienced over the past several years, 
these challenges have erupted in multiple crises, probably most visibly manifest by children and 
adults in emergency departments. Maine  Developmental  Disabilities  Council
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478     833-713-2618    www.maineddc.orgMDDC recognizes that there are no easy solutions. DHHS is undertaking several initiatives that 
may ultimately result in more robust and accessible community mental health care, including 
more effective crisis intervention. But this will not address the current crisis. 
CMS’ new waiver guidelines encourage innovation for states to address their shortcomings in 
treatment delivery. This is welcome, because structural barriers to a continuum of care are real. 
The proposal on the table will not address the current crisis. It may, however, decrease the long-
term barriers to the using institutions as solutions to challenges. Historically, this has gone very 
poorly.  
Until 1983, if you needed support to be safe and maintain your health, institutionalization was 
the only service that Medicaid was required to cover. Home and Community Based Services 
were established as a Medicaid option so that people with disabilities would be able to access 
support in their communities. In the 40 years since the inception of HCBS, there have been a lot 
of changes in the experiences and hopes of people with developmental disabilities. While it’s 
unlikely that anyone every hoped to be institutionalized, one of the gains of recent decades is that 
many fewer people have experienced institutionalization.
MDDC asks the Committee to carefully consider the potential long-term impact of reducing 
barriers to institutionalization. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. 

