219 Capitol Street, Suite7 
‘ 
Consumer €0uncii Systerra of Meme Augusta’ ME 04330 
A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services 
Phone: 207.430.3300 
Fax: 207.430.8301 
Toll-Free: 877.207.5073 
www.maineccsm.org 
March 14, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, 
My name is Simonne Maline. l am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). I am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in opposition of LD 445 "Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Apply for a Waiver from 
the Federal Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with 
More Than 16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment" 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute by the Maine 
Legislature to sen/e in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those sen/ed by them. 
This is not the first time we oppose a proposal for an IMD (Institutes of Mental Disease) waiver. DHHS 
proposed it in 2019. I have attached that testimony to this one. We are grateful that they chose not to pursue 
it at that time. 
The reason we do not support an IMD waiver is that this waiver is about creating more inpatient beds. While 
inpatient care is needed for a small group of people in a time of extreme crisis, we believe that the real issue 
is the lack of community care. If people can readily access the care that is needed in their communities, the 
need for acute care greatly diminishes. 
Currently in Maine, there is no live bed tracking data (something that HHS might want to consider) so we 
have no real way of knowing if all the beds are full. We have heard from DHHS and others in the provider 
community share that there are beds offline due to staffing shortages. So more beds will not magically fix 
that if there is no one to staff them. 
If we really want to look to infuse more funds from the federal government for community-based care, then 
there are other waivers and state plan amendments that could be used to support that work. Also, this is not 
free money and we are concerned that funds will be taken from the community system to pay for the $1 seed 
money to get the federal match. Depending on where those funds could be taken from might put us out of 
compliance with the AMHI Consent Decree. 
Thank you, 
Executive Director
5 
I 3,,- 
!' _’ M_
" - 
. ;»~ .,€3s:1~.-~ C:/3§:§;> 
.-' ' '~—-ff‘ . >’\~<-'>\<x<§ . . 6-\‘g{;<<>{ Consumer Council System of lbiaine 
A Voice for Cormirners of ivlentai ieleaith Services 
STATEWIDE 
CONSUMER 
COUNCIL 
Vickie Morgan, 
Chair 
April Kerr, 
Secretary 
Cathy Brovim 
Karen Evans 
Karyn Wing 
Laurie Holiister 
Irene Larrabee 
Mike Lee 
Gordon 
Maxham 
Eric McVay 
Nancy Michaud 
Consumer Council System of zllaine, 219 Capitol Street, Suite 7, Augusta, 1l4E 04330, 207-4308300 “ ‘ \ >»~<;ii% . 
\“ \ ex’ \NWW.1”na1n6CCS1 ’n.OI‘g
? 
March 6, 2019 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Division of Policyl MaineCare Services, 
242 State House St. 
11 State House Station, 
Augusta, ME 04333-0011 
Dear Department of Health and Human Services, 
The Consumer Council System of Maine (CCSM) is here today to 
speak in opposition to DHHS’ draft request of the IMD 1115 waiver 
from CMS. Our comments are focused on the adult mental health 
portion of the request, as this is the community we work/live in. 
For just a moment, I want to speak about an important fact that 
does not get said enough. There are a number of groups that will 
speak today. They will speak about mental health services in a lot 
of venues; sen/ice providers, state entities, etc. Many have an 
important point of view that has much value. Often though, they 
either say, imply or we just get used to thinking that they are 
speaking for US, but they do not. 
There is an important saying in the disability community “Nothing 
about us without us” . The reason we make pins and t-shirts that 
say this is because we are often fighting to have our voices heard. 
We are talking about what will impact thousands of Mainers 
directly. 
I will tell you that in my years of working with my fellow peers, their 
requests are not for more hospital beds. 
People want to have a place they can call home. This includes 
family and friends giving purpose and meaning in their lives. 
We have spent decades reversing what we did to institutionalize 
individuals who had no business being in psychiatric hospitals. 
This resulted in the Maine AMHI Consent Decree filed in 1989. In 
>v<f<Y* M .. ....
spite of this, we have not been successful at creating full 
community mental health options that would allow people to live 
well in their communities of choice. l was there for the ceremony in 
2004 where we officially closed AMHI and read the names of 
those who died in that institution. All of these 11,647 deceased 
individuals were honored. 
Allowing hospitals to be paid through the IMD 1115 waiver makes 
most peers shiver. lf we bring funds to Maine for the purpose of 
making institutional and residential sen/ices more prolific, what do 
you think will grow in Maine? It will not be community-based 
sen/ices. It will be more beds, more hospitalizations, which in 
reality are only needed for a small group of people short term, but 
not for the majority of our peers who have proven they can stay 
well with adequate community supports. 
We had hoped last year to support a last-minute Legislative bill 
which would have addressed potentially ending the Consent 
Decree. lt didn‘t make it to a public hearing but there is talk of 
bringing it back for this session. We would not support ending the 
Consent Decree if there is a new emphasis on creating more beds 
that would foster a continuum of institutionalization. This flies in 
the face of everything we have worked for. 
We plead with DHHS to think about putting the brakes on this 
waiver. Why? Because we truly do not know what the mental 
health system really needs. We need to have a thorough system 
wide assessment in order to make the best recommendations for 
investment in our system. 
We look forward to working with DHHS and all stakeholders to 
make smart moves in Maine. Our lives depend on it! 
Sincerely, 
sémamze 77ZaZ¢'ae 
Executive Director
