March 14, 2023                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Good day, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee,
My name is Victoria McCarty.  I am from Augusta, and I wish as a person with mental 
health challenges to testify in opposition of LD  445 "Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Health and Human Services to Apply for a Waiver from the Federal 
Government for the Medicaid Limitation on Payment to a Facility with More Than 
16 Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Treatment.”
I too have other family members who live with very serious mental health challenges. 
My family and I have learned that through compassion, empathy, listening and 
conversation whenever possible that we can truly support one another. We are concrete 
proof that robust community services and supports keep us from having to go into 
psychiatric facilities to receive care. Having access to such services from psychiatrists, 
case managers and Intentional Peer Support Specialists has allowed us to thrive in our 
communities which ends up also being more cost effective than if hospitalization had 
been our only choice.
I invite you to read Jennifer Mathis’ complete article addressing this issue (See link 
below.)
In part she says: “Because states can draw down federal Medicaid reimbursement for 
community services but generally not for care in psychiatric hospitals, the IMD rule has 
been an important driver of state systems shifting toward community services. That has 
been good policy.
Accordingly, “When determining psychiatric inpatient capacity, system leaders should 
first assess the capacity of evidence-based community programs and services to 
reduce the need for inpatient care” ( 3). Community services such as …crisis services, 
supportive housing, and other services have proven successful in reducing inpatient 
admissions and bed-days, as well as incarceration in jails and prisons ( 3). Yet calls for 
more psychiatric hospital beds almost never take into account what additional 
community capacity is needed and how much reduction in inpatient beds—or arrests 
and incarceration—could be expected if that capacity were developed. Dr. Jess 
Jamieson, former Director of State Hospitals in Washington State, observed ( 4): “When 
I was running the State hospitals in Washington, we were right in the middle of this 
controversy . . . boarding patients in the ERs waiting for a bed. My hospitals were full, 
so the prevailing attitude was we needed more beds. This is not the solution!! What I 
needed was a stronger community-based system to divert patients from inpatient 
hospitalizations and the community resources to discharge my patients who were ready 
for community placement, thus opening up a bed for those patients who needed 
hospitalization. The problem was the community system was under funded and lacked 
resources.” *
*Medicaid’s Institutions for Mental Diseases (IMD) Exclusion Rule: A Policy 
Debate—Argument to Retain the IMD Rule Jennifer Mathis, J.D. Published Online:  
3 Dec 2018   https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201800413
There are also other federal waivers that could be applied for that would help to keep 
individuals in the communities of their choice. Programs such as Housing First, 
Intentional Peer Support and Employment First are evidenced-based practices that 
have a proven record of working well for people.
At present there is not any mechanism for a live bed tracking data collection system that 
could pinpoint where available beds are if needed. Creating such a tool would save 
providers from having to use up valuable time trying to locate beds and would cut down 
on individuals being stuck in Eds for days on end.
And finally, we should be focusing more of our efforts on the Office of Behavioral 
Health’s current strategic plan that has come about because of LD 1262: Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Health and Human Services To Develop a 
Comprehensive Statewide Strategic Plan To Serve Maine People with Behavioral 
Health Needs throughout Their Lifespans.  
https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/blog/dhhs-releases-comprehensive-behavioral-health-plan-
maine-2023-02-17
In wrapping up I would strongly urge this committee to vote “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 
445.
Thank you.
Sincerely,
Victoria McCarty
Augusta, ME.
 
