. I >1 . . 
Maine Summer Camps 
Real Kids. Real Camps. Real Maine! 
Testimony of the Maine Youth Camp Association 
Presented to the 
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
In Support of LD 152, Resolve, Directing the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to 
Change the Term “Woodsman ” to “Woodsperson ” in the Junior Maine Guide Program 
Representative James Dill 
February 6, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. My name is Newell Augur. I am a resident of 
Yarmouth and a partner" at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate the opportunity to submit this letter 
on behalf of the Maine Youth Camp Association (“MYCA”), the non-proﬁt organization 
representing the nearly l75 children ’s camps throughout our state, in support of LD 152, Resolve 
Directing the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to change the Term “Woodsman ” to 
“Woodsperson ” in the Junior Maine Guide Program. 
The Junior Maine Guide Program (JMG) is a long-established wilderness camping skills 
program sponsored by the Maine Youth Camp Association and the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife. It is an outdoor skills program designed to foster enjoyable, safe, and 
healthy outdoor living experiences for youth ages 9 — 18. The program, unique to Maine, was 
created in 1937 as an act of the State Legislature in an effort to promote the use of the Maine 
wilderness for recreation as well as to train new generations of youth to adopt use practices that 
conserve the environment. Since JMG’s inception, more than 3,000 young women and men 
have been certiﬁed as Junior Maine Guides. The Junior Maine Woodsman & Maine 
Woodsman programs were created as part of the J MG curriculum and are focused speciﬁcally on 
youth aged 9-l2 and 12-l4 respectively. There are perhaps three times as many children who 
have been part of this program, and today the participants are roughly even between girls and 
boys. 
This bill would require IF&W to amend its rules governing the Junior Maine Guide Program to 
require that the program use the term “woodsperson ” as a replacement for “Woodsman. ” These 
15737590 1
current terms are not gender neutral and in keeping With efforts to ensure that our Wilderness is 
open to everyone, it behooves us to change these terms to ones that are. The operating 
documents that govern these programs are not in statute nor are they in IF&W rules. Efforts are 
already underway to amend this language in the progran1 ’s operating documents and these 
changes are imminent. Accordingly, We would propose that this Committee send a letter to 
MYCA and IF&W directing the groups to make this change to the J MG program and to report 
back to the Committee once the new terms have been implemented. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I’d be happy to answer any questions.
2 
15737590 1
