Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
Testimony of Maine Transgender Network in Support of
LD 152: Resolve, Directing the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to Change the
Term "Woodsman" to "Woodsperson" in the Junior Maine Guide Program
February 6, 2023
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Honorable members of the Committee on
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife: My name is Quinn Gormley, I use she/her pronouns, and I am
here today in my capacity as Executive Director of the Maine Transgender Network to express
our support for LD 152. That's right, even Inland Fisheries and Wildlife can do something about
transgender equality!
There are two things that I really love about Mainers: Our respect and enthusiasm for the
incredible natural resources and wilderness we live in and alongside here in Maine, and our
long held values for equality and inclusion of women and LGBTQ+ in our communities. It's not
often that we have the opportunity to bring these values together in one place, but here we are.
Decades of work have gone into ensuring that women and girls are fully and equally included in
all forms of sport and outdoor venturing. The use of inclusive language is an important step in
efforts to achieve this equality. Since 2018, the State of Maine has legally recognized the
existence of nonbinary people in our state with the inclusion of Gender Mark X as an option on
State ID's and Birth Certificates, an action that has been mirrored in other states and by our
Federal Government.
Sadly, this legal recognition does not always translate to inclusion in other parts of our society,
or in our language. LD 152 is a step in the right direction. By moving to more inclusive language
you are communicating that Our Junior Guide Program isn't there to raise yet another
generation of good old boys, but rather is an opportunity for young Mainers of all genders.
It is my sincere hope that future iterations of the Junior Maine Guide Program will reflect the
beautiful diversity of our state. For that reason, I urge you to vote "Ought to Pass" on LD 152.
Thank You,
Quinn Gormley |
s h e / h e r
Executive Director | MaineTransNet
www.mainetrans.net

