m §'§i%%r 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
gg§g2|§m0N Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES WebSit€: WwW'n1smaWeb ‘cOn1 MaincSchoulS\rperin\endcnts:\ss1v:ia1ion 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF 
L.D. 485 
RESOLVE, TO AMEND THE RULES REGARDING ATHLETIC DIRECTOR QUALIFICATIONS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in support of L.D. 485. 
In what we believe may have been an oversight in the re-write of Chapter 115, the changes in the steps toward 
achieving a certiﬁcate to serve as an Athletic Director has resulted in educators choosing not to enter the 
profession, pursue renewal of the certiﬁcate or simply leave the profession. 
Athletic directors are dedicated hard working educators who oversee the athletic programs in their high 
schools. They are positive role models for our students and are often the trusted adult students will tum to 
when in need. They are present at various athletic events and offer tremendous support to our students and 
coaches. The athletic directors I have worked with were among the hardest working members of my staff, 
putting in long hours into the evening, after a full day of teaching. They did so enthusiastically, with a smile 
on their face and only Wanted the very best for their students. .. 
The new language in Chapter 115 now requires Athletic Directors to hold a valid Maine Administrator 
certiﬁcate. Many athletic directors are not interested in pursuing administration, nor do the skills and job 
requirements require that level of certiﬁcation. By adding “or” to the certiﬁcate renewal, those pursuing this 
certiﬁcate will be given an option of pursuing an administrative certiﬁcate OR demonstrating knowledge in 
interscholastic athletics, and athletic administration as it pertains to legal issues and methods as well as 
completing three semester hours in culturally responsive teaching. 
MIAAA, under the direction of Executive Director Gerry Durgin, provides tremendous professional 
development for Maine Athletic Administrators. Their professional learning is comprehensive and rigorous 
and provides athletic directors with the knowledge and skills needed to be successful. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
