. , HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
.1, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry TTY3 Mame Relay 711 
9 Lombard Street 
y Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Terry@legislature.maine.2ov 
April s, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen T errv presenting 
LD 1258, An Act to Increase the Personal Property Tax Exemption for Farm Machinery 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Taxation Committee, I am 
Maureen Teiry, representing part of Gorham in House District 108. I am proud to be here to 
present LD 1258, An Act to Increase the Personal Property Tax Exemption for Farm 
Machinery. 
For those of you who have been around for a couple cycles, you may recognize this bill as very 
similar to one that Rep. O’Neil presented before this committee in the 129"‘ Legislature. Her bill, 
LD 241, unfortunately died on the table in 2019, after receiving an OTP-AM vote out of 
committee, when the Legislature had to abruptly shut down due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This bill seeks to increase the existing personal property tax exemption for haying and ﬁeld crop 
equipment from $10,000 to $45,000, and provides a time frame for phasing in this increase. For 
years, members of the Maine Farm Bureau have identiﬁed this to be an important issue to 
farmers across the state, particularly since this credit has not been adjusted since 1977. 
Farming is a capital-intensive endeavor that almost always requires large investments in 
equipment. Buying a tractor, a baler or another large piece of equipment, even if used, 
constitutes a huge expense for farmers, particularly for the small family farms that make up the 
majority of Maine’s agricultural industry. Beyond the expense of purchasing equipment, owning 
such valuable equipment increases a farm’s tax burden. 
Recognizing this, Maine law provides a $10,000 personal property tax exemption for farm 
machinery. Farm Bureau members have requested this legislation because the current amount no 
longer adequately represents the value of machinery farms rely on to operate. This bill would 
address that issue and account for inﬂation by increasing the exemption to $45,000. 
Existing Business Equipment Tax Exemption and Reimbursement programs, BETE and BETR, 
do not adequately address the needs of smaller farmers. First, both programs only apply to 
equipment that is new or new to the state. This means a farm could purchase a used piece of 
District 108: Gorham (part)
equipment out of state and bring it into Maine (in which case, it would be ﬁrst subject to taxation 
here), and that equipment would be eligible. Used equipment purchased from within Maine are 
not eligible for either program. 
The second consideration is the particular age of eligible equipment. BETE exempts equipment 
placed in service in 2007 and later. BETR reimburses the taxpayer for property taxes paid on 
equipment placed in service between April l, 1995 and April l, 2007. A tractor purchased before 
April of 1995 would not be eligible. That means smaller farmers are at a disadvantage simply for 
owning older equipment or purchasing used equipment in Maine. These are the folks who would 
beneﬁt most from an exemption — dairy farmers, younger farmers who are just starting out and 
smaller farms who are working to grow their businesses. 
Though this proposed increase to the current exemption will result in a modest cost to reimburse 
municipalities, it will mean a great deal to the farmers who produce our food and help to fuel our 
rural economy. That money will be put directly back into those farms and communities, 
ultimately beneﬁting our entire state. 
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
