TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 4/5/23 
LD 1258- An Act to Increase the Personal Property Tax Exemption for Farm 
Machinery 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee —~ good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD I258, An Act to Increase 
the Personal Properly Tax Exemption for F arm Machinery. 
This proposal adds complexity to an already complex set of property tax relief 
programs without a clear need for the additional complexity. Most business- 
owned farming equipment covered by this bill is already eligible for either the 
Business Equipment Tax Reimbursement program or the Business Equipment Tax 
Exemption program, depending on the age of the equipment. 
From an administrative perspective, adding an annual ﬁling requirement will create 
additional work for taxpayers and for municipalities, as well as for Maine Revenue 
Services to review and audit applications. Creating a new, separate reimbursement 
formula for the exemption, where a portion is not reimbursed and a portion is 
reimbursed at a different rate from the other exemptions, adds additional 
complexity to the administration of the program. In addition, it’s unclear whether 
municipalities with BETE equipment would face an actual “loss in property tax 
revenue” or how that loss should be calculated. Finally, the requirement for
1
municipalities to process annual applications will trigger the constitutionally 
mandated 90% reimbursement of those costs to municipalities. 
From a technical perspective, the audit authority contained within this bill is 
unnecessary because Title 36, section 661 already provides MRS with audit 
authority for reimbursable exemptions. 
If there is a need for changes, consideration should be given to making those 
changes within the Business Equipment Tax Exemption program. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
