PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
To:  Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint Committee for 
Environment and Natural Resources
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director
Date:  February 15, 2023
Re: Testimony in Support of L.D. 188, An Act to Require the Department of Environmental 
Protection to Pay for Certain Water Tests for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint Committee for 
Environment and Natural Resources, thank you for the ability to provide brief testimony on L.D. 188, 
An Act to Require the Department of Environmental Protection to Pay for Certain Water Tests 
for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 
300 members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities from 
around the state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy 
environment through the proper treatment of wastewater. 
Soon after the previous Legislature passed L.D. 1911 the Department of Environmental 
Protection exercised their authority to require 105 Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) and 
nineteen (19) industrial and commercial entities to sample for PFAS in their effluent. Since that time, 
the Department has offset the cost of sampling to the 105 POTWs through federal funding. Our 
members appreciate that policy and hope that this legislation, in an amended fashion, may tie the 
Department to that policy in the future. 
We recognize the State’s inability to pay for industrial and commercial facility sampling with 
their current funding mechanism and believe that this legislation could be amended to clarify that the 
aid for future testing is exclusively for POTWs. For many reasons the cost of (quasi)municipal 
wastewater treatment is skyrocketing right now and these costs are borne by our ratepayers. By 
continuing to fund these tests after federal money runs out, the State would recognize the burden of 
these relatively small entities and spread the cost among a far larger base. 
If you have any questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to reach out to me at 
Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org or 207-737-9014. 
