 
1 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
February 15, 2023 
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner, Senate Chair 
Honorable Lori Gramlich, House Chair  
Joint Legislative Committee on Environment & Natural Resources 
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re:  Public Hearing Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 188: An Act to Require the Department of 
Environmental Protection to Pay for Certain Water Tests for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances 
  
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the ENR Committee: 
 
About MeWEA. The Maine Water Environment Association is a non-profit, all volunteer association of over 650 
members. MeWEA represents a diverse group of water quality professionals throughout Maine including 
municipalities, quasi-municipal entities, wastewater treatment plant operators, sewer collection system operators, 
utility system administrators, engineers, suppliers, contractors, public works officials, stormwater professionals, 
and regulatory officials. MeWEA’s mission is to support and enhance Maine’s water environment community 
through training opportunities, balanced environmental policy and practice; and collaboration to protect and 
enhance Maine’s water resources.    
Discussion.  MeWEA applauds the efforts to offset some of the financial burdens on municipal wastewater 
services to reduce the overall costs associated with sampling wastewater effluent, especially at a time when sewer 
districts and municipalities throughout the State are experiencing astronomical and ever-rising costs to haul their 
biosolids to landfill. However, while we commend the effort, we must acknowledge some of the concerns that this 
bill could have on the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), our ratepayers, and Maine’s taxpayers. 
Additionally, should the cost to sample effluent at for-profit businesses that run their own wastewater treatment 
systems be financially covered by the DEP? If this were to be the case, taxpayers may be financially burdened 
with the costs that a business may incur.   
Conclusion. Although MeWEA supports the initiative to consider offering some relief to wastewater treatment 
facilities, we recommend working with the DEP to revise the language of this bill to focus on financial assistance 
to municipalities and sewer districts that struggle to afford PFAS effluent sampling. We recommend that the 
legislature work with the DEP through the rulemaking process to determine what entities may be eligible to 
receive financial assistance for PFAS effluent sampling.   
Sincerely, 
Emily Cole-Prescott    Amanda Smith 
Emily Cole-Prescott, Co-Chair    Amanda Smith, Co-Chair       
Government Affairs Committee     Government Affairs Committee    
 
 
cc:  Tim Wade, MeWEA President  
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel 
 Malenie Loyzim, DEP Commissioner  
