9/20/22, 3:22 AM 'Forever chemicals' destroyed by simple method | NSF - National Science Foundation
https://beta.nsf.gov/news/forever-chemicals-destroyed-simple-method?utm_medium=email&utm_source=govdelivery 1/2'Forever chemicals' destroyed by simple
method
New process causes PFAS to degrade into benign end products
September 12, 2022
PFAS, manufactured chemicals commonly used since the 1940s in nonstick and
waterprooﬁng agents, are called "forever chemicals" for good reason. Bacteria can't
eat them; ﬁre can't incinerate them; and water can't dilute them. And, if these toxic
chemicals are buried, they leach into surrounding soil, becoming a problem for
generations. PFAS is an abbreviation for perﬂuoroalkyl and
polyﬂuoroalkyl substances.
Now, Northwestern University chemists have done the seemingly impossible. Using
low temperatures and inexpensive, common reagents, the research team developed
a process that causes two major classes of PFAS compounds to fall apart — leaving
behind only benign end products.
"PFAS has become a major societal problem," said Northwestern's William Dichtel,
who led the study. "Even just a tiny amount of PFAS causes negative health eﬀects,
and it does not break down. We wanted to use chemistry to create a solution. It's
exciting because of how simple that solution is."
The U.S. National Science Foundation-supported research was published in the
journal  S c i e n c e
9/20/22, 3:22 AM 'Forever chemicals' destroyed by simple method | NSF - National Science Foundation
https://beta.nsf.gov/news/forever-chemicals-destroyed-simple-method?utm_medium=email&utm_source=govdelivery 2/2. The technique could be a way of disposing of these harmful chemicals, which are
linked to negative eﬀects in humans, livestock and the environment. The substances
have made their way into drinking water and into the blood of 97% of the U.S.
population.
While studying PFAS compounds, Dichtel's team found a weakness in them. PFAS
contains a long tail of unyielding carbon-ﬂuorine bonds. But at one end of the
molecule, there is a charged group that often contains oxygen atoms. Dichtel's team
targeted this group by heating the PFAS in dimethyl sulfoxide — an unusual solvent
for PFAS destruction — with sodium hydroxide, a common reagent.
"That triggered all these reactions and started spitting out ﬂuorine atoms from the
compounds to form ﬂuoride, which is the safest form of ﬂuorine," Dichtel said.
"Although carbon-ﬂuorine bonds are super-strong, the charged group is the Achilles'
heel."
The new technique relies on milder conditions and a simple, inexpensive reagent,
making the solution potentially more practical for widespread use.
Research areas
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Division of Chemistry (MPS/CHE)
Kenneth Capron
Portland
LD 188
two files attached?                                                          
