 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
In Support For  
LD 188 -  An Act to Require the Department of Environmental Protection to Pay for Certain Water Tests 
for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  
February 15, 2023  
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony in support for LD 188, 
An Act to Require the Department of Environmental Protection to Pay for Ce rtain Water Tests for 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances  on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which 
represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association 
are established by our 70 -memb er Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils 
and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.  
In 2019, m unicipalities, some with recently acquired loans from the Department of 
Environmental Protection  for beneficial use facilities, needed to rapidly shift operations to transporting 
waste sludge no longer usable for secondary fertilizer and compost to the only landfill in Maine, Juniper 
Ridg e, big enough to handle it. The cost of handling the waste that was  once a desirable product, has 
doubled while treatment facilities have invested even more money into drying solutions to reduce the amount disposed. All of these solutions have been shouldered by rate payers and the costs continue to 
grow.  
To date, there is no stop in the flow of PFAS chemicals into our waste streams, or products and  
no plan for appropriate remediation for the waste from our own bodies that is managed in a facility. However, Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) have been required to shou lder the full expense to 
dispose of the waste, as directed by the department without a statewide remediation plan, on their own. 
Only recently did the department assist with a change in operation that started in 2019.  
In September of 2022, the department notified POTWs that e ffluent testing t he cost of courier 
transportation, sample analyses, and reporting would be c overed by funds under the American Rescue 
Plan Act (ARPA). Private facilities are  responsible for sampling and covering their own shipping and 
analysis costs.  When those funds run out, communities will again be on the hook for the monthly cost of 
testing as they have been on the hook for all of the costs of disposal of material to date.  
Officials ask that you enshrine this obligation and pass L D 188. Officials believe the department 
should continue to pay for the testing and information that work provides to the state in order to relieve just a small portion of the unmitigated costs currently burdening facilities and their users, who did not create the problem.  
 

