Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1217: Resolve, to Create a Pilot Program for Alternative Teacher Certification 
Mallory Cook, Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement, 
Maine Education Association 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association, and a certiﬁed English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am here to provide testimony neither for nor against LD l2l 7: Resolve, to Createa 
Pilot Program for Alternative Teacher Certiﬁcation. 
This session, the Committee has seen and will continue to see a number of bills that attempt to mitigate 
the critical educator shortage we are facing. While the MEA believes compensation to be the most 
favorable solution, we understand there are barriers that exist when entering the profession and are open 
to exploring altemative pathways, especially those that target underrepresented demographic groups, as 
called for in this bill. The vision of MEA is a great public school for every Maine student, and we know 
a key component to achieving this goal involves representation of Maine’s rich cultural and linguistic 
diversity in our workforce. Our students need a culturally affirming enviromnent to thrive. The Learning 
Policy Institute notes that teachers of color boost the academic performance of students of color, which 
results in higher graduation rates and increased aspirations to attend college. ' 
Furthermore, Dr. Gloria 
Ladson-Billings speaks to the beneﬁts of a diverse teacher workforce in broader terms, noting: “We need 
White students to have an experience in a classroom with a teacher from a different background or group 
different from their own so that they can begin to shift some of their thinking about hierarchy and who’s 
capable, who has authority, who has knowledge. ” 
As we seek to implement solutions to our educator shortage, it is essential we create sustainable options 
that best prepare candidates to meet the rigors of the job. Failing to do so will create a revolving door —a 
temporary ﬁx for an on-going issue. For this reason, we believe that it would be appropriate for the 
‘ Learning Policy Institute. “How to Recruit and Retain Teachers of Color. “ Diversifying the Teaching Profession: How to 
Recruit and Retain Teachers of Color I Learning Policy institute 
2 Partnership for the Future of Learning. “Building a Strong and Diverse Teaching Profession. ” 
Teaching+Profession+Playbook+-+Partnership+for+lhe+Future+of+ Learning+-+0501 21 .pdf 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736129 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
M Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
:1; t~‘Ir1-re [Mmaw\r\L*='1'|=l-we "' 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director
" , / 
Department to develop this pilot program for alternative certiﬁcation and be prepared to present it to the 
committee for approval by December of 2023. As written, it looks like the program would be 
implemented immediately, and we fear this would not allow for a robust, long-term, sustainable program 
to be built, vetted, and revised. Inadequate training and insufficient support are two of the leading 
reasons new teachers leave the profession; this is especially true for those entering the profession 
through alternative preparation programs. It is our hope that this alternative program would have ample 
support to ensure those who participate in the program continue to thrive in the profession for years to 
come. The models used by teacher residency and apprenticeship programs both in our state and across 
the country serve as great examples of effective programs; they integrate partnerships with professional 
educators, require routine observations with feedback, and invest in high quality mentoring practices 
These high-impact strategies have proven effective and should be considered in the development of this 
plan. 
Thank you for your time, and I will do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 13139 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME D4106 
207-‘622-5866 I 207—888~2070 fax I Www.maineea.org
