State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Michael Perry, Acting Director of Higher Education and Educator Support 
Services 
In Support of: L.D. 1217 
Resolve. to Create a Pilot Program for Alternative Teacher Certification 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Senator Rotundo 
Date: April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Michael Perry, and I am here today representing the Department speaking in support 
of L.D. 1217, Resolve, to Create a Pilot Program for Alternative Teacher Certification, which 
Would create an opportunity to develop a set of certification pilot programs for teachers and 
education technicians. 
The Maine Department of Education is committed to developing alternative pathways for our 
aspiring educators. LD 1217 allows us to explore possibilities for honoring life and career 
experience when considering the qualifications of educators. This will help us to expand and 
grow an education workforce that is inclusive and better reﬂects the makeup of our State and 
local communities. 
The Department of Education believes in a Whole student approach to education that develops 
and prepares students for the challenges and opportunities of today and tomorrow by addressing 
their comprehensive needs through a shared responsibility of students, families, schools, and 
communities. One of the tenets of Maine’s Whole Student Approach is supporting the educator 
Workforce. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is in support of L.D. l2l'7. I am happy to answer 
any questions, and I will be available for work sessions on this bill.
Original language 
That the Department of Education shall create a pilot program to provide alternative teacher 
certification that targets demographic groups that are underrepresented in the education workforce or 
who hold unique expertise and experience. The pilot program must allow potential educators to acquire 
and demonstrate the knowledge and skills that are defined within nationally recognized standards for 
beginning educators. The program must allow an individual who receives an alternative teacher 
certification to renew that certification for a reasonable amount of time until the individual can achieve 
traditional certification. The department shall submit a report with findings and recommendations 
concerning the program to the Legislature no later than December 6, 2023. 
LD 1217 Resolve Amendment 
That the Maine Department of Education ma\Lpilot the issuance of alternative teacher and educational 
technician certificates which target demographic groups that are underrepresented in the education' 
workforce or who hold unique expertise and experience. 
The pilot programs must allow potential educators to provide evidence of the knowledge and skills that 
are defined within nationally recognized, competency-based standards for beginning educators in order 
to become certified. 
The programs must enable an individual who receives an alternative teacheror educational technician 
certification to renew that certification for a reasonable amount of time until the individual can achieve 
professional certification as prescribed in State Board of Education Rule Chapter 115. This timeline may 
be based on individual applicant circumstances and is not to exceed ten years. 
The Department shall submit a report with findings and recommendations concerning the pilots to the 
Legislature no later than December 6, 2023. .
