. 
.— 
.;,,..si 
‘ ' 
Peggy Rotundo THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 21 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony introducing 
LD 1217, "Resolve, to Create a Pilot Program for Alternative Teacher Certification ” 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other distinguished members of the Committee On 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Peggy Rotundo and I represent Senate District 21, the City of 
Lewiston. I am here today to introduce LD 1217, ”Resolve, to Create a Pilot Program for Alternative 
Teacher Certification" . 
Lewiston, like so many other school districts around the state, is facing a critical shortage of teachers and 
educational technicians. l/Vhile I acknowledge that signiﬁcant pay increases could make a difference in the 
district's ability to recruit and retain talented professionals, the reality of town budgets necessitates that in 
addition to the consideration of higher salaries, We think creatively about additional ways to address the 
shortages we now face.i 
I present a bill today, LD 1217, An Act to Create a Pilot Program for Alternative Teacher Certiﬁcation, 
which will enable the Department of Education to develop pilot projects designed to provide alternative 
teacher and education technicians certificates, targeting those who represent demographic areas that are 
currently underrepresented or who hold unique experiences. Candidates must demonstrate the 
knowledge and skills that are defined within nationally recognized standards for beginner educators. The 
program must allow an individual who receives an alternative certiﬁcate to renew that certificate fora 
reasonable amount of time until the individual can achieve traditional certification. The bill also requires 
the Department of Education to report back to the Legislature no later than December 6, 2023. 
I have worked with the Department of Education on this bill. They will be offering suggested amended 
language i.n their testimony. Educational technicians will be added to teachers in the bill, for example. 
Their amendment would also add a timeline by which certification would need to be completed.- 
I want to stress that my purpose in bringing this bill forward is not to Water down standards and provide 
an inferior education to children in our public schools. As a former public school teacher, I would never 
propose this. LD 1217 is also not designed to be a long-term solution to our teacher shortage problem. 
There are other bills that address this problem and that you will be hearing this session. My bill simply 
presents this Committee and the DOE with the opportunity to explore possibilities that can help address 
the more immediate and pressing shortage of teachers and ed techs in our classrooms without 
compromising standards. 
Thank you for your willingness to consider the possibilities this bill provides your committee. I am happy 
to answer any questions you might have. .
0 
Chair, Appropriations and Financial Aﬂairs Committee 
Slate House: (207) 287-15./5 * Fax." (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 -* TTY: 711 
Peggy.R0fundo@legisla1 ‘uI'e. maine. gov * legislature. maine. gov/senate
