Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition  
LD 685: An Act to Codify That Freedom of Access Act and Freedom of Information Act 
Requests Are Not Hate Crimes   
Ben Grant – General Council , Maine Education Association  
Before the Judiciary Committee  
March  21, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and other members of the Judiciary Committee,  
 
My name is Ben Grant and I serve as General Counsel for the Maine Education Association (MEA) and I 
am submitting this testimony in opposition to LD 685, An Act to Codify That Freedom of Access Act and 
Freedom of Information Act Requests Are Not Hate Crime s. 
 
This is a stark example of a solution -in-search -of-a-problem. To our knowledge, no “hate crime” charge 
has been brought against anyone deploying Maine’s FOAA law to request public documents. Further, it 
is difficult to imagine a scenario where this all eged accusation would carry any weight with an 
adjudicator. Maine has a forceful and well -defended FOAA statute, and it is highly unlikely that a Court 
would read these two statutes and conclude that a FOAA request rises to the level of a hate crime. Just 
because someone in the public may have raised this as an issue does not mean that the Legislature 
needs to act.  
 
The MEA would also like to take this opportunity to remind the Committee the likely reason this issue 
has arisen at this point in time. As mos t of you are surely aware, FOAA is being used – and some would 
say abused – by opponents of inclusive public education to generate information later in order  to 
shame and intimidate educators. The people determined to misuse access to public information do  not 
need protection from hypothetical allegations. Rather, it is possible that the time has come to bring 
balance back to the question of what information is “public” and what should be protected in order for 
officials to do the job they are hired to do.  
 
For these reasons, the MEA urges the Committee to reject LD 685.   
 
