Z STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-00021 
,_ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
John Andrews 
P.(). Box I I3 
Souili l‘;u‘i.\. ME 0-lZ7| 
liIl1ii..Ai1d1 ‘e\\si‘€: IC!l_\'IZJlL|l ’L‘.ITl;lIl1t: ‘ <_u\ 
Cell: iiovi vswilss3 
March 21, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 685 
"An Act to Codify that FOAA and FOIA Requests are Not Hate Crimes" 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is 
John Andrews I represent District 79 in western Maine. l am here today to present my bill LD 
685, ”An Act to Codify that FOAA and FOIA Requests are Not Hate Crimes". 
The catalyst for this bill came from a meeting of the state Right to Know Advisory Committee in 
November 2022. In that meeting a member of the Board who is also the Maine School Board 
Management Association's Director of Communications and Government Affairs said, 
”Our great concern with the Freedom of Access requests our districts have been receiving is 
that they target gay, lesbian and transgender students. If these types of targeted FOIA (sic) 
requests are allowed to go forward -—— and make no mistake, these requests are intended to 
discourage public support for all students regardless of their gender identity — it will be 
despicable misuse of the FOIA (sic) law...Personally, l believe these requests are just another 
form of hate speech,”* 
I found this to be very alarming. People as individuals can hold whatever ideas or positions 
they want. However, when statements like these are made on a Board whose jurisdiction 
covers the right to know, base transparency in this state, it is important to address them. 
I felt it was important to submit legislation that explicitly states in statute that these 
information requests coming from Maine citizens are not hate speech or hate crimes. There 
must be absolutely no confusion about this going forward. 
Admittedly, the bill's title is a little hyperbolic, but that was intentional to bring attention to this 
issue. It is exceptionally dangerous when government authorities and powerful lobbying 
associations begin to make moves to classify what requests for information from the public are 
valid and which ones are not. This must be recognized immediately and stopped before it is 
District 79 Paris, Sumner. VVest Paris and Woodstock 
Printed on rec\ clad p lptl
allowed to metastasize. Calling something hate speech because you and your organization do 
not want to deal with information requests is more than being dismissive. it is censorship. 
Censorship is always bad, but to frame concerned parents, grandparents and parental rights 
advocates as bigots and hateful people for requesting information is quite pernicious and it 
must not stand. / 
l ask you to protect and affirm in statute that FOAA and FOIA requests are not hate speech or 
hate crimes. I ask you to take a stand against censorship in any form and vote ought to pass for 
LD 685. 
Thank you for your time and commitment to public service. 
Respectfully, 
Representative John Andrews 
Maine House District 79
