 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 685 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: L.D. 685, An Act to Co dify That Freedom of Access Act an d Freedom of I nformation Act 
Requests Are Not Hate Crimes  
 
DA: March 21 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 685.  
 
CLAC is not aware of circumst ances that make the proposed legislation necessary , e.g., 
where requests for information  were inappropriately  charged as crimin al offenses .     
 
CLAC members noted that communications , including requests for information , can include 
threats against persons  based on impermi ssible motivations in violation of 5 M.R.S. § 4684 -A or 
other statutes  (see, e.g., 17 -A M.R.S. §§ 209, 210) .  It would not be appropriate to immunize 
conduc t before it occurs without any information as to what the protected conduct may consist of  
and absent  a specific definition that takes it outsi de the criminal prohibition .        
 
With respect to drafting issues, CLAC observed  that there is no citation to the Maine 
Freedom of Access Act, 1 M.R.S. §§ 400-414, and that fede ral Freedom of Information  Act 
requests would not be processed by Maine state agencies or political subdivisions.    
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Co unsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to  crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
