LD685
My name is Regina Leonard, I reside in Hermon Maine. I am here today in favor of LD 685. For the last 
year, I have been actively involved with our school committee and schools to get transparency and 
defend my parental rights regarding my child and his public education. Showing up to meetings, making 
phone calls, having meetings, and sending emails with my questions got me nowhere. The more I asked 
the more silent they became, many of my questions have still not been answered by Micah Grant, our 
school’s superintendent, or our school committee. Parents are forced to use FOAA to get information, to 
get questions answered, and to gain any sort of transparency. Until I used FOAA, I got no answers, just 
more silence. Micah Grant does not fully comply with many of the FOAA requests I have made and even 
tried to charge me over $27,000 for one of them. Rather than have a conversation with me and work 
with me so that I could gain access to the public information I was requesting and have a right to, he 
charges this asinine fee to try to deter me from gaining this information. Not one of my requests made 
with the use of FOAA has a thing to do with LGBTQ or otherwise. This is public information, I am a 
stakeholder, parent, and taxpayer and have the right to know. We shouldn't have to use FOAA to gain 
this information. To label, those of us who have used FOAA as anti-LGBTQ or whatever else is just 
terrible and contributes to the problem.  The issue here is not FOAA, it is the school's administration not 
wanting to be forthcoming and transparent with its taxpayers and parents.  FOAA is our only protection 
right now as parents and taxpayers. I fully support LD 685, I am asking you to as well. I welcome 
questions.
Regina  Leonard
Hermon 
LD 685
My name is Regina Leonard, I reside in Hermon Maine. I am here today in favor of 
LD 685. For the last year, I have been actively involved with our school committee 
and schools to get transparency and defend my parental rights regarding my child and 
his public education. Showing up to meetings, making phone calls, having meetings, 
and sending emails with my questions got me nowhere. The more I asked the more 
silent they became, many of my questions have still not been answered by Micah 
Grant, our school's superintendent, or our school committee. Parents are forced to use 
FOAA to get information, to get questions answered, and to gain any sort of 
transparency. Until I used FOAA, I got no answers, just more silence. Micah Grant 
does not fully comply with many of the FOAA requests I have made and even tried to
charge me over $27,000 for one of them. Rather than have a conversation with me 
and work with me so that I could gain access to the public information I was 
requesting and have a right to, he charges this asinine fee to try to deter me from 
gaining this information. Not one of my requests made with the use of FOAA has a 
thing to do with  LGBTQ or otherwise. This is public information, I am a stakeholder,
parent, and taxpayer and have the right to know. We shouldn't have to use FOAA to 
gain this information. To label, those of us who have used FOAA as anti-LGBTQ or 
whatever else is just terrible and contributes to the problem.  The issue here is not 
FOAA, it is the school's administration not wanting to be forthcoming and transparent
with its taxpayers and parents.  FOAA is our only protection right now as parents and 
taxpayers. I fully support LD 685, I am asking you to as well. I thank you for listening
and allowing my testimony and I welcome questions. 
