Shawn McBreairty 
Hampden, ME 
Maine Source Of Truth 
Maine First Project 
Through Maine’s Freedom Of Access Act, FOAA, We’ve exposed items such as 
Critical Race Theory in Maine public schools starting in kindergarten. 
The 2022 Maine Teacher Of The Year pushed a book list, where she used daily 
announcements, prizes and incentives to push pornography on ll year olds. 
That the MDOE says that doctors make mistakes with the gender of babies When 
they are born. 
Trans-gender library book displays, showing 63 different genders and a taxpayer 
paid Gay Sexuality Alliance cults inside our schools. 
We’ve exposed hundreds of horriﬁc K-12 public educational issues and have 
placed these on the Maine Source Of Truth Facebook page for parents to review. 
Parents in Maine are starting to realize the evils inside our public schools. 
But many here in Augusta don’t Want this exposure. 
The Maine School Management Association tried to say I’m some type of cult 
leader, simply for teaching Maine parents that FOAA is one of their most powerful 
Weapons regarding educational transparency. 
Steven Bailey and Vicki Wallack at the Maine School Management Association, 
have attempted to bully me into submission, asking for transparency. 
Something the parents and taxpayers of Maine deserve, since We are paying almost 
3 billion dollars for our horriﬁc Maine K-12 public education system.
Maine should have full transparency not willful violations, delays and games 
played with abusive charges. 
MSMA is attempting to weaponize the FOAA process because they know it will 
continue to expose them. 
This is not about “hate speech” it is about exposure of these agencies like MSMA 
that are simply taxpayer paid, political organizations. 
I’ve had over a dozen emails with Mr. Bailey at the MSMA over asking these three 
items via FOAA nearly ﬁve months ago: 
l) How much money does the MSMA get paid from taxpayers a year? 
a) The answer is a total of $626,987 from the 253 Maine school districts. 
2) How much does Vicki Wallack make a year as Director of Communications? 
a) The answer is $128,946 
3) How many written records does MSMA have on me, Shawn McBreairty? 
a) The answer was an astronomical 276 pages. 
b) Also, 73 of these were from Ms. Wallack alone, as she’s kept quitea 
ﬁle on me. 
I still don’t have these because Mr. Bailey has delayed and wants to charge me 
$ l 82.50 for information on my own name. 
Taxpayers are being stonewalled by agencies and public schools because they 
know FOAA is the only tool available for parents to ﬁnd out what's being taught. 
Ms. Wallack says, “ the requests. . .target gay, lesbian and transgender students. ” 
Never have I, not anyone I know, targeted LGBTQ students with F OAA. 
“Personally, I believe these requests are just another form of hate speech,” Ms. 
Wallack also said, speaking to our requests.
Quite a serious accusation, since engaging in "hate speech" is a violation of the 
Maine Human Rights Act. 
It’s not hate speech, it’s our free speech they hate. 
We are asking government run schools and groups, many who are adding no value 
to our chi1dren ’s education, paid for by our tax dollars, for transparency. 
I’m concerned because Ms. Wallack has inﬂuence as a member of the 
Right-to-Know committee that advises legislators on the FOAA statute. 
I’m concerned that the Legislature may further weaken the already weak FOAA 
statute. 
I ask this committee to pass LD 685 and do so for the students, parents, taxpayers 
and teachers of Maine. 
FOAA is not hate speech, it’s transparency. 
I have a couple articles, MSMA email information, my recent F OAA lawsuit 
against Hermon School Department and recent Nation’s Report Card information I 
would like to submit to the Judiciary Committee as part of my public comment on 
this bill. 
Thank you. 
Questions?
STATE OF MAINE 
PENOBSCOT, ss. 
SHAWN MCBREAIRTY 
Plaintiff, 
v. 
MICAH GRANT, 
JESSE KEITH, 
KRISTEN QUINN SHOREY, 
in their personal and ofﬁcial] 
capacities, and 
HERMON SCHOOL DEPT. 
Defendants. SUPERIOR COURT 
CIVIL ACTION 
DOCKET NO; 
PENSC-CIV-2023-00024 
RULE 80B COMPLAINT 
AND INDEPENDENT CLAIM
1
COMPLAINT 
Plaintiff Shawn McBreairty (Mr. McBreairty), of Hampden, ME by way of this 80B complaint and 
claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for Defendant ’s violation of Mr. McBreairty ’s First Amendment and 
Due Process rights and as a review of improper governmental action against Defendants; Jesse Keith 
(Mr. Keith), Kristen Quinn Shorey Quimi (Ms. Shorey), Micah Grant (Mr. Grant), all of Hermon, 
ME and the Hermon School Department (HSD) and alleges as follows: 
PRELIMINARY STATEMENT 
1. This is a lawsuit seeking the court to rule in favor of and enforce the right to inspect and copy 
government records pursuant to the Maine Freedom Of Access Act (FOAA) l M.R.S.A §40l et 
seq, through declaratory judgments for Mr. McBreairty. 
2. Mr. McBreairty ﬁles this motion to specify future course of proceedings, with a trial of the facts, 
by a jury, should the court deem this necessary. Mr. McBreairty pleads with the court that asa 
citizen, a trial would be very burdensome upon him ﬁnancially and he has prepared extensive 
detail within the following information so that the court could make a decision on these matters 
swiftly and with the least amount of taxpayer money spent in doing so. 
3. Mr. McBreairty would like to ensure the least burden to the taxpayers of Hermon, the State of 
Maine and the nation the least possible in garnering a suitable decision in this case, given HSD 
has paid approximately $56,000 in legal fees to DrummondWoodsum from January 2022 to date. 
Signiﬁcantly over their $5,000 legal line item budget for FY22/23. Much of this ridiculous 
expense was on ﬁghting against Mr. McBreairty and ﬁghting against other local citizen’s FOAA
2
requests. What an absolute waste by Mr. Grant of taxpayer dollars not spent on the children ’s 
already failing education within HSD. 
HSD is a school district that is attempting to “dance around” FOAA requests, “slow walk” the 
process, not follow the law and impede Mr. McBreairty ’s exposure of the issues Within HSD, 
prior to the upcoming school budget vote in June, 2023. 
Mr. McBreairty requested access to government records via F OAA request from Defendants on 
November 30th, 2022. 
Mr. McBreairty requested access to government records via FOAA request from Defendants on 
December 21st, 2022. 
Mr. McBreairty requested access to govemment records via FOAA request from Defendants on 
January llth, 2023. 
Mr. McBreairty received written notice denying his request for copies of government records, 
with Mr. Grant stating copyright exemption on approximately January 17th, 2023 (Exhibit 1). 
Mr. McBreairty received \vritten notice on his second FOAA request on approximately January 
19th, 2023 (Exhibit 2) and a denial for access to inspection, prior to payment of $50. 
Mr. McBreairty received written notice on this third FOAA request on approximately February 
8th, 2023 (Exhibit 3) and a denial for access to inspection, prior to payment of $75. 
A verbal denial was provided by Mr. Grant to Mr. McBreairty in person, relating to exhibits 1 
and 2 on Friday, February 3rd, 2023, at the HSD Supcrintendent ’s Office. 
Mr. McBreairty has ﬁled this complaint and appeal to seek relief for alleged FOAA violations 
within 30 calendar days of the latest denials by Mr. Grant on February 3rd, 2023 and February 
7th, 2023, pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A § 409.
13 
4. 
15 
16 
l7 
18 . There is a Hemqon Town Council (HTC) meeting on March l6th, 2023 in which the submitted 
HSD school budget from Mr. Grant would begin to be reviewed, with the HTC. There is an 
approval, or disapproval process by the HTC that happens by June 15th. It is in the best interest 
of the townspeople of Hermon, ME and State of Maine taxpayers to be aware of this requested 
F OAA information prior to that date, which may inﬂuence their critical review of the HSD 
budget submission. 
This case may be advanced on the docket and receive priority over other cases when the court 
determines that the interests of justice, so require. Mr. McBreairty requests that this decision by 
the coult for at minimum, a preliminary injunction to be completed by April 15th. 
. HSD has imposed prior restraint on Mr. McBreairty ‘s speech and petitioning activities, 
presumably because they believe that Mr. McBreairty ’s opinions on how the school should 
function and the exposure thereof, are contrary to how they wish for the school to function and 
be seen in the Hennon community, state and nation. 
Mr, McBreairty alleges that the Defendants have not treated him equitably, nor equally with 
regards to the Maine F OAA law, in an effort to subvert his First Amendment rights. 
Defendants have a Penobscot County Superior Court Civil Action pending, Docket No. 
CV-2022-00056 ‘ for exposing a former Hermon High School 9th grade English teacher, Mallory 
Cook. This lawsuit is frivolous at best, given that their claim of “bullying, harassment and 
hazing,” which is a HSD policy that Mr. McBrcai1ty isn’t subject to. At worst, their remedy to 
their self-created problem is to violate Mr. McBreai1ty ’s rights to petition the govemment and 
speak freely under the United States and Maine Constitutions. 
. For the record, Ms. Cook was an “anti-Trumper, ” supporting “Democrat Socialist, ” Bernie 
Sanders and the radical activist group Maine Pcople’s Alliance, in a pro~Joe Biden election video 
‘ 
https:l/drive.google.comlfile/dI1VwWMbaFA4NRTHfEjDd06xv|yN3aUc_xD/view'?usp=sharing
4
l9 
0. from the HSD classroom in the fall of 2020, using public internet and equipment. A clear 
violation of policy IMB - Teaching About Controversial Issues, where, “4. The teacher does not 
use the classroom as a personal forum? (The classroom was literally used for Ms. Cook’s 
personal, political forum.) He/she does not employ the techniques of the demagogue or the 
propagandist for attention, for control, or simply for color.“ 
. Ms. Cook was provided a $1,000 grant from the MEA - Maine teachers union, to create a 40 
book trans-gender library display inside the Hermon High School library and presented students 
with 63 different genders within the exhibition. 
Ms. Cook was also the taxpayer paid faculty advisor of the Gay Sexuality Alliance within the 
I-lennon High School up until her resignation around July of 2022, when she left the HSD to go 
to work for the MEA, the Maine teachers union. This may have been a violation of policy 
GBEB3 - Staff Conduct With Students, which includes prohibited conduct, “For 
non-guidance/counseling staff, encouraging students to conﬁde their personal or family problems 
and/or relationships. ” Also, potentially, “Sexual banter, allusions, jokes or innuendos with 
students; Asking a student to keep a secret; Disclosing personal, sexual, family, employment 
concerns or other private matters to one or more students. ” The HSD didn’t \vant this to be 
exposed to the voters of Hermon, parents were totally unaware the “GSA” even existed within 
the walls of HSD. Parents were unaware that one could send their child to soccer, band, chorus, 
or talk about “sexuality ” with a teacher after school. Taxpayer funded indoctrination and sex talk 
aﬁer school.
2 
https:/lcore-docs.s3.amazonawscomldocumentslasset/uploaded __ﬁ|el441468/lMB_Teaching_about_Cont 
roversial_lssues.pdf
3 
httpszl/core-docs.s3.amazonawscomldocumentslasset/up|oaded_ ﬂle/441384/GBEB_Staff_Conduct __with 
_Students.pdf
5
21 
2. 
23 
24 On November 7th, 2022, HSD Vice Chair, Kristen Quinn Shorey willfully withheld Mr. 
McBreairty ’s First Amendment rights‘ to redress grievances with the government, free speech 
and freedom of the press by calling, “recess” in the middle of his public comment at the school 
board meeting. This was because Mr. McBreairty named HSD employees, which is well within 
his First Amendment rights to do. Upon coming out of recess, Ms. Shorey didn’t allow Mr. 
McBreairty to continue with his public comment, some of which was gathered via FOAA. Ms. 
Shorey doesn't seem to understand the process of gathering public data and then being able to 
inform the greater public of these educational horrors. 
Ms. Shorey, being the second in command of Superintendent Micah Grant, allegedly wishes to 
silence Mr. McBreairty, in the courts, at the podium and from delaying, or denying his FOAA 
requests, or by providing her employee, Mr. Grant any direction to comply with the law. 
For the record, Ms. Shorey is known virally on the intemet for shouting back at concemed 
parents simply asking questions, “I don’t want to be on the fucking internet!? ”5 This was 
shouted from the stage of the High School auditorium, aﬁer a HSD policy meeting had 
concluded and Ms. Shorey discovered she was being recorded. Ms. Shorey’s meltdown has been 
seen some 500,000 times“ . This is the HSD leadership, a complete lack of transparency. 
Defendants are allegedly trying to silence Mr. McBreairty ’s First Amendment rights by trying to 
impose prior restraint on his speech and petitioning activities. This denial and misuse of the 
Maine FOAA laws appear to be activity imposed upon Mr. McBreairty and their motivation in 
order to either delay, or withhold gaining public information, as in examples stated above, much 
of which was garnered via F OAA. 
“ https://wvwv.youlube.comlwatch?v=2E4 __zWV5rBo&t=100s 5 
https://rumbIe.com/v20bohu-school-board-member-has-meltdown-about-being-recorded.html 5 
https:l/vvww.youlube.eom!wateh?v=E-62ixwsPak&llst=WL&index=2&t=6s
6
25 
26 
27
8 
29 
0. 
31 In other words, it’s all connected and HSD is attempting to use their excessive power, size and 
immense taxpayer ﬁnances to inﬂuence Mr. McBreai1ty as a citizen. 
. Mr. McBreairty realizes that upon ﬁling, HSD has 14 days to ﬁle an appeal. 
FACTS 
Plaintiff Shawn McBreairty (Mr. McBreairty) is a citizen in Hampden, ME, in Penobscot County 
He is a journalist of various social media, has been quoted, participated in and written hundreds 
of news articles, has been featured in numerous local, state, national and global news programs, 
hosts a podcast named Maine Source Of Truth’ and is the Director of Special Projects with 
Maine First Project. ‘ 
Mr. MeBreairty advocates for students, parents, taxpayers and teachers who are too afraid to 
speak, because of being bullied by schools like HSD and his work centers around using his First 
Amendment rights to expose the public to educational issues and inﬂuence the government to 
adopt policies in which he believes are positive changes. 
Mr. McBreairty is notably despised by many of these school districts, when it comes to exposing 
the Maine Department of Education, Maine School Management Association, MEA teachers 
union, the Maine Library Association and the dozens of other woke “non~proﬁt” organizations 
being paid by taxpayers to “support” Maine’s K-12 public schools. 
The “education, ” or indoctrination cabal in Maine appears robust with an immense lack of return 
on a $2.8B taxpayer investment, student harm, fraud and deceit. 
This process of “petitioning the govemment ” for transparency is done through good faith 
Freedom Of Access Act (FOAA) requests to the Defendants to identify public information not 
7 https://open.spotify.com/show/13sXOX6sBmTAPDN9kru7CF?si=BCC2guQXQNC|-kTdonA2Rg 
“ httpszllmaine ﬁrslprojectorgl
7
already provided to the community, due to lack of transparency from various Maine schools, just 
like the HSD. 
The Defendants have allegedly and willfully violated Maine F OAA law, delaying the ability for 
Mr. McBreairty to receive information and have denied access to inspection and copying of 
records, per sections, I & 2 of §408-A, Public Records and Proceedings. 
However, Mr. Grant did not properly cite section 4 of §408-A, refusals; denials. Mr. Grant has 
effectively tried to “side step” Maine FOAA law under what is alleged to be poor guidance of the 
HSD’s lawyers, Drummondwoodsum. For the record, DrummondWoodsum is bringing the 
previously stated lawsuit against Mr. McBreairty on the behalf of HSD. 
Drummondwoodsum is so hell bent on making an example out of Mr. McBreairty, the biggest 
advocate in the state for educational freedom, that they would take on the lawsuit against him, 
impeding upon his opinion and First Amendment rights, allegedly for free. For free. . .because 
HSD is already over their FY22/23 legal budget by tens of thousands of dollars. 
Drummondwoodsum also represents nearly all Maine school districts and support organizations, 
a legal monopoly of sorts. Working not for the Maine taxpayers, but for the Maine 
Superintendents against the taxpayers paying for it! Drummondwoodsum is gaining a reputation 
for being the “bullying ” arm for schools and doing so in many cases to these school’s school 
board members themselves, in executive sessions. Those who are supposed to be overseeing the 
school policies and supervision and direction of the superintendent. These school boards are 
being bullied into submission by DrummondWoodsu1n, who’s laughing all the way to the bank. 
Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey are the direct supervisors to Mr. Grant and these F OAA requests have 
initially ﬂowed through them via email, then were sent down the chain of command, to Mr. 
Grant. Mr. Grant has “completed ” a four hour course of training on FOAA, by
8
37. 
38 
39 Drummondwoodsurn and is the Public Access Officer of HSD, thus one would think he should 
know the Maine FOAA law and process. 
COUNT ONE, RULE 80B COMPLAINT 
FREEDOM OF ACCESS ACT VIOLATIONS 
Per Maine FOAA law, Mr. Grant did not claim in his original “good faith” estimate that he was 
going to charge Mr. McBreairty for documents. Mr. Grant‘s letter dated January 19th, 2023 
(Exhibit 2), stated that the printouts, which were in the range of 100 pages placed in a box, 
would not be provided unless Mr. McBreairty paid him $50. Mr. Grant was effectively holding 
this information “hostage, ” out of compliance with the Maine FOAA law. 
Citizens in Maine have the right to “inspect” a FOAA request, prior to payment for anything less 
than $100, to detennine what actually would be taken, if anything at all. The Maine FOAA law 
states, “The agency or official can schedule the time for your inspection, conversion and copying 
of the records during the regular business hours of the agency or official, and at a time that will 
not delay or inconvenience the regular activities of the agency or official. ” 
On December Zlst, Mr. McBreaii1y ﬁled an additional FOAA request with HSD School Board 
Chair Jesse Keith to, “Provide for inspection all written materials (which would include emails, 
invoices, checks, wire transfers, debits, calendar entries, hand written notes, presentations, texts, 
etc.) related to any FOAA training that you (Micah Grant), yourself have ever been part of, but 
especially related to the clearly received 9/16/22 (FOAA) training. ” This FOAA training was 
done by the lawyers of Drummondwoodsum. This was to confirm that Mr. Grant had actually 
been trained in F OAA, given his propensity to not follow the Maine laws around it. Mr. Grant 
also often refers to it as “FOIA,” the federal right to know law.
9
40 
41 
2.
3 
44 On approximately January 14th, 2023, Mr. McBreairty received a certiﬁed, taxpayer paid letter 
(Exhibit l) from Micah Grant, stating that he was not willing to comply with the FOAA request, 
per Maine law. Mr. Grant stated, “The FOAA training materials you requested are copyright 
protected. While I am not authorized to make copies you may review these by calling (207) 
848-4000 ext 6000 or emailing administrative assistant Jody White at 
jody.white@schools.hennon.net to schedule an appointment for viewing. ” 
As stated 011 the Copyrightgov website, “You can also use works that are in the public domain. 
Works in the public domain are those that are never protected by copyright (like facts or 
discoveries)... ” Mr McBreairty has a legitimate public and private interest in the records 
requested and Mr. McBreairty ’s interest cannot be outweighed by Mr. Grant’s potential concems 
and his confusion in not allowing these records to be duplicated by copying, or photographing. 
Furthermore, Drummonwoodsum and the eight trainers of this material, do not appear to have 
registered the “25th Annual New Superintendents ’ Workshop ” binder as a copyright with the 
Federal Government, thus may not have any protections to begin \vith. 
“Copyright exists automatically in an original work of authorship once it is ﬁxed, but a copyright 
owner can take steps to enhance the protections. The most important step is registering the work. 
Registering a work is not mandatory, but for U.S. works, registration (or refusal) is necessary to 
enforce the exclusive rights of copyright through litigation. Timely registration also allows 
copyright owners to seek certain types of monetary damages and attomey fees if there isa 
lawsuit, and also provide a presumption that information on the registration certiﬁcate is 
correct. ” 
Mr. Grant can’t determine what Mr. McBreairty may do with the public records and only the 
holder of the copyright, in this case, if registered by Drummondwoodsum, only they would be
10
5 
6. 
7. 
48. able to cite damages in civil court, if there were any actual damages. Only if Mr. McBreairty 
used them for his own personal proﬁt, such as creating an identical, “New Superintendent ’s 
Workshop" and sold it to other Maine school districts for personal gain, proﬁting off their 
misguided views of the management of our Maine public K-12 schools. 
Furthermore, a proper FOAA denial should cite both this provision of FOAA and the speciﬁc 
federal copyright law in question. Simply referencing “copyright ” as Mr. Grant did in the 
response letter (Exhibit 1), is not enough and thus, violates the Maine FOAA law. 
Any materials which become “public records, ” are void of copyright claims for public viewing, 
review and exposure. 
Mr. McBreairty has received many copyrighted presentations from other Maine schools, without 
incident, or this type of delay. Should Mr. Grant’s assertion that no member of the public can 
copy, or photograph a public record that has “©” somewhere on it, the public would never be 
able to duplicate these documents, nor would anyone ever be able to quote, or photograph pages 
from library books. This information was also not stated by Mr. Grant as “conﬁdential” or any 
sort of “attorney/client privilege. ” Because of course, it was not. It’s simply a training binder. A 
training binder full of infonnation that should be shared. 
Mr. McBreairty received the second acknowledgement (Exhibit 2) of request to, “Provide for 
inspection all written information on behalf of Hermon School Board member Chris McLaughlin 
from the time period of 9/ 1 5/22 to ll/15/22. ” Mr. McLaughlin is the Executive Director for the 
National Association of Social Workers, Maine. He also has a consulting business, named 
Inspired Consulting Group LLC.° As a sitting member of the HSD school board, M1". 
McLaughlin sells the politically leﬁist LGBTQ+ narrative to other school districts, paid for by 
9 http://www.inspiredcg.com/about.htm|
11
49 
0_ 
Sl 
52 
53 
54 
55 the taxpayers. He has made upwards of approximately $20,000 on these “trainings ” to other 
Maine school districts 
Mr. McLaughlin was exposed by Mr. McBreairty for his heinous and egregious statements via 
multiple videos. 
Mr. McLaughlin stated that, “The (pomographic) book ‘Gender Queer’ was a book he personally 
loves,” and that “if this (book, ‘Gender Queer’) were ripped from the pages of any number of 
adult magazines, it would be immediately stamped porn and removed out of there.” 
Mr. McLaughlin also states, “Even if those safety issues were present (such as a student‘s 
thoughts of suicide?) it would not be ever appropriate for me (Mr. McLaughlin) to out that youth 
to their ‘caregivers ’ without their consent. ” He calls parents, caregivers. 
Mr. McLaughlin states, in his ofﬁcial capacity, to “Be willing to explore things that as clinicians 
We may have thought were a bit ‘taboo’ in the past, especially when working with youth.” 
. Mr. McBreairty wanted to know how this apparent bias against parents, allegedly wanting to 
hyper-sexualize minors, doing so by keeping secrets and discussing “taboo” subjects with 
children, would affect his clear conﬂict of interest on the HSD School Board. Through F OAA. 
Mr. McLaughlin was supported, endorsed and inserted on the HSD school board by the HEA, 
Hermon teachers union. 
10 r He was appointed to the Negotiations Connnittee on July llth, 2022, to be in charge of the 
HEA teachers union contract negotiations for the teachers ‘ pay raises, days off, perks, etc. 
Interesting conﬂict of interest for the taxpayers of Hermon. Those who endorsed Mr. 
McLaughlin now appear ready to be ﬁnancially rewarded by him for their efforts.
_ 
10 
httpszllcore-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/up|oaded_ ﬁle/1043/HSD/2329888/2022-O7-11_H 
SC_Meetlng_Minutes.pdf 
12i
56 
7. 
58 
59 This email FOAA request was provided to Mr. Keith on November 30th, 2022 and was not 
returned until approximately 50 days later, via taxpayer funded certiﬁed USPS mail. 
Mr. Grant appears to be violating the Maine FOAA law regarding, “Within a reasonable time of 
receiving the request, the agency or official shall provide a good faith, nonbinding estimate of the 
time within which the agency or ofﬁcial will comply with the request. . .“ as stated in §408-A, 3- 
Acknowledgment. Although “reasonable ” is not deﬁned within the Maine FOAA Statute, 
Merriam-Webster deﬁnes it as “not extreme or excessive." SO days simply for a return of the 
letter would appear to be excessive. 30 days to obtain the material requested would seem to be 
more reasonable. 
Mr. Grant has a habit of responding to Mr. McBreairty via certiﬁed USPS mail, which is not the 
way he replies to most other FOAA requests, most of which are done via more timely, personal 
email response. This further delays Mr. McBreairty in gathering and reviewing HSD documents 
requested and appears to be a strategy that the HSD is using, possibly in use only with Mr. 
McBreairty, because of their current and frivolous lawsuit against him. 
As a side note, the Maine School Management Association ’s Director of Communications, Vicki 
Wallack stated during a Maine Right To Know Committee hearing on November l7th, 2022, that 
Mr. McBreairty ’s FOAA requests were, “hate speech.”“ Ms. Wallack stated, “Our great concern 
with the Freedom of Access request our districts have been receiving is that they target gay, 
lesbian and transgender students. ” She said that she had been targeted with “burdensome ” public 
record requests that were designed, she said, to undermine her personal support for gay, lesbian, 
and transgender children. “If these types of targeted FOIA (sic) requests are allowed to go 
forward — and make no mistake, these requests are intended to discourage public support for all
H 
https:l/www.themainewire.comI2022I11/public-record-requests-are-hate-speech-says-maine-right-to-know 
-committee-member!
13
0. 
61 
62 
63 students regardless of their gender identity — it will be despicable misuse of the F OIA (sic) 
law,” she said. Wallack did not offer any explanation as to how she had intuited the motives of 
the people submitting FOA requests. It was clear that Wallack was directing her comments 
about hate speech toward McBreairty. ” Ms. Wallack’s rant appears to be displaced emotional 
baggage. She also doesn’t apparently know in Maine, it’s called FOAA, not FOIA, the federal 
program. Sounds familiar with Mr. Grant’s propensity for calling it the same thing. 
Mr. McBreairty has never sent, nor ever seen a FOAA request, “targeting ” students, regardless of 
their sexuality, skin color, race, or any other item. 
What Mr. McBreairty asked for in his FOAA request of Ms. Wallack was, l)“ ...provide for 
inspection all written materials regarding Shawn McBreairty." 2)“ ...the total of what Maine 
schools have paid the MSMA for FY21/22. ” 3)“ ...I request your salary information, including 
beneﬁts.” Obviously there was no “hate speech” included in this email sent to Ms. Wallack in 
October of 2022. But, this is the strategy of the leﬁ, they can’t defend their actions, so they lash 
outwith name calling and bullying. 
The answers were, 1) 276 pages of information on Shawn McBreairty, held by the MSMA, 73 of 
which were with Ms. Wallack alone, which seems very “stalkcrish, ” to say the least. To date, 
Mr. McBreairty has still yet to receive these written records. 2) The taxpayers of Maine paid 
$626,987 from 253 school districts for the “expertise ” of the MSMA. 3) Vicki Wallack makes 
$111,840 in salary and $17,106, all paid for by taxpayers, so she can attack citizens with 
unhinged rants about defamatory, “hate speech.” 
. Why the MSMA, or any organization would be so infatuated with students “gender identity ” is 
mind blowing, as Maine has never had worse academic scores” since they have been tracked“.
' 
‘Z 
https://nces.ed.govlnationsreportcardlsubjectlpublications/stt2022/pdf/2023011ME8.pdf *3 
https://nces.ed.govlnationsreportcardlsubiect/publications/st12022/pdf/2023010ME8.pdf 
14 
4. 
65. 
6. 
67 
68 
9. Or, maybe citizens are onto something? It should paint for the Court the overall view of citizens 
looking for transparency and instead groups involved with Maine schools, like the MSMS would 
rather defame citizens with hurtful words and emotional blackmail, then comply with Maine 
FOAA law. 
HSD may be taking advice on FOAA from the MSMA all tied together with 
Drumrnondwoodsum. All this power gathered to subvert the rights of the Maine taxpayers. 
Mr. McBreairty called and set up an appointment with HSD for Friday, 2/3/22 at 9am to review 
these two sets of records. There \vas no mention by Superintendent's Ofﬁce Administrator Jodi 
White as to the length of time permitted to view the materials, as there should not be, given these 
are public records to be reviewed in a public building, with 110111131 business hours. 
Mr. McBreairty was greeted by Ms. White, upon entering the Superintendent ’s Ofﬁce at 
approximately 8:55am. 
. Mr. McBreairty asked for the Drummond Woodsum presentation, and the Chris McLaughlin 
emails and Ms, White “parked” Mr. McBreai11y at a small table near her desk. 
Mr. McBreai1 “ty was then approached by Mr. Grant, who said, “You can’t take any pictures (of 
the Drummondwoodsum New Superintendent ’s Workshop). . .and if you do, I’m going to end the 
session. ” Mr. McBreairty explained the copyright law to Mr. Grant and he disagreed, referencing 
Drummondwoodsum, the HSD’s attomey group's views of the law. 
Mr. McBreairty then spoke about the Chris McLaughlin emails and asked to inspect these prior 
to being forced to pay for them. Mr. Grant stated, “I’m not going to do that, if you want to pay 
$50, I’ll hand them to you.” This is illegal and against Maine F OAA law. The requester hasa 
right to review materials before deciding what they will pay for, if at all, when the estimate is 
less than $100.
15
70 
71 
72 
73 
4. 
75 Mr. McBreairty was provided lined paper and a pen, to hand write from the 
DrummondWoodsum training binder. Mr. McBreai1 “ty is a very slow and messy hand-\vriter, but 
proceeded to attempt to effectively copy this binder at the desk, packed with juicy information 
the State taxpayers and Hermon community will want to be made aware of. 
. At some point shortly into the process, Mr. Grant appeared to attempt to intimidate Mr. 
McBreairty, by sitting directly behind him, within about 4’ of his personal space. 
Mr. McBreairty was made to feel very uncomfortable, as Mr. Grant was hovering over Mr. 
McBreairty ’s shoulder, seated directly behind his back where he could not see Mr. Grant. This 
made it very difﬁcult to concentrate on working through the FOAA information because of Mr. 
Grant’s presence and having to manually hand write the infonnation. 
. Mr. McBreaii1y felt like Mr. Grant was treating him like a criminal on some sort of “camp work 
duty program” needing constant supervision and Mr. McBreairty had to assume that no other 
citizen would be treated so unprofessionally by Mr. Grant. Think of the precedent in whicha 
taxpayer paid school superintendent, like Mr. Grant, who’s educational assessments are already 
beyond horrendous, would spend an entire hour of taxpayer ’s time, hovering over members of 
the public who wish to review a public document? What an extreme waste of taxpayer dollars, 
not to mention the overall lack of etiquette, leadership, policy, or a legal argument to do so. 
Mr. Grant doesn’t seem to understand where his $125,000 (before beneﬁts) annual salary and 
obnoxious 3 year revolving contract as superintendent is paid from. The taxpayers of Hennon, 
the State of Maine and the nation. 
At about 9:30am, Mr. Grant threatened Mr. McBreairty with the statement, “Huny up,” said ina 
very gruff tone.
16
76 
77 
78 
79. 
80 
81 
82 
83 This made Mr. McBreai11y feel even more uncomfortable and began to consider that his safety 
was being threatened, given Mr. Grant’s close proximity to him, unable to see Mr. Grant. 
Mr Grant has a history of hostility towards Mr. McBreairty and general unpredictability in his 
reactions towards him and unwillingness to answer very simple questions. 
Mr. McBreairty asked Mr. Grant several questions from the presentation about policy and la\v 
and talked about open session votes of the school board and the section in the binder named, 
“Avoiding Disaster In Court, by Dnunmond Woodsum lawyer, Jeana M. McCormick. Here it 
states, “Rule Number 6 - Educate Your Board; Before Litigation, When Litigation Happens and 
During The Lawsuit and Your Duties To Insurer (the Town of Hermon)” all of which Mr. Grant 
has failed to do. 
Mr. McBreairty ’s understanding is that Mr. Grant has not updated the school board, nor the HTC 
on the lawsuit since it was approved either during, or alter Hermon School Board executive 
session on May 2nd, 2022.“ 
. No public school board vote was ever taken in approving the lawsuit against Mr. McBreairty. 
Mr. McBreai1ty further asked Mr. Grant about the executive session process in May 2022, 
regarding the lawsuit Mr. Grant, Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey placed upon Mr. McBreairty in their 
attempt to violate his First Amendment rights. 
Mr. Grant came back with a stem, “You have 3 minutes. . .you are done at 10 o'clock, ” which 
appeared to be another threat toward Mr. McBreairty. 
At approximately 9:57am, Mr. McBreairty took a “selﬁe” of Mr. Grant (Exhibit 4) who was 
sitting directly behind him, to document how close Mr. Grant was. Mr. Grant said this 
“tenninated ” the appointment, because Mr. McBreairty used a “picture taking device.” 
I4 
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/up|oaded_ ﬁle/1043/HSD/2154976/2022-05-02_H 
SC_Meeting_Minutes.pdf
17
84 
85 
6. 
87 . Mr. McBreairty was also not able to complete his full assessment of the public information 
within the binder. If Mr. McBreairty was able to take photos, or the Hermon School District 
simply made PDF copies of the binder, per Maine law, this entire waste of taxpayer dollars could 
have been easily avoided. Mr. McBreairty did not initially take pictures of the binder, simply of 
the situation, per his right, of a public employee, in a public building. 
For the record, Mr. Grant also incorrectly stated the HSD Superintendent ’s Office was nota 
public building. It would seem he believes HSD is a “sovereign nation” upon itself. 
Mr. Grant reacted to the selﬁe with, “Jodi (Office Admin), would you call the sheriff ‘s 
department please?” They called 911 on Mr. McBreairty for a “picture taking device.” Mr. 
Grant did not ask Mr. McBreairty to leave upon them calling 911. This appears to be a “color of 
law” violation, as Section 242 of Title 18 makes it a crime for a person acting under color of any 
law to willfully deprive a person of a right or privilege protected by the Constitution or laws of 
the United States. For the purpose of Section 242, acts under "color of law" include acts not only 
done by federal, state, or local ofﬁcials within their lawful authority, but also acts done beyond 
the bounds of that ofiicial's lawﬁil authority, if the acts are done while the ofﬁcial is purporting 
to or pretending to act in the performance of his/her ofﬁcial duties. Persons acting under color of 
law within the meaning of this statute include police ofﬁcers. . .and others who are acting as 
public officials. It is not necessary that the crime be motivated by animus toward the race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin of the victim. 
Mr. McBreairty was not asked to leave and there was no reason given to him, nor Ms. (Jodi) 
White. Mr. Grant simply stated again that he terminated the session due to Mr. McBreairty 
taking out a “photo taking device.”
18
88 
89 
90. 
91 
92 
93 
94 Then Mr. McBreairty took a photo of the front of the binder, to which Mr. Grant then asked for 
“my binder,” which technically is the public’s binder, but it was immediately provided back to 
him, without incident. 
Penobscot County Sheriff ’s Deputy Taylor J. Keeran was taken off the road to protect the 
residents of the county and he had to respond to the call at approximately 10:10 am. 
Mr. McBreairty, after a brief statement provided in the attached Incident Report (Exhibit 5 
forthcoming) peacefully left under his own recognisance. The audio can be heard and pictures 
can be viewed on Mr. McBreairty ’s YouTube channel. “ 
Mr. McBreairty received his third FOAA acknowledgment on approximately February 8th 
(Exhibit 3), with Mr. Grant again, incorrectly stating that when $75 was provided, that the 
respective documents would be mailed to his residence, but only after payment had been 
received and processed. 
This is not in accordance \vith Maine FOAA law, which allows for inspection of documents prior 
to payment, if under $100. 
In this case, the original FOAA request was not even cited in the letter. This is also a key 
takeaway from Mr. McBreairty sending various Maine schools FOAA requests, they don’t ever 
seem to reply with history, or the initial ask, making the sender have to double back to determine 
what was sent as a FOAA request in the ﬁrst place. It is not part of the Maine F OAA law that 
the government must return information with the request included, just simply another 
unprofessional approach. 
This FOAA third request in question, sent again to Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey via email on 
January llth, 2023, stated the following; “Provide for inspection, all emails from Hermon 
'5 https:/lwww.youtube.comIwatch?v=6tLJmJ6jHKg&t=314s
19
librarians Kara Schwartz and Brittney McAllister from 9/1/21 to ll/30/21 for anything with the 
following key search words: 
0 Gender and Sexuality Alliance 
0 Gender Sexuality Alliance 
0 Gay Sexuality Alliance 
0 GSA 
0 MEA 
0 Union 
0 Grant 
0 LGBTQ 
0 LGBTQIA+ 
0 Display 
0 Audit 
These two librarians within the HSD participated with ex-teacher Ms. Cook in hyper-sexualizing 
minors with the 40 book transgender library book display within the Hennon High School in the 
fall of 2021. 
Mr. Grant stated in the letter that this FOAA would take five hours to complete, charging Mr. 
McBreairty for 3 hours (there are 2 hours free, per Maine FOAA law, then $25 thereafter). This 
is shocking and presents a picture of the inefficiency within HSD’s IT group. They would need 
to take 5 hours to search for these basic terms above, from two librarians? It appears that Mr. 
Grant is trying to “nickel and dime” him, without providing Mr. McBreairty any idea of even 
what he is paying for.
20
96. By denying, delaying, or deﬂecting these three FOAA requests from Mr. McBreairty, the 
Defendants appear to be making willful, yet select violations of the State of Maine FOAA laws. 
97. The Defendants are also allegedly withholding this information critical to the upcoming public 
HSD budget discussion starting March 16th, 2023 and an upcoming vote on June 15th, 2023 via 
the HTC in Hemion on the Defendant ’s annual school budget. 
98. Mr. McBreairty believes that the defendants may be purposely withholding information vital to 
the community, for fear that this continued negative exposure could provide the citizens of 
Hermon even more concem regarding this upcoming budget. This may cause them to vote 
against the HSD budget. 
99. Other local citizens have had similar issues with HSD and FOAA requests. 
100. Mr. Grant has shown an pattem of not wanting to provide public information to Mr. 
McBreairty. Such as the April lst, 2022 FOAA request on then-teacher Mallory Cook’s “teacher 
in-service day” training on 3/ 18/22 to various Bangor area teachers, including HSD. 
101. Mr. McBreairty asked via FOAA, “Provide for inspection the training provided by Hermon 
8th grade teacher Mallory Cook on March 18th, 2022 to various Bangor area schools. including 
RSU22.” This presentation by Ms. Cook was titled, “Leaders for Just Schools" and included 
items such as “conversations about race, microaggressions and reﬂection on their own privilege. ” 
102. Mr. Grant denied this information to Mr. McBreairty stating in the letter (Exhibit 6) that, 
“The training you reference, however, was not a HSD program, and the HSD was not involved in 
organizing, or presenting the program. The HSD is not in possession or custody of the 
referenced training (or any related materials), and as noted above, the training was not othenvise 
prepared in connection with the transaction of any HSD business. Accordingly, your request is 
denied.” Even though Ms. Cook was “on the clock“ during the time of creating this training she
21
STATE OF MAINE SUPERIOR COURT 
PENOBSCOT, ss. CIVIL ACTION 
DOCKET NO.: 
PENSC-CIV-2023-00024 
SHAWN MCBREAIRTY' 
Plaintiff, j 
j RULE 80B COMPLAINT 
v. ' 
AND INDEPENDENT CLAIM 
MICAH GRANT, j 
JESSE KEITH, : 
KRISTEN QUINN SHOREY, : 
in their personal and ofﬁcial] 
capacities, and : 
HERMON SCHOOL DEPT. I 
Defendants. I
1
COMPLAINT 
Plaintiff Shawn McBreairty (Mr. McBreairty), of Hampden, ME by way of this 80B complaint and 
claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for Defendant ’s violation of Mr. McBreairty ’s First Amendment and 
Due Process rights and as a review of improper governmental action against Defendants; Jesse Keith 
(Mr. Keith), Kristen Quinn Shorey Quinn (Ms. Shorey), Micah Grant (Mr. Grant), all of Hermon, 
ME and the Hermon School Department (HSD) and alleges as follows: 
PRELIMINARY STATEMENT 
l. This is a lawsuit seeking the court to rule in favor of and enforce the right to inspect and copy 
government records pursuant to the Maine Freedom Of Access Act (FOAA) l M.R.S.A §40l et 
seq, through declaratory judgments for Mr. McBreairty. 
2. Mr. McBreairty ﬁles this motion to specify future course of proceedings, with a trial of the facts, 
by a jury, should the court deem this necessary. Mr. McBreairty pleads with the court that asa 
citizen, a trial would be very burdensome upon him ﬁnancially and he has prepared extensive 
detail within the following information so that the court could make a decision on these matters 
swiftly and with the least amount of taxpayer money spent in doing so. 
3. Mr. McBreairty would like to ensure the least burden to the taxpayers of Hermon, the State of 
Maine and the nation the least possible in garnering a suitable decision in this case, given HSD 
has paid approximately $56,000 in legal fees to DrummondWoodsum from January 2022 to date. 
Signiﬁcantly over their $5,000 legal line item budget for F Y22/23. Much of this ridiculous 
expense was on ﬁghting against Mr. McBreairty and ﬁghting against other local citizen’s F OAA
2
requests. What an absolute waste by Mr. Grant of taxpayer dollars not spent on the children ’s 
already failing education Within HSD. 
HSD is a school district that is attempting to “dance around” FOAA requests, “slow walk” the 
process, not follow the law and impede Mr. McBreairty ’s exposure of the issues within HSD, 
prior to the upcoming school budget vote in June, 2023. 
Mr. McBreairty requested access to government records via FOAA request from Defendants on 
November 30th, 2022. 
Mr. McBreairty requested access to government records via F OAA request from Defendants on 
December 21st, 2022. 
Mr. McBreairty requested access to govermnent records via FOAA request from Defendants on 
January llth, 2023. 
Mr. McBreairty received written notice denying his request for copies of government records, 
with Mr. Grant stating copyright exemption on approximately January 17th, 2023 (Exhibit 1). 
Mr. McBreairty received Written notice on his second FOAA request on approximately January 
l9th, 2023 (Exhibit 2) and a denial for access to inspection, prior to payment of $50. 
Mr. McBreairty received written notice on this third FOAA request on approximately February 
8th, 2023 (Exhibit 3) and a denial for access to inspection, prior to payment of $75. 
A verbal denial was provided by Mr. Grant to Mr. McBreairty in person, relating to exhibits 1 
and 2 on Friday, February 3rd, 2023, at the HSD Superintendent ’s Office. 
Mr. McBreairty has ﬁled this complaint and appeal to seek relief for alleged FOAA violations 
Within 30 calendar days of the latest denials by Mr. Grant on February 3rd, 2023 and February 
7th, 2023, pursuant to l M.R.S.A § 409.
There is a Hermon Town Council (HTC) meeting on March 16th, 2023 in which the submitted 
HSD school budget from Mr. Grant would begin to be reviewed, with the HTC. There is an 
approval, or disapproval process by the HTC that happens by June 15th. It is in the best interest 
of the townspeople of Hermon, ME and State of Maine taxpayers to be aware of this requested 
FOAA infonnation prior to that date, which may inﬂuence their critical review of the HSD 
budget submission." 
This case may be advanced on the docket and receive priority over other cases when the court 
determines that the interests of justice, so require. Mr. McBreairty requests that this decision by 
the court for at minimum, a preliminary injunction to be completed by April 15th. 
HSD has imposed prior restraint on Mr. McBreairty ’s speech and petitioning activities, 
presumably because they believe that Mr. McBreai1ty ’s opinions on how the school should 
function and the exposure thereof, are contrary to how they wish for the school to function and 
be seen in the Hermon community, state and nation. 
Mr. McBreairty alleges that the Defendants have not treated him equitably, nor equally with 
regards to the Maine FOAA law, in an effort to subvert his First Amendment rights. 
Defendants have a Penobscot County Superior Court Civil Action pending, Docket No. 
CV-2022-00056 ‘ for exposing a former Hermon High School 9th grade English teacher, Mallory 
Cook. This lawsuit is frivolous at best, given that their claim of “bullying, harassment and 
hazing,” which is a HSD policy that Mr. McBreairty isn’t subject to. At Worst, their remedy to 
their self-created problem is to violate Mr. McBreairty ’s rights to petition the govermnent and 
speak freely under the United States and Maine Constitutions. 
For the record, Ms. Cook was an “anti-Trumper, ” supporting “Democrat Socialist, ” Bernie 
Sanders and the radical activist group Maine People’s Alliance, in a pro-Joe Biden election video 
1 
https://drive.google.com/ ﬁle/d/1VwWMbaFA4NRTHfEj0d06xv|yN3aUc_xD/view?usp=sharing
4
from the HSD classroom in the fall of 2020, using public internet and equipment. A clear 
violation of policy IMB - Teaching About Controversial Issues, where, “4. The teacher does not 
use the classroom as a personal forum.’ (The classroom was literally used for Ms. Co0k’s 
personal, political forum.) He/she does not employ the techniques of the demagogue or the 
propagandist for attention, for control, or simply for color.” 
Ms. Cook was provided a $1,000 grant from the MEA - Maine teachers union, to create a 40 
book trans-gender library display inside the Hermon High School library and presented students 
with 63 different genders within the exhibition. 
Ms. Cook was also the taxpayer paid faculty advisor of the Gay Sexuality Alliance within the 
Hermon High School up until her resignation around July of 2022, when she left the HSD to go 
to Work for the MEA, the Maine teachers union. This may have been a violation of policy 
GBEB3 - Staff Conduct With Students, which includes prohibited conduct, “For 
non-guidance/counseling staff, encouraging students to conﬁde their personal or family problems 
and/or relationships. ” Also, potentially, “Sexual banter, allusions, jokes or innuendos with 
students; Asking a student to keep a secret; Disclosing personal, sexual, family, employment 
concems or other private matters to one or more students. ” The HSD didn’t want this to be 
exposed to the voters of Hermon, parents were totally unaware the “GSA” even existed within 
the walls of HSD. Parents were unaware that one could send their child to soccer, band, chorus, 
or talk about “sexuality ” with a teacher after school. Taxpayer funded indoctrination and sex talk 
after school.
2 
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/uploaded_file/441468/IMB_Teaching_about_Cont 
roversia|_Issues.pdf
3 
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/uploaded_file/441384lGBEB_Staff __Conduct_with 
_Students.pdf
5
21 
22 
23 
4. On November 7th, 2022, HSD Vice Chair, Kristen Quinn Shorey willfully withheld Mr. 
McBreairty ’s First Amendment rights4 to redress grievances with the government, free speech 
and freedom of the press by calling, “recess” in the middle of his public comment at the school 
board meeting. This was because Mr. McBreairty named HSD employees, which is well within 
his First Amendment rights to do. Upon coming out of recess, Ms. Shorey didn’t allow Mr. 
McBreairty to continue with his public comment, some of which was gathered via FOAA. Ms. 
Shorey doesn't seem to understand the process of gathering public data and then being able to 
inform the greater public of these educational horrors. 
Ms. Shorey, being the second in command of Superintendent Micah Grant, allegedly wishes to 
silence Mr. McBreairty, in the courts, at the podium and from delaying, or denying his FOAA 
requests, or by providing her employee, Mr. Grant any direction to comply with the law. 
For the record, Ms. Shorey is known virally on the intemet for shouting back at concerned 
parents simply asking questions, “I don’t want to be on the fucking internet!? ”5 This was 
shouted from the stage of the High School auditorium, after a HSD policy meeting had 
concluded and Ms. Shorey discovered she was being recorded. Ms. Shorey’s meltdown has been 
seen some 500,000 times“ . This is the HSD leadership, a complete lack of transparency. 
Defendants are allegedly trying to silence Mr. McBreairty ’s First Amendment rights by trying to 
impose prior restraint on his speech and petitioning activities. This denial and misuse of the 
Maine FOAA laws appear to be activity imposed upon Mr. McBreairty and their motivation in 
order to either delay, or withhold gaining public information, as in examples stated above, much 
of which was garnered via F OAA. 
4 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2E4_zWV5rBo&t=100s 
5 
https://rumble.com/v20bohu-school-board-member-has-meltdown-about-being-recorded.htm| 
6 
https://www.youtube.comlwatch?v=E-62ixwsPak&list=WL&index=2&t=6s
6
In other words, it’s all connected and HSD is attempting to use their excessive power, size and 
immense taxpayer ﬁnances to inﬂuence Mr. McBreairty as a citizen. 
Mr. McBreairty realizes that upon ﬁling, HSD has 14 days to ﬁle an appeal. 
FACTS 
Plaintiff Shawn McBreairty (Mr. McBreairty) is a citizen in Hampden, ME, in Penobscot County 
He is a journalist of various social media, has been quoted, participated in and written hundreds 
of news articles, has been featured in numerous local, state, national and global news programs, 
hosts a podcast named Maine Source Of Truth7 and is the Director of Special Projects with 
Maine First Projects 
Mr. McBreairty advocates for students, parents, taxpayers and teachers who are too afraid to 
speak, because of being bullied by schools like HSD and his work centers around using his First 
Amendment rights to expose the public to educational issues and inﬂuence the government to 
adopt policies in which he believes are positive changes. 
Mr. McBreairty is notably despised by many of these school districts, when it comes to exposing 
the Maine Department of Education, Maine School Management Association, MEA teachers 
union, the Maine Library Association and the dozens of other woke “non-proﬁt” organizations 
being paid by taxpayers to “support” Maine’s K-12 public schools. 
The “education, ” or indoctrination cabal in Maine appears robust with an immense lack of return 
on a $2.8B taxpayer investment, student harm, fraud and deceit. 
This process of “petitioning the government ” for transparency is done through good faith 
Freedom Of Access Act (F OAA) requests to the Defendants to identify public information not 
7 https:/[open.spotify.com1show/13sXOX6sBmTAPDN9kru7CF?si=BCC2guQXQNC|-kTdonA2Rg 
8 https://mainefirstprojectorgl
7
already provided to the community, due to lack of transparency from various Maine schools, just 
like the HSD. 
The Defendants have allegedly and willfully violated Maine FOAA law, delaying the ability for 
Mr. McBreairty to receive information and have denied access to inspection and copying of 
records, per sections, 1 & 2 of §408-A, Public Records and Proceedings. 
However, Mr. Grant did not properly cite section 4 of §408-A, refusals; denials. Mr. Grant has 
effectively tried to “side step” Maine FOAA law under what is alleged to be poor guidance of the 
HSD’s lawyers, DrummondWoodsum. For the record, Dn1mmondWoodsum is bringing the 
previously stated lawsuit against Mr. McBreairty on the behalf of HSD. 
DrummondWoodsum is so hell bent on making an example out of Mr. McBreairty, the biggest 
advocate in the state for educational freedom, that they would take on the lawsuit against him, 
impeding upon his opinion and First Amendment rights, allegedly for free. For free. . .because 
HSD is already over their FY22/23 legal budget by tens of thousands of dollars. 
DrummondWoodsum also represents nearly all Maine school districts and support organizations, 
a legal monopoly of sorts. Working not for the Maine taxpayers, but for the Maine 
Superintendents against the taxpayers paying for it! DrummondWoodsum is gaining a reputation 
for being the “bullying ” arm for schools and doing so in many cases to these school’s school 
board members themselves, in executive sessions. Those who are supposed to be overseeing the 
school policies and supervision and direction of the superintendent. These school boards are 
being bullied into submission by DrurnmondWoodsum, who’s laughing all the way to the bank. 
Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey are the direct supervisors to Mr. Grant and these F OAA requests have 
initially ﬂowed through them via email, then were sent down the chain of command, to Mr. 
Grant. Mr. Grant has “completed ” a four hour course of training on FOAA, by
8
DrummondWoodsum and is the Public Access Officer of HSD, thus one would think he should 
know the Maine FOAA law and process. 
COUNT ONE, RULE 80B COMPLAINT 
FREEDOM OF ACCESS ACT VIOLATIONS 
Per Maine F OAA law, Mr. Grant did not claim in his original “good faith” estimate that he was 
going to charge Mr. McBreairty for documents. Mr. Grant’s letter dated January 19th, 2023 
(Exhibit 2), stated that the printouts, which were in the range of 100 pages placed in a box, 
would not be provided unless Mr. McBreairty paid him $50. Mr. Grant was effectively holding 
this information “hostage, ” out of compliance with the Maine FOAA law. 
Citizens in Maine have the right to “inspect” a FOAA request, prior to payment for anything less 
than $100, to determine what actually would be taken, if anything at all. The Maine FOAA law 
states, “The agency or ofﬁcial can schedule the time for your inspection, conversion and copying 
of the records during the regular business hours of the agency or ofﬁcial, and at a time that will 
not delay or inconvenience the regular activities of the agency or official. ” 
On December 21st, Mr. McBreairty ﬁled an additional FOAA request with HSD School Board 
Chair Jesse Keith to, “Provide for inspection all written materials (which would include emails, 
invoices, checks, wire transfers, debits, calendar entries, hand written notes, presentations, texts, 
etc.) related to any FOAA training that you (Micah Grant), yourself have ever been part of, but 
especially related to the clearly received 9/ 16/22 (FOAA) training. ” This FOAA training was 
done by the lawyers of DrummondWoodsum. This was to conﬁnn that Mr. Grant had actually 
been trained in FOAA, given his propensity to not follow the Maine laws around it. Mr. Grant 
also often refers to it as “FOIA,” the federal right to know law.
9
40. 
41 
42. 
3. 
44. On approximately January l4th, 2023, Mr. McBreairty received a certiﬁed, taxpayer paid letter 
(Exhibit 1) from Micah Grant, stating that he was not willing to comply with the FOAA request, 
per Maine law. Mr. Grant stated, “The F OAA training materials you requested are copyright 
protected. While I am not authorized to make copies you may review these by calling (207) 
848-4000 ext 6000 or emailing administrative assistant Jody White at 
jody.white@schools.hem1on.net to schedule an appointment for viewing. ” 
As stated on the Copyright. gov website, “You can also use works that are in the public domain. 
Works in the public domain are those that are never protected by copyright (like facts or 
discoveries)... ” Mr McBreairty has a legitimate public and private interest in the records 
requested and Mr. McBreairty ’s interest cannot be outweighed by Mr. Grant’s potential concerns 
and his confusion in not allowing these records to be duplicated by copying, or photographing. 
Furthermore, DrummonWoodsum and the eight trainers of this material, do not appear to have 
registered the “25th Annual New Superintendents ’ Workshop ” binder as a copyright with the 
Federal Government, thus may not have any protections to begin with. 
“Copyright exists automatically in an original work of authorship once it is ﬁxed, but a copyright 
owner can take steps to enhance the protections. The most important step is registering the Work. 
Registering a work is not mandatory, but for U.S. works, registration (or refusal) is necessary to 
enforce the exclusive rights of copyright through litigation. Timely registration also allows 
copyright owners to seek certain types of monetary damages and attorney fees if there isa 
lawsuit, and also provide a presumption that information on the registration certiﬁcate is 
correct. ” 
Mr. Grant can’t determine what Mr. McBreairty may do with the public records and only the 
holder of the copyright, in this case, if registered by DrummondWoodsum, only they would be
10
able to cite damages in civil court, if there were any actual damages. Only if Mr. McBreairty 
used them for his own personal proﬁt, such as creating an identical, “New Superintendent ’s 
Workshop ” and sold it to other Maine school districts for personal gain, proﬁting off their 
misguided views of the management of our Maine public K-12 schools. 
Furthermore, a proper FOAA denial should cite both this provision of FOAA and the speciﬁc 
federal copyright law in question. Simply referencing “copyright ” as Mr. Grant did in the 
response letter (Exhibit 1), is not enough and thus, violates the Maine FOAA law. 
Any materials which become “public records, ” are void of copyright claims for public viewing, 
review and exposure. 
Mr. McBreairty has received many copyrighted presentations from other Maine schools, without 
incident, or this type of delay. Should Mr. Grant’s assertion that no member of the public can 
copy, or photograph a public record that has “©” somewhere on it, the public would never be 
able to duplicate these documents, nor would anyone ever be able to quote, or photograph pages 
from library books. This information was also not stated by Mr. Grant as “conﬁdential” or any 
sort of “attorney/client privilege. ” Because of course, it was not. It’s simply a training binder. A 
training binder full of information that should be shared. 
Mr. McBreairty received the second acknowledgement (Exhibit 2) of request to, “Provide for 
inspection all written information on behalf of Hermon School Board member Chris McLaughlin 
from the time period of 9/ 15/22 to 11/15/22. ” Mr. McLaughlin is the Executive Director for the 
National Association of Social Workers, Maine. He also has a consulting business, named 
Inspired Consulting Group LLC.9 As a sitting member of the HSD school board, Mr. 
McLaughlin sells the politically leftist LGBTQ+ narrative to other school districts, paid for by 
9 http://www.inspiredcg.com/about.html
11
the taxpayers. He has made upwards of approximately $20,000 on these “trainings ” to other 
Maine school districts. 
Mr. McLaughlin was exposed by Mr. McBreairty for his heinous and egregious statements via 
multiple videos. 
Mr. McLaughlin stated that, “The (pornographic) book ‘Gender Queer’ was a book he personally 
loves,” and that “if this (book, ‘Gender Queer’) were ripped from the pages of any number of 
adult magazines, it would be immediately stamped porn and removed out of there.” 
Mr. McLaughlin also states, “Even if those safety issues were present (such as a student’s 
thoughts of suicide?) it would not be ever appropriate for me (Mr. McLaughlin) to out that youth 
to their ‘caregivers ’ without their consent. ” He calls parents, caregivers. 
Mr. McLaughlin states, in his official capacity, to “Be willing to explore things that as clinicians 
we may have thought were a bit ‘taboo’ in the past, especially when working with youth.” 
Mr. McBreairty Wanted to know how this apparent bias against parents, allegedly wanting to 
hyper-sexualize minors, doing so by keeping secrets and discussing “taboo” subjects with 
children, would affect his clear conflict of interest on the HSD School Board. Through FOAA. 
Mr. McLaughlin was supported, endorsed and inserted on the HSD school board by the HEA, 
Hermon teachers union. 
He was appointed to the Negotiations Committeew on July llth, 2022, to be in charge of the 
HEA teachers union contract negotiations for the teachers ’ pay raises, days off, perks, etc. 
Interesting conﬂict of interest for the taxpayers of Hermon. Those who endorsed Mr. 
McLaughlin now appear ready to be ﬁnancially rewarded by him for their efforts. 
10 
https://core-d0cs.s3.amazonaws.com/docu ments/asset/uploaded_fi|e/ 1 043/ HS D/2329888/2022-07-11_H 
SC_Meeting_Minutes.pdf
12
56 
7. 
58 
59 This email FOAA request was provided to Mr. Keith on November 30th, 2022 and was not 
returned until approximately 50 days later, via taxpayer funded certiﬁed USPS mail. 
Mr. Grant appears to be violating the Maine FOAA law regarding, “Within a reasonable time of 
receiving the request, the agency or ofﬁcial shall provide a good faith, nonbinding estimate of the 
time within which the agency or ofﬁcial will comply with the request... ” as stated in §408-A, 3- 
Acknowledgment. Although “reasonable ” is not deﬁned within the Maine FOAA Statute, 
Merriam-Webster deﬁnes it as “not extreme or excessive. ” 50 days simply for a return of the 
letter would appear to be excessive. 30 days to obtain the material requested would seem to be 
more reasonable. 
Mr. Grant has a habit of responding to Mr. McBreairty via certiﬁed USPS mail, which is not the 
way he replies to most other FOAA requests, most of which are done via more timely, personal 
email response. This further delays Mr. McBreairty in gathering and reviewing HSD documents 
requested and appears to be a strategy that the HSD is using, possibly in use only with Mr. 
McBreairty, because of their current and frivolous lawsuit against him. 
As a side note, the Maine School Management Association ’s Director of Communications, Vicki 
Wallack stated during a Maine Right To Know Committee hearing on November 17th, 2022, that 
Mr. McBreairty ’s FOAA requests were, “hate speech.”“ Ms. Wallack stated, “Our great concern 
with the Freedom of Access request our districts have been receiving is that they target gay, 
lesbian and transgender students. ” She said that she had been targeted with “burdensome ” public 
record requests that Were designed, she said, to undermine her personal support for gay, lesbian, 
and transgender children. “If these types of targeted FOIA (sic) requests are allowed to go 
forward — and make no mistake, these requests are intended to discourage public support for all 
11 
https://www.themainewire.com/2022/11/public-record-requests-are-hate-speech-says-maine-right-to-know 
-committee-membe ﬂ
13
students regardless of their gender identity —-— it will be despicable misuse of the FOIA (sic) 
law,” she said. Wallack did not offer any explanation as to how she had intuited the motives of 
the people submitting FOA requests. It was clear that Wallack was directing her comments 
about hate speech toward McBreairty. ” Ms. Wallack’s rant appears to be displaced emotional 
baggage. She also doesn’t apparently know in Maine, it’s called FOAA, not FOIA, the federal 
program. Sounds familiar with Mr. Grant’s propensity for calling it the same thing. 
Mr. McBreairty has never sent, nor ever seen a FOAA request, “targeting ” students, regardless of 
their sexuality, skin color, race, or any other item. 
What Mr. McBreai1ty asked for in his F OAA request of Ms. Wallack Was, 1)“ ...provide for 
inspection all written materials regarding Shawn McBreairty. ” 2)“ ...the total of What Maine 
schools have paid the MSMA for FY21/22. ” 3)“ ...I request your salary information, including 
beneﬁts.” Obviously there was no “hate speech” included in this email sent to Ms. Wallack in 
October of 2022. But, this is the strategy of the left, they can’t defend their actions, so they lash 
outwith name calling and bullying. 
The answers were, l) 276 pages of information on Shawn McBreairty, held by the MSMA, 73 of 
which were with Ms. Wallack alone, which seems very “sta1kerish, ” to say the least. To date, 
Mr. McBreairty has still yet to receive these written records. 2) The taxpayers of Maine paid 
$626,987 from 253 school districts for the “expertise ” of the MSMA. 3) Vicki Wallack makes 
$111,840 in salary and $17,106, all paid for by taxpayers, so she can attack citizens with 
unhinged rants about defamatory, “hate speech.” 
Why the MSMA, or any organization would be so infatuated with students “gender identity ” is 
mind blowing, as Maine has never had worse academic scores” since they have been tracked“. 
‘Z https://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/subject/pubIications/stt2022/pdf/2023011ME8.pdf 
13 
https://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/subject/pubIications/stt2022/pdf/202301OME8.pdf
14
Or, maybe citizens are onto something? It should paint for the Court the overall view of citizens 
looking for transparency and instead groups involved with Maine schools, like the MSMS would 
rather defame citizens with hurtful words and emotional blackmail, then comply with Maine 
FOAA law. 
HSD may be taking advice on FOAA from the MSMA all tied together with 
Dru1nmondWoodsum. All this power gathered to subvert the rights of the Maine taxpayers. 
Mr. McBreairty called and set up an appointment with HSD for Friday, 2/3/22 at 9am to review 
these two sets of records. There was no mention by Superintendent's Ofﬁce Administrator Jodi 
White as to the length of time permitted to view the materials, as there should not be, given these 
are public records to be reviewed in a public building, with normal business hours. 
Mr. McBreairty was greeted by Ms. White, upon entering the Superintendent ’s Ofﬁce at 
approximately 8:55am. 
Mr. McBreairty asked for the Drummond Woodsum presentation, and the Chris McLaughlin 
emails and Ms. White “parked” Mr. McBreairty at a small table near her desk. 
Mr. McBreairty was then approached by Mr. Grant, who said, “You can’t take any pictures (of 
the DrummondWoodsum New Superintendent ’s Workshop). . .and if you do, I’m going to end the 
session. ” Mr. McBreairty explained the copyright law to Mr. Grant and he disagreed, referencing 
Dru1nmondWoodsum, the HSD’s attorney group’s views of the law. 
Mr. McBreairty then spoke about the Chris McLaughlin emails and asked to inspect these prior 
to being forced to pay for them. Mr. Grant stated, “I’m not going to do that, if you want to pay 
$50, I’ll hand them to you.” This is illegal and against Maine FOAA law. The requester hasa 
right to review materials before deciding what they will pay for, if at all, when the estimate is 
less than $100.
15
Mr. McBreairty was provided lined paper and a pen, to hand write from the 
DrummondWoodsum training binder. Mr. McBreairty is a very slow and messy hand-writer, but 
proceeded to attempt to effectively copy this binder at the desk, packed with juicy information 
the State taxpayers and Hermon community will want to be made aware of. 
At some point shortly into the process, Mr. Grant appeared to attempt to intimidate Mr. 
McBreairty, by sitting directly behind him, within about 4’ of his personal space. 
Mr. McBreairty was made to feel very uncomfortable, as Mr. Grant was hovering over Mr. 
McBreairty ’s shoulder, seated directly behind his back where he could not see Mr. Grant. This 
made it very difﬁcult to concentrate on working through the FOAA information because of Mr. 
Grant’s presence and having to manually hand write the information. 
Mr. McBreairty felt like Mr. Grant was treating him like a criminal on some sort of “camp work 
duty program” needing constant supervision and Mr. McBreairty had to assume that no other 
citizen would be treated so unprofessionally by Mr. Grant. Think of the precedent in whicha 
taxpayer paid school superintendent, like Mr. Grant, who’s educational assessments are already 
beyond horrendous, would spend an entire hour of taxpayer ’s time, hovering over members of 
the public who wish to review a public document? What an extreme waste of taxpayer dollars, 
not to mention the overall lack of etiquette, leadership, policy, or a legal argument to do so. 
Mr. Grant doesn’t seem to understand where his $125,000 (before beneﬁts) annual salary and 
obnoxious 3 year revolving contract as superintendent is paid from. The taxpayers of Hermon, 
the State of Maine and the nation. 
At about 9:30am, Mr. Grant threatened Mr. McBreairty with the statement, “Hurry up,” said ina 
very gruff tone.
16
This made Mr. McBreairty feel even more uncomfortable and began to consider that his safety 
was being threatened, given Mr. Grant’s close proximity to him, unable to see Mr. Grant. 
Mr Grant has a history of hostility towards Mr. McBreairty and general unpredictability in his 
reactions towards him and unwillingness to answer very simple questions. 
Mr. McBreairty asked Mr. Grant several questions from the presentation about policy and law 
and talked about open session votes of the school board and the section in the binder named, 
“Avoiding Disaster In Court, by Drummond Woodsum lawyer, J eana M. McCormick. Here it 
states, “Rule Number 6 - Educate Your Board; Before Litigation, When Litigation Happens and 
During The Lawsuit and Your Duties To Insurer (the Town of Hermon)” all of which Mr. Grant 
has failed to do. - 
Mr. McBreairty ’s understanding is that Mr. Grant has not updated the school board, nor the HTC 
on the lawsuit since it was approved either during, or after Hermon School Board executive 
session on May 2nd, 2022.14 
No public school board vote was ever taken in approving the lawsuit against Mr. McBreairty. 
Mr. McBreairty further asked Mr. Grant about the executive session process in May 2022, 
regarding the lawsuit Mr. Grant, Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey placed upon Mr. McBreairty in their 
attempt to violate his First Amendment rights. , 
Mr. Grant came back with a stern, “You have 3 minutes. . .you are done at 10 o'clock, ” which 
appeared to be another threat toward Mr. McBreairty. 
At approximately 9:57am, Mr. McBreairty took a “selﬁe” of Mr. Grant (Exhibit 4) who was 
sitting directly behind him, to document how close Mr. Grant was. Mr. Grant said this 
“terminated ” the appointment, because Mr. McBreairty used a “picture taking device.” 
14 
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/up|oaded_file/1 O43/HSD/21 5497612022-05-02_H 
SC __Meeting_Minutes.pdf
17
Mr. McBreairty was also not able to complete his full assessment of the public information 
within the binder. If Mr. McBreairty was able to take photos, or the Hermon School District 
simply made PDF copies of the binder, per Maine law, this entire waste of taxpayer dollars could 
have been easily avoided. Mr. McBreairty did not initially take pictures of the binder, simply of 
the situation, per his right, of a public employee, in a public building. 
For the record, Mr. Grant also incorrectly stated the HSD Superintendent ’s Ofﬁce was nota 
public building. It would seem he believes HSD is a “sovereign nation” upon itself. 
Mr. Grant reacted to the selﬁe with, “Jodi (Ofﬁce Admin), would you call the sheriff ’s 
department please?” They called 911 on Mr. McBreairty for a “picture taking device.” Mr. 
Grant did not ask Mr. McBreairty to leave upon them calling 911. This appears to be a “color of 
law” violation, as Section 242 of Title 18 makes it a crime for a person acting under color of any 
law to willfully deprive a person of a right or privilege protected by the Constitution or laws of 
the United States. For the purpose of Section 242, acts under "color of law" include acts not only 
done by federal, state, or local ofﬁcials within their lawful authority, but also acts done beyond 
the bounds of that ofﬁcial's lawful authority, if the acts are done while the ofﬁcial is purporting 
to or pretending to act in the performance of his/her ofﬁcial duties. Persons acting under color of 
law within the meaning of this statute include police ofﬁcers. . .and others who are acting as 
public ofﬁcials. It is not necessary that the crime be motivated by animus toward the race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin of the victim. 
Mr. McBreairty was not asked to leave and there was no reason given to him, nor Ms. (Jodi) 
White. Mr. Grant simply stated again that he terminated the session due to Mr. McBreairty 
taking out a “photo taking device.”
18
Then Mr. McBreairty took a photo of the front of the binder, to which Mr. Grant then asked for 
“my binder,” which technically is the public’s binder, but it was immediately provided back to 
him, without incident. 
Penobscot County Sheriff ’s Deputy Taylor J. Keeran was taken off the road to protect the 
residents of the county and he had to respond to the call at approximately 10:10 am. 
Mr. McBreairty, after a brief statement provided in the attached Incident Report (Exhibit 5 
forthcoming) peacefully left under his own recognisance. The audio can be heard and pictures 
can be viewed on Mr. McBreairty ’s YouTube channel. ” 
Mr. McBreairty received his third FOAA acknowledgment on approximately February 8th 
(Exhibit 3), with Mr. Grant again, incorrectly stating that when $75 was provided, that the 
respective documents would be mailed to his residence, but only after payment had been 
received and processed. 
This is not in accordance with Maine F OAA law, which allows for inspection of documents prior 
to payment, if under $100. 
In this case, the original FOAA request was not even cited in the letter. This is also a key 
takeaway from Mr. McBreairty sending various Maine schools FOAA requests, they don’t ever 
seem to reply with history, or the initial ask, making the sender have to double back to determine 
what was sent as a FOAA request in the ﬁrst place. It is not part of the Maine FOAA law that 
the government must return information with the request included, just simply another 
unprofessional approach. 
This FOAA third request in question, sent again to Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey via email on 
January llth, 2023, stated the following; “Provide for inspection, all emails from Hermon 
15 https:1/www.youtube.com/watch?v=6tLJmJ6jHKg&t=314s
19
librarians Kara Schwartz and Brittney McAl1ister from 9/1/21 to 11/30/21 for anything with the 
following key search words: 
O Gender and Sexuality Alliance 
0 Gender Sexuality Alliance 
0 Gay Sexuality Alliance 
0 GSA 
0 MBA 
0 Union 
0 Grant 
0 LGBTQ 
0 LGBTQIA+ 
0 Display 
0 Audit 
These two librarians within the HSD participated with ex-teacher Ms. Cook in hyper-sexualizing 
minors with the 40 book transgender library book display within the Hermon High School in the 
fall of 2021. 
Mr. Grant stated in the letter that this FOAA would take ﬁve hours to complete, charging Mr. 
McBreairty for 3 hours (there are 2 hours free, per Maine FOAA law, then $25 thereafter). This 
is shocking and presents a picture of the inefficiency within HSD’s IT group. They would need 
to take 5 hours to search for these basic terms above, from two librarians? It appears that Mr. 
Grant is trying to “nickel and dime” him, Without providing Mr. McBreairty any idea of even 
what he is paying for.
20
96. By denying, delaying, or deﬂecting these three FOAA requests from Mr. McBreairty, the 
Defendants appear to be making willful, yet select violations of the State of Maine FOAA laws. 
97. The Defendants are also allegedly withholding this information critical to the upcoming public 
HSD budget discussion starting March 16th, 2023 and an upcoming vote on June 15th, 2023 via 
the HTC in Hennon on the Defendant ’s annual school budget. 
98. Mr. McBreairty believes that the defendants may be purposely Withholding information vital to 
the community, for fear that this continued negative exposure could provide the citizens of 
Hermon even more concern regarding this upcoming budget. This may cause them to vote 
against the HSD budget. 
99. Other local citizens have had similar issues with HSD and FOAA requests. 
100. Mr. Grant has shown an pattern of not Wanting to provide public information to Mr. 
McBreairty. Such as the April lst, 2022 FOAA request on then-teacher Mallory Cook’s “teacher 
in-service day” training on 3/18/22 to various Bangor area teachers, including HSD. 
l0l. Mr. McBreairty asked via FOAA, “Provide for inspection the training provided by Hermon 
8th grade teacher Mallory Cook on March l8th, 2022 to various Bangor area schools. including 
RSU22.” This presentation by Ms. Cook was titled, “Leaders for Just Schools” and included 
items such as “conversations about race, microaggressions and reﬂection on their own privilege. ” 
102. Mr. Grant denied this information to Mr. McBreairty stating in the letter (Exhibit 6) that, 
“The training you reference, however, was not a HSD program, and the HSD was not involved in 
organizing, or presenting the program. The HSD is not in possession or custody of the 
referenced training (or any related materials), and as noted above, the training was not otherwise 
prepared in connection with the transaction of any HSD business. Accordingly, your request is 
denied.” Even though Ms. Cook was “on the clock” during the time of creating this training she
21
presented during the March 18th, 2022 online training class, paid for by the HSD taxpayers, thus 
all her materials were indeed, public records. If Ms. Cook was taking unpaid days and using 
non-HSD computer equipment to create and disseminate her training materials, then of course, it 
would not be a public record, but this is not the case here. It is alleged that Mr. Grant simply did 
not want these woke training items by Ms. Cook disclosed to the public for fear of continued 
public exposure during last year’s school budget negotiations. 
103. Mr. Grant appears to be trying to follow the previous Superintendent Jim Chasse’s lead,“ not 
willing to provide any records involving any MEA, or HEA teachers union members in FOAA 
documents. 
104. This is not the intent of the law, nor is it stated in such a way. As stated on the Maine. gov 
FAQ website, the only items that are not FOAA worthy are those designated conﬁdential by 
statute, doctunents subject to a recognized legal privilege such as the attorney-client privilege or 
the work-product privilege, records describing security plans or procedures designed to prevent 
acts of terrorism, medical records, juvenile records, and the personal contact information of 
public employees contained within records. ” 
105. In an email on March 10th, 2022, Mr. Chasse stated, “I must respectfully disagree with your 
(Mr. McBreairty ’s) interpretation. As you know, l M.R.S.A. Sec. 402(3)(A) excludes from the 
deﬁnition of “public record” any “records that have been designated conﬁdential by statute. ” 26 
M.R.S.A. Sec. 975(2)(B) makes clear that the names of bargaining unit members “are not public 
records as deﬁned in Title 1, section 402, subsection 3 and are conﬁdential and may not be 
disclosed by the public employer. . ..” Lastly, that same provision is speciﬁcally included in the 
Maine Legislature ’s list of statutory exceptions to Maine’s Freedom of Access Act. For your 
16 Hennon Superintendent Jim Chasse resigned in haste from HSD in May of 2022 and now works for the MDOE. 17 
https://www.maine.gov/f0aa/faq/
22
reference, I have included a link to the helpful search engine here: 
https://www.maine.gov/foaa/law/exceptions.htm ”18 
106. Searching this database provides similar information to the FAQ site, but just in more depth 
and states nothing about withholding names and records of “bargaining ” agents, except in the 
case of §402 (3)(D)'9 - Material prepared for and used speciﬁcally and exclusively in preparation 
for negotiations, including the development of bargaining proposals to be made and the analysis 
of proposals received, by a public employer in collective bargaining with its employees and their 
designated representatives. ” Exclusively in negotiations and proposals of contracts. Not 
exclusive of day to day Written records of those teachers within the MBA, teachers union, aka 
“bargaining ” unit. It does not certainly make it “clear.” In fact, it makes no mention of What 
he’s claiming at all. 
107. If what Mr. Chasse and now Mr. Grant is claiming as denials were indeed the case, no citizen 
would ever be able to obtain a record from a teacher, or member of the union, aka “bargaining 
unit.” If schools didn’t want to turn over public documents to citizens, just have the subject join 
the unionl? The HSD can’t magically deem certain records, “confidential ” as they choose, they 
must ﬁt within the statute deﬁnitions and purposely deﬁne why they are denied. 
108. What Mr. McBreairty is claiming that HSD is purposely denying return of information, based 
on not wanting this information exposed. 
109. Regarding the head of the HEA - Hermon Education Association, aka “local bargaining 
unit/teachers union,” union boss Erin York, a 3rd grade HSD teacher, actually told parents in her 
public comment, “Those of you who don’t trust us. . .y0u can take your children elsewhere. . .”2° 
1° https:!lvvvvvv.maine.gov/foaa/law/exceptions.htm 
1° http1//www.mainelegislature.org/|egis/foa/ 
2° https:/!rumble.comlv1on4mi-teachers-says-to-parents-to-take-your-kids-elsewhere.htm|
23
Examples such as this should provide this Court more information on how HSD is actively 
pushing back against the community. It’s all connected and they want to bully citizens. 
110. Defendant ’s Jesse Keith and Kristen Quinn Shorey are supervisors to Superintendent Micah 
Grant and have provided no assistance to assist Mr. McBreairty. They appear to not provide Mr. 
Grant any clear direction on these FOAA requests, all of which have ﬂowed through them, to 
Mr. Grant. They appear to take a “hands off’ approach to their employee. 
111. Per HSD policy KDB - Public’s Right To Know/Freedom Of Access,” this policy mentions 
nothing of the law regarding the ability for citizens to inspect documents for those estimates 
under $100. This policy actually quotes the Maine F OAA law incorrectly. 
112. For quite some time, Mr. Grant actually referred to it as “FOIA.” This was even after his 
alleged Drum1nondWoodsum, four hour F OAA training. 
113. The current State of Maine F OAA law provides “guaranteed access” to public records. The 
response by the Defendants to withhold public information is unreasonable and the Plaintiff 
requests that the Superior Court takes appropriate action to require the Defendants to follow the 
current State of Maine FOAA law and provide the requested information within a reasonable 
timeframe, allowing the inspection of and copying of said information. 
APPLICABLE MAINE LAW 
114. §408-A. Public records available for inspection and copying. Except as otherwise provided 
by statute, a person has the right to inspect and copy any public record in accordance with this 
section within a reasonable time of making the request to inspect or copy the public record. 
21 
https://core-docs.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/asset/up|oaded_fi|e/441550/KDB_Public_s_Right_to_K 
now_amended_11-O7-22.pdf
24
115. §408-A, 1 - Inspect. A person may inspect any public record during reasonable office hours. 
An agency or ofﬁcial may not charge a fee for inspection unless the public record cannot be 
inspected without being converted or compiled, in which case the agency or official may charge 
a fee as provided in subsection 8. 
116. §408-A, 8 - Payment of costs. D. An agency or official may not charge for inspection unless 
the public record cannot be inspected without being compiled or converted, in which case 
paragraph B or C applies. 
B. The agency or official may charge a fee to cover the actual cost of searching for, retrieving 
and compiling the requested public record in accordance with this paragraph. Compiling the 
public record includes reviewing and redacting conﬁdential information. 
(1) The agency or official may not charge a fee for the first 2 hours of staff time per 
request. 
(2) After the ﬁrst 2 hours of staff time, the agency or official may charge a fee of not 
more than $25 per hour. 
C. The agency or official may charge for the actual cost to convert a public record into a form 
susceptible of visual or aural comprehension or into a usable fonnat. 
117. §408-A, 10 - Payment in advance. The agency or official having custody or control ofa 
public record subject to a request under this section may require a requester to pay all ora 
portion of the estimated costs to complete the request prior to the search, retrieval, compiling, 
conversion and copying of the public record if: 
A. The estimated total cost exceeds $100; or
25
B. The requester has previously failed to pay a properly assessed fee under this chapter ina 
timely manner. 
118. §408-A, 4 - Refusals; denials. If a body or an agency or official having custody or control of 
any public record refuses permission to inspect or copy or abstract a public record, the body or 
agency or official shall provide, within 5 working days of the receipt of the request for inspection 
or copying, written notice of the denial, stating the reason for the denial or the expectation that 
the request will be denied in full or in part following a review. A request for inspection or 
copying may be denied, in whole or in part, on the basis that the request is unduly burdensome or 
oppressive if the procedures established in subsection 4-A are followed. Failure to comply with 
this subsection is considered failure to allow inspection or copying and is subject to appeal as 
provided in section §409 Appeals. 
119. §409-A Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a refusal or denial to inspect or copy a record or 
the failure to allow the inspection or copying of a record under section 408-A may appeal the 
refusal, denial or failure within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the written notice of refusal, 
denial or failure to the Superior Court within the State for the county where the person resides or 
the agency has its principal office. The agency or official shall ﬁle a statement of position 
explaining the basis for denial within l4 calendar days of service of the appeal. If a court, aftera 
review, with taking of testimony and other evidence as determined necessary, determines such 
refusal, denial or failure was not for just and proper cause, the court shall enter an order for 
disclosure. Appeals may be advanced on the docket and receive priority over other cases when 
the court determines that the interests of justice so require. 
CASE PRECEDENT
26
There are many cases that set precedent that the Federal Copyright Act would not prevent 
disclosure under the open records law, in this case, our Maine Right To Know laws. 
120. Weisberg v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 631 F.2d 824, 827-31 (D.C.Cir.l980)22 afﬁnning 
“determination that copyrighted materials may constitute agency records under F OIA.” Appellee 
Harold Weisberg brought this FOIA action to compel disclosure of all photographs in the 
Government's possession that were taken at the scene of the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther 
King, Jr. Included in the FBI's possession are 107 photographs taken by Joseph Louw, then 
employed by Liﬁz Magazine. Louw sold the photographs to TIME, Inc., the parent company of 
Life Magazine, and TIME submitted copies of the photos to the FBI for use in the assassination 
investigation. 
On cross-motions, the district court entered summary judgment for Weisberg and ordered the 
FBI to provide him with "prints" of the requested photos. The court ﬁrst held that the photos 
were "agency records" subject to disclosure under FOIA. It then decided that neither of the FOIA 
exemptions asserted by the Government applied to the photos. 
The court concluded that the Copyright Act is not a statute exempting disclosure for the purposes 
of Exemption 3, and that even if it were, only three of the 107 requested photos "have been 
registered for statutory copyright protection." The district court further stated that even if all the 
photos were protected by statutory copyright, they would be subject to disclosure under the "fair 
use” doctrine because Weisberg intended to use them solely for scholarly purposes. The court 
also determined the photos were not "conﬁdential" or "privileged" by virtue of a copyright, and 
thus held the fourth exemption for commercial information inapplicable. Although the parties 
22 https:!!casetext.com/case/weisberg-v-us-dept-of-justice-4
27
and TIME were aware of TIME's interest in this litigation, they did not make any effort to bring 
TIME before the district court. 
121. Lindberg v. Kitsap Cty, 82 Wash.App. 82 Wash.App. 566, 919 P.2d 89 (1996), aff’d in part, 
rev’d in part, 133 Wash, 2d 729, 948 P.2d 805 (l997).23 The Kitsap County Department of 
Community Development denied Evelyn and Richard Lindberg's request to photocopy site and 
drainage plans for proposed residential developments, contending that federal copyright law 
prohibited reproduction of the requested material. The Lindbergs sued under the Public Records 
Act to obtain the documents. The trial court ordered the County to pennit photocopying of the 
documents, and awarded the Lindbergs a total of $1,110.00 in costs and statutory penalties. The 
Lindbergs contend on appeal that the trial court erred in failing to award greater penalties. The 
County cross-appeals the order compelling it to release the documents for copying. We afﬁrm the 
trial court's order but remand for recalculation of the statutory penalty award. 
On December 23, 1993, the trial court ordered the County to allow the Lindbergs to copy the 
requested documents. At a later hearing, the trial court awarded the Lindbergs costs and statutory 
penalties totaling $1,110.00. The Lindbergs appeal the amount awarded and the County 
cross-appeals the order compelling it to release the documents for copying. 
122. State ex rel. Rea v. Ohio Dept of Education, 81 Ohio St.3d 527, 532-33, 692 N.E.2d 596 
(1998)2“ . Plaintiffs-relators, Stephen and Hollie Rea, father and daughter, brought this 
mandamus action to compel ofﬁcials at the Ohio Department of Education ("ODE") and the 
Ohio State University-Vocational Instructional Materials Laboratory ("OSU") to release 
requested portions of both the Twelfth Grade Ohio Proﬁciency Test ("OPT") and the Ohio 
23 
https://casetextcom/case/Iindberg-v-kitsap-county-1 
24 
https://casetextcom/case/state-ex-reI-rea-v-ohio-dept-of-edn
28
Vocational Competency Assessment ("OVCA"). In 1995, Hollie Rea took both the Twelfth 
Grade OPT and the OVCA. After Rea took the examinations, she and her father requested access 
to portions of the OPT and OVCA examinations at their local high school, but were told to 
contact ODE. Upon contacting ODE, the Reas were informed that they could review the OPT 
and a portion of the OVCA, the Ohio Competency Analysis Proﬁle ("OCAP"), but only if they 
executed a nondisclosure agreement, prohibiting them from disclosing the examinations ’ 
contents. The Reas refused to sign the agreement and eventually instituted this action on August 
28, 1996. 
In order for documents or materials to be subject to disclosure under the Public Records Act, 
they must fall within the statutory deﬁnition of a "public record." R.C. l49.01l(G) deﬁnes 
"records" as "any document, device, or item, regardless of physical form or characteristic, 
created or received by or coming under the jurisdiction of any public ofﬁce of the state or its 
political subdivisions, which sen/es to document the organization, functions, policies, decisions, 
procedures, operations, or other activities of the ofﬁce." 
Pursuant to R.C. 149.43, a public record is subject to release, unless it falls within one of the 
Act's exceptions. R.C. l49.43(A)(l) deﬁnes a "public record" as "any record that is kept by any 
public ofﬁce, including, but not limited to, state, county, city, village, township, and school 
district units." The deﬁnition excludes certain records from public inspection, including medical, 
adoption, probation, and parole records, and "[r]ecords the release of which is prohibited by state 
or federal 1aw." 
In order to foster open government, it is well settled that the Public Records Act is to be liberally 
construed. State ex rel. The Miami Student v. Miami Univ. (1997), 79 Ohio St.3d I68, 170, 680
29
N.E.2d 956, 958. Furthermore, the custodian of the records bears the burden of establishing that 
the public records are excepted from disclosure. State ex rel. James v. Ohio State Univ. (1994), 
70 Ohio St.3d 168, 169, 637 N.E.2d 911, 912. Any doubt is to be resolved in favor of providing 
access to such records. State ex rel. The Warren Newspapers, Inc. v. Hutson (1994), 70 Ohio 
St.3d 619, 621, 640 N.E.2d 174, 177. In reviewing relators ’ request, we ﬁnd that the documents 
sought are public records. 
The OPT examinations clearly fall under the deﬁnition of a public record. By statute, ODE is 
required to develop the proﬁciency tests and ODE admits that it owns the OPT. Although ACT 
helps ODE develop the OPT, ODE acquires sole ownership of the OPT pursuant to contract. 
Furthermore, once the examination has been completed and scored, the OPT test results are 
maintained by ODE. Because ODE develops, owns, and maintains the OPT materials, they are 
considered public records under R.C. 149.43. 
We conclude that previously administered OPT and OCAP examinations are subject to 
disclosure pursuant to R.C. 149.43. The tremendous implications for students who take such tests 
or assessments camiot be underestimated. The instruments that evaluate students and determine 
their capabilities should not be enshrouded in a cloak of secrecy, isolated from the scrutiny and 
oversight of the general public, concerned parents, and students themselves. ODE and OSU 
argue that access has always been granted, albeit subject to a nondisclosure form. However, 
beyond a few narrowly limited exceptions, the Public Records Act is unconditional. 
Once records are deemed public, and not subject to an applicable exception, a public ofﬁce 
cannot subvert or avoid its duty to disclose such records through restrictive agreements. 
Although parents or the public could view the previously administered tests, the nondisclosure
30
agreement effectively negated any chance that legitimate concerns could be raised through public 
exposure and debate. It is paramount that such tests are subjected to the keen eye of the public to 
ensure that the state does not stray from its duty to properly educate Ohio's citizenry. 
Accordingly, we grant relator‘s Writ of mandamus in part and order the disclosure of the OPT and 
OCAP materials in question. 
123. Robert ZELLNER V. CEDARBURG SCHOOL DISTRICT and Daryl Herrick No. 
2006APl143-AC ” . This appeal is before the court on certiﬁcation from the court of appeals, 
pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 809.61 (2005-06). Robert Zellner (Zellner), a high school science 
teacher, appeals from the decision of the Ozaukee County Circuit Court, Judge Paul V. Malloy 
presiding. The circuit court denied Zellner's request for an injunction prohibiting the Cedarburg 
School District (District) from releasing a memorandum (memo) and a compact disc (CD) 
containing adult images and intemet searches that Zellner allegedly viewed and conducted on his 
school computer. The circuit court ordered release of the memo and the CD and dismissed the 
action, but stayed the release of the memo and the CD pending appeal. The Milwaukee Journal 
Sentinel and one of its reporters, Katharine Goodloe (collectively Journal), had requested access 
to the memo and CD pursuant to Wisconsin's Open Records Law, Wis. Stat. §§ 19.31-19.39, 
after a public hearing resulting in Zellner's termination by the Cedarburg School Board (District 
Board), and after a grievance had been ﬁled challenging that termination. 
Zellner appealed the circuit court's dismissal and release order, and the court of appeals certiﬁed 
the case to this court, presenting several questions, including whether a public employee who 
25 
https://scholangoog|e.comischolar_case?case=12260392454326802293&q=zeIlner+v+cedarburg+school 
+dist&hl=en&as_sdt=6,50
31
views copyrighted images on a work computer has standing to raise the copyright exception to 
Wisconsin ‘s Open Records Law, and if so, What is the scope of such exception? 
A threshold issue in this case is whether Zellner has standing to assert the copyright exception to 
the Open Records Law, Wis. Stat. § 1932(2). The CD at issue, which the District created aftera 
forensic analysis of Zellner's computer, contains copyrighted adult images and websites. 
The Journal argues that the copyright exception was intended to protect the rights of authors, not 
to shield the misconduct of public employees. The Joumal asserts that the District, not Zellner, 
would be liable for any copyright infringement, and thus, Zellner should not be permitted to 
assert copyright infringement as a bar to disclosure of the memo and CD. 
Under federal law, "[c]opyright protection subsists in original Works of authorship ﬁxed in any 
tangible medium of expression, now known or later developed..." 17 U.S.C. § l()2(a). "Works of 
authorship" include literary works; musical Works, including any accompanying words; dramatic 
works, including any accompanying music; pantomimes and choreographic works; pictorial, 
graphic, and sculptural Works; motion pictures and other audiovisual works; sound recordings; 
and architectural Works. Id. Ordinarily, use and reproduction of copyrighted material is one of 
many rights granted only to the copyright holder. 17 U.S.C. § 106. 
However, federal law recognizes a "fair use" exception to copyright infringement. In 17 U.S.C.§ 
107 four factors are listed that shall be considered in determining Whether the use made ofa 
copyrighted work in any particular case is a "fair use." Those factors include: (1) the purpose and 
character of the use, including Whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for nonproﬁt 
educational purposes; (2) the nature of the copyrighted work; (3) the amount and substantiality of
32
the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and (4) the effect of the use upon 
the potential market for, or value of, the copyrighted work. 17 U.S.C. § 107. 
In sum, we hold that the strong presumption of complete openness with regard to public records 
overrides any public policy against disclosure of the CD and the memo in this case. It is 
important to note, however, that the District need not, by itself, bear the ﬁnancial burden of 
producing copies of the CD and the memo in response to open records requests. Under Wis. Stat. 
§ 1935(3), the District may impose a fee upon the Journal, or any others who request the 
records, for the reproduction of the records, but the fee may not exceed the actual, necessary, and 
direct cost of complying with the open records request. 
COUNT TWO - FIRST AMENDMENT VIOLATIONS 
124. “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances. ” Although 
not taught very often in Maine’s public K-12 schools anymore, replaced by identity politics, this 
is the First Amendment to our US Constitution. A vital document protecting us from our 
government. From these very Defendants, who are paid by citizens to be the govermnent. 
125. Prior restraints on speech and publication are the most serious and the least tolerable 
infringement on First Amendment rights.” Neb. Press Ass’n v. Stuart, 427 U.S. 530, 559 (1976). 
126. Mr. McBreairty based on his exercise of his First Amendment rights to petition and Art. 1,§ 
15 of the Maine Constitution. 
127. HSD has repeatedly looked to deny, delay, subvert, silence, or outright bring legal action 
against Mr. McBreairty ’s First Amendment Rights.
33
128. It is on this basis that Mr. McBreairty states to this Court that HSD is looking to penalize him 
for gathering public information and informing the community. A community of Hennon who 
may change their opinion of HSD and affect their consideration of the upcoming school budget. 
HSD has also looked to bully Mr. McBreairty and the citizens of Hermon and the State of Maine 
who share an opinion that this public K-12 school system could be doing so much better than it is 
for the students and taxpayers. 
129. Submitting public records requests via FOAA is at the heart of petitioning the government 
for records not already transparent to the community at large. Being delayed, denied 
inappropriately, or by HDS not following Maine FOAA law, does not allow Mr. McBreairty the 
full breadth of his activities to raise awareness about HSD. 
130. Defendants don’t just simply misunderstand these laws, it is a strategy used against Mr. 
McBreairty to deny him of his full breadth and scope of his rights. To make him “go back into 
the corner for a timeout. ” The full weight of a government entity to control transparency and 
subvert the rights to free speech, redress of grievances with this very government. Going 
forward, citizens need to be well aware of what they can ask for and should receive. Full 
transparency within the law, within a “reasonable ” timeframe. 
131. Mr. Grant having his administrative staff call 911 on Mr. McBreairty, appears to be a “color 
of law” infringement on his Constitutional rights, as no reason was given for calling the Sheriff ’s 
department. Section 242 of Title 18 makes it a crime for a person acting under color of any law 
to willfully deprive a person of a right or privilege protected by the Constitution or laws of the 
United States. For the purpose of Section 242, acts under "color of law" include acts not only 
done by federal, state, or local ofﬁcials within their lawﬁil authority, but also acts done beyond 
the bounds of that official's lawful authority, if the acts are done while the ofﬁcial is purporting
34
to or pretending to act in the performance of his/her ofﬁcial duties. Persons acting under color of 
law within the meaning of this statute include police ofﬁcers. . .and others who are acting as 
public oﬁicials. It is not necessary that the crime be motivated by animus toward the race, color, 
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin of the victim. This appears to be a clear 
deprivation of rights under color of law. 
CONCLUSION 
132. For all the reasons set forth above, Plaintiff respectfully requests the Court granta 
declaratory judgment to reverse the denial of providing information for inspection, prior to 
payment for estimates less than $100. 
133. Order the Defendant to allow Mr. McBreairty the ability to copy, or photograph public 
information, regardless of copyright status, as this does not apply with regards to FOAA. 
134. Although Mr. McBreairty is aware that the ﬁling timing of 30 days is past due, he 
respectfully asks the court to rule on demanding HSD provide all of Ms. C0ok’s in-service day 
training and written materials from the March 18th, 2022 FOAA request. 
135. Mr. McBreairty also requests HSD provide information from the bargaining unit request 
from March 10th, 2022, realizing this is also past due. 
136. Plaintiff asks the Court to have Mr. Grant retake a four hour Maine FOAA class to be 
certiﬁed by an organization not affiliated with DmmmondWoodsum, or the MSMA. 
137. Plaintiff asks the Court to have Mr. Keith and Ms. Shorey take a two hour FOAA class, ﬁom 
an organization not affiliated with DrummondWoodsum. 
138. Plaintiff asks the Court to have Mr. Keith, Ms. Shorey and Mr. Grant take a two hour First 
Amendment certiﬁcation class, from an organization not afﬁliated with DrummondWoodsum, or 
the MSMA.
35
139. Plaintiff asks the court to award all reasonable attorney ’s fees and all costs associated with 
this civil action, including ﬁling fees and the $50 paid to Micah Grant on February 3rd, 2023, 
along with other relief that the Court may deem equitable and just to the Plaintiff, Shawn 
McBreairty. 
140. If needed, Mr. McBreairty asks the court to declare an emergency injunction to gain this 
information prior to April 15th, 2023, so that the residents of Hermon can be fully aware of the 
information relating to the upcoming budget discussions within the HTC. 
141. Finally, Mr. McBreairty wants to plead to the court to spend the least amount of taxpayer 
dollars on this case, given that any dollar spent on this from HSD is a dollar not spent on 
improving the simply horriﬁc HSD academic assessments of its students. 
PROOF OF SERVICE 
142. I hereby affirm under oath and under the penalty of perjury according to the laws of the State 
of Maine that on the same day of ﬁling, I have requested service to all three defendants via the 
Penobscot County Sheriff ’s Office for HSD Superintendent Micah Grant, School Board Chair 
Jesse Keith and Vice Chair Kristen Quinn Shorey. 
SHAWN P. MCBREAIRTY; PLAINTIFF March 3rd, 2023 
Hampden, ME 
207.408.7855 
Addresses of those being served: 
Superintendent Micah Grant School Board Vice Chair Kristen Quinn Shorey 
391 Bog Road 571 Ridge Dr. 
Hermon, ME 04401 Hermon, ME 04401
36
School Board Chair Jesse Keith 
47 Copper Ridge 
Hermon, ME 04401 
Exhibits 
1. January 11th, 2023 Freedom of Access Act Response To Request 
2. January 19th, 2023 Freedom of Access Acknowledgement of Request 
3. February 8th, 2023 Freedom of Access Act Acknowledgment of Request 
4. February 3rd, 2023 Selﬁe of Mr. McBreairty and Mr. Grant 
5. Penobscot County Sheriff ’s Incident Report (forthcoming) 
6. April 7th, 2022 Freedom of Access Act Response to Request
