Maine Servic e Employees Association,      Page 1 of 4  
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union     April 18, 2023 
5 Community Drive , Augus ta, ME 04330 
www.ms easeiu.org  
  
   
  
Testimony of Jeff M cCabe 
Maine Service Employees A ssociation, SEIU  Local 1989 
 
In Support of LD 1173  
 LD 1173, A n Act Directing the Bureau of General Services to Ensure Ad equa te Air Quality in 
All State -owned and State- leased Buildings  
Representative Montel l 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Stat e and Local Government  
April 18, 2023 
 
Senator  Nangle , Representative Stover  and members of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, I’m Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine  Service 
Empl oyees Ass ociation , Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. We are a 
labor union representing over 13,000 Maine workers, including workers  in all three branches of 
Maine State Government . 
 
We are here in support today of LD  1173, know ing that th is bill before you looks to ex pand on 
important work that this committee and the Maine Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services has begun around building health and safety.  
 We believe that the bill sponsor will be proposing an amendment to LD 1173 tha t will pick up 
some key aspec ts missed in the work to date . Representative Montell has lived experience herself 
and has heard from numerous  individuals  who have concerns associated  with t he State House 
complex. It would be our hope that Representative  Montell and  Maine Bureau of General 
Services continue the important work around this issue .  
 We would support Representative Montell’s propos al to a dd radon as a specified indoor pollutant 
to be tested for.  
 I am happy to answer any questions and have provided past test imony to show work rela ted to 
this issue.      
   
 
Maine Servic e Employees Association,      Page 2 of 4  
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union     April 18, 2023 
5 Community Drive , Augus ta, ME 04330 
www.ms easeiu.org  
  
   
  
Testimony of Jeff M cCabe 
Maine Service Employees A ssociation, SEIU  Local 1989 
 
In Support of LD 1042, An Act to Protect State Workers from Exposure to Harmful Substances , 
Sponsored by Representative Thom Harnett  
 
Before th e Joint Standing Committee on Stat e and Local Government  
9 a.m. Friday, April 30, 2021, Cross Offi ce Building 214 
 
Senator Bal dacci , Representative Matlack  and members of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, I’m Jeff McCabe, director of politics an d legislation for the Maine  Service 
Empl oyees Ass ociation , Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. We are a 
labor union representing over 13,000 Maine workers, including workers  in all three branches of 
Maine State Government .  
 
We’re here in support LD 1042, An Act  to Protect S tate Workers from Exposure to Harmful 
Substances , sponsored by Representative Thom Harnett.  
 LD 1042 require s the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of General 
Services , to inventory all stat e-owned buildings where sta te employees perform job duties to 
determine the presence of asbestos, lead, black mold and other substances that may be harmful to human health. It requires property owners of buildings leased to the State to conduct a similar 
inventory and report the res ults to the b ureau.  
 The bill requires the bureau to establish and maintain a database containing the results of the 
inventories and make the database readily accessible electronically to employee collective bargaining agents, em ployees working in state of fice buildings with asbe stos, lead, black mold or 
other substances that may be harmful to human health, individuals who perform maintenance, repair or custodial services, firefighters, the Department of Labor, the Department of H ealth and 
Human Services, M aine Center f or Disease Control and Prevention and members of the joint 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over state and local government matters . 
 Furthe rmore, i t requires the database to be consulted bef ore maintenance of or repai r to a state -
owned building by a stat e employee and the provision of protective gear to the employee if 
appropriate. The department may adopt rules to implement these requirements and is required to submit a biennial report to th e joint standing committee regarding the  conditions of the buil dings.  
   
 
Maine Servic e Employees Association,      Page 3 of 4  
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union     April 18, 2023 
5 Community Drive , Augus ta, ME 04330 
www.ms easeiu.org  
 LD 1042 is necessary because r ight now , the State of Maine is filled with old er buildings that 
have been in decline  for many years . One notori ous state bu ilding  is right next door : The Maine 
State Cultural Building, home to  the Maine State Library, Maine State Museum , Maine State 
Archives , and, since January of 2013, the Maine Labor History Mural  created  by Tremont artist 
Judy Taylor . As al l of you may know, t he Maine State Cultural Bu ilding  been closed since th e 
summer of 2 020 for upgrades that include asbestos  removal.  One of our members, Michael S. 
King, a boiler  engineer for  the Department of Adm inistrative and Financial Services,  on his own 
time in in January of 2020, explained to members of this  committee  the hazardous conditions 
he’s endured in t he Cultural Building. I ’ll quote from his te stimony : 
 
"All the spray -on fireproofing in the building is made of asbestos . The mechanical rooms, and 
many other rooms above the drop ceilings , are laced with this asbes tos-ridden fi reproofing. Over 
the years, the stuff has become friable from m any different factors, including an ever -declining 
health of the building, various leaks  and mechanical failures.  Unbeknownst to me and almost 
anyone els e in the building, I've bee n working wit h this fireproofing all over the place, disturbing 
it as I wor ked. Walking through it, sweeping it up, brushing it off, knocking it off and around the 
air handlers as they needed work. This fireproofing breaks down over time and becomes airbor ne, settling with dust on any given surface. This dust now sit s, waiting for the slightest 
disturbance to become airborne. Myself and many others experienced years of preventable exposure while trying to conduct our jobs to keep the building inhabitable. I n addition, w e now 
live with the fact we have possibly exposed the occupants of the building while conducting our work, all unbeknownst to us."  
To this day, t he State of Maine  lacks a comprehensi ve syst em for tracking potential h ealth risks, 
repairs and ri sk zones in buildings. As a result, there is a pattern of short -term specific repairs 
with problems that are reported, but no real plan for the proac tive work to prevent exposures. 
There also has n’t been real education for worker s about potential risks and how to spot risks and 
alert management.  
 We are focused mostly on issues around asbestos and black mold, but we also want you to know  
about the existence of  other ongoing building and hea lth iss ues, including drinking water issu es. 
These issues affect Mai ners who work both in and out of our bargaining units; exposure is not 
just limited to state employees.  
 Fortunately, LD 1042 would identify and catalog problem buildings and related testing. It would 
create new standards relatin g to contaminant levels and improve test ing requirements. It would 
improve the ability of workers to raise and resolve safety concerns.  
 Through LD 1042, we are seeking the following actions:  
 1) Establishment of a  system for tr acking, monitoring, and tran sparent information about 
buildings and potential risk areas.  
 2) Adoption of recommended standards concerning black mold and adopt ion of  U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency standards for black- mold enforcement for state workplaces.  
 
Maine Servic e Employees Association,      Page 4 of 4  
Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union     April 18, 2023 
5 Community Drive , Augus ta, ME 04330 
www.ms easeiu.org  
 3) Establishment of a s afety committee, trainin g, and transparent communication. 
   
Attached and below are several useful links, reports and memos around ongoing issues. Thank you and I’d be glad to answer any questions.  The Failure of Asbestos Monitoring in Maine State Buildings: The Case for the Creation of a Tracking and Monitoring system, by Adam Caplan-Bricker and Tom J uravich , Labor Center-
University of Massachusetts Amherst,  January 22, 2020, Executive Summary 
 EPA Mold Guidelines  https://www.epa.gov/mold/mold- remediation -schools- and-commercial -buildings-guide
 
 News Article s  
https://www.mainebiz.biz/article/maine -state- library -finds- temporary -home- in-winthrop
 
 https://www.mainebiz.biz/article/troubled -m
 aine- state-cultural -building- closed -for-upgrades-
asbestos -removal  
 
https://www.centralmaine.com/2019/04/03/high- asbestos -levels-found- in-states -cultural -
building- in-augusta-but-consultants- say-theres -no-danger/  
 https://www.pressherald.com/2019/05/01/biddeford-dhhs- office -closes-due- to-flooding/
  
 https://www.pressherald.com/2019/06/06/dhhs-opens- temporary -biddeford- office/
 
 https://www.wabi.tv/content/news/High -asbestos -level -508131241.html
 
 
https://www.newscentermaine.com/article/news/local/asbestos -testing -underway -at-state-
archives -dep-calls-danger- minimal/97 -6d54612f-06cd-4015-8c99-f0d10b93bbe8 
 Massachusetts State Work  
https://www.boston.com/news/local-news/2019/12/03/asbestos- still-kills-thousands-of-
americans -each-year-maura -healey-is-spearheading -an-effort -to-change- that 
 https://www.mass.gov/service- details/healthy -buildings- healthy -air-initiative
 
 https://www.mass.gov/service- details/asbestos -in-schools
 
