Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 187
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT Committee
    Efficiency Maine Trust, a cash cow for the select, and a bloated bureaucracy spending ratepayer 
money with no regard to the fact that ratepayers are paying unmerciful prices for electricity (.     This 
bill wants to eliminate the only funding EMT receives that receives voluntary contributions:  "Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Resource FundEERRF is composed of voluntary contributions from 
ratepayers, as well as alternative compliance payments from entities that do not meet Maine’s 
renewable portfolio standard requirement. Maine law stipulates that 35% of these revenues be directed 
to the Maine Technology Institute (MTI) to help promote research on and development of renewables. 
The Trust may use the remainder of these revenues to fund demonstration projects or to provide rebates
for customer-sited, commercialized renewable energy equipment, as funds allow. Although Efficiency 
Maine did not launch a call for projects in FY2022, one is planned for FY2023."
   How about redirecting all funding for EMT into solutions that would bring down electricity costs.  
Invest in nuclear power, clean, baseload power.....truly efficient due to its energy density and long 
periods of continuous operations between scheduled maintenance. "A small modular nuclear reactor 
just got US approval — a big milestone"
A small modular nuclear reactor just got US approval — a big milestone (yahoo.com)
    Chasing zero carbon with unreliable wind and solar is futile. RGGI data exposes that truth.
   How about considering Maine removing itself from ISO-NE, where 83% of our electric bills are 
produced. There is no stability left in ISO-NE. They respond to the whims of the wind and solar 
lobbyists. "In New Hampshire, six Republican lawmakers introduce a bill to study if the state should 
pull out of ISO New England to oversee its own grid and power market planning, citing consumer costs
and net energy export."
Dan McKay       Dixfield Maine 
