STATE or MAINE 
Egg Ormcu or THE GOVERNOR 
n . ISTATE HOUSE ST.-\TlOl\ ‘ 
AUGUSTA, IVIAINE 
04333-0001 
'-‘=8!- . "E:.~ 
JANET Mlu.s DAN BURGESS 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR OF GOVERNOR'S 
ENERGY QFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Eliminate the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Resource Fund 
L.D. 187 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
February 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Dan Burgess and I am the Director of the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 187. 
L.D. 187 is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208. The summary indicates the bill would 
eliminate the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Resource Fund and would use money received 
from alternative compliance payments to lower future renewable portfolio standard 
compliance costs. 
The Energy Efficiency and Renewable Resource Fund was established at the Efficiency Maine 
Trust to receive alternative compliance payment funds paid by competitive electricity providers 
in lieu of satisfying the Class 1 and Class 1A Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) requirements. 
The purpose of alternative compliance payment funds deposited in the Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Resource Fund is to ”fund research, development and demonstration projects 
relating to renewable energy technologies and to fund rebates for cost-effective renewable 
energy technologies." A related but separate fund, the Thermal Energy Investment Fund, is 
similarly established to accept alternative compliance payment funds paid in lieu of satisfying 
the thermal renewable resource standard requirement, with the established purpose to "fund 
incentives and low-interest or no-interest loans to businesses, municipalities, educational 
institutions and nonprofit entities in the State for the installation of new thermal energy- 
derived projects." 
Alternative compliance payments are a typical component of RPS programs across the region. 
They are generally intended to provide a cost cap on RPS compliance, particularly in the event 
of unforeseen or unusual market situations. Because of this purpose, alternative compliance 
payments are not generally regarded as consistent revenue streams. The presence of 
alternative compliance payment revenue in Maine is uncommon, a sign that Maine's RPS is 
generally functioning as intended.
1
As the office established to carry out the responsibilities of the State relating to energy 
resources, planning and development, the GEO currently engages in activities closely aligned 
with the purpose of the existing Energy Efficiency and Renewable Resource Fund. These 
important funds could provide resources for on-going activities to reduce future compliance 
payments through the development of initiatives focused on the RPS, and the GEO is well- 
positioned to lead or coordinate the deployment of them for this purpose. Although funds 
deposited through alternative compliance payments are expected to be limited and 
inconsistent, the GEO is well-suited to be involved in the coordination of these resources as is 
done in other New England states.- 
The GEO looks forward to working with the sponsor, committee, and interested stakeholders 
on the language and implementation of this legislation. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
D16 /£7 Dan Burgess, Director 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
