 
 
 
 Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust  
 Michael D. Stoddard, Executive Director  
 
IN SUPPORT OF  
 LD 187 - An Act to Eliminate the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Resource Fund  
 Presented to the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT)  
 
 February 2, 2023  
 
  
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, the Efficiency Maine Trust (the Trust) appreciates the opportunity to testify today in support of  
LD 187 - An Act to Eliminate the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Resource Fund .  
This propos ed amendment to the statute  is supported by the Trust ’s Board and was included , by vote of the 
Board,  in the Legislative Recommenda tions section of our Annual Report  submitted to this Committee on 
December 1,2022 . 
Section 10121 of Title 35 -A of the Maine statutes establishe d a fund, originally called the Renewable 
Resource Fund , as a nonlapsing fund administered by the Trust  primarily to promote the commercialization 
of renewable energy resource s.  At one point in its history, when there  was a system benefit charge 
dedicated to small renewable energy projects , the Fund offered rebates  for solar projects  on homes and 
businesses . After the system  benefit charge “sunset ” in 2011, the revenues declined substantially and the 
Trust pivoted  the Fund ’s use  to focus on  community demonstration projects  for renewable energy 
technologies . Over the past decade, the Trust has issued three  rounds of competitive solicitations  for 
renewable demonstration projects. During that time, i t award ed approximately $6 75,000  in grants  for 
projects including solar photovoltaic installations, solar hot -air systems, biomass boilers, and district heating.  
The Fund now receives revenues from two sources: (1) voluntary contributions from electric utility 
ratepayers and (2) alternative compliance  payments (ACP) from electricity suppliers who fail to meet their 
obligations under the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS). These revenues have been on a steady decline.  
From 2013 to 202 2, annual revenues from the voluntary contributions ranged from a high  of $105,000 
(2013 ) to a low of $47,000 (last year);  over that same period, annual revenues from the  ACP ranged from a 
high of $54,000 (2013) to a low of $0 (2020).  
These revenues have been sporadic and unpredictable. The resulting fund balance is often so small that for 
several years in a row the Trust had insufficient funds to make a competitive solicitation worthwhile  for the 
bidders .  Moreover, since the mechanism for generating revenue for thi s Fund was first established more 
than a decade ago, Maine’s policies to promote renewable  energy have evolved to dwarf what this Fund 
now offers. While it was originally conceived as a means to fund demonstration of small rooftop solar 
2 
 
 
 
 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330     |     (866) 376 -2463     |     efficiencymaine.com  systems and micro wind turbines, these technologies are now fully commercialized, and have since far 
surpassed the point of needing small “demon stration ” grants measured in the tens of thousands of dollars. 
Arguably, the costs of the Trust to administer these funds, and of the utilities to collect and remit them, 
outweigh the benefits of the program.   
The Trust suggests that the Legislature consid er reforming or repealing §10121 in its entirety, which would 
eliminate both the voluntary ratepayer contributions and the small demonstration projects. Additionally, 
since there are likely to continue to be sporadic revenues from the ACP, the Trust sugges ts that the RPS 
provisions in the statute (at 35 -A MRS §3210(9)(b)) be amended to direct any future ACP revenues to a use 
that directly lowers future RPS compliance costs.    
The Trust would welcome the opportunity to work with the bill ’s Sponsor and other stakeholders to d evelop 
language to acco mplish these objectives.  
Respectfully,   
/s/MDS  
Michael D. Stoddard  
Executive Director  
