iW(I1l!Tit:?>'S 
THE UNIVERSITY or bf} pﬂijb/;(;;
V Testimony Presented by Joan Ferrini-Mundy, University of Maine President 
and University of Maine System Vice Chancellor for Research & Innovation 
In Support of LD 1871, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in a Green 
Energy Materials Building at the University of Maine, May 25, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs: My name is Joan Ferrini-Mundy and I am 
honored to sen/e as the President of the R1 University of Maine and its regional campus in 
Machias, and also as the first Vice Chancellor for Research & Innovation for the University of 
Maine System (UMS). Relevant to today’s testimony is that l also serve on the Executive Steering 
Committee overseeing implementation of Maine’s 10-Year Statewide Economic Development 
Strategy, as the chair of the Maine innovation Economy Advisory Board and on the board of 
Maine & Company. 
l am here to urge your support of critically needed investment in Maine’s public university 
infrastructure, like that proposed by LD 1871, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to 
Invest in a Green Energy Materials Building at the University of Maine. 
Earlier this month, this Committee took up legislation sponsored by Representative Sawin Millett 
that would require certain legislation to be independently analyzed to determine how it advances 
the actions and goals outlined in the State’s 10-year strategy. As you are aware, that plan 
identified talent and innovation as the two primary necessities to spur growth in our economy for 
the benefit of all Maine people. 
Through that lens, I believe the single capital project that could have the most transformative 
impact on talent development and innovation generation, and thus, accelerate the state’s 
economy consistently with the recommendations of the 10-year plan, is the UMaine Green 
Engineering & Materials Factory of the Future (GEM). 
Under the leadership of the visionary Habib Dagher and his team, and utilizing artificial 
intelligence and arrays of massive 3D printers, this cutting-edge facility will enable the expansion 
of our Advanced Structures & Composites Center’s workforce training and research into next- 
generation, large-scale bio-based manufacturing process and materials development. 
The GEM project builds on the success of the world’s first 3D-printed home made entirely from 
low-value wood waste. it leverages the state’s vast, sustainable forest resources and market 
opportunities for durable, low-cost, low-carbon construction materials. An entire bay of the 
90,000-square-foot Factory of the Future would be focused on R&D for affordable housing, alsoa 
priority of the 10-year plan and the Legislature. Other applications advanced by GEM, and then 
commercializable by the private sector, would be clean energy, durable transportation 
infrastructure and boat building, including for national security use. Additionally, GEM will: 
o Attract hundreds of millions of dollars in new public and private investment to Maine; 
o Spin-oft new companies that will create great-paying innovation jobs for Mainers while 
enabling existing businesses here to grow and hire more Mainers; 
o Stabilize, strengthen and diversify the forest economy, and dependent rural communities; 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta ' 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent 
University of Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
0 Advance Maine’s climate action goals; 
o Enable UMS to deliver on a bold commitment to double our output of engineering and 
computing graduates over the next decade; 
o And sustain UMaine’s R1 designation and solidify the state as a global leader in R&D that 
matters to Maine and the world. 
The construction and equipping of GEM has already garnered $80 million in investment, including 
from the Departments of Defense and Energy and Congressionally Directed Spending secured by 
Senators Susan Collins and Angus King. The bipartisan $35 million bond before you represents 
the remaining funding needed to break ground on GEM in 2024. 
However, please know this amount is far less than what is needed now to realize the full potential 
of the Factory of the Future and Maine’s public universities. 
Last month you heard from Chancellor Malloy that UMS is burdened by a backlog of deferred 
maintenance that exceeds $1.6 billion, more than four times the combined need of Maine’s 
community college system and maritime academy. At UMaine — where 61% of space has not 
been meaningfully renovated in at least 50 years, upgrading our archaic electrical infrastructure is 
becoming increasingly urgent. We regularly experience outages that threaten campus safety and 
productivity, and our grid cannot meet the added demand anticipated by GEM and other planned 
improvements, like those underwritten by the Alfond Foundation to Black Bear athletic facilities. 
LD 460, a bipartisan $100 million bond sponsored by Senator Teresa Pierce with the support of 
President Jackson and many of you, and the endorsement of the Education Committee in its 
March budget report-back, proposes investment across our System. Those funds would allow us 
to both modernize existing spaces and systems that undergird our operations, and create new 
state-of-the-art facilities that move fon/vard world-class public education and research, and 
Maine's economy and communities. As GEM demonstrates, pursuing both catch-up and get- 
ahead projects simultaneously is essential to enabling UMS to strengthen and grow student 
enrollment and Maine’s workforce. UMaine would invest its $58 million share to modernize 
electrical and mechanical systems and construct the Factoiy of the Future. 
lf the Legislature opts not to advance general obligation bonds like LDs 460 and 1871 this year, 
we urge you to appropriate an additional $10 million in ongoing debt service to UMS in the 
Part ll budget to support $100 million in critical, time-sensitive infrastructure investments 
to classrooms, residence halls and laboratories like GEM. As Trustee Pat Flood recently 
reminded you, our System utilizes debt service provided to us by the Legislature to make 
payments on revenue bonds issued directly by UMS to finance capital projects. S&P just affirmed 
our AA- rating, allowing the System to continue to borrow at competitive rates without the backing 
of the full faith and credit of the State. 
We are grateful to President Jackson, who was so inspired by a recent visit to ASCC, for 
championing this and other important investments in Maine’s public universities. As the 10-year 
plan notes, Maine’s greatest growth potential lies at the intersection of global trends and the 
state’s assets. Through talent development and research-driven innovation enabled by your 
support of modern public university infrastructure, UMS uniquely activates those assets for 
maximum return so that Maine’s people and economy can prosper. 
Thank you and l welcome your questions. 
Page 2 of2
