. 
.,-‘E-; 
.t °_51,1'T§Z _ 
1932 gr 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1871 
“An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in a Green Energy Materials 
Building at the University of Maine" 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
May 25, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Troy Jackson andI 
have the honor of sewing as Senate President representing the good people of Aroostook 
County in the Maine Legislature. l'm here today to introduce LD 1871, “An Act to Authorize a 
General Fund Bond lssue to lnvest in a Green Energy Materials Building at the University of 
Maine." 
Earlier this year I had the great privilege of touring the University of Maine's Advanced 
Structures and Composites Center, or ASCC. l was inspired by the new technologies being 
developed there and made a commitment that day to introduce a bill to invest in their 
groundbreaking work. And while I am amazed that ASCC builds wind turbines, boats, bridges 
and much more out of recyclable materials, l am most compelled by their ability to construct 
durable, affordable houses. 
As legislators, we hear about the housing crisis every day. lt results in increased homelessness, 
an inability to attract workers to our state and more and more middle-income Mainers finding 
themselves priced out of houses and apartments for their families. The combination of a labor 
shortage and the high cost of building supplies has severely affected our ability to construct the 
thousands of homes we need in order to move beyond this crisis. 
Making a strategic investment in ASCC is a critical step in solving this problem. The materials 
used by ASCC’s 3-D printer to construct houses come from plant-based resins and pellets 
made of wood that at one time went to paper mills. Dr. Habib Dagher, who founded and runs the 
Center, has noted that we have enough of this wood material in Maine to construct 100,000 
homes. The material is cheap, there is plenty of it and we have ASCC staff and University of 
Maine students standing by to build affordable homes. What we need now is what Dr. Dagher 
has called the ‘factory of the future.’ 
The money from this bond would help build a factory with the capacity to put all of this 
technology to work building affordable homes on a large scale. We know that these homes are 
built well and can survive Maine winters. Maine Housing is already partnering with Penquis to 
develop a neighborhood of houses for the homeless in Bangor. l know l am eager to see this 
Slate Hozrse (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * T0llFree 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Senatorlacksonl@gmaiI.c0m * Web Sire.‘ ]€giSl(l1‘lIl'€.ll1Gil78.g0l ’/.S‘8I'IGl€
project get off the ground, but ASCC needs to increase capacity and build this factory in order 
for that to happen. 
ln the process of constructing this facility and bringing more affordable housing stock into the 
market, we will expand the profile of what is already the largest university-based research 
center in Maine. By passing this bill, we can attract more world-class talent to the University of 
Maine and train the next generation of leaders in this field. 
Thank you for considering this bill to ask the voters if they support building a facility that will 
create renewable, recyclable housing stock so that Maine can offer incoming workers a place to 
live, help house the homeless and provide the average Mainer with clean, efficient and 
affordable housing options. l am happy to answer any questions you may have.
