Mailing Address: 
1 , P.O. Box I280 - Westbrook, ME 04098 
p Street Address: 
‘ ' ‘ 15 Saunders Way, Suite 500-G, Westbrook, ME 04092 
G Telephone 207-523-5170 (V/FT Y) — Fax 207-289-7029 
Su,'>_r2o>'tim lnrlep<>i1<ic<n.c<:<J 
(.21;-lzcrrs. KL-?l§iz!, ‘;‘!éiX-' . i,:.m:‘-=.'.1_:.:-;,-:;/ 
In Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities by 
Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees. 
My name is Ann-Marie Mayberry. l am the executive director for GMS. 
For over four decades, GMS has been designing and maintaining programs that enhance, 
support, and teach through knowledge, respect, and dignity, in the Greater Portland area. GMS 
provides Shared Living, In-Home Support, Case Management, and Residential Services. We are 
dedicated to serving the community by providing a valuable service while working 
collaboratively with individuals served, guardians, family members, agencies, caseworkers, and 
other advocates. The individuals we serve live, work, volunteer and socialize in their community 
with support from dedicated professionals. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in strong support of LD 744 which would direct 
DHHS to conduct rate studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS Group Home and Community Supports and 
Community Membership services for people with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. 
This bill would also direct the department to establish a work group to help determine a daily rate for 
Group Home services and adjust the minimum staffing level to 85% after the Appendix K waiver ends in 
November and before new rates would be available in January 2025. 
Without this bridge, more agencies will be forced to close group homes. There have been 
approximately 75 group home closures in the past two years. GMS has closed 5 group homes 
since 2020, affecting the lives of ll people. The closures are due to funding that does not 
support a living wage, forcing direct support professionals to leave this career for higher pay and 
leading to high staff turnover and an inability to attract new workers. The crisis is compounded 
by increased expenses, inﬂation, a rising minimum wage, and a Maine unemployment rate of 
2.8%. The closure of these group homes is undoubtedly a challenging situation for everyone 
involved, especially for the individuals with intellectual disabilities and their families. These 
group homes provided a stable and supportive environment for those who require assistance with 
daily living activities. The closure of these homes has left these individuals without the familiar 
structure and support system they had come to rely on, which can be a signiﬁcant source of stress 
and anxiety. 
Additionally, there is a signiﬁcant cost associated with adapting homes to accommodate the 
medical and behavioral needs of individuals with intellectual disabilities. Closing these homes 
means losing the investment in the modiﬁcations and resources that were put into them. 
Furthermore, ﬁnding alternative accommodations that meet the same standards and requirements 
is nearly impossible in Portland ’s housing market. This often means that individuals must move 
out of their community and away from family and friends.
In conclusion, the closure of these residential group homes and the displacement of people with 
intellectual disabilities is a signiﬁcant loss for the community. It is essential to acknowledge the 
impact this has on individuals and their families. It is not only essential but an expectation of the 
Home and Community Base Service (HCBS) regulation that the Department investment in 
disability services and support systems to ensure that everyone has the opportunity to livea 
fulﬁlling, independent life, in the community of their choice. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Respect lly Submitted, 
//ﬂﬂ/)¢~./" Ann-Marie Mayberry 
ammavberr\1@gmsme.org
