 
Barbara Alberda,  
Manager of Intellectual and Developmental Disability Services 
Social Learning Center, Tri County Mental Health Services 
Lewiston, ME  
 
In Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities by Requiring 
Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
April 13, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committees.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 744 which would direct DHHS to conduct 
rate studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS Group Home and Community Supports and Community Membership 
services for people with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. This bill would also direct the 
department to establish a work group to help determine a daily rate for Group Home services and through the 
proposed amendment adjust the minimum staffing level to 85% after the Appendix K waiver ends in November 
and before new rates would be available in January 2025. 
 
My name is Barbara Alberda.  I am the Manager of Intellectual and Developmental Disability Services at the 
Social Learning Center of Tri-County Mental Health Services. The Social Learning Center is a center based 
community support service that offers people opportunity to interact with long time friends, opportunity to 
volunteer, explore work opportunities, and be part of the Lewiston/Auburn/Community at large.  The Social 
Learning Center has been a division of Tri County Mental Health Services for 47 years. Sadly, the cost of doing 
business and workforce crisis has become a hardship and we will be closing our doors in June.  Despite having 
plenty of people on our waitlist to serve and people who are only attending a small percentage of their 
authorized hours, we simply don’t have the staff to increase census. It is heart breaking to close this valued and 
reputable service in Lewiston after all these years. Many of the people I serve are seniors and people who have 
significant physical and cognitive disabilities. They have a wide variety of interests and tolerance for getting out 
and about both physically and emotionally.  
 
I also wear another hat, that of Chair of the Community Support, Work Support, Community Membership 
Committee of Maine Association for Community Service Providers (MACSP). I have been in this role for 
nearly two years and just this morning, the committee took up the conversation of how are businesses surviving 
under the weight of Community Service shortfalls. People shared that the increased costs of documentation, the 
low reimbursement rate, the cost of vehicles/mileage to provide the necessary community exploration, 
inclusion, and meaningful engagement are all making the service untenable. The rate currently used is not based 
on the actual services mandated for Waiver Section 21 and 29. This study will assist in formulating a reasonable 
expectation for the cost to companies to provide the vital out of home experience that we all need to grow and 
thrive in our lives. Collecting actual data from these providers and understanding the mandates of HCBS is 
crucial. Previous rate studies cannot compare with the amount of documentation detail for example that is now 
required. For example, we serve a man with significant behavioral challenges due to anxiety. He loves to get out 
1:1 and spend time exploring Lewiston, given that he is non verbal and cannot tell us where he wants to go or 
what he wants to see or any of his personal history, we must explore places, observe his demeanor and make 
conclusions to then try again later to learn more about where he might find a place of familiarity like the TV 
Show Cheers—where will his “NORM” impact be. Where will he be accepted valued and appreciated for who 
he is? I’m sure you can imagine that the time it takes to document the observation is much more than a simple 
statement that “He went to the fire department to look at the trucks after showing staff a firetruck in a 
magazine.” Additionally, this man receives 1:1 due to his behavioral challenges when anxious. That funding is 
not addressed in the current rate structure for community supports. This type of service is not feasible for an 
agency to provide and survive without appropriate funding.  
 
I wear yet another hat and that is of a sister/guardian. My sister lives in a group home in Southern Maine. She 
has been essentially home bound for nearly 3 years due a medical event in Feb 2020. She quickly found herself 
unemployed and without a community support program due to covid. Her life has been static now due to large 
community support waitlists and staffing in her home using agency or temp staffing that cannot take her out and 
don’t really understand her. For my sister, having a sustainable rate for residential services is crucial, the 
inability to hire long-term staff that can assist her to grow and thrive in her own home has caused her much 
distress in the past three years. Turnover causes tremendous grief for people whose basic care is dependent on 
others. The drain this causes on the long term staff who are dedicated is evident in burnout. I can’t even speak 
to the cost of overtime. Staff tell me all the time that they are working over. The cost of temp staff too is 
excessive, but 24/7 service is just that 24/7. She and her housemates need someone present for their safety and 
care.  
 
You can make a huge difference for my sister, residentially and in her community/work life. She had a career, 
with support, for nearly 30 years on the same job, three-four days a week. She attended a community support 
program on her days off. She had a meaningful place in her community. We would run into people all over the 
place that knew her from work or her presence in her town. Huge waitlists for these services have seriously 
curtailed her life.  
 
As you can see from my examples, a serious investment in workforce development and a viable rate, that will 
sustain competitive wages based on today’s mandates and work actually being done, is vital  
 
I appreciate the Department’s efforts thus far with workforce, COLA’s to residential programs (Community 
Supports were left out) and flexibilities to date under the Waiver K. There is still much work to be done. Please 
support this bill. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
  
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Barbara Alberda 
balberda@tcmhs.org 
 
