March 13, 2023 
L.D. 744 Resolve, to Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Perform Rate Studies and Rate Determinations for Providers of Certain Services 
for Adults with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and honored members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: 
My name is Bonnie-Jean Brooks. I am here today as Public Policy Consultant for 
OHI. We provide a variety of services in 6 Maine counties. We have been 
supporting people funded under the Waiver (HCBW) since 1983 when Maine 
started this Medicaid program. l have also been guardian for a person receiving 
waiver services for that time. 
OHl is in favor of L.D. 744. While we are deeply appreciative of both OADS and 
this committee for their support of this program over the last few years, it is 
simply not enough! 
The current rate is just not supporting the program. We have had to close homes, 
transfer people, and reduce the quality of what we do - sometimes to a point 
where we are not able to keep people safe! 
People with disabilities are not able to get out into the community to live their 
best lives and to accomplish their dreams and aspirations and even to get to 
important appointments. Choice, the watchword of our commitment, is not 
possible. 
We have over 2000 hours a week of direct support professional (DSP) openings! 
We paid over $610,000 last year in overtime but still were unable to fill many 
vacant hours. 
We are often not able to comply with the federal “Settings ” rule because we do 
not have enough staff to do it! We are unable to accept new people from the 
Waiting List, which is growing longer by the day, into group homes or our 
community support program - even though we have vacancies. We don’t have the 
staff.
There has not been an approved rate study of these services for over ten (10) 
years while, at the same time, regulations, economic realities, waiting lists and 
unmet needs have increased. We can't wait any longer. 
A recent national report was authored by the University of Minnesota, the Human 
Services Research Institute in Cambridge, and the National Association for State 
Directors of Developmental Disability Services. OADS is a member of the latter. lt 
was entitled "Community Supports in Crisis: No Staﬁj No Services.” 
In its introduction, “Sounding the Alarm '1 the report says, '$4ll the progress toward 
community living that has been made in services for people with IDD over 
decades is now in jeopardy - because of catastrophic labor shortages and 
pervasive high rates among workforce that supports them, direct support 
professionals (D-SP3).” 
The report states that “Workforce disruptions have a direct and negative effect on 
the we/l-being of people with /DD. High rates of turnover among D6-‘P3 have been 
linked to injuries and hospital admissions amongpeople with IDD... '1 
State DD directors calling the situation we are in ‘a crisis” , saying that we havea 
"catastrophic labor shortage ’; and that people with IDD are "in ieogardgf is 
nothing short of a national 911 call. We need First Responders now! 
911 has been called while a popular song plays in the background, "Love can 
build a bridge. Don’! you think its time. " We desperately need that bridge now. 
Please vote in favor of L.D. 744. 
We deeply respect your time today. 
Bonnie-Jean Brooks 
Public Policy Consultant, OHI 
964 Cape Jellison Road 
Stockton Springs, ME 04981 
bjbrooks@fairpoint.net 207-944-9093
