LD 744 4/12/23 Catherine Honeycomb on behalf of Megan Tucker 
In 1988, I delivered two healthy identical twin babies. They were beautiful, and as they 
grew, they hit all their physical milestones. But their acquisition of language and social 
skills lagged. l sought opinions from pediatricians, speech therapists, occupational 
therapists, you name it. No one wanted to give an actual diagnosis, they just identified 
“developmental delays” , and kept saying it was common with twins. Two years later,I 
took them to see Dr Isabel Rapin at Albert Einstein Medical Center in New York, where 
we were given a diagnosis of autism and a Kleenex. And that was it. 
Since that day, my primary responsibility has been keeping these two now grown 
women connected; to their family, their peers, their community. Caity currently lives ina 
privately managed residence for adults with mild disabilities in South Portland. Megan's 
needs are far broader. She has an extensive vocabulary, but struggles to forma 
sentence. She has learned to ride a horse and a bike, to ski, swim, skate. She's a great 
traveler and we went everywhere as a family. But she has not been able to generalize 
these skills into other environments. 
Meg's transition to residential placement was preceded by 7 months at Spring Harbor 
Hospital, after endangering her own life and mine. She now resides in a Woodfords 
Family Services residence in Scarborough, with two housemates who also struggle with 
very challenging behaviors. Woodfords ’ ability to provide appropriate staff for this 
house is severely hampered by their inability to hire, train, pay and retain people with 
the qualities necessary to support these residents, both in their house and in the
community. Turnover is a huge issue with residents who cannot communicate 
effectively. Megan cannot access the community unless she is accompanied by 
experienced, trained, competent staff. It has been a very long time since someone has 
fit that description, and so a very long time since Meg has gone into the community with 
anyone other than me. 
Autism, anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder rule her life. If there is a loose 
string on her shirt, she rips the shirt to shreds. If a puzzle piece goes missing, or the 
DVD case breaks, the result is catastrophic. She resists transitions in any form. She 
does things to gain access to sweets that would get anyone else arrested. She is 
banned for life from the Cookie Jar in Cape Elizabeth, has climbed over counters for 
whoopie pies, and grabbed a handful from the middle of a sheetcake at Hannafords. 
When Meg's tolerance is eclipsed by her anxiety, she shrieks as loud as she can, 
wherever she is. This is followed by panicked behavior, rushing out the door, property 
destruction and the like. For Megan to be engaged in both her home and community, 
she must be supported by capable, trained and dedicated staff. THEY DO NOT GROW 
ON TREES. All the outside professionals in the world, and we've engaged plenty, 
cannot replace those staff with whom the residents interact 90% of the time. Woodfords 
needs the resources to identify, hire and train these desperately-needed staff. Please 
give them a path forward to accomplish this.
