      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 1 3, 2023  
 
Re: LD 744, Resolve, to Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to Perform Rate 
Studies and Rate Determinations for Providers of Certain Services for Adults with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM .  I am also the parent of a 26 -year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair of the Maine Developmental Services 
Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 744, Resolve, to Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to Perform Rate Studies and Rate Determinations for Providers of Certain 
Services for Adults with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder .  This bill would 
direct DHHS to conduct rate studies and rate determinations for home and comm unity benefits and 
support services for members of the MaineCare program with intellectual disabilities or autism 
spectrum disorder.  And this bill would direct DHHS to convene a working group to advise the 
Department on the development of a daily rate pay ment system for agency home support service 
providers to be incorporated into the rate determinations.  The department would be required to 
implement the rates determined no later than January 31, 2025.  
 
I urge the Committee to support any bill s which woul d increase the rates for HCBS, specifically 
rates for direct support professionals (DSPs) .  
 
The reduced rates over the past decade have made it progressively harder for providers to hire and 
retain direct care staff, or DSPs, the people who work with my s on and others with ID/DD.  DSPs 
are the very nexus of the system of care.  Direct service professionals need to be paid enough to want to work in the field to begin with, and to stay in the field once they’ve begun their careers.  If agencies can’t hire an yone, if agencies can’t retain anyone, people like my son won’t receive 
services.  Hiring and retaining essential support service staff has become increasingly more 
difficult as starting hourly wages at places like McDonalds and Walmart, which require far less 
training/credentials than DSPs, have increased dramatically amid the workforce crisis.  DSPs ought to be paid a professional salary commensurate with the work expected and the training required.  
 
And providers need to be able to keep their doors open while paying a wage high enough to 
accomplish this.  The current rates, though improved in recent years thanks to investments by the Legislature and the Department, are not yet sustainable for providers to succeed in hiring and 
retaining staff .  This ultim ately hurts the recipients of needed services.  Despite the great need, 
agencies can only lose money for so long before it becomes completely untenable to provide 
services.   
 
LD 744, and other bills before this Committee during this Legislative Session, w ould see that the  
rates for Home and Community- Based Services (HCBS) are increased through a thoughtful, 
inclusive process to ensure providers can adequately compensate staff .  This will drastically help 
agencies attain and retain dedicated direct support professional staff, ensuring that people in Maine 
with ID/DD have access to quality, continuous, essential support services.    
 
I believe helping everyone reach their full potential is the way to go.  I hope that you will invest in 
helping people with intellectual/development disabilities have access to and receive the services 
they need.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
