>1 
L EA in Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities by 
Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committees. 
My name is Darryl Wood, and l am the executive director for LEAP in Farmington l\/laine. LEAP 
provides residential and case management services to adults with intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities since 1980. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in strong 
support of LD 744 which would direct DHHS to conduct rate studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS Group 
Home and Community Supports and Community Membership services for people with intellectual 
disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. This bill would also direct the department to establish a work 
group to help determine a daily rate for Group Home services and adjust the minimum staffing level to 
85% after the Appendix K waiver ends in November and before new rates would be available in January 
2025. 
LEAP has always focused on doing all the little things to attract the best staff to our agency, 
because we understand quality starts and ends with the people who do the work. For the most 
part, we have always been able to make this work despite the low pay for our workers. This 
changed in January of 2020, with the onslaught of the pandemic. At that time, we had 200 
workers and were able to fully staff all the people who we supported. A combination of the 
vaccine mandate, difficult work in a potentially covid environment and escalating costs for 
necessities has left us in a place where we are no longer able to recruit and retain staff in 
numbers sufficient to take care of these individuals, much less be a resource to families in our 
communities that needs our services. Currently, we have about 130 staff, and they are very 
tired. We have closed several homes, given notice to several individuals and consolidated other 
residential living situations to maximize the staffing resources we have left. We are on the 
verge of having to do this again. l never thought l would be in a position to tell a person we 
have been caring for they have to move. Or take a call from a family in need and say we have 
no capacity to consider helping. As a nonprofit, LEAP has a consistently low administrative 
percentage, and we are expected to lose money this year. We give everything we can back to 
our employees financially and by doing the little things, but it is not enough. You can make 
more stocking shelves at the big box next door than you can as a Certified DSP/CRMA at LEAP. 
We have lost many great DSP's who left crying out the door for more money next door. 
LD744 would hopefully account for all the expenses related to running a complex organization 
and create a viable rate that would allow for a sustainable workforce now and into the future. If 
nothing is done, l fear LEAP and other organizations like us will no longer be able to provide 
housing and life skills support necessary to so many Mainers and their families.
