Veritas Care of Maine Inc 1 | P a g e  
  
 
Senator Baldacci’s (bill sponsor) amendment  
Testimony of: Dr. Maxwell K. Chikuta PhD.,PPA, PH 
In Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-
based Services. 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 13, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees.  
My name is Dr. Maxwell Chikuta Ph.D. MPPA, PH founder, and CEO at 
VERITAS CARE OF MAINE, located in Portland, Maine.   
For more than three years, we have been serving adult individuals who have been 
diagnosed with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder and who have 
received Section 19, 20, 21, and 29 waivers to live in an integrated community 
setting rather than in an intermediate care facility.   
Our agency follows HCBS rules, a family-living support model whereby 
individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities live in a managed care 
facility provided by our agency and is set in a residential neighborhood with easy 
access to community resources.   
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 744 which 
would direct DHHS to conduct rate studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS Group 
Home and Community Supports and Community Membership services for people 
with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. This bill would also 
direct the department to establish a workgroup to help determine a daily rate for 
Group Home services and through the proposed amendment adjusts the minimum 
staffing level to 85% after the Appendix K waiver ends in November and before 
new rates would be available in January 2025. 

Veritas Care of Maine Inc 2 | P a g e  
  In support of LD 744, Veritas Care of Maine is supporting the increase in 
reimbursement to better support the individuals we serve. You will agree with me 
that the cost of living has skyrocketed nationally wide, we have seen an increase in 
Housing (Rentals, Mortgages), food, heating oil, insurance, electricity, water, and 
sewerage, snow removal, lawn mowing, and house maintenance to name but a few, 
but not to forget increase in wages.  
 I lost 9 employees simply because they left my organization to join Abbott in 
Westbrook where they were offered two times the hourly wage, I was offering 
them. I am in the process of closing my group home in Portland, Maine simply 
because I cannot afford the rental increase. The closing of this group home will 
negatively impact the lives of three Mainers who deserve to live in the setting of 
their choices.  
All these increases are happening in a blink of an eye, but without an increase in 
reimbursement from the department, it is like asking agencies to provide more 
service with few funds. Good help is hard to find, and we have challenges to hire 
DSPs/CRMA, the hourly rate, and overtime.   
I would like to remind you that we are not in the manufacturing sector where they 
can have the choice of sourcing their raw materials at a cheaper price. We are 
serving humanity, and the lives of the people we serve deserve better or higher 
quality services. We cannot continue to provide better services or higher quality 
services with less. Your support will be highly appreciated.   
I appreciate the Department’s efforts to invest in workforce development and the 
cost-of-living adjustments received to date, and flexibilities to date, however a 
viable rate, that will sustain a competitive wage is critical and cannot wait.  
  
I urge your support. Thank you for your 
time and consideration.  
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Dr. Maxwell K. Chikuta 
c.chikutam@veritascareofmaine.com 
 
Dr. Maxwell Chikuta
VERITAS CARE OF MAINE Inc
LD 744
Senator Baldacci’s (bill sponsor) amendment 
Testimony of: Dr. Maxwell K. Chikuta PhD., PPA, PH
In Support of LD 744
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services.
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of 
the Health and Human Services Committees. 
My name is Dr. Maxwell Chikuta Ph.D. MPPA, PH founder, and CEO at VERITAS 
CARE OF MAINE, located in Portland, Maine.  
For more than three years, we have been serving adult individuals who have been 
diagnosed with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder and who have 
received Section 19, 20, 21, and 29 waivers to live in an integrated community setting
rather than in an intermediate care facility.  
Our agency follows HCBS rules, a family-living support model whereby individuals 
with intellectual and developmental disabilities live in a managed care facility 
provided by our agency and is set in a residential neighborhood with easy access to 
community resources.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 744 which 
would direct DHHS to conduct rate studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS Group 
Home and Community Supports and Community Membership services for people 
with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. This bill would also direct 
the department to establish a workgroup to help determine a daily rate for Group 
Home services and through the proposed amendment adjusts the minimum staffing 
level to 85% after the Appendix K waiver ends in November and before new rates 
would be available in January 2025.
 In support of LD 744, Veritas Care of Maine is supporting the increase in 
reimbursement to support better the individuals we serve. You will agree with me that
the cost of living has skyrocketed nationally wide, we have seen an increase in 
Housing (Rentals, Mortgages), food, heating oil, insurance, electricity, water, and 
sewerage, snow removal, lawn mowing, and house maintenance to name but a few, 
but not to forget increase in wages. 
 I lost 9 employees simply because they left my organization to join Abbott in 
Westbrook where they were offered two times the hourly wage, I was offering them. I
am in the process of closing my group home in Portland, Maine simply because I 
cannot afford the rental increase. The closing of this group home will negatively 
impact the lives of three Mainers who deserve to live in the setting of their choices. 
All these increases are happening in a blink of an eye, but without an increase in 
reimbursement from the department, it is like asking agencies to provide more service
with few funds. Good help is hard to find, and we have challenges in hiring 
DSPs/CRMA, the hourly rate, and overtime.  
I would like to remind you that we are not in the manufacturing sector where they can
have the choice of sourcing their raw materials at a lower price. We are serving 
humanity, and the lives of the people we serve deserve better or higher quality 
services. We cannot continue to provide better services or higher quality services with
less. Your support will be highly appreciated.  
I appreciate the Department’s efforts to invest in workforce development and the 
cost-of-living adjustments received to date, and flexibilities to date, however, a viable 
rate, that will sustain a competitive wage is critical and cannot wait. 
 
I urge your support. Thank you for your
time and consideration. 
Respectfully Submitted,
Dr. Maxwell K. Chikuta
c.chikutam@veritascareofmaine.com

