4 
U I 'ﬁ P I Inc. Dreams, ()pp0i'!z/nily, Growth, and Laughter 
P O Bot I106 
25 Winter Street 
Gardiner, ME 04345 
(207) 582-802] 
Testimony of Heidi Mansir, Executive Director 
In Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Sen/ices for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities by 
Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committees. 
My name is Heidi Mansir, l am the Executive Director of Uplift, lnc. l am a family member of an 
individual with a developmental disability and have worked in this field for more than thirty years.l 
have spent much of my adult life trying to improve the system of support for individuals with 
intellectual and developmental (ID/DD) disabilities. l have served in leadership roles with both our 
state association, The Maine Association for Community Service Providers, and our federal 
association, the American Network of Community Options and Resources, also known as Ancor. l 
am currently serving on the ANCOR Board of Directors as the Immediate Past President. 
Uplift is a private nonprofit Agency that provides services to 187 individuals with lD/DD in the 
Kennebec Valley region. We have been providing services in this community for almost 65 years. 
l am writing to offer testimony in strong support of LD 744 which would direct DHHS to conduct rate 
studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS Group Home, Community Supports, and Community 
Membership services. This bill would also direct the department to establish a work group to help 
determine a daily rate for Group Home services and through the proposed amendment adjust the 
minimum staffing level to 85% after the Appendix K waiver ends in November and before new rates 
would be available in January 2025. l feel that each of these objectives are essential to prevent 
further a collapse of this vital system of service. 
The first objective, a 2024 rate study, is critical. The current rates do not support the service and 
providers cannot wait multiple years for a turn in the new system of review. 
Last week l had to hold a meeting with some of the individuals we support, families, guardians, and 
case managers. The purpose of the meeting was to share the difficult news that we are going to 
close another one of our programs. This is a program that we have provided for more than 30 years 
and now, we have determined that it is no longer possible to continue this sen/ice, it is not viable. 
Closing this program has a very drastic impact on 19 individuals who have been part of the Uplift 
family for most of their lives. 
This program is the third program that we have had to close in the last two years. This one provides 
Community Supports, the other two programs were group homes that had provided residential 
supports to nine people Uplift has known and supported for decades. With these closures, people 
Supporting Persons with Disabilities
o 
U I ‘ft P J Inc. Dreams, Opportunity, Growth, and Laughle/' 
P. 0. Box 1106 
25 Winter Street 
Gardiner, ME 04345 
(207) 582~802l 
are uprooted from their homes, separated from housemates, and moved to unfamiliar places with 
unfamiliar people. 
Just yesterday, April 12, 2023, l signed the final documents to sell a 5 bedroom, Licensed, ADA 
compliant, fully accessible home, located in Gardiner. This was a home that we have operated asa 
group home for individuals with both intellectual and physical disabilities for more than nine years. 
We had to close this home because the program was not sustainable. This is accessible housing that 
will no longer be available to the people that we support. 
Uplift is not closing these programs and selling these homes because the sen/ice is unwanted, or 
unneeded. There are individuals on waitlists to receive these sen/ices. We have had to close 
people's homes and our Community Support program because we just cannot hire enough staff to 
keep them open. The rate does not support a living wage for our employees. 
We appreciate the efforts of the legislature, the Department's efforts to invest in workforce 
development, the cost of living adjustments received to date, and flexibilities to date, however a viable 
rate, that will sustain a competitive wage, is critical and cannot wait. 
l know that a lot of attention and resources are focused on the development of the new Lifespan 
Project. l am excited about the opportunities that this Waiver will bring to individuals who receive 
services in Maine. However, as a provider of services, and as a family member, l have never been 
more concerned about our “current” service system. l worry that without a rate review and the 
flexibility allowed in the amendment, many providers will not be able to hold on to operate in that new 
system. ln l\/laine, right now, there is no other care option for individuals. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Heidi Mansir 
Heidi.mansir@upliftmaine.orq 
Supporting Persons with Disabilities
