 
 
 
 
 
             ______________________  
              
 
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324 -7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org    
 
Written Testimony In Support of LD 744,  An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community -based Services  
 April 7, 2023  
  Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee , 
 
My name is Jennifer Putnam, Executive Director  at Waypoint (formerly Waban ).  Waypoint has been delivering 
services to children and adults  with disabilities for over five decades.   From special purpose preschool 
services to aging in place for our oldest adult members, we provide a wide range of caring and supportive 
services in Southern Maine.  
The people who live in our group homes are those  with the highest needs, whether behavioral, medical or 
both. For a wide variety of reasons, they are unable to live in the community  without 24/7 supports.  All require 
daily support from our hardworking to DSP’s, as well as clinical and behavioral manage ment. As the public 
health emergency has drawn to a close, we thought staffing might begin to improve, but it did not. Our workforce was decimated during Covid and we lost many overworked staff and residential managers who just could not continue to work overtime hours that were never -ending.  We changed our staffing model to 
allow for fewer workdays and put other measures into place, but fundamentally, the  MaineCare Section 21 
agency home  support rate (Group home rate) needs to be studied and of course, in creased as needed.  
Waypoint has been a trusted provider in the community of Sanford for over 55 years. But last year, we were 
forced to make the difficult decision to close almost 35% of our homes, seven total, which affected 34 
residents . Those homes, staff and services won’t be coming back. This is the story you will hear over and over 
across the state of Maine.  
You may recall that last year we received HCBS funds designated as bonuses for DSP’s, along with one -time 
funds for group homes.  This was helpful and lifted our dedicated DSP’s up at a critical time. These funds are 
long gone, however, and in their wake are a raft of group home closures, disillusioned families and exhausted service providers. As a provider with 13 group homes left open, down from 20, I can tell you we can’t wait 
years for a rate study and subsequent implementation.  
We are not asking for money. We are asking for the care and attention  that a rate study offers  for people with 
the most severe needs. One point of consideration is the manner in which MaineCare Section 21 services are 
paid. Instead of a true per diem (daily) rate, the kind of rate paid to nursing homes and assisted living facilities , 
group home rates a re calculated using a convoluted staffing hours and case mix model. Further, no one 
knows what the rate methodology is, ever since the since Maine changed the methodology without due 
notice last year. None of this is a prudent or sustainable service model.  
Our agency’s residential budget is half a million dollars in the red. We, and the community we serve, are lucky we have been able to bear  these losses for this long. But we cannot continue to operate this wa y, no  busine ss 
or nonprofit could, or should.   
Thank you for reading this testimony and I am available to clarify my testimony or answer any questions.  
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
JPutnam @waypointmaine.org  

