S K I l ‘ S Support Services For People With DiS8bi|l ’£I6S
I 
Kristin Overton,
i
* . “ Chesterville, ME 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Kristin Overton and I am the Executive Director of SKILLS, 
Inc. SKILLS is a non-proﬁt organization in central Maine, serving people with intellectual and 
developmental disabilities for more than 60 years. SKILLS provides more than 110 people with 24/7 
residential support and day programming under Sections 21, 29, and 97-F. We have 9 waiver-funded 
group homes, 4 PNMIs, 3 community support programs, and a number of other one-on-one support 
services. We strongly support LD 744: Resolve, to Direct the Department of Health and Human 
Services to Perform Rate Studies and Rate Determinations for Providers of Certain Services for Adults 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder. 
Since 2020, We have closed 1 community support day program in Waterville and 3 group homes in 
Waterville, Canaan, and Hartland. These 3 homes had two people living in each. We had to close them 
due to inadequate reimbursement to attract and retain staff. That, coupled with the skyrocketing costs to 
maintain waiver home facilities, but no mechanism other than increasing the room and board rates above 
and beyond what the low-income individuals that we support can afford to pay us from their SSDI, 
meant we had to make the difﬁcult decision to close these homes. Currently, our waiver-funded homes 
have 2-6 people living in each. 
The community support program in Waterville had to be closed because of the high level of needs that 
these individuals required. Many are wheelchair-bound and have other physical and developmental 
disabilities that mean they need 1:1 or even 2:1 staffing. It is impossible to take people out into the 
community and push two wheelchairs at once, yet the reimbursement rate assumes a 1:3 ratio for staff to 
people supported. This resulted in us needing to close one very popular location and develop a waitlist 
of almost 20 individuals who we cannot support at this time due to the higher level of needs and 
inadequate reimbursement to fund their support. If we had our own rate study for these programs, these 
are the types of factors that we could contribute so that all waiver members can receive the access to 
services that they desire. 
Residential services, deﬁned as home support-agency per diem under the Section 21 Mainecare 
Regulations, deﬁne the service requirements at residential homes with: 
I There must be at least one staff person in the same setting as Members receiving services at all times 
(24/7) that is able to respond immediately to the requests/needs for assistance from the Members in 
the setting. The Department reimburses for the delivery of a service to a Member and that assumes 
that the provider is awake. 
I Members cannot be made to attend a day program (any other service or support other than Home 
Support) if they choose to stay home, would prefer to come home after a job or doctor’s appointment 
in the middle of the day, if they are ill, or otherwise choose to remain at home. 
I Payments are not made for room and board, the cost of facility maintenance, upkeep, or improvement. 
The cost of transportation is included in the residential habilitation rate.”
._._ ~»___ 
A 
S ‘ I $ Support Services For People With Disabilities 
Although the regulations require 24/7 stafﬁng to be available, the payment model does not provide the 
funding for 24/7 suppoit. For reimbursement, we must submit our 6-month stafﬁng plan including the 
times of day when a member is predicted to be away from home so that those hours are reduced from the 
daily rate established for each home. This prediction is nearly impossible to do but has signiﬁcant 
implications if we are wrong. If all the residents are scheduled to be out of the home as frequently 
occurs, perhaps attending a day program or at their place of employment, any staff in the home are not 
billable hours and so we do not have staff in the home during those hours. In the event that someone we 
support wishes to stay home sick, has a last-minute appointment, or doesn’t want to leave the home that 
day, we scramble to ﬁnd stafﬁng because we have to staff the hours that someone is home. If those 
hours add up to mean that we exceed the stafﬁng plan variance allowable by the rate, we are not paid 
extra for this time. 
In order to make sure that we are reaching the minimum 80% of that stafﬁng plan, soon to be 92.5% in 
November 2023, we’ve had to instead decrease the total number of hours requested to be reimbursed in 
our stafﬁng plan. The stafﬁng minimum was 70% in the midst of the pandemic and was increased to 
80% in October of 2022. In that ﬁrst month, we lost almost $15,000 in revenue because we achieved a 
79% stafﬁng level rather than the 80% in 3 of our homes. We cannot meet 92.5%; we are struggling to 
meet 80%. If it is increased, we will not be able to increase our stafﬁng, instead we will reduce our 
already decimated stafﬁng plan which results in less services, community integration, and consumer 
choice for the people who live there. This stafﬁng metric is not useful in establishing quality, service 
levels, or monitoring spending. A new model is needed that incentivizes providers to efﬁciently use 
staff resources wisely, provide more individualized opportunities, and promote ﬂexibility for the people 
who live there. 
Not included in the reimbursement for agency-owned residential home support hours is overtime. For 
almost 3 years, we had mandated overtime as a requirement of the job due to the loss of staff 
experienced during the pandemic, the result of the vaccine mandate, wages that have not kept pace with 
private market jobs, and the shrinking workforce. Stafﬁng is a signiﬁcant challenge. For more than3 
years, we have averaged a 30-person vacancy rate for staff which translates to a 20% vacancy rate. All 
of these positions are full-time positions with a 100% employer-covered HSA insurance plan and 
vacation and sick time which exceeds the minimum Eamed Paid Leave requirements by 100% — 500% 
depending on tenure. Stafﬁng group homes is not an option; it is a requirement. In the past 24 months, 
overtime hours have accounted for 17% of our staff hours in the waiver homes with a price tag of an 
additional $777,008 in wages alone, not including fringe and beneﬁts costs. 
The impact on these stafﬁng realities has negative impacts on the people we support. Less staff in the 
home means that there is limited availability to respond to individual requests. For example, if 3 people 
live in a home and 2 out of 3 would like to go out for Sunday breakfast, then they cannot go because the 
level of stafﬁng in place is what We refer to as “stafﬁng for safety” which means bare minimum 
coverage. If a transportation provider cancels their ride, we cannot bring someone to their day program
' 
~-<._~:~ u ., -=.-emf»; _.,....... ﬂ.ﬁ._. mm <v;;IIh§"':<:~'Y1
2 
S l I S Support Services For People With Disabilities 
or to a doctor’s appointment because We do not have the coverage to support those left home. Attending 
concerts in the park, going for a drive and lunch on a nice summer weekend day, spending time with 
friends outside the home, going to get a haircut, planning a picnic, going for a hike, all of these are 
examples of the things that we, as providers, used to be able to support people to do and want to be able 
to do. 
I urge you to pass LD 444, as written. I thank the committee for their consideration and am glad to 
answer any questions that may arise from this testimony. 
'7' " " 1.. ._.' W_;iii.;'.i=¢=;s'»;1
