e- 52% 
Veritas Care ot Maine True Care on Time 
Senator Baldacci ’s (bill sponsor) amendment 
Testimony of: Dr. Maxwell K. Chikuta PhD.,PPA, PH 
In Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community- 
based Services. 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees. 
My name is Dr. Maxwell Chikuta Ph.D. MPPA, PH founder, and CEO at 
VERITAS CARE OF MAINE, located in Portland, Maine. 
For more than three years, we have been serving adult individuals who have been 
diagnosed with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder and who have 
received Section l9, 20, 21, and 29 waivers to live in an integrated community 
setting rather than in an intermediate care facility. 
Our agency follows HCBS rules, a family-living support model whereby 
individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities live in a managed care 
facility provided by our agency and is set in a residential neighborhood with easy 
access to community resources. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 744 
Veritas Care of Maine is supporting a rate study for group home services because 
an adequate rate is needed to better support the individuals We serve. You will 
agree with me that the cost of living has skyrocketed national wide, we have seen 
an increase in housing (Rentals, Mortgages), food, heating oil, insurance, 
electricity, water, and sewerage, snow removal, lawn mowing, and house 
maintenance to name but a few, but not to forget increase in wages. 
Veritas Care of Maine Inc 1 | P age
Recently, I lost 9 employees simply because they left my organization to 
manufacturing industry offering two times the hourly wage Veritas can offer. I am 
in the process of closing my group home in Portland, because I cannot afford the 
rental increase. The closing of this group home will negatively impact the lives of 
three Mainers who deserve to live in the setting of their choices. 
All these increases are happening in the blink of an eye, but without an increase in 
reimbursement from the department, it is like asking agencies to provide more 
service with fewer funds. Good help is hard to ﬁnd, and we have challenges to hire 
DSPs/CRMA, the hourly rate, and overtime is too much to bear. 
I would like to remind you that we are not in the manufacturing sector where they 
can have the choice of sourcing their raw materials at a cheaper price. We are 
serving humanity, and the lives of the people We serve deserve better or higher 
quality services. We cannot continue to provide better services or higher quality 
services with less. Your support will be highly appreciated. 
I appreciate the Department ’s efforts to invest in workforce development and the 
cost-of-living adjustments received to date, and ﬂexibilities to date, however a 
viable rate, that will sustain a competitive wage is critical and cannot wait. 
I urge your support. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Respectfull ubmi ,d,‘ " /<»>r<c" r 
Dr. Maxvye hikuta \5 
c.chikutam@veritascareofmaine.com 
Veritas Care of Maine Inc 2 I P age
