 
 
 
 
 
              
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324 -7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org  
Written Testimony  
LD 744  Resolve, to Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to Perform Rate 
Studies and Rate determination for Providers of Certain Services for Adults with Intellectual 
Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder   
 
April 13th, 2023  
 
Good afternoon , my name is Melissa Hall and I am the Director of Life Works, our Community 
Support Services of Waypoint  (formerly Waban) in Sanford, Maine.  We provide to over 60 
individuals, Community Support Services funded through MaineCare Waiver Section 21 & 29 
services.   
 
I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 744 directing DHHS to conduct 
rate studies and rate determinations for MaineCare Waiver Section 21  & 29 services for people 
with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder in calendar year 2024.   
  
My testimony is specifically in support for rate studies and rate determinations for Community 
Support Services for the viability of these services for the people we support now, on our waitlists 
and those seeking services in their future.  Community Support Services under Section 21 & 29 
have undergone significant rule and waiver changes following a rate determination which was 
conducted in 2020. The change in this service rate did not involve Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities provider input but was based on a rate study condu cted for Section 18 & 20 with input 
from providers of brain injury services and services for persons with other related conditions.  
 
Since 2020, changes in Community Support Services include a new tiered rate and service model 
along with a fix ed 1 to 3 st aff ratio for group services that significantly changes the model and 
billable service time.  Additionally,  to support Maine’s  recent adoption of the federal Home and 
Community Based Setting (HCBS) Rule , providers have increased  required  training s for Direct 
Support Professionals (DSPs) , documentation and  reporting  requirements and experienced 
increased transportation costs also impacting this rate.   To attract and retain DSPs during this time 
of ongoing staffing shortages highlights the needs for compe titive wages set by a rate that 
supports the skills and complexity  of the job and ongoing training needs .  
 
Without a rate study and determination reflective of the current service model and requirements 
we will continue to see the collapse of programs and  a growing waitlist for services.  Please 
support LD 744.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration of my testimony. Please contact me with any questions 
you may have.  
 
Melissa J Hall  
mhall@waypointmaine.org  
Sanford, Main e 
 
