Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
April 13 , 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Co -Chair  
Representative Meyer, Co -Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 744, Resolve, To Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to Perform Rate 
Studies and Rate Determinations for Providers of Certain Services for Adults with Intellectual 
Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is written to provide the Committee with information as it relates to LD 744 - Resolve, 
to Direct the Department of the Health and Human Services to Perform Rate Studies  and Rate 
Determinations for Providers of Certain Services for Adults with Intellectual Disabilities or 
Autism Spectrum Disorder . The Department is opposed to this bill and the proposed amendment.  
LD 744  directs the Department to conduct rate studies and rate determinations  for Maine’s home 
and community based services waiver programs under  the MaineCare Benefits Manual, Section s 
21 and 29 . The Resolve cites Title 22, Section 31 73-J to define  rate studies and rate 
determinations .  
 
This citation is part of statute , proposed by t he Department , that codif ies a comprehensive, 
streamlined , and coherent system to set MaineCare rates  (P.L. 2021, c. 639) . As part of the 
system, the Department publishes draft and final rate study schedules each year, most recently on 
December  09, 2022 for Calendar Year 2023. In that process, the Department did receive and 
consider comments asking that Section s 21 and 29  be scheduled for rate studies , and it 
determined that , given recent increases and competing needs,  other services were in greater need 
of rate studies. This bill require s rate studies contrary to the selection process specified  in Section 
3176 -J. 
 
Although Sections 21 and 29 have not had rate reviews recently that fully meet all requirements 
of chapter 639 , they have had multiple rate increases in recent years , informed by recent Home 
and Community Ba sed Services  (HCBS)  waiver provider survey and utilization dat a, as well as 
by current state wage data and other sources . Those increases result ed in meaningful increases to 
many services, including increases to ensure that the labor components equal at least 125% of 
minimum wage, and that all rate components be adjusted for cost -of-living increases. Other 
services have gone much longer without subs tantive, data -driven adjustments, and therefore are 
 
 higher priority. In addition, HCBS nursing and clinical services, which include services in 
Section 21, are on the rat e determination schedule to initiate in this calendar year.   
 
The proposed amendment adds an additional section requiring the Department to maintain a 
minimum staffing threshold in Section 21 of 8 5% of approved staf fing levels  until rate studies 
are completed.  Normal policy in Section 21 requires providers to maintain at least 92.5% of 
approved staffing.  This policy protects Members from under -staffing their needs and ensures 
that MaineCare payments  are reasonable relative to services delivered.  During the pandemic, 
using emergency authority under Appendix K of the waiver s, the Department  allowed staffing to 
drop initially to 50% of approved staffing , and has been gradually raising the staffing level back 
toward no rmal policy.  Currently, the Department requires at least 80%  staffing through 
November 11, 2023, when Appendix K authority will end.  The Department has communicated 
to providers that the normal staffing threshold of 92.5 % must be met by November 12, 2023.   
 
Finally , the rate stud ies envisioned in this bill may be redundant with work planned for a new 
Lifespan waiver program . We intend to conduct studies of Section 21 and 29 as the basis for 
Lifespan rates.  The Department  is interested in developing a daily rate for agency home supports 
as part of that work.  We would be happy to share more information about this at the work 
session.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
Office of MaineCare Services  
 

