 
Our mission is to provide individuals with the highest standard of care and help all of the 
people we serve enjoy life to the fullest potential. 
 
     Toll Free 1(866) 321-1999         Website www.nmgeneral.org      TTY (207) 444-
2876 
NMG is an equal opportunity provider and employer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Support of LD 744 
An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 
by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 13, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  
 
My name is Michelle Raymond.  I am the Chief Executive Officer for Northern Maine General 
(NMG), a not for profit social services organization that has been serving individuals throughout 
Aroostook County for over 115 years.  Our mission is to provide individuals with the highest 
standards of care and help all of the people we serve enjoy life to their fullest potential.   
 
NMG provides a wide range of services to approximately 250 individuals across a variety of 
specialized programs supported by MaineCare, such as long term care, behavioral health, 
targeted case management, and home and community supports for children and adults.   
 
I am writing to offer testimony in strong support of LD 744 which would direct DHHS to 
conduct rate studies and rate determinations for home and community benefits and support 
services for members of the MaineCare program with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum 
disorder; including Agency Home Supports and Community Support Services.  
 
When I compared NMG’s data from 2017 vs today, our employee base has reduced by 60% 
across all programs and the numbers of people we are able to support has reduced by 38%.   This 
leaves an imbalance between the number of remaining employees available and those individuals 
we work with.  The decrease in the workforce ramped up even more over these least 4 years with 
the minimum wage changes in Maine and the difficulties of working through the pandemic.  In 
the remaining group homes NMG operates, 30% of all hours worked are overtime hours (OT) 
worked by the Direct Support Professional (DSP) and their supervisors in order to meet the 
individuals’ needs.  We are averaging 80 hours of OT each week, in each home.  Specific to the 
residential programs impacted by LD744, this translates to the average full time DSP working an 
average of 60+ hours across a six-day workweek, every week.  This pattern has caused us to 
incrementally close homes.  NMG closed 4 homes that served 11 individuals between 2017 and Eagle Lake Office
PO Box 310
Eagle Lake, ME 04739
Telephone (207) 444-
5152
Fax (207) 444-6099Caribou Office
PO Box 187
Caribou, ME 04736
Telephone (207) 492-1036
Fax (207) 492-1830
 
 2021, all because of an insufficient workforce, in part aggravated by an impractical rate 
assumption.  Currently we have 3 homes supporting 14 individuals and have been considering 
closing another home due to the continued and unresolved staffing shortage.  From a business 
and financial perspective, we should have closed all these homes already.  Four years ago we 
stopped all in-home quarter-hour supports we provided to people who are more independent and 
live in their own homes because they usually have family and other natural supports to help.  We 
made that decision because we needed all the staff we had available to meet the needs of those 
who are the most vulnerable, which are those individuals typically supported in a waiver or 
group home.   
   
In regards to our Community Supports program, we have had to reduce the numbers of those we 
can support because of staffing shortages by 64% during this same time period.  We have not 
been able to offer additional programs proposed by the department such as community 
membership, and work supports, because we have not been able to obtain and maintain the staff 
resources to do it.  While the department and the HCBS rules typically encourage smaller groups 
of people to be supported at a time, we have not been able to take on those services because 
staffing is in short supply, and smaller groups and more individualized activities require more 
staff resources that we just do not have.  I have not touched on what the costs have been to 
operate these homes under the newer HCBS regulations and the department’s method of 
implementing the rules.      
 
Simply put, individuals with disabilities are not getting their needs met.  Many individuals have 
been forced to leave their home, their neighborhoods and communities, including familiar staff 
who understand their unique and preferred communication style, and start over in a place that 
may have an open bed, 4 hours’ drive away.  They are being involuntarily discharged from a 
fully environmentally adapted home specific to their disabilities to go live in another location 
that likely isn’t modified.    
 
While I appreciate the Department’s recent efforts to invest in workforce development and the 
latest COLA’s, these responses were too late for those people already discharged and is still not 
addressing those who still need and are waiting for services.   There needs be more consideration 
given to a rate that will sustain a more competitive wage for the DSP’s.  A rate study of Maine’s 
Intellectual and Developmental Disability (IDD) providers would help the department become 
more cognizant of the actual cost of the services provided today.  Rate setting should also 
recognize a DSP as a critical staff in their industry, and they should be paid a rate that 
encourages them to stay in the field.  The 125% of minimum wage legislation helped to meet the 
minimum wage increases but didn’t address the top tiers of the experienced staff.  We have 
DSP’s that have worked for over 25 years and are now leaving because they just can’t continue 
to work the long hours at the expense of time with their families.  People are leaving after 20 
years, because they don’t want to stay working in this field when they know they can get paid the 
same as the high school employee at the nearby convenient store or fast food place and have less 
responsibility.  NMG is considering closing another home right now, because if just one more 
staff leaves, whether that be retirement, a change in field, an unplanned illness/event or simply to 
obtain a similar or better paying job with less responsibility and less pressure to work long 
weeks, the supports will not be able to continue.  The people of Maine deserve better.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration of my testimony. Please contact me with any 
questions you may have. 
 
  
Respectfully 
 
Michelle Raymond, Chief Executive Officer 
Michelle.raymond@nmgeneral.org  
Town of Eagle Lake 
