5 1 xi. 
Richard A. Bennett 3 State House Station 
Senator, District l8 . Augusta, Maine 04333 ‘B. 
THE MAINE SENATE 
l 3 1 st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Support of LD 744, "Resolve, to Direct the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Perform Rate Studies and Rate Determinations for Providers of Certain Services for Adults with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder" 
13 April 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Servies, I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in 
Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to cosponsor LD 744, “Resolve, to Direct the 
Department of Health and Human Services to Perform Rate Studies and Rate Determinations for 
Providers of Certain Services for Adults with Intellectual Disabilities or Autism Spectrum 
Disorder. ” 
The Maine Legislature has made it a priority to clear the Waitlists for adults with developmental 
disabilities seeking services they are entitled to. Part of the problem has been a shortage of staff 
to offer services. The supplemental budget from the l30‘h legislature included an initiative that 
increased the minimum wage of workers to 125% of the minimum wage. Yet, before that wage 
increase took effect, the Department adopted a new rate model for this service that actually cut 
the percentage of the rate that supports program costs by 40%. The new rate does not support 
program costs and employers have continued to experience staff loss. 
Upwards of 70 homes have closed in the last two years forcing countless MaineCare members to 
seek services elsewhere, sometimes far away from family and friends. It is time the Department 
of Health and Human Services conduct rate studies and rate determinations for MaineCare 
Waiver Section 21 & 29 services. This simply can’t wait any longer. Vulnerable Mainers need 
their services and in my opinion, having even one person on a waitlist is unacceptable. Proper 
funding and reimbursement is imperative if we ever hope to properly serve this population. 
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Fax: (207)287-1527 * TTY(207) 287-1583 * Message Service I-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
