4%. COMMUNITY LIVING 
ASSOCIATION 
Incorporated in 1967 
April 13, 2023 
Rob Moran, Community Living Association, Houlton Maine 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Rob Moran, I’m the Executive Director of Community Living Association in 
Houlton Maine. CLA provides Community Supports, Group Homes and ICF Residential 
Services, Shared Living Services, Case Management, and Work Supports. We are primarily 
located in Houlton and surrounding towns but do case management out of an ofﬁce in Bangor. 
CLA has been in business since 1967 serving people with disabilities. _ 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in strong support of LD 744 which would 
direct DHHS to conduct rate studies in 2024 for Maine Care HCBS Group Homes and 
Community Supports and Community membership services for people with intellectual 
disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. This bill would also direct the department to establish a 
work group to determine a daily rate for Group Home services and adjust the minimum stafﬁng 
level to 85% after the appendix K Waiver ends in November and before new rates would be 
available in January 2025. 
Whenl started out as a DSP over thirty years ago, the pay rate was enough that it attracted me to 
give this ﬁeld a try. Little did I know that this would become my life’s work. I’ve seen some 
wonderful things take place during the last thirty years. The closure of Pineland, the elimination 
of time out rooms and a huge push for rights and inclusion for the people we serve to namea 
few. I must tell you though that I’m worried, worried for the people we serve and the services 
we provide. In Aroostook County the past five years a total of eight homes have closed. The 
homes we have closed were all accessible. At least a couple more that I know of have reduced 
beds. These are all due to lack of stafﬁng. Agencies can’t meet staff levels with more homes 
and keep people safe, so they reduce homes. At CLA last year we closed a home and I have 
managers that think we need to close another. I have drawn a line in the sand for now because I 
don’t think these beds are coming back. Most Executives I talk to feel the same way. 
When we closed a home last year, one of the people served ended up moving to the southern part 
of the state to a group home with a new agency. When he arrived, he found that most of the 
house was not wheelchair accessible, there was no accessible van, and in fact there was very 
little food in the house. Can you imagine being a person with disabilities and having to move 
hours away from your parents and family into that situation? Can you imagine how hard it is on 
their family? 
Administrative officesl 45 School Street, Houlton, Maine 047 30 
207'532"9446 ~ 866343-4144 ~ Fax 207‘532'l359 ~ WwW.Cla"maine.0rg 
Community Living Association is a non-discriminatory organization and an Equal Opportunity Employer
In Aroostook county many of the providers do “in-home” supports, meaning staff come in toa 
person’s home or apartment to help make sure they are able to live safely on their own witha 
few stafﬁng hours each Week. Due to the agency being down so many staff in their group home 
program, they needed to move people from being able to essentially support themselves in the 
community to living in group home programs. For some people this may mean they are unable 
to live by themselves and will need to be placed in a group home. A much more expensive 
option for the state and that’s if they can even ﬁnd a bed. 
I appreciate the Departrnent ’s efforts to invest in workforce development, the COLA’s received 
to date (which really helped to retain stafﬁ not necessarily to recruit) and the ﬂexibilities to date, 
however a viable rate that sustains a competitive wage, is critical and can’t wait. We are using 
large amounts of overtime in order to staff the homes we currently have. Many of our homes 
have eggshell thin staffing margins. 
Most of our best staff are all twenty—thi1ty year employees who are aging into retirement. This is 
an issue for most agencies that I know. I know all businesses are having trouble getting staff, but 
in our business, for most of the people we serve there is no plan B. 
I urge your support. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Respectfully submitted, 
I 
/,7 .- 
11/¢‘ l°"\0%L/v/N 
Rob Moran 
532-9446 X1115 
rmoran@,cla —maine.org
