Ryan Gallant
Gallant Therapy Services
LD 744
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee,
My name is Ryan Gallant and I am the President of Gallant Therapy Services.  We 
provide a variety of services to children and adults with disabilities and 
developmental delays.  We have offices in Augusta, Lewiston, Oakland, and Hermon.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in strong support of LD 744 
which would direct DHHS to conduct rate studies in 2024 for MaineCare HCBS 
Group Home and Community Supports and Community Membership services for 
people with  intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder. 
We continually have difficulty with maintaining staff for our community supports 
program and the chief complaint always returns to the rate of pay.  We regularly lose 
staff to entry level positions in other industries, which is unfortunate because many of 
these staff have skills and experience in the human services field and a tremendous 
assets to the people they support.
I appreciate the Department’s efforts to invest in workforce development and the cost 
of living adjustments received to date, and flexibilities to date, however a viable rate, 
that will sustain a competitive wage, is critical and cannot wait. 
Community support services have been a long standing commitment from the 
Department and our organization to ensure individuals are included and connected to 
their communities. However, without a rate study that includes data from IDD 
providers, the future of this service is uncertain. 
These Community Support services have a significant impact on the people accessing 
them.  It assists them to develop community relationships, volunteer in their 
community, develop work skills, etc...  For example, we have several individuals with
Autism that have developed paid employment after developing relationships as a 
volunteer at a business.  
I urge your support. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Respectfully Submitted,
Ryan Gallant, MOT, OTR/L
