 
 
 
 
 
             ______________________ 
              
 
Waypoint 
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073        P: (207) 324-7955        F: (207) 324-6050       info@waypointmaine.org     
www.waypointmaine.org 
 
Testimony In Re: LD 744, An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and Community-based Services 
 
April 13, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, 
 
I am Sally Mileson Director of Adult Services at Waypoint, formerly Waban.  Waypoint has been delivering 
services to people with disabilities for 57 years.  In the past few years, we have had the challenge every agency 
has experienced of finding people to do this important work.  This challenge has forced us to close 7 of our 
homes which is 35% of our residential programs.  The closing of these programs impacted 34 people.  These 
34 people represent just under half of our total census. 
What this meant to one person was that the home she had lived in for many years was no longer her home.  She 
is a person with a very strong need for routine and her entire life was upended.  Nothing was familiar anymore.  
Her housemates were people she did not know.  Many of the staff she saw every day were strange to her.  The 
items she used most, like her recliner were in a strange place, and although we tried to keep her old routine as 
much as possible, she had to adjust to the routines of others now in her environment. This was frightening for 
her.  
Another woman had to move twice because the home she went to first did not work for her and what she needed.  
This led to confusion, anxiety, and fear for her.   
A third person who has significant staffing needs is looking to move out of Waypoint but has not found the right 
situation.  In the meantime, he is not getting the staff support he needs above simply maintaining his safety in 
the program.  This is not the quality of life people expect and we expect to provide. 
The lack of people to hire has had a significant impact on the people who need our services.  We can’t do this 
work without people. 
I am here today to urge this committee to support a rate study for Section 21 and 29 services in Maine and 
specifically group homes.  We must do better in attracting talented and committed people to this work.  A rate 
study would provide a realistic picture of what it costs to deliver these vital services to some of our most 
vulnerable people in Maine.  Last year there was one-time money freed up for agencies to support the work to 
become compliant with the Home and Community Based Rule.  This was not intended to support the on-going 
needs of the agencies to meet operating costs.  We need a rate that will support, long term, the staff and 
increasing costs of doing business in Maine.    
We are beyond agencies tightening our belts, reassessing our resources, and moving forward with what we 
have.  Our staff deserve to be able to earn a living doing the work they enjoy.  The need to be able to buy food, 
gas, and heat.  Costs have gone up for all of us.  The people who need our services deserve to be supported by 
people who are not overstressed because they have 3 jobs, or are not able to eat every day, or are on the verge 
of homelessness.   
We are asking for the rate study to identify the actual costs of providing services today.   
 
Thank you for your time. I’m happy to answer any questions.  
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Sally Mileson 
SMileson@waypointmaine.org 
 
