Scott Miller
South Portland
LD 744
My name is Scott Miller and I am the Director and founder of Creative Trails, which 
is the Community Support program of Support Solutions. Creative Trails has been 
around for over 15 years and currently serves 150 participants throughout 5 locations 
and 2 counties and has national recognition for providing contemporary services. 
Prior to the pandemic we supported over 200 participants throughout 8 locations. Due
to financial constraints of poor rates and low wages for staff we had significant 
program closures. We are lucky to still be providing contemporary services as many 
other Community Support Providers had to close. Waiver recipient waitlists are out of
control with many individuals with intellectual disabilities not getting desired 
services. Our services are essential for individuals to live meaningful lives in their 
community. It gives them opportunities to explore their chosen community, volunteer 
options, develop skills and to explore careers. All of these components are crucial and
the key focus of our program, which is driven by skilled staff. Without higher rates 
we can’t afford to pay staff what the job entails. We can not find staff at $16 an hour, 
which we can barely afford with the current rate. We need your help to avoid a full 
collapse of an important service. Please see the below bulleted points to ensure LD 
744 Community-based rate study happens.
LD 744  An Act to Ensure Access to Services for Adults with Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities by Requiring Rate Studies for Home and 
Community-based Services. Below are some examples of why and what needs to be 
examined in the Community-based Service rate studies:
a.CS service methodologies need to be reviewed so staff to participant ratios are 
accurate in today’s programing realities. It is imperative that the wavier participants 
can have flexible services to meet the positive HCBS requirements. The service 
methodology has to be financially sound for providers to deliver a successful service. 
b.Training staff: There have been several added HCBS state required trainings that 
staff are mandated to take, which we are important and exciting for the movement but
is costly. There are also many OADS webinars that are important and take up 
management time to be current. Management then uses these updates in orientation 
trainings to meet the higher level of community connectivity and career exploration 
needs. This also is expensive as it costs providers at all staffing levels. 
c.Documentation time: The new HCBS OADS recommended documentation 
template in Therap is very time consuming to meet OADS and Mainecare needs. 
Documentation time to complete a note takes 20-30 minutes on average. This needs to
be taken into consideration in the current rate study as it is not reflected correctly in 
the previous one.
d.Program prep: To meet HCBS needs with making individualized connection in 
the community takes more prep time outside of billing hours. The last rate study is 
short in this line item.
e.Transportation: Fuel prices have sky rocketed since the last study and need to be 
updated in the rates so individuals can access the community when bus systems are 
not always an option. Following HCBS philosophy it is crucial we can afford to get 
the individuals out in the community to explore volunteer and career options. 
Providers want to steer away from larger vans/group outings which is also desired in 
the HCBS philosophy of community integration… so smaller vehicles are need. 
However, this means more vehicles, thus more fuel. 
f.Utility costs: Prices for electricity have sky rocked and even with decreasing 
facility sizes and being out in the community for larger percentages of time there is 
still sophisticated skill development that takes place at the center, which is costly. 

g.Programing absentee rates have been unpredictable and high due to illness, 
pandemic fall out, and NET transportation issues. This needs to be reexamined. 
h.Provider administration costs need to be looked at. HCBS compliance needs take 
an enormous amount of administrative time. We are now required to track 
Competitive Integrated Employment on all individuals, use mapping tools, and many 
other aspects that are extremely time consuming…but recognized by the provider and 
state as important.
Sincerely,
Scott Miller
Creative Trails Director
207-671-2118
smiller@supportsolutions.org
www.creativetrails.org
 
