 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
 
DATE:   March 31 , 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Education & Cultural Affairs  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 989, Resolve, Directing the University of Maine System to Study the  
  Potential Effects of the State's Adopting Atlantic Standard Time  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State & Local Government : My name is Samantha Warren and I am the Director of Government 
Relations for the University of Maine System  (UMS). I write today to inform your consideration of  LD 
989, Resolve, Directing the University of Maine System to Study the Potential Effects of the State's 
Adopting Atlantic Standard Time  (AST) . 
As I shared with this Committee last session when a similar bill was considered, our public 
universities  led by the R1 University of Maine take seriously their responsibility to serve as a 
resource to the people of this state , including by providing objective, nonpartisan research and 
analysis  for the Legislature . We are  appreciative that Senator Bennett,  who has long been a 
champion of UMS research and development, continues to recognize the contributions our faculty, 
staff and student experts can uniquely make to inform ing and improving public po licy. 
 
I have previously spoken with economic researchers at UMaine who confirmed that if adequate 
funding was  provided, they had the expertise to conduct  a study like the one outlined in this 
legislation . In fact, one  UMaine  economist undertook  a similar study in his native country of Wales.  
Our researchers suggested that a simple study (estimated  cost of  $15,000) would include a review  
of existing research  and electronic surveys of key stakeholders relevant to the focus of LD 989 
including those representing industry, media and transportation. To better inform decision -making  
consistent with the requirements of the U.S. Depar tment of Transportation , a more comprehensive 
study (estimated cost of  $75,000) would include the aforementioned literature review , more 
extensive surveying and stakeholder focus groups , and  public meetings to gather inp ut. UMaine 
researchers suggested any serious study  must not only examine impacts of changing to AST , but 
also of stopping the twice -annual hour change to account for Daylight Saving  Time (DST) .  
There  is a growing body of research related to DST. In 2020, the American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine released a position statement  that stated public health an d safety  would benefit from 
eliminating DST. More recently, the U.S. Congress has turned its attention to ending the  bi-annual 
changing of the clocks, and last year the Senate unanimously passed the Sunshine Protection Act  
but it stalled in the House . Earl ier this month, it was reintroduced  in the 118th Congress .  
I hope this information is informative to your consideration of LD 989. UMS looks  forward to 
conducting this research if the Legislature deems it a priority and funding is provided , including  
from the private sources  referenced in the bill. Please let me know any  additional information I can 
produce in advance of your  work session .  
Thank you for your  ongoing  support of Maine’s public universities .   
