- 
STATE or MAiNEZ 
DEPARTMENT or Aif>MlNlS ’i‘R/YTEVE & FINANCIAL SERVICFS 
BURTON M. CROSS BUELUING. 3“ FLOOR 
78 STATE House Sr/-xrzow 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0078
- 
SERVING THE PUBLEC AND DELIVERXNG ESSENTIAL SERVICES TO STATE GOVERNMENT 
JANET T. MILLS IGRSTEN LC FKEUEROA 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
testifying in opposition to 
LD 863, An Act to Require an Analysis Prior to the Start of State-funded Building 
Construction over $1,000,000 
Sponsored by Sen. Baldacci 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Government, I am Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
for the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. l am providing testimony in 
Opposition to LD 863. 
The Bureau of General Services employs professionals who possess expertise in planning, 
construction project management, and building and facilities management among other things. 
They are committed stewards of the State's capital assets who balance the current demands of 
State-owned space against long-term objectives and future versatility over its long, full life. The 
analysis that LD 863 would require BGS to undertake is in some instances already being 
performed, and in other instances an inappropriate analysis. 
First, the bill requires that BGS determine whether an existing building can be rehabilitated to 
accomplish the same purpose as new construction. lt is already BGS’s modus operandi to 
repurpose existing state-owned property for new uses and presen/e historic buildings in 
accordance with the State Facilities Master Plan. In fact, over the last four years, BGS 
construction projects have been exclusively renovations of existing facilities rather than new 
construction. 
Second, the bill favors “downtown ” locations in close proximity to other sen/ices and easily 
accessible by public transportation. While these are important considerations if you are locating 
a DHHS regional office or .a DOL career center, the State of Maine is a large organization that 
sen/es a wide variety of purposes, and the proposed statute is ill-fitted to the objectives and 
operational needs of other departments and agencies. 
As an example, after several years of close collaboration between BGS and DIFW, the lFW 
Committee recently endorsed plans and MGFA bond financing in the biennial budget to renovate 
PHONE: (207)624-7800 www.Mainc.gov FAX: (207) 624-7804
the CETA Building on the East Campus as a new DIFW headquarters. The East Campus is ideal 
for DIFW because the location: 1) allows the Department to consolidate several locations, 
bringing all of their Bureaus under one roof and their labs and equipment storage on-site, 
2) co-locates DIFW with their fellow natural resource agencies (DACF, DMR, DEP) already in 
residence on the East Campus, 3) has an existing state-owned wharf that provides access to 
the Kennebec River, and 4) has open space and adjacent trails to offer outdoor education. 
Whereas downtown Augusta is not an ideal location to off-load a moose to the necropsy lab. 
Third, the bill asks BGS to consider incorporating housing into future construction projects. 
Undeniably Maine has a housing crisis, however DAFS does not believe housing is a permissible 
use of MGFA bond funding, which the State relies upon to finance State construction projects. 
Projects eligible for MGFA bond funding are defined by 4 M.R.S. §1603, sub-§7 as “the 
acquisition, construction, improvement, reconstruction or equipping of, or construction of an 
addition or additions to, any structure designed for use as a court facility, state office or state 
activity space and intended to be used primarily by the State, any agency, instrumentality or 
department of the State or by any branch of State Government. ” 
Lastly, this bill would establish a public hearing process separate and apart from both the 
municipal permitting process that State construction projects are subject to under 5 M.R.S. 
§1742-B and the biennial budget process through which state construction projects are vetted 
for funding. The public has ample opportunity to weigh in during both processes. Adding to the 
process risks missing the window for legislative approval of funding and delaying construction 
timelines. With construction costs currently increasing at a rate of 10% year-over-year, lost time 
translates directly into increased costs. 
The Department of Administrative and Financial Sen/ices respectfully requests that the 
Committee vote LD 863 ought not to pass in favor of allowing Bureau of General Services staff 
to exercise their professional expertise and judgement and work collaboratively with State 
departments and agencies to satisfy their operational needs, prior to seeking legislative approval 
of funding. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. l am happy to answer any questions. 
PHONE: (207)624-7800 www.Maine.gov FAX: (207) 624-7804
