 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 863 
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE AN ANALYSIS PRIOR TO THE START OF STATE -FUNDED  
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION OVER $1,000,000  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Committee on State and Local Government . I am 
Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , in opposition to  L.D. 863. 
 
This bill requires the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of General Service s to get 
involved in an an alysis of any new building that requires the expenditure of more than $1 million in state 
funds and that would include public school buildings.  It also requires a review to determine if the existing 
building can be rehabilitated.  
 
Basically , it adds a ddition al layers to the approval process of school construction, which we believe is 
working well.  
 
The Department of Education’s School Facilities Department already has a th orough  review process when it 
comes to new school construction and their staff is well ver sed in the rules. There is no reason to involve the 
Bureau of General Services to conduct an analysis that the DOE’s School Facilities Department is well 
equipped to do. That bureau knows school construction better than any agency in the state.  
 
We also are concer ned this bill would give the Bureau greater authority to determine the need for school 
construction and where it should be located, which is and should remain a local decision.  
 
Our associations have confidence in the wisdom of the DOE’s School Facilities Departm ent staff because they 
have the greatest experience in the state dealing with such projects, and there already is considerable public 
input into such plans and their funding at the local level. We urge you not to change a system that already is 
working and  is overseen by experts in the field.  
