Veterans Park Pass to include Families 
Good morning, Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee. l am Jennie Titcomb, l proposed this idea to Representative 
Hepler in support of my husband Chuck (an Iraq War veteran) and all other Maine veterans and their 
families. I support LD 56, An Act to Provide Free Admission to State Parks and Historic Sites for the 
Spouses and Children of Veterans Holding Free Day Use Passes. 
Firstly, we wanted to say that we appreciate the fact that the state has provided veterans with this 
benefit. We also want to thank Representative Hepler for presenting the bill and the Senators and 
Representatives for cosponsoring. 
individual passes cost $55. Currently, we purchase this pass and pay the additional $1 for our 
daughter. Once she turns 12 years old, two individual passes would total $110, making the $105 car 
pass a better value. Once purchasing this, it effectively negates the veteran's pass, as that's irrelevant 
with a vehicle pass. At that point it is no longer a benefit. 
This example is our reality, and we are fortunate enough that there will be no issue paying the car pass 
price when the time comes. Our concern is for veterans and their families who cannot afford either 
pass, or who do not necessarily go often enough to warrant a season pass. A family of 4, with 2 kids 12 
or older, would spend S18 every time they go to Reid State Park (RSP) or Popham Beach State Park 
(PBSP). It would only make sense for them to pay per trip until their 6”‘ beach trip, at which point it 
would have been a better value for them to have purchased the vehicle pass. For lower income 
veterans with families, this could quickly make it cost prohibitive to go to a park more than 1-2 times 
annually. There is likely a significant portion of the veteran population unable to use this benefit 
because of this. 
For example, when we go to RSP or PBSP, we present the Veteran's pass, individual Season pass, and 
S1. Almost every time this causes confusion for the park staff and we have to explain why we're giving 
them 3 different forms of payment. After researching for this, we found that the Active Duty and 100% 
Disabled Veteran passes both grant day use, which covers families as well as the veteran. Likely the 
park staff are assuming we're part of one of those categories and are therefore confused when we try 
to pay. 
We believe this needs to be amended to better align the three categories of servicemembers/veterans 
in a more equitable way. If all three classifications of veterans have similar benefit in regards to day 
use of parks, it would ease the financial burden on veterans and their families. It would also make 
administration easier and would ease the burden for park staff, helping with expediting park entry for 
those parks that are busier. 
We strongly believe the three classifications of Veterans should have the same benefit, and also allow 
the families to use the pass even in the veteran's absence. ln our case, we utilize Reid State Park very 
frequently. Quite often, our daughter and l go while Chuck is at work. If this benefit isn't allowed to be 
used by the families, then families like ours will still have no choice but to purchase passes to the parks 
or pay the full price each time we want to go without the veteran— making the Veteran's pass 
irrelevant at a certain point. For other veterans, this could be the difference between them using the 
parks or not. 
Thank you again for your time and support.
