Maine Human Rights Commission 
V, # 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0051 
Physical location: 19 llnion Street, Augusta, ME 04330 
Phone (207) 624-6290 - Fax (207) 624-8729 - TTY: Maine Relay 711W wwzv.maine.gov[mhrc 
Amy M. Sneirson Barbara Archer Hirsch 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR COMMISSION COUNSEL 
March 21, 2023 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Matthew Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: An Act Regarding the Limits on Civil Remedies Available Under the Maine Human Rights Act, LD 960 
Dear Sena,tor,Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
The Maine Human Rights Commission ("Commission") is Maine's quasi-independent, neutral, apolitical State 
agency charged with enforcing our state anti-discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 4551, et seq. 
(”MHRA"). The Commission is statutorily charged with the duties of: investigating, conciliating, and at times litigating 
protected-class discrimination cases under the MHRA; promulgating rules and regulations to effectuate the Act; and 
making recommendations for further legislation or executive action concerning infringements on human rights in 
Maine. 5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11). With those duties in mind, the Commission is pleased to provide this testimony 
neither for nor against LD 960. 
As the Commission has statutory authority only to seek MHRA remedies in court, we do not encounter the 
situation at which LD 960 seems targeted: a person alleging violations of state ﬂag federal anti-discrimination laws. 
With respect to Section 1, the Commission wishes to note that the addition of "any other provision of law" may lead to 
unintended (or intended but nonsensical) consequences. That phrase could be interpreted to apply the MHRA's 
damages cap to all recovery in a given lawsuit, even if a lawsuit includes anti-discrimination law claims along with 
claims under other statutes or causes of action that are not based on discrimination law. Since this would apply the 
MHRA cap to legally distinct claims having nothing to do with discrimination — such as alleged violations of the Family 
and Medical Leave Act, National Labor Relations Act, or of wage and hour laws — that would not make sense. It also 
seems -unnecessary given the proposal within Section 4. 
It is also worth noting that the Commission has a longstanding worksharing agreement with the U. S. Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), which enforces the federal employment anti-discrimination laws 
referenced in LD 960. That worksharing agreement is predicated on the EEOC's determination that the MHRA provides 
parties with procedural and substantive due process that are substantially equivalent to those provided by parallel 
federal anti-discrimination laws. Should LD 960 be enacted, the EEOC may raise concerns about whether the MHRA\ 
remains substantially equivalent to federal anti-discrimination laws. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony related to LD 960. The Commission would be pleased to 
discuss these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this matter. 
Si n ce rely, 
;4/iitius, iii iC8gv\>;-*f~5 ‘”‘~ 
<. 
Amy M. Sneirson, Executive Director 
Cc: Commissioners
