Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  1 
  
 
2022 WL 4016824  
Only the Westlaw citation is currently available.  
United States District Court, D. Maine.  
Brian BELL, Plaintiff,  
v. 
O’REILLY AUTO ENTERPRISES, LLC , 
d/b/a O’Reilly Auto Parts, Defendan t. 
1:16-cv-00501 -JDL  
| 
Signed September 2, 2022  
Synopsis  
Background:  Former store manager brought action 
alleging that employer violated Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) and Maine Human Rights Act 
(MHRA) when it failed to pro vide him with reasonable 
accommodation for his Tourette’s syndrome, 
attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and 
major depression. After denying employer’s motion for 
summary judgment, 2018 WL 1886491 , the United States 
District Court for the District of Maine, Jon David Levy , 
Chief Judge, entered judgment on jury verdict in 
employer’ s favor, and denied employee’s motion for new 
trial. Former employee appealed, and the United States 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, 972 F.3d 21 , 
remanded for new trial on fa ilure-to-accommodate claim. 
Following new trial, the jury found for former employee 
on that claim and awarded compensatory and punitive 
damages. Former employer filed motion for a new trial or, 
in the alternative, for a reduction of the punitive damages 
award. 
  
Holdings:  The District Court, Jon David Levy , Chief 
Judge, held that:  
  
failure to give former employer’s requested instruction on 
business judgment did not warrant new trial;  
  
court was not required to define “good faith” in jury 
instructio ns which delineated former employer’s and 
employee’s obligations to participate in the interactive 
process;  
  
missing witness argument was proper;  
  
evidence was sufficient to support finding that former employer was acting with awareness that it was viola ting 
former employee’s right to a reasonable accommodation 
when it declined his request for a scheduling 
accommodation, and thus supported award of punitive 
damages;  
  
evidence was sufficient to support finding that former 
employer perceived but recklessly  disregarded its duty to 
engage in the interactive process in good faith, and thus 
was sufficient to support award of punitive damages;  
  
under common -law remittitur standard, award of 
$750,000 in punitive damages was not excessive; and  
  
award of $750,000  in punitive damages did not offend 
due process.  
  
Motion denied.  
  
Attorneys and Law Firms  
Chad T. Hansen , Martin Tartre , Peter L. Thompson , 
Maine Employee Rights Group, Portla nd, ME, Allan K. 
Townsend , U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, DC, 
for Plaintiff.  
Christopher C. Taintor , Robert W. Bower, Jr. , Trevor D. 
Savage, Norman, Hanson & Detroy, Portland, ME, for 
Defendant.  
 
 
 
 
ORDER ON DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR A NEW 
TRIAL OR REMITTITUR  
Jon D. Levy , CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT 
JUDGE  
*1 As the manager at the O’Reilly Auto Parts store in 
Belfast, Brian Bell began to work additional hours aft er 
two relatively senior employees unexpectedly quit. After 
several weeks, he experienced on June 4, 2015, what his 
psychiatric nurse practitioner described as a “meltdown.” 
Bell had previously been diagnosed with major depressive 
disorder , Tourette syndrome , and 
attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. After his 
mental -health crisis, Bell proposed to O’Reilly Auto a 
scheduling accommodation described in a note from his 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  2 
 psychiatric nurse practitioner that would have limited his 
weekly scheduled hours. O’Reilly Auto ultimately 
prevented Bell from returning to work, declined Bell’s 
accommodation request, and terminated his employment. 
Bell then brought this action (ECF No. 4), asserting 
claims of disability discrimination under the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (“ADA”) and the M aine Human 
Rights Act (“MHRA”).  
  
At the July 2018 trial, the jury found (ECF No. 101) in 
favor of O’Reilly Auto on Bell’s claims of disability 
discrimination, failure to accommodate, and unlawful 
retaliation. On appeal, the First Circuit remanded for a 
new trial solely on the failure -to-accommodate claim due 
to an instructional error. Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enters. , 972 
F.3d 21, 24 -25 (1st Cir. 2020) . The second trial in 
October 2021 consisted of two phases. At the end of the 
first phase, which focused on liability, backpay, and 
compensatory damages, the jury found (ECF No. 234) 
that O’Reilly Auto had violated Bell ’s right to a 
reasonable accommodation under both the ADA and 
MHRA, and it awarded $42,000 in backpay and $75,000 
in compensatory damages. At the conclusion of the 
second phase, which focused on punitive damages, the 
jury found (ECF No. 235) that O’Reilly Auto had violated 
the ADA and MHRA with malice or reckless 
indifference, and it awarded Bell an additional $750,000.  
  
O’Reilly Auto moves (ECF No. 262) for a new trial or, in 
the alternative, for a reduction of the punitive award on 
common -law or constitu tional grounds. See Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 59 . For the reasons that follow, I deny the motion.  
  
 
I. LEGAL ANALYSIS  
 
A. Jury Instructions  
O’Reilly Auto contends t hat the jury instructions 
contained three errors. First, the jury should have been 
instructed not to second -guess O’Reilly Auto’s business 
judgments. Second, the instructions should have stated 
that an unpredictable work schedule is not a reasonable 
accomm odation. Third, the phrase “good faith” should 
have been defined in keeping with case law cited by 
O’Reilly Auto. After reviewing the relevant legal 
standards, I conclude that none of these purported errors 
merit a new trial.  
  
 
 1. Standards  
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 59(a)  “authorizes a 
district court to over ride a jury verdict and order a new 
trial ‘if the verdict is against the law, against the weight of 
the credible evidence, or tantamount to a miscarriage of 
justice.’ ” Teixeira v. Town of Coventry ex rel. Przybyla , 
882 F.3d 13, 16 (1st Cir. 2018)  (quoting Casillas -Díaz v. 
Palau , 463 F.3d 77, 81 (1st Cir. 2006) ). “A verdict that 
results from prejudicial error in jury instructions is a 
verdict that is against the law ....” Id. 
  
*2 “Where ‘a party assigns error to the failure to give a 
requested instruction, the threshold in quiry is whether the 
requested instruction was correct as a matter of law.’ ” 
Franchina v. City of Providence , 881 F.3d 32, 55 (1st Cir. 
2018)  (quoting Shervin v. Partners Healthcare Sys., Inc. , 
804 F.3d 23, 47 (1st Cir. 20 15)). “If that threshold is met, 
the challenger must make two subsequent showings: first 
that the proposed instruction is ‘not substantially 
incorporated into the charge as rendered’ and second that 
it is ‘integral to an important point in the case.’ ” Id. at 
55-56 (quoting White v. N.H. Dep’t of Corr. , 221 F.3d 
254, 263 (1st Cir. 2000) ). 
  
However, a trial court’s “choice of language is largely a 
matter of discretion” if that language suffi ciently covers a 
litigant’s theory of the case. United States v. DeStefano , 
59 F.3d 1, 2 (1st Cir. 1995) . “[T]rial  courts must be 
accorded substantial latitude about how to distill 
complicated legal concepts into language that jurors will 
understand.” Shervin , 804 F.3d at 48 . The wording 
selected by a court will not require a new trial if “the 
instruction ‘adequately illuminated the law applicable to 
the controverted issues in the case without unduly 
complicating matters or m isleading the jury.’ ” Id. at 47  
(alteration omitted) (quoting Testa v. Wal -Mart Stores, 
Inc., 144 F.3d 173, 175 (1st Cir. 1998) ). Trial courts also 
have discretion over whether to define words contained in 
jury instructions. Ciolino v. Gikas , 861 F.3d 296, 301 (1st 
Cir. 2017) . 
  
Unpreserved claims of instructional error are reviewed for 
plain error. Rodríguez -Valentin v. Drs.’ Ctr. Hosp. 
(Manati), Inc. , 27 F.4th 14, 23 (1st Cir. 2022) ; see also  
Fed. R. Civ. P. 51(d)(2)  (“A court may consider a plain 
error in the instructions that has not been preserved as 
required by Rule 51(d)(1)  if the error affects substantial 
rights.”). “To demonstrate plain error, the party advancing 
the claim of error must establish ‘(1) that an error 
occurred (2) which was clear or obvious and which not 
only (3) affected the defendant’s subst antial rights, but 
also (4) seriously impaired the fairness, integrity, or 
public reputation of judicial proceedings.’ ” Lestage v. 
Coloplast Corp. , 982 F.3d 37, 45 (1st Cir. 2020)  (quoting 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  3 
 Teixeira , 882 F.3d at 18 ). The p lain-error hurdle is high, 
and “[n]owhere is this hurdle higher than in instances in 
which an appellant relies on a claim of instructional 
error.” Teixeira , 882 F.3d at 18 . 
  
 
 
2. Instruction on Deference to Employer’s 
Judgment  
O’Reilly Auto asserts that the jury should have been 
instru cted not to question O’Reilly Auto’s business 
judgments when deciding the essential functions of the 
store manager position. More specifically, O’Reilly Auto 
assigns error to my decision not to instruct the jury as 
follows:  
The inquiry into essential funct ions is not intended to 
second -guess an employer’s business judgment with 
regard to production standards. An employer is not 
required to make an accommodation which would have 
the effect of lowering its standards, insofar as the 
quality and quantity of the  work of its employees is 
concerned.  
ECF No. 209 at 5 (O’Reilly Auto’s Proposed Jury 
Instructions).  
  
I declined to provide that instruction, concluding that it 
was “adequately covered” by other instructions that I 
would give and that “ this additional commentary is not 
needed and would add unnecessary complexity.” ECF No. 
254 at 3:15 -18. In particular, the existing instructions 
substantially covered these points by inviting the jury to 
consider O’Reilly Auto’s stated judgment along with 
other evidence illuminating whether that stated judgment 
was sincerely grounded in the realities of the workplace:  
*3 To decide what the essential functions of a job are, 
you may consider the following factors: (1) The 
emplo yer’s judgment as to which functions of the job 
are essential; (2) written job descriptions; (3) the 
amount of time spent on the job performing the 
function in question; (4) consequences of not requiring 
the person to perform the function; (5) the work 
experience of people who have held the job; (6) the 
current work experience of people in similar jobs; (7) 
whether the reason the position exists is to perform the 
function; (8) whether there are a limited number of 
employees available among whom the performa nce of 
the function can be distributed; and (9) whether the 
function is highly specialized and the individual in the 
position was hired for his or her expertise or ability to 
perform the function. No one factor is necessarily 
controlling. You should consid er all of the evidence in deciding whether a job function is essential.  
  
The First Circuit has observed that courts “generally give 
substantial weight to the employer’s view of job 
requirements in the absence of evidence of discriminatory 
animus,” Ward v. Mass. Health Rsch. Inst., Inc. , 209 F.3d 
29, 34 (1st Cir. 2000) , and that a court’s “ inquiry into 
essential functions ‘is not intended to second guess the 
employer or to require the employer to lower company 
standards,’ ” Mulloy v. Acushnet Co. , 460 F.3d 141, 147 
(1st Cir. 2006)  (quoting Mason v. Avaya Commc’ns, Inc. , 
357 F.3d 1114, 1119 (10th Cir. 2004) ). Further, the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission’s (“EEOC”) 
interpretive guidance provides: “It is important to note 
that the inquiry into essential functions is not intended to 
second gue ss an employer’s business judgment with 
regard to production standards, whether qualitative or 
quantitative, nor to require employers to lower such 
standards.” 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, app. (2022).  
  
Yet the First Circuit has also cautioned that an employer’s 
views are “only one factor in the analysis” and that other 
“fact -intensive considerations” matter, including “written 
job descriptions, consequences of not requiring the 
function, work experience of past incumbents, and work 
experience of current incumbents .” Ward , 209 F.3d at 34  
(citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3) (1999) ). Those additional 
factors are taken from an EEOC regulation, which also 
lists “[t]he amount of time spent on the job performing the 
function.” 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)(iii) (2022) . These 
further considerations “are not meant ‘to enable courts to 
second-guess legitimate business judgments, but, rather, 
to ensure that an employer’s asserted requirements are 
solidly anchored in the realities of the workplace, not 
constructed out of whole cloth.’ ” Sepúlveda -Vargas v. 
Caribbean Rests., LLC , 888 F.3d 549, 553 (1st Cir. 2018)  
(quoting Gillen v. Fallon Ambulance Serv., Inc. , 283 F.3d 
11, 25 (1st Cir. 2002) ). In other words, it is not 
“second -guessing an employer’s legitimate business 
judgment” to apply these other factor s to check whether 
an employer is “merely pay[ing] ... lip service” to 
requirements “during litigation.” Benso n v. Wal -Mart 
Stores E., L.P. , 14 F.4th 13, 27 (1st Cir. 2021) . 
  
Deference to O’Reilly Auto’s legitimate business 
judgments was thus substantially incorporated into the 
jury instructions as given becaus e the jury was told to 
consider “[t]he employer’s judgment as to which 
functions of the job are essential” along with the eight 
additional factors mentioned in the block quotation above. 
The first five of the additional factors appear in the 
EEOC’s list of  relevant factors, see 29 C.F.R. § 
1630.2(n)(3)(ii) -(iv), (vi) -(vii), and these factors help to 
elucidate an employer’ s legitimate business judgments 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  4 
 without second -guessing them, Sepúlveda -Vargas , 888 
F.3d at 553 . The final  additional three factors are 
qualitatively similar to the previous five, and they were 
specifically requested by O’Reilly Auto in its Proposed 
Jury Instructions. Indeed, O’Reilly Auto requested that 
the jury be instructed as to all the additional factors,  none 
of which invited the jury to second -guess O’Reilly Auto’s 
business judgment.  
  
*4 Given the evidence that the jury was asked to consider, 
the jury was sufficiently inst ructed on deference to 
O’Reilly Auto’s legitimate business judgment. And, 
because this point was substantially covered, excluding 
the proposed instruction was an appropriate exercise of 
discretion over wording. Again, O’Reilly Auto’s proposed 
instruction w as: 
The inquiry into essential functions is not intended to 
second -guess an employer’s business judgment with 
regard to production standards. An employer is not 
required to make an accommodation which would have 
the effect of lowering its standards, insofa r as the 
quality and quantity of the work of its employees is 
concerned.  
ECF No. 209 at 5. The first sentence risked confusing the 
jury because it is phrased in terms of “production 
standards,” but this case concerned Bell’s attendance and 
availability –not his ability to satisfy a production 
standard. See 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, app. (providing 
examples of production standards including typing 75 
words per minute and cleaning 16 rooms per day). The 
second sentence was potentially confusing as well. It does 
not mention essential functions but rather states that an 
employer is not required to make “accommodation[s]” 
that lower standards. That statement makes sense only if 
one understands that accommodations that require 
employers to alter essential functions are n ot reasonable. 
See Benson , 14 F.4th at 27 -28. Although that point was 
covered elsewhere in the instructions , this sentence could 
have confused the jury by skipping over an intermediate 
concept. The second sentence also assumed, without 
making clear, that the production standards at issue had 
already been determined to be an essential function.  
  
 
 
3. Instruction on Unpredictable Schedules  
O’Reilly Auto contends that I erred when I declined to 
instruct the jury that modified schedules are per se 
unreasonable when the employee’s attendance would be 
unpredictable. The instruction at issue appeared in 
O’Reilly Auto’s Proposed Jury Instructions:  Under some circumstances, a reasonable 
accommodation may include a part -time or modified 
work sc hedule. A change to an employee’s work 
schedule may be a reasonable accommodation if it is 
specific and well -defined. However, a scheduling 
modification which makes an employee’s attendance at 
work erratic and unpredictable is not a reasonable 
accommodatio n. 
ECF No. 209 at 4. I instead instructed the jury that, “[b]y 
way of illustration, under federal and Maine law, a 
‘reasonable accommodation’ may include ... part -time or 
modified work schedules.”  
  
As Bell correctly argues and O’Reilly Auto does not 
dispu te, this issue is subject to plain -error review because 
O’Reilly Auto did not object on the record and I did not 
provide a definitive ruling on the record. See Fed. R. Civ. 
P. 51(d)(1)(B), (2) . 
  
O’Reilly Auto cites out -of-circuit authority in support of 
its proposed instruction and claims that no contrary First 
Circuit authority exists. See, e.g. , Crowell v. Denver 
Health and Hosp. Auth. , 572 Fed. App’x 650, 659 (10th 
Cir. 2014)  (unpublished) (“Alt hough the ADA provides 
for part -time or modified work schedules as a reasonable 
accommodation, an unpredictable, flexible schedule that 
would permit [the employee] to leave work whenever she 
has a medical episode is unreasonable as a matter of law.” 
(citat ions omitted)). Bell responds that the proposed 
instruction is legally erroneous in light of the First 
Circuit’s decision in Ward , 209 F.3d at 36 . 
  
*5 In Ward , the First Circuit reversed a trial court’ s grant 
of summary judgment against an employee who had 
requested the accommodation of being allowed to arrive 
late whenever his arthritis  was flaring up. 209 F.3d at 
31-32, 36 . The First Circuit observed that “[t]he ADA 
explicitly states that ‘job restructuring’ and ‘part -time or 
modified work schedules’ are potential reasonable 
accommodations.” Id. at 36  (quoting 42 U.S .C. § 
12111(9) (2000) ). Because “[n]othing in that explicit 
language implies that a modified schedule must be regular 
or predictable,” the First Circuit rejected the employer’s 
argument that “as a matter of law, open -ended ‘work 
when able’ schedules are  not reasonable 
accommodations” and “decline[d] to hold that the flexible 
schedule [the employee] proposes is per se unreasonable.” 
Id. at 36 & n.6 . 
  
Thus, O’Reilly Auto’s proposed instruction, which was 
phrased without qualification, was legally incorrect. The 
decision not to give O’Reilly Auto’s proposed instruction 
that unpredictable schedules are always unrea sonable was 
not error, let alone plain error.  
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  5 
   
 
 
4. Definition of “Good Faith”  
O’Reilly Auto contends that I should have provided the 
jury with a definition of the phrase “ good faith” when I 
delineated the parties’ obligations to participate in the 
interactive process. During the trial and well after the 
deadline for the submission of proposed instructions, 
O’Reilly Auto proposed in an email to the Court that the 
jury be ins tructed on the meaning of “good faith,” 
explaining:  
First, the First Circuit has made clear that “[o]nce an 
accommodation is properly requested, the 
responsibility for fashioning a reasonable 
accommodation is shared between the employee and 
employer.[”] Jacques v. Clean -Up Group, Inc. , 96 F.3d 
506, 514 (1st Cir. 1996) . As such, the “interactive 
process is trig gered only after [the] employer makes 
[the] threshold determination that [the] disabled 
employee may be accommodated.” Id. (citing White v. 
York Int’l Corp. , 45 F.3d 357, 363 (10th Cir. 1995) ). 
Once the employer has determined that the disabled 
employee may be accommodated, the “employee’ s 
request for reasonable accommodation requires a great 
deal of communication.” Tobin v. L[i]berty Mutual Ins . 
Co., 433 F.3d 100, 109 (1st Cir. 2005) . 
However, “this does not mean that the employer has the 
unreasonable burden of raising and discussing every 
conceivable accommodation with the disabled 
employee.” Id. Rather, the interactive process “requires 
open communication by both parties, and an employer 
will not be held liable if it makes reasonable efforts 
both to communicate with the employee and pr ovide 
accommodations based on the information it 
possessed.” Enica v. Principi , 544 F.3d 328, 339 (1st 
Cir. 20 08) (quotation marks omitted). Put differently:  
Neither party should be able to cause a breakdown in 
the process for the purpose of either avoiding or 
inflicting liability. Rather, courts should look for 
signs of failure to participate in good faith or failure 
by one of the parties to make reasonable efforts to 
help the other party determine what specific 
accommodations are necessary. A party that 
obstructs or delays the interactive process is not 
acting in good faith. A party that fails to 
communicate, by way of initiation or response, may 
also be acting in bad faith. In essence, courts should 
attempt to isolate the cause of the breakdown and 
then assign responsibility.... Where the missing information is of the type that can be provided by 
one of the pa rties, failure to provide the information 
may be the cause of the breakdown and the party 
withholding the information may be found to have 
obstructed the process.[ ]  
Beck v. University of Wisconsin Bd. of Regents , 75 F.3d 
1130, 1135 -36 (7th Cir. 1996) . 
*6 ECF No. 262 -1. I declined to instruct the jury as to the 
definition of  “good faith” because no clear definition 
existed in the First Circuit’s case law on the interactive 
process and it “is a term of common usage.” ECF No. 254 
at 6:1. O’Reilly Auto then specifically objected to the 
instruction’s failure to define “good faith ” for the jury 
using the language from Enica v. Principi , 544 F.3d 328, 
339 (1st Cir. 2008) , and Beck v. University of Wisconsin 
Board of Regents , 75 F.3d 1130, 1135 -36 (7th Cir. 1996) , 
that was provided in the email.  
  
O’Reilly Auto now argues I should have provided the jury 
with as clear and detailed of a definition as possible. Bell 
counters that it would have been impractical to define 
“good faith” because the term is subjective.  
  
A trial court “permissibly exercise[s] its discretion by 
declining to provide a definition” of words or phrases that 
are not “outside of an ordinary juror’s understanding.” 
Ciolino , 861 F.3d at 301  (alteration omitted) (quoting 
United States v. Fulmer , 108 F.3d 1486, 1495 (1st Cir. 
1997) ) (concluding there was no abuse of discretion in 
declining to define “incited”); accord  United States v. 
Sabetta , 373 F.3d 75, 81 -82 (1st Cir. 2004)  (“[T]his 
circuit has generally held that terms a reasonable jury can 
understand do not ne ed further definition.... The term 
‘knowingly,’ as it was used in this jury instruction, could 
reasonably have been understood by a lay jury and further 
definition of the term was unnecessary.”); United States v. 
Rule Indus., Inc. , 878 F.2d 535, 544 (1st Cir. 1989)  
(“[W]ords familiar to persons of ordinary intelligence do 
not require definition.” (quoting 9C Charles Alan Wright 
& Arthur R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure  § 
2556 (1971) )). 
  
“Good faith” is a common phrase that an ordinary juror 
would understand to mean “honesty or lawfulness of 
purpose.” Good faith , Merriam -Webster Dictionary 
Online, 
https://www.merriam -webster.com/dictionary/good% 
20faith (last visit ed September 2, 2022). Jurors can 
reasonably be expected to understand the meaning of 
“good faith.” Providing the gloss on that phrase that 
O’Reilly Auto requested would have been 
counterproductive because “attempts to clarify inherently 
nebulous concepts can do more harm than good.” United 
States v. Prigmore , 243 F.3d 1, 17 (1st Cir. 2001) . 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  6 
 Additionally, O’Reilly Auto never provided a concrete 
definition of “good faith”; instead, it offered three 
paragraphs of quotations. “[W]hen the instruction offered 
by the lawyer is manifestly overbroad, the district judge 
may reject without assuming the burden of editing it 
down to save some small portion that may be viable.” 
Parker v. City of Nashua , 76 F.3d 9, 12 (1st Cir. 1996) ; 
see also 9C Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R. Miller, 
Federal Practice and Procedure  § 2556 (3d ed. 2022)  
(“[I]t generally is not helpful to take quotations  from the 
opinions of appellate courts, never intended to be used as 
instructions to juries, and make these a part of the 
charge.”).  
  
 
 
B. Improper Argument  
O’Reilly Auto next  submits that Bell’s attorney made 
three arguments that each merit a new trial. First, during 
the closing arguments for phase 1 of the trial, Bell’s 
attorney made a “missing -witness” argument, asserting 
that O’Reilly Auto did not call the current manager o f the 
Belfast store because that individual would have said that 
Bell’s requested accommodation was reasonable. Second, 
at the end of phase 2 of the trial, Bell’s attorney told the 
jury that O’Reilly Auto’s litigation efforts were evidence 
of the absence o f good faith. Third, during the closing 
arguments for phase 1, Bell’s attorney made a statement 
that was inconsistent with the evidence. After reviewing 
the relevant legal standards, I conclude that none of these 
arguments merit a new trial. Finally, I add ress O’Reilly 
Auto’s theory that the cumulative effect of these 
arguments necessitates a new trial. The purported errors, 
viewed individually or cumulatively, do not merit a new 
trial. 
  
 
 
1. Standard  
*7 Again, Rule 59(a)  authorizes a district court to 
override a jury verdict and order a new trial if the verdict 
is against the law, against the weight of the credible 
evidence, or tantamount to a miscarriage of justice. 
Teixeira , 882 F.3d at 16 . Improper argument warrants a 
new trial if the complaining party was prejudiced, see 
Fonten Corp. v. Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc. , 469 F.3d 
18, 22 (1st Cir. 2006) , which depends on “the effect of 
counsel’ s comment” under the totality of the 
circumstances, Burnett v. Ocean Props., Ltd. , 987 F.3d 
57, 75 (1st Cir. 2021 ). Factors relevant to the totality of 
the circumstances include: “(1) the nature of the comments; (2) their frequency; (3) their possible 
relevance to the real issues before the jury; (4) the manner 
in which the parties and the court treated the commen ts; 
(5) the strength of the case; and (6) the verdict itself.” 
Granfield v. CSX Transp., Inc. , 597 F.3d 474, 4 90 (1st 
Cir. 2010) . “The district court has considerable discretion 
in supervising attorneys’ remarks during closing 
argument.” Gonzalez -Marin v. Equitable Life Assurance 
Soc’y of U.S. , 845 F.2d 1140, 1147 (1st Cir. 1988) . 
  
 
 
2. Missing -Witness Argument  
During his closing ar gument at the end of the first phase 
of the trial on liability, backpay, and compensatory 
damages, Bell’s attorney suggested that O’Reilly Auto 
had not called the current Belfast store manager as a 
witness because that individual would have agreed that 
Bell’s proposed scheduling accommodation was 
reasonable:  
And I think it’s interesting that other than [Bell] who 
else would know whether this schedule, this 
accommodation would work? How about the Belfast 
store manager right now? Or —they are an O’Reilly 
emplo yee. They could have brought him in. They could 
have put him on the stand. It would have been 
interesting to see what they would have said. But 
O’Reilly didn’t call him. And the reason that they 
didn’t call them is that they would have said the same 
thing as [Bell], that this would have worked. If they had 
given him a chance, [Bell] could have done the job.  
ECF No. 254 at 19:12 -22. In response, O’Reilly Auto 
requested that I instruct the jury to disregard this 
argument. I declined to give that instruction, concluding 
that there was “nothing that occurred during the course of 
the case that would have prevented O’Reilly from calling 
the individual in that position” and, as such, the argument 
was not unfair. ECF No. 254 at 35:25 -36:2.  
  
O’Reilly Auto urges that  I follow Fifth Circuit precedent, 
which it characterizes as holding that missing -witness 
arguments are improper in civil cases. See Herbert v. 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. , 911 F.2d 1044, 1048 (5th Cir. 
1990) . In the alternative, O’Reilly Auto a rgues that I 
should conclude that Bell failed to lay the necessary 
evidentiary foundation for a missing -witness argument. 
O’Reilly Auto contends that it was prejudiced by the 
missing -witness argument because the argument 
impugned the credibility of the com pany and its lawyers 
by creating the impression that O’Reilly Auto withheld 
the current store manager to avoid damaging testimony. 
Bell responds that the missing -witness argument was 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  7 
 appropriate under the circumstances.  
  
As recently as 2010, the First Circuit recognized that, 
“[a]lthough far more common in criminal cases, a missing 
witness instructio n may be given in a civil case as well.” 
Latin Am. Music Co. v. Am. Soc’y of Composers Authors 
& Publishers , 593 F.3d 95, 101 (1st Cir. 2010)  (footnote 
omitted). “The instruction informs the jury that a party’s 
failure to produce a particular witness may justify the 
inference that the witness’ testimony would have been 
unfavorable to that party.” Id. “The instruction, however, 
should only be given where ‘the witness is either actually 
unavailable to the party seeking the instruction or so 
obviously partial to the other side that the witness  though 
technically available is deemed to be legally unavailable.’ 
” Id. at 102  (alteration omitted) (quo ting United States v. 
Perez , 299 F.3d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 2002) ). “When deciding 
whether to issue a missing witness instruction the ‘court 
must consider the explanation (if any) for the witness’s 
absence and whether the witness, if called, would be 
likely to provide relevant, non -cumulative testimony.’ ” 
Id. (quoting Perez , 299 F.3d at 3 ). The same 
consideratio ns apply in determining whether arguments 
about missing witnesses are proper. See United States v. 
Aboshady , 951 F.3d 1, 10 (1st Cir. 2020)  (“[A]n ‘attorney 
may not argue that the jury should draw an inference 
against an opponent where the opponent does not present 
witnesses that are available to both parties.’ ” (alterations 
omitted) (quoting United States v. Jiménez -Torres , 435 
F.3d 3, 12 (1st Cir. 2006) )); Hrichak v. Pion , 522 F. Supp. 
2d 283, 290 n.4 (D. Me. 2007) ; Steinhilber v. McCarthy , 
26 F. Supp. 2d 265, 280 -81 (D. Mass. 1998) . 
  
*8 Bell is correct that “[t]he ‘e mployer -employee 
relationship is recognized as one creating practical 
unavailability’ due to the economic ties of the employee 
to his employer.” Steinhilber , 26 F. Supp. 2d at 281  
(quoting Jones v. Otis Elevator Co. , 861 F.2d 655, 
659-660 (11th Cir. 1988) ); accord  Grajales -Romero v. 
Am. Airlines , Inc. , 194 F.3d 288, 298 (1st Cir. 1999)  
(concluding that employment status was “ample 
evidence” that a missing witness was favorably disposed 
to his employer). In addition, as Bell contends, the current 
store manager’s testimony about the reasonablene ss of a 
proposed accommodation for that same position at the 
same store would not be cumulative of the testimony of 
the other witnesses from O’Reilly Auto, who were all 
human resources staff or more senior managers 
responsible for multiple stores. The evid ence indicated 
that O’Reilly Auto hired a replacement for Bell several 
months after he left, and there was no evidence, and 
O’Reilly did not argue, that the Belfast store was without 
a manager at the time of the trial. Indeed, the opposite 
inference is sup ported by Regional Manager Nicholas Thomas’s testimony that the Belfast store has become a 
profit center. For these reasons, Bell’s missing -witness 
argument was proper.  
  
Even if the missing -witness argumen t had been improper, 
the argument was not prejudicial and thus does not 
warrant a new trial under the totality of the circumstances. 
See Burnett , 987 F.3d at 76 . “Although the nature of the 
comment spoke to a relevant trial issue” —the 
reasonableness of Bell’s requested accommodation —“the 
improper comment was brief” and singular. Id. I 
instructed the jury at the start of the trial that “statements 
and arguments and questions by the lawyers are not 
evidence,” ECF No. 251 at 20:19 -20, and again after 
closing arguments that “arguments and statements by 
lawyers are not evidence,” ECF No. 254 at 63:23 -24. 
“[T]he ... standard instructions that arguments by counsel 
are not evidence mitigated any prejudicial effect.” 
Burnett , 987 F.3d at 76 . 
  
Additionally, assessing the evidence independently, the 
effect of the comment was minimal. As discussed in 
greater detail in Part II(C), there was essentially no 
dispute at trial as to whether the accommodation request 
that Bell described to the jury was reasonable; O’Reilly 
Auto’s witnesses instead criticized the workability of 
different interpretations of Bell’s request that he 
repeatedly disavowed. Thus, the missing -witness 
argument pertaining to the reasonableness of Bell’s 
accommodation request very likely had no impact. 
Additionally, as also discussed in Part II(C), one of the 
ways that Bell could have succeeded on his 
failure -to-accommodate claim was to sh ow that O’Reilly 
Auto violated a duty to engage in the interactive process 
in good faith, and success on this theory did not require a 
showing that Bell’s accommodation request was 
reasonable, only that it would have been possible for the 
parties to identi fy a reasonable accommodation if 
O’Reilly Auto had engaged in good faith. The evidence in 
support of this alternative theory was strong, which 
further indicates that this missing -witness argument was 
not prejudicial. Finally, “the case does not appear to h ave 
been a close one in the eyes of the jury, which returned a 
verdict in” less than an hour at the end of phase 1 of the 
trial. Prouty v. Thippanna , 557 F. Supp. 3d 212, 216 (D. 
Mass. 2021) . 
  
 
 
3. Argument That O’Reilly Auto Litigated in Bad 
Faith  
After the jury returned a ver dict for Bell on liability and 
awarded him backpay and compensatory damages, the 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  8 
 parties presented arguments to the jury on punitive 
damages. One topic that both parties addressed was 
O’Reilly Auto’s affirmative defense to punitive damages 
that it engaged in a good -faith effort in consultation with 
Bell to identify and make a reasonable accommodation. 
See 42 U.S.C.A. § 1981a(a)(3)  (West 2022).1 Bell’s 
counsel argued to the jury that O’Reilly Auto’s li tigation 
efforts were evidence of the absence of good faith:  
They did the opposite of act in good faith. After [Bell] 
filed his court case, which is —that was a long time ago, 
O’Reilly could have looked into it, brought [Bell] back, 
tried to fix things, cha nge their ways. They did the 
opposite. As you saw, they subpoenaed his therapy 
records and put them up in public in a way that was not 
easy for [Bell], but it’s like this is the price you pay if 
you challenge us for violating your rights. They fought 
him. They insisted they did nothing wrong. They 
brought witnesses in from all over to say that what they 
do is absolutely fine.  
*9 Their position is that they’re essentially exempt 
from these laws when it comes to store managers and 
salaried employees, that essentially for O’Reilly for 
these people they don’t get the benefit of having these 
rights.  
And they aren’t just fighting their obligation to 
accommodate [Bell], this is really every store manager 
in all of the states. And I w onder how many store 
managers, since [Bell] brought his case, have gone 
through the same thing because this is O’Reilly’s 
approach to these sorts of things. And they’re not just 
fighting [Bell]. I think it’s clear that this is the 
company’s attempts to try —they’re trying to say we 
can do this, this is okay, and today you already told 
them it’s not okay, it violates the law.  
ECF No. 254 at 113:14 -114:14.  
 1 
 That affirmative defense can apply to both punitive and 
compensatory damages, 42 U.S.C.A. § 1981a(a)(3) , (b), 
but O’Reilly Auto pleaded it as to punitive damages 
only.  
 
 
O’Reilly Auto objected to the suggestion that Bell should 
be awarded punitive damages for O’Reilly Auto’s 
courtroom conduct or decision to litigate and conduct 
discovery. O’Reilly Auto requested a curative instruction 
informing the jury that it “has a perfec t right to defend 
itself, and that nothing that happened in this courtroom 
was inappropriate or deserving of punitive damages.” 
ECF No. 254 at 116:13 -19. 
  
I informed the parties that I would instruct the jury “that a 
party has a right to subpoena medical records in a case such as this, and to defend itself, and those acts —the 
defense of this case in the courtroom —should not be 
considered in determining punitive damage in this case.” 
ECF No. 254 at 117:13 -17. I asked O’Reilly Auto 
whether it had any problem  with such an instruction, to 
which it responded, “No, that’s fine, Your Honor.” ECF 
No. 254 at 117:20. I then provided the following curative 
instruction:  
Members of the jury, it was just mentioned that —as 
part of the argument that there was reference mad e to 
the fact that Mr. Bell’s medical records were 
subpoenaed and brought into court, and I want to 
instruct you that a party, including O’Reilly Auto in 
this case, a party has a right to subpoena medical 
records in preparation for its defense in a case su ch as 
this, and it has a right to come into court and defend 
itself, and so nothing that happened here in court as 
part of the trial should factor or be considered 
by–factored in or considered by you in determining 
whether to award punitive damages and, if  so, in what 
amount, and that is my instruction to you.  
ECF No. 254 at 118:1 -14. O’Reilly Auto did not further 
object.  
  
Notwithstanding the unobjected -to curative instruction, 
O’Reilly Auto now argues that Bell’s counsel improperly 
conveyed to the jury th at punitive damages should be 
awarded for the emotional harm that Bell suffered from 
having to litigate this case. Bell argues that O’Reilly Auto 
waived any argument on this issue by acquiescing to the 
curative instruction and that, in any event, the curat ive 
instruction was sufficient. Bell also emphasizes (and 
O’Reilly Auto does not dispute) that O’Reilly Auto’s 
argument on this point must be construed as a request for 
a new trial solely on the question of punitive damages 
because liability, backpay, and compensatory damages 
had already been determined by the jury at the end of the 
first phase of the trial.  
  
*10 When an issue is “unmistakably on the table” and a 
party “ ‘signif[ies] agreement that there was nothing 
objectionable,’ the issue is waived.” United States v. 
Simon , 12 F.4th 1, 60 (1st Cir. 2021)  (quoting United 
States v. Soto , 799 F.3d 68, 96 (1st Cir. 2015) ). “One 
application of this rule occurs when ‘the district court 
informed the parties exactly how it was planning to 
instruct the jury’ and ‘sought their feedback,’  with the 
result that a party’s counsel ‘affirmatively stated there 
was no objection’ or ‘remained silent.’ ” Id. (alteration 
omitted) (quoting Soto, 799 F.3d at 96 ). In such a case, 
“[a]ny claim that the instructions are inadequate is 
deemed waived.” Id.; see also  United States v. 
Charriez -Rolón , 923 F.3d 45, 50, 53 (1st Cir. 2019)  
(holding that, when a party agreed to a curative 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  9 
 instruction and then did not object before the jury 
deliberations, “[t]hat is waiver, pure and simple” on the 
issue of improper argument); Goulet v. New Penn Motor 
Express, Inc. , 512 F.3d 34, 40, 44 (1st Cir. 2008)  (holding 
that a party had affirmatively waived any objection when 
counsel sought a supplementary jur y instruction and then 
indicated it was satisfactory). Accordingly, O’Reilly Auto 
waived this issue when I informed O’Reilly Auto of the 
type of curative instruction I was inclined to provide, it 
approved, I delivered that instruction, and O’Reilly Auto 
remained silent.  
  
Regardless, even under the standard of review for 
preserved objections, O’Reilly Auto was not prejudiced 
under the totality of the circumst ances. The improper 
argument was of moderate length. But recall that O’Reilly 
Auto’s theory is that this argument increased the punitive 
damages award. Although the argument did bear 
somewhat on reprehensibility and thus the amount of 
punitive damages the jury should award, it was primarily 
aimed at the separate issue of whether O’Reilly Auto had 
proven its affirmative defense of good -faith engagement 
in the interactive process. See 42 U.S.C.A. § 1981a(a)(3) . 
Even the relevance to this affirmative defense was 
somewhat attenuated because O’Reilly Auto’s good faith 
in choosing to litigate is a step removed from how it acted 
during the interactive  process. Additionally, I provided a 
curative instruction that instructed the jury not to consider 
O’Reilly Auto’s decision to litigate this case, exactly as 
O’Reilly Auto requested. The jury was specifically 
informed that O’Reilly Auto was within its righ ts to 
subpoena Bell’s medical records. “The normal 
presumption is that a jury will follow a court’s curative 
instruction.” Hatfield -Bermudez v. Aldanondo -Rivera , 
496 F.3d 51, 64 (1st Cir. 2007) . 
  
Under the totality of the circumstances, even if O’Reilly 
Auto’s objection had not been waived, the curative 
instruction erased any prejudice to O’Reilly Auto.  
  
 
 
4. Misstatement of the Evidence  
During his closing argument at the end of the first phase 
of the trial, Bell’s counsel told the jury that Bell and his 
wife “ maxed out credit cards and they’re still digging out 
of that hole” as a result of O’Reilly Auto’s misconduct.2 
ECF No. 254 at 28:20 -21. O’Reilly Auto requested an 
instruction telling the jury to disregard the comment about 
the credit cards. O’Reilly Auto argued that there had not 
been any testimony that Bell and hi s wife had maxed out 
their credit cards. Bell conceded that there had been no 
evidence on this point.3  2 
 Bell’s attor ney argued:  
So last I want to talk about [Bell’s] harms and losses, 
which is really the reason we’re here. O’Reilly broke 
the law, they hurt somebody, and they need to be 
held accountable. So, you’ll see on the jury verdict 
form that if when you check yes that they violated 
[Bell’s] rights they’ll ask what do you award for lost 
wages? Well, here is what —this isn’t in dispute. 
[Bell] was unemployed or underemployed for 143 
weeks, from June of 2015 to March of 2018 when he 
finally got a job that paid as well.  At O’Reilly, if he 
used his last salary at $827 per week, that’s $118,000 
that he would have earned at O’Reilly. You’ll see a 
stipulation that the parties have agreed he actually 
made about $60,000 because he was working for 
most of that time just in lowe r paying jobs. So his 
lost wages are $57,000. Which hurt. You know, 
they’ve maxed out credit cards and they’re still 
digging out of that hole, and so that’s a real harm.  
ECF No. 254 at 28:4 -21. 
 
 
3 
 O’Reilly Auto also asserted that the argument was 
improper because I had ruled that O’Reilly Auto could 
not introd uce mitigating evidence about Bell’s financial 
condition (i.e., the fact that Bell had received disability 
insurance benefits) unless Bell opened the door by 
putting his financial distress at issue. On this second 
point, Bell correctly responded that I had  subsequently 
ruled that Bell had opened the door. Bell had also 
testified during his direct examination that he had 
received disability insurance benefits.  
 
 
*11 I denied O’Reilly Auto’s request for a curative 
instructio n because O’Reilly Auto would soon have the 
opportunity to respond to Bell’s closing argument and it 
could rebut the arguments that Bell had made that were 
not supported by the trial evidence.  
  
O’Reilly Auto argues that the credit card comment at the 
end of phase 1 prejudiced it in two ways that both 
manifested during the second phase of the trial on 
punitive damages. First, O’Reilly Auto contends that the 
credit card comment later amplified the harm from the 
argument (from phase 2) that O’Reilly Auto liti gated this 
action in bad faith because, together, the two remarks 
suggest that O’Reilly Auto was using litigation tactics to 
prolong Bell’s financial distress. Second, O’Reilly Auto 
argues that there was no other support in the record for 
the idea that Bel l was financially vulnerable, a 
consideration that the jury was instructed to weigh when 
calculating punitive damages. Bell responds that the 
general instructions told the jury that lawyers’ arguments 
are not evidence; O’Reilly Auto passed up the opportuni ty 
in its closing argument to remind the jury that there was 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  10 
 no evidence that the Bells had maxed out their credit 
cards; and, overall, O’Reilly Auto was not prejudiced 
because there was other substantial evidence in the record 
establishing Bell’s financia l vulnerability.  
  
Contrary to O’Reilly Auto’s argument, the credit card 
comment was not prejudicial under the totality of the 
circumstances. The misstatement of the evidence by 
Bell’s attorney constituted one sentence of a closing 
argument that spans twenty -two pages of the transcript. 
O’Reilly Auto had the opportunity to respond to the 
argument by pointing out to the jury that there had been 
no testimony on maxing out credit cards, but it failed to 
do so. See SEC v. Happ , 392 F.3d 12, 27 (1st Cir. 2004)  
(noting that a factor weighing against prejudice is that a 
party’s “counsel could have pointed out the error to the 
jury in the course of his own later closing argument, 
which he did not do”); Correa -Carrillo v. Grupo HIMA 
San Pablo -Fajardo Inc. , CIVIL NO. 17 -2253, ––– 
F.Supp.3d –––– , –––– , 2022 WL 939383, at *8 (D.P.R. 
Mar. 29, 2022)  (“ ‘[T]rials are adversarial processes in 
which things may be said which the other side regards as 
incorrect and sometimes offensive.’ Though courts should 
‘intervene in instances of unfairness and impropriety,’ 
such instances are usually dealt with ‘through r ebuttal by 
the opposing side.’ ” (alteration omitted) (citation 
omitted) (quoting Mitchell v. Weaver , 806 F.2 d 300, 302 
(1st Cir. 1986) )). Further, the jury was twice instructed 
that the attorneys’ arguments are not evidence. See 
Burnett , 987 F.3d at 76 ; Wilson v. Town of Mendon , 294 
F.3d 1, 16 (1st Cir. 2002)  (“Moreover, we are confident, 
that if there was any prejudice, it was cured by the court’s 
admonition to the jury, both in its preliminary and 
concluding instructions, that the lawyers’ statements and 
arguments were not to be considered as evidence.”).  
  
In addition, the re was evidence presented at trial that Bell 
was financially vulnerable because he had few resources 
and little leverage or earning power in the employment 
market. Bell testified that, once he lost his disability 
insurance benefits, “I had to pay for my he alth insurance 
completely out of pocket at that point” and “it was 
financially trying.” ECF No. 252 at 174:15 -17. The 
evidence established that Bell was willing to accept a 
$13-per-hour assistant manager position at the Belfast 
store —a steep reduction from  his annual manager’s salary 
of approximately $42,000 —but O’Reilly Auto refused to 
hire him at that rate. The parties stipulated that Bell did 
not surpass his O’Reilly Auto salary until March 2018, 
approximately two and a half years after he was fired by 
O’Reilly Auto. To the extent that any prejudice is 
grounded, as O’Reilly Auto asserts, in the interaction 
between the credit card comment and the argument that 
O’Reilly Auto was litigating in bad faith, I have already concluded that any objection on the sec ond point has been 
waived and that the curative instruction on that point was 
sufficient. For these reasons, Bell’s counsel’s argument 
that Bell’s credit cards had been maxed out does not merit 
a new trial.  
  
 
 
5. Cumulative Error  
*12 O’Reilly Auto next argues that the three 
aforementioned arguments by Bell’s counsel, when 
viewed cumulatively, resulted in an unfair trial. In 
particular, O’ Reilly Auto asserts that improper comments 
were made in summation, meaning they were among the 
last points that the jury heard before deliberating and that 
O’Reilly Auto did not have an opportunity to respond 
with additional evidence. Furthermore, O’Reilly  Auto 
contends that the three improper comments all relate to 
the single theme that O’Reilly Auto’s litigation tactics 
harmed Bell and, as such, the curative instruction that I 
gave on O’Reilly Auto’s right to litigate this case was 
ineffective.  
  
“To deploy [the cumulative -error doctrine] successfully, 
... a p arty must establish that individual miscues, while 
insufficient in themselves to warrant a new trial, have an 
aggregate effect that impugns the fairness of the 
proceedings and thus undermines the trustworthiness of 
the verdict.” Williams v. Drake , 146 F.3d 44, 49 (1st Cir. 
1998) . “In other words, [courts] will order a new trial on 
the basis of cumulative error only  if multiple errors 
synergistically achieve ‘the critical mass necessary to cast 
a shadow upon the integrity of the verdict.’ ” Id. (quoting 
United States v. Sepulveda , 15 F.3d 1161, 1196 (1st Cir. 
1993) ). “If the verdict is to stand, the court must be able 
to say with a fair degree o f assurance that the error(s) did 
not skew the verdict.” Gomez v. Rivera Rodriguez , 344 
F.3d 103, 118 (1st Cir . 2003) . When evaluating a 
cumulative -error claim, a court “must consider each such 
claim against the background of the case as a whole, 
paying particular weight to factors such as the nature and 
number of the errors committed; their interrelationship, if 
any, and combined effect; how the district court dealt with 
the errors as they arose (including the efficacy —or lack of 
efficacy —of any remedial efforts); and the strength of the 
... case.” Sepulveda , 15 F.3d at 1196 . 
  
I have already concluded that O’Reilly Auto waived any 
claim of error related to the argument that O’ Reilly Auto 
was litigating in bad faith when it ratified my proposed 
curative instruction and then failed to further object. 
There was also no error related to this issue because any 
prejudice was eliminated by the curative instruction. See 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  11 
 Granfield , 597 F.3d at 491, 492 n.14  (rejecting a 
cumulative error claim where the court “sufficiently 
neutralized” improp er arguments with a curative 
instruction and thus “the district court committed no 
errors”).  
  
O’Reilly Auto asserts that the instruction was ineffective 
given the relationship between the bad -faith-litigation 
argument and the other assertedly improper com ments, 
but the connection is overstated. Bell’s missing -witness 
argument did not malign O’Reilly Auto’s litigation tactics 
so much as it asked the jury to infer that O’Reilly Auto’s 
decision not to call the current Belfast store manager 
implied that this i ndividual would have testified that 
Bell’s requested scheduling accommodation was 
reasonable. And the comment about the credit card was a 
misstatement of the evidence, not an attack on how 
O’Reilly Auto litigated this case. Thus, the curative 
instruction w as effective and, for purposes of evaluating 
the effect of cumulative error, there was no error related 
to the bad -faith-litigation argument. See United States v. 
Stokes , 124 F.3d 39, 43 (1st Cir. 1997)  (“By definition, 
cumulative -error analysis is inappropriate when a party 
complains of the cumulative effect of non -errors.”). 
Similarly, I have already concluded t hat Bell’s 
missing -witness argument was proper and the failure to 
provide a curative instruction on the credit card comment 
was harmless, so these cannot factor into the 
cumulative -error analysis either.  
  
*13 Even if the missing -witness argument is treated as 
improper, that comment combined with the absence of a 
curative instruction on the credit card comment would not 
have synergistically achieved a critical mass of prejud ice 
that casts a shadow on the integrity of the jury’s verdict. 
This was a hard -fought trial, and the claimed errors are 
few. Neither was prejudicial for the reasons already 
stated, including the expectation that the jury followed my 
instructions that atto rney argument is not evidence. Each 
argument was brief and singular in nature. There was no 
symbiotic effect across the two arguments because the 
missing -witness argument bolstered Bell’s contention that 
his requested accommodation was reasonable, whereas 
the credit card comment pertained to the separate issue of 
Bell’s damages. Additionally, while both arguments 
happened during phase 1 of the trial, O’Reilly Auto’s 
theory is that the prejudice from the credit card comment 
did not manifest until phase 2, wh ich further suggests an 
absence of synergy.  
  
 
 
C. Weight of the Evidence  O’Reilly Auto also argues that a new trial is appropriate 
because the jury’s award of punitive damages  was against 
the weight of the evidence. O’Reilly Auto does not 
challenge the weight of the evidence supporting the 
liability verdict. Because punitive damages were 
addressed in the second phase of the trial, I treat O’Reilly 
Auto as requesting a new trial  limited to punitive 
damages.  
  
After rehearsing the standard of review for 
weight -of-the-evidence challenges and the standard for 
awarding punitive damages under the ADA and MHRA, I 
recount the relevant evidence. I then evaluate whether a 
finding of punit ive liability was within the weight of that 
evidence for each of Bell’s two theories as to how 
O’Reilly Auto violated his right to a reasonable 
accommodation. The first theory is that O’Reilly Auto 
failed to accommodate Bell when it rejected his proposed 
accommodation. The second is that O’Reilly Auto failed 
to reasonably accommodate Bell by violating its duty to 
engage in the interactive process in good faith. I evaluate 
the availability of punitive damages for each theory 
because the jury did not differen tiate between the two 
when it found that O’Reilly Auto had violated the ADA 
and MHRA or when it found that O’Reilly Auto had 
satisfied the standard for punitive damages. The jury’s 
decision to award punitive damages must stand if the 
weight of the evidence  supports the availability of 
punitive damages under either of Bell’s theories of 
liability.  
  
 
 
1. Standard for Weight -of-the-Evidence Challenges  
“[A] district court ‘may set aside a jury’s verdict and 
order a new trial only if the verdict is so clearly against 
the weight of the e vidence as to amount to a manifest 
miscarriage of justice.’ ” Sailor Inc. F/V v. City of 
Rockland , 428 F.3d 348, 351 (1st Cir. 2005)  (quoting 
Rivera Castillo v. Autokirey, Inc. , 379 F.3d 4, 13 (1st Cir. 
2004 )). “Unlike its consideration of a motion for 
judgment as a matter of law, which requires the district 
court to construe the evidence in the light most favorable 
to the verdict, ‘a district court is free to independently 
weigh the evidence’ when assessi ng whether to grant a 
motion for a new trial.’ ” Sánchez v. Foley , 972 F.3d 1, 16 
(1st Cir. 2020)  (quoting Jennings v. Jones , 587 F.3d 430, 
436 (1st Cir. 2009) ). However, “[t]he mere fact that a 
contrary verdict may h ave been equally —or even more 
easily —supportable furnishes no cognizable ground for 
granting a new trial.” Luson I nt’l Distribs., Inc. v. 
Fabricating & Prod. Mach., Inc. , 966 F.2d 9, 12 (1st Cir. 
1992)  (quoting Freeman v. Package Mach. Co. , 865 F.2d 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  12 
 1331, 1333 -34 (1st Cir. 1988) ). “If the weight of the 
evidence is not grotesquely lopsided, it is irrelevant that 
the judge, were she sitting jury -waived, would likely have 
found the other way.” Id. (alteration omitted) (quoting 
Freeman , 865 F.2d  at 1334 ). 
  
 
 
2. Standard for Punitive Damages  
Punitive damages were available if Bell demonstrated that 
O’Reilly Auto “engaged in a discriminatory practice or 
discriminatory practices with malice or with reckless 
indifference to [his] federally protected rights.” 42 
U.S.C.A. § 1981a(b)(1) ; see also  5 M.R.S.A. § 
4613(2)(B)(8)(c)  (West 2022) (equivalent for rights 
protected under the MHRA); Burnett , 987 F.3d at 69  
(recognizing the parallel standards for punitive dam ages 
under the ADA and the MHRA). Under the ADA, this 
showing must be by the preponderance of the evidence, 
and, under the MHRA, clear and convincing evidence is 
required. Burnett , 987 F.3d at 69 . 
  
*14 “Malice and reckless indifference concern, not the 
employer’s awareness that it is discriminating, but the 
employer’s knowledge that it is acting in violation of 
federal law.” Id. (alteration omitted) (quoting McDonough 
v. City of Quincy , 452 F.3d 8, 24 (1st Cir. 2006) ). This is 
a subjective inquiry, Che v. Mass. Bay Transp. Auth. , 342 
F.3d 31, 41 (1st Cir. 2003) , and “an employer must at 
least discriminate in the face of a perceived risk  that its 
actions will violate federal law to be liable in punitive 
damages,” Kolstad v. Am. Dental Ass’n , 527 U.S. 526, 
536, 119 S.Ct. 2118, 144 L.Ed.2d 494 (1999) . Applying 
that standard, punitive damages are not available “when 
the employer is unaware of the federal law prohibiting 
discrimination, when the employer believes he can 
lawfully discriminate, whe n the underlying theory of 
discrimination is novel or poorly recognized, or when the 
employer believes its discrimination falls within a 
statutory exception.” Che, 342 F.3d at 42 . 
  
“[P]roof of a defendant’s awareness of the risk of 
violating federal law may be circumstantial.” 
Méndez -Matos v. Mun. of Guaynabo , 557 F.3d 36, 49 (1st 
Cir. 2009) . “[I]f a defendant’s conduct is ‘egregious or 
outrageous,’ it may suggest an awareness of its illegality.” 
Id. (quoting Powell v. Alexander , 391 F.3d 1, 19 (1st Cir. 
2004) ). “The existence of an extensive body of federal 
law on a particular issue also may suggest that the 
defendant must have been aware of the risk of violating 
that law.” Id. A person’s occupation may also be evidence 
that “she must have been aware that her conduct risked 
violating the plaintiff’s ... rights.” Id.; see also, e.g. , Perry v. Roy , Civil Action No. 10 -10769, 2016 WL 1948823, at 
*4 (D. Mass. May 3, 2016)  (“As nurses employed in a 
prison facility, both ... were surely aware that prisoners 
had a right to receive treatment for their serious medical 
needs.”).  
  
 
 
3. Weight -of-the-Evidence Analysis  
According to O’Reilly Auto, the evidence reflects that the 
company’s conduct was negligent at worst. In response, 
Bell argues that (1) O’Reilly Auto should not be 
permitted to assert this argument because too many of its 
citations to the record in its memorandum of law appear 
in footnotes and (2) because the argument is 
impermissibly similar to other, hypothetical arguments, 
such as the argument that the jury should not have been 
instructed on punitive damages or that the evidence in 
support of punitive liability was  insufficient as a matter of 
law. Bell also responds that the punitive damages verdict 
was supported by the weight of the evidence.  
  
I address the merits of O’Reilly Auto’s argument because 
O’Reilly Auto’s motion for a new trial sufficiently raises 
the we ight-of-the-evidence issue. Bell does not cite to any 
authority for the idea that a weight -of-the-evidence 
argument is precluded by the availability of other 
arguments that O’Reilly Auto does not pursue. For 
reasons that I will explain, I conclude that a f inding of 
reckless indifference was supported by the weight of the 
evidence for both of Bell’s theories of liability.  
  
 
a. Evidence Regarding Bell’s Accommodation Request 
and the Interactive Process  
At trial, there was agreement among Bell, his immediate 
supervisor District Manager Chris Watters, and Watters’s 
supervisor Regional Manager Nicholas Thomas that a 
store manager works both scheduled and unscheduled 
hours. Bell’s sch eduled hours, like the scheduled hours of 
other store employees, were set every Wednesday for the 
following week. Beyond those scheduled shifts, Bell’s 
off-schedule work included filling in for employees who 
were late or sick, responding to the store’s ala rm, and 
completing paperwork that he did not have time to finish 
during his scheduled hours.  
  
Bell testified that his requested accommodation was a cap 
on his weekly scheduled hours and that he had not 
requested restrictions on his unscheduled hours. 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  13 
 Acco rding to Bell, his requested accommodation would 
have worked like this: When the store’s staffing was 
being planned on Wednesdays for the following week, 
Bell would be scheduled for only 45 hours of shifts, and, 
if something went awry with the expected sch edule, he 
would work as necessary on an ad hoc basis beyond his 
scheduled hours. To that end, Bell testified that, under the 
proposed accommodation, he “could be scheduled during 
any day of the week any time of the day, and that in the 
event that something  was needed from me that would 
obviously be off of the schedule and therefore not covered 
by this restriction.” ECF No. 252 at 154:16 -20. 
  
*15 The testimony of Judy Weitzel, Bell’s psychiatric 
nurse practitioner, was some what ambiguous as to what 
accommodation she thought Bell needed. On the one 
hand, at times she seemed to suggest that she thought Bell 
should be able to pick and choose which of his 
unscheduled hours to perform. On the other hand, when 
she completed O’Reil ly Auto’s Fitness for Duty Form, 
she informed O’Reilly Auto that Bell needed a cap on his 
scheduled hours: “Mr. Bell because of his mental health 
issues should not be scheduled for more than 9 hours 5 
days a week.” Exhibit 2. As will be discussed in greate r 
detail below, she testified that she refused to alter that 
language later because “I felt that as I had written things 
that was adequate.” ECF No. 252 at 18:17 -18. She also 
testified that she and Bell had “mutually agreed” on the 
requested accommodation.  ECF No. 252 at 20:2. Bell 
testified that Weitzel phrased Bell’s accommodation 
request as a cap on his scheduled hours because he told 
her that he needed to have flexibility to address 
unforeseen circumstances.  
  
Despite the phrasing Weitzel employed in the Fitness for 
Duty Form —“Mr. Bell because of his mental health 
issues should not be scheduled for more than 9 hours 5 
days a week.” —O’Reilly Auto interpreted Bell’s 
accommodation request to mean that he was seekin g a 
45-hour weekly cap on his scheduled and unscheduled 
hours. Sherri Jones, O’Reilly Auto’s Leave of Absence 
Coordinator, asked District Manager Watters via email for 
his opinion as to whether such a restriction would be 
feasible, and he responded that it  would not work and that 
it would be better to transfer Bell to a less -demanding 
position. Jones responded that she and her supervisor, 
Leave of Absence Lead Allison Rush, agreed that Bell 
should be accommodated through reassignment.  
  
None of the witnesse s recalled any efforts by anyone at 
O’Reilly Auto to generate or discuss with Bell any 
alternative accommodations that would have kept Bell in 
his store manager role. Bell testified that he would have 
considered alternative accommodations, including increa sing his maximum number of scheduled hours. For 
her part, Weitzel testified that she is “not a very rigid 
person in terms of saying this is the maximum” and that 
she had previously allowed Bell to talk her up from eight 
to nine scheduled hours per day. ECF  No. 252 at 
17:23 -24. 
  
According to Leave of Absence Coordinator Jones, the 
only steps she customarily took between receiving a 
determination from a manager like Watters and 
responding with her agreement or disagreement was 
discussing that determination w ith Leave of Absence 
Lead Rush and occasionally checking the job description. 
She testified that the ultimate decision as to whether to 
grant an accommodation request was made together 
between the Leave of Absence Team and O’Reilly Auto’s 
operations -focuse d employees (e.g., store managers, 
district managers), who were asked by her team to 
evaluate the practicality of requested accommodations. 
Jones stated that she could not remember an occasion in 
which the Leave of Absence Team had disagreed with the 
opera tions -focused employees about whether a requested 
accommodation was workable. Rush similarly testified 
that neither she nor her supervisor, Team Member 
Relations and Leave of Absence Manager Donald Beck, 
had ever overruled a determination by a manager in t he 
field that an accommodation request should be denied. 
Regional Manager Thomas testified that he, not District 
Manager Watters, had the final say as to whether Bell’s 
scheduling accommodation would work. However, the 
evidence indicates that Jones receive d only Watters’s 
perspective before she and Rush concluded that Watters 
and Thomas needed to deny the requested 
accommodation and instead find another position to 
which Bell could be reassigned.  
  
Regarding Watters’s response to Jones about the 
feasibility  of Bell’s proposed accommodation, Watters 
acknowledged at trial that he had previously stated that he 
had viewed himself as “combatting” what Weitzel had 
written on the Fitness for Duty Form.4 Watters testified 
that this had been a poor choice of words, that he did not 
have a combative attitude toward the Fitness for Duty 
Form, and that what he had meant to communicate was 
that he did not feel qualified to dispute Weitzel’s 
representations about Bell’s disabilitie s and what type of 
reasonable accommodation Bell required. Bell testified 
that he and Watters had a rocky relationship, that Watters 
had previously and unfairly accused him of time theft, and 
that Watters had once cursed at him. Watters testified that 
he did not remember swearing at Bell but that he had been 
upset with him at the time and had expressed that.  
 4 
 Watters was asked:  
Well, do you remember being asked under oath 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  14 
 about whether or not when you got that note from 
Ms. Weitzel that —that you thought that you were 
supposed to be looking at that question in te rms of 
can the company do these accommodations and 
saying that I understood it was —I was combating 
Ms. Weitzel’s note; do you recall that —that sworn 
testimony?  
ECF No. 251 at 132:23 -133:4. He responded: “I 
recall —yes, I recall the vocabulary.” ECF No. 251 at 
133:5.  
 
 
*16 When Watters responded to Jones by email, he cited 
several reasons for opposing the accommodation 
requested by Bell which, as previously noted, he 
interpreted as a 45 -hour cap on both scheduled and 
unscheduled hours. Watters wrote that the 
accommodation w ould not work because store managers 
are required to be on call for unscheduled duties. At trial, 
Watters explained that the store manager is the contact 
person when a store alarm goes off and that if hourly 
employees miss work, the store manager should re port to 
cover some of those hours. However, Watters also 
testified that if an alarm went off or an employee was 
absent, there were other people who could be called to 
respond or provide the coverage if the store manager did 
not answer the phone or was unav ailable. Watters 
acknowledged that store managers did not need to tell him 
in advance if they would be unreachable during times 
they were not scheduled to work and that he had never 
disciplined a store manager for not answering a call 
related to an alarm.  
  
After receiving the message from Leave of Absence 
Coordinator Jones that she and Leave of Absence Lead 
Rush agreed with Watters that Bell’s accommodation 
request should be denied, Watters called Bell on June 10, 
2015, and told him that store managers mus t have open 
availability for unscheduled work. Bell told Watters that 
the accommodation request articulated on the Fitness for 
Duty Form was limited to his scheduled hours. The 
situation became in effect a standoff, with O’Reilly Auto 
insisting that it cou ld accommodate Bell only through 
transferring him from the manager’s position unless he 
obtained a revised Fitness for Duty Form more clearly 
articulating Weitzel’s support for Bell’s framing of his 
accommodation request. Bell tried to obtain a revised 
Fitness for Duty Form from Weitzel but ultimately 
reported back to Watters around June 18 that Weitzel had 
refused to provide one because, as Bell put it, “she felt 
that she was very specific about it being scheduled hours” 
and did not see the need to revise the accommodation. 
ECF No. 252 at 156:13 -14. Notably, Watters testified that 
Bell had communicated Weitzel’s viewpoint to him.  
  On June 18, 2015, Watters relayed that Weitzel would not 
revise the Fitness for Duty Form to Regional Manager 
Thomas and others . Jones responded the next day that 
Bell had told her the same thing and that he had 
mentioned that Weitzel agreed with what she had already 
written on the form. Bell repeatedly invited O’Reilly Auto 
to contact Weitzel so that she could confirm Bell’s 
interpretation of the Fitness for Duty Form. No one from 
O’Reilly Auto contacted her even though Leave of 
Absence Lead Rush testified that the Leave of Absence 
Team had previously contacted other medical providers 
for additional information that O’Reilly Auto thought it 
needed for other employees.  
  
Not having heard further from O’Reilly Auto regarding 
his proposed accommodation, Bell emailed Watters, 
Jones, and Thomas on July 13, 2015, to reiterate that, 
“according to Ms. Weitzel, [i]f necessary for me to work  
some hours beyond the scheduled 45 hours on occasion 
that that would be ok so long as my scheduled hours are 
limited to 45 hours per week” and that O’Reilly Auto 
should “[f]eel free to contact me or Ms. Weitzel to discuss 
my need for accommodation further .” 
  
Beck, the Team Member Relations and Leave of Absence 
Manager, who was Rush’s supervisor, agreed at trial that 
“initially it was understood by O’Reilly that Mr. Bell was 
asking for a very specific nine -hour-a-day, 
five-day-a-week restriction” but then “that evolved —or at 
least O’Reilly’s understanding of it evolved over time so 
that the request was for nine hours a day, five days a 
week, but possibly some additional work if he felt up to 
it.” ECF No. 253 at 68:14 -22. Beck also testified that, as a 
resul t of that evolved understanding, he was sure he 
would have asked Watters for an updated evaluation of 
whether that proposal was reasonable. But there is no 
record of any such request or reevaluation, something that 
Beck testified would normally be written down. Regional 
Manager Thomas similarly testified that he agreed that 
O’Reilly Auto’s understanding of Bell’s restrictions 
“changed over time” and that he was “made aware” that 
“Bell’s psychiatric nurse practitioner was not telling him 
that he was strictly  limited to nine hours a day, five days a 
week, but that that should be his schedule but he might be 
able to work some additional time if he felt up to it.” ECF 
No. 253 at 98:8 -12, 99:23 -100:6.  
  
*17 Bell testified that hi s proposed accommodation would 
have been reasonable because it was “approximately what 
I was working at the time as far as scheduled hours go”; 
he was able to complete his managerial duties “[t]he vast 
majority of the time” within his scheduled hours; and,  
when he could not, he would make up the difference 
during relatively short unscheduled periods.5 ECF No. 252 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  15 
 at 127:23, 149:2 -3. According to Bell, those relatively 
short unscheduled periods consisted of approximately two 
hours per month of additional work. Importantly, District 
Manager Watters, who was Bell’s im mediate supervisor, 
testified that an accommodation in which Bell’s 
scheduled hours were capped and Bell worked occasional 
unscheduled hours would have worked.  
 5 
 Bell testified that his typical schedule was from 
between 6:00 and 6:30 a.m. to between 4:30 and 5 p.m. 
Watters testified that Bell worked alternating weeks of 
(1) Monday through Friday 6:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and 
(2) Monday through Saturday 6:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
with a half -day somewhere in the week. According to 
Watters, Bell had a half hour for lunch and discretion to 
take other breaks. Bell testified that he had an hour for 
lunch and took two other fifteen -minute breaks and that 
this was reflected in the schedule. Bell agreed that 
when he worked Saturdays, he would  take a half -day 
off during the week.  
 
 
Notwithstanding Bell’s position that he had sought a 
45-hour cap on his scheduled hours only, the evidence at 
trial against the workability of Bell’ s request focused on 
whether it would have been reasonable to cap Bell’s 
scheduled and unscheduled hours at 45 or to cap Bell’s 
scheduled hours at 45 and to let Bell decide in the 
moment whether to fulfill his unscheduled duties 
depending on how he was fee ling psychologically. 
However, as Bell reiterated when he was asked whether it 
would have been within his rights to decline to work 
unscheduled hours if the store were unexpectedly 
short -staffed, “unscheduled hours” were “not covered by 
the accommodation t hat [he] was requesting.” ECF No. 
252 at 229:12 -14. Although there was ample testimony 
that store managers are expected to work more than 45 
scheduled hours per week, there was no specific 
testimony about why it would have been unreasonable to 
cap Bell’s s cheduled hours at 45 if his availability for 
unscheduled work was unchanged.  
  
While Bell, Watters, and Jones were at an impasse over 
Bell’s accommodation request, Bell and Watters 
discussed other possible positions, all of which were, in 
effect, demotions  from Bell’s store manager position. The 
first possibility they discussed was a retail service 
specialist position at $10 per hour at another store. When 
Watters called Bell with this offer on June 10, 2015, Bell 
declined because it was not financially fea sible given the 
low pay, the distance from his home, and the fact that he 
drives his wife back and forth from her work. Bell 
testified that accepting this position would have led to 
him making less than $21,000 per year, down from the 
approximately $42,000  he was making as a store 
manager. Bell also declined a July 7, 2015 offer for the same role at the same $10 -per-hour rate but at the Belfast 
store.  
  
Bell testified that he later discovered an online 
advertisement that O’Reilly Auto was seeking to hire an  
assistant manager at the Belfast store, and he mentioned 
the possibility of him stepping down to that role in his 
July 13 email to Watters, Jones, and Thomas. Watters 
testified that he then spoke to Bell and offered him the 
assistant manager position in B elfast at $12 per hour, at 
which point Bell said he would do it for $13 per hour. 
Bell testified that Watters said he would get back to him 
on whether $13 per hour was workable but that Bell never 
heard back. The conversation about the $12 -per-hour 
offer w as the last communication Bell received from 
O’Reilly Auto. A little over a month later, Bell received a 
COBRA insurance letter in the mail that contained a 
termination date, which indicated to him that he had been 
fired.  
  
*18 Watters testified that he did not have the authority 
alone to offer Bell $13 per hour for the assistant manager 
position and, when asked whether he had communicated 
Bell’s $13 proposal to anyone else, he responded that 
others had seen Bell’s email. H owever, Bell’s email does 
not mention the $13 -per-hour figure or any other hourly 
rate for the assistant manager job. Watters also testified 
that, based on that email, he thought that an internal 
conversation would have happened between himself and 
others about the prospect of paying Bell $13 per hour as 
the Belfast assistant manager, but he could not 
specifically remember such a discussion.  
  
Regarding the $12 -per-hour offer, Watters testified that it 
was high for the Belfast location given the economics o f 
that store, even though he had previously authorized Bell 
to hire an assistant manager for the same location at 
$13.50 per hour. According to Watters, $13.50 per hour 
was an appropriate offer for the prior candidate but $13 
per hour was too high for Bell  because the other candidate 
could have brought business with him and because the 
store had begun to perform worse since the $13.50 hourly 
rate was authorized. Bell testified that the store’s financial 
position was better when he was offered $12 than when 
the prior candidate had been offered $13.50.  
  
Regional Manager Thomas testified that there is a 
potential for conflict when former store managers are 
placed as assistant managers at the same stores in which 
they had been working and, for that reason, he p refers to 
locate store -managers -turned -assistant -managers at 
different stores. Nonetheless, Bell was offered the 
assistant manager role in Belfast at $12 per hour. Bell 
testified that he would have been a good choice for the 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  16 
 assistant manager role because of his experience in the 
industry and as a store manager there, his certifications, 
and because of his relationships with local customers.6 
 6 
 O’Reilly Auto eventually hired an assistant manager for 
a more -successful Bangor store at more than $12 per 
hour and had him fill -in at times as an assistant 
manager at the Belfast store. This individual had prior 
experience working for O’Reilly Auto in a similar 
capacity and was described by Watters as a potential 
future store manager.  
 
 
Leave of Absence Coordinator Jones and Leave of 
Absence Lead Rush testified that they had attended 
trainings on the ADA. Rush recalled that she had been 
trained “in general that the company needed to 
accommodate and look at accommodations for anybody ... 
unless it was an undue hardship.” ECF No. 253 at 13:6 -8. 
Rush also stated at trial that she had no reason to doubt 
her previous testimony that she had been trained that 
reassignment is an accommodation of last resort to be 
offered only if an employee cannot  be otherwise 
reasonably accommodated. Rush also testified that she 
agreed that the ADA “requires an interactive process 
between the employer and the employee” and is “more 
than just an employee asking for something and an 
employer just saying no.” ECF No.  253 at 42:14 -22. She 
also agreed that the interactive process “could mean 
responding and providing alternatives” and “saying well 
maybe if we tweak it or if we adjust this we can make it 
work.” ECF No. 253 at 42:18 -43:1. Rush acknowledged 
that O’Reilly Au to did not maintain a written policy 
outlining the steps required after an employee submits a 
request for an accommodation.  
  
As district manager, Watters was at one point responsible 
for 14 O’Reilly Auto stores in Maine. He had been trained 
on O’Reilly Au to’s protocols regarding accommodation 
requests and acted as Bell’s primary point of contact with 
O’Reilly Auto as the parties discussed the requested 
accommodation and possible demotions. He testified that 
he knew he was supposed to treat Bell’s accommoda tion 
request in a fair, reasonable, and objective manner.  
  
 
b. Analysis of the Weight of the Evidence Regarding 
Punitive Damages for Bell’s First Theory of Liability  
*19 Bell’s first theory at trial was that O’Reilly Auto 
violated his right to a reasonable accommodation when it 
declined his request for a scheduling accommodation, 
because his proposed accommodation was reasonable and 
O’Reilly Au to did not offer any other reasonable accommodation that would have kept Bell in his role as a 
store manager. See Bell, 972 F.3d at 24  (“[T]o make out a 
failure to accommodate claim, a plaintiff need only show 
that: ‘(1) he is a handicapped person within the meaning 
of the Act; (2) he is nonetheless qualified to perform the 
essential functions of the job (with or without reasonable 
accommodation); and (3) the employer knew of the 
disability but declined to reasonably accommodate it upon 
request.’ ” (quoting Sepúlveda -Vargas , 888 F.3d at 553 )); 
Williams v. HealthReach Network , No. Civ. 99 -0030 -B, 
2000 WL 760742, at *12 n.12 (D. Me. Feb. 22, 2000)  
(“Reassignment is the reasonable accommodation of last 
resor t and is required only after it has been determined 
that ... there are no effective accommodations that will 
enable the employee to perform the essential functions of 
his/her current position.” (alteration omitted) (quoting 
EEOC, Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable 
Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the ADA , 
No. 915.002, 2002 WL 31994335, at *20 (Oct. 17, 
2002) )). 
  
The facts here are somewhat analogous to those of 
Burnett v. Ocean Properties, Ltd. , 987 F.3d 57 . In 
Burnett , the First Circuit held, in the context of a motion 
for judgment as a matter of law, that there was sufficient 
evidence that an employer acted with reckless 
indifference to a perceived legal risk when the employer 
repeatedly “failed to follow up” with t he employee after 
receiving an accommodation request. Id. at 64, 70 . The 
employee had emailed his request for a push -button, 
automatic door; did not hear back; injured himself on the 
door he was seeking to modify; and still did not hear back 
after that incident was reported or after he filed a 
complaint with the Maine Hum an Rights Commission. Id. 
at 61 -62. 
  
The weight of the evid ence established that O’Reilly Auto 
refused to heed Bell’s repeated warnings that it was 
ignoring his true accommodation request, which was 
sufficiently reflected in the plain language of the Fitness 
for Duty Form: “Mr. Bell because of his mental health 
issues should not be scheduled for more than 9 hours 5 
days a week.” The distinction between a store manager’s 
scheduled and unscheduled duties was well understood at 
O’Reilly Auto. Bell repeatedly clarified his request and 
told O’Reilly Auto that Weitzel ag reed with his 
characterization of the Fitness for Duty Form. The jury 
could reasonably have interpreted Beck’s and Thomas’s 
testimony to mean O’Reilly Auto eventually realized that 
it was misinterpreting the Fitness for Duty Form but did 
not take any steps  to re -evaluate its position that Bell’s 
requested accommodation was unreasonable. In short, the 
weight of the evidence supported a finding that O’Reilly 
Auto failed to assess or respond to any version of Bell’s 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  17 
 request other than a proposed 45 -hour cap on  all 
scheduled and unscheduled hours, an interpretation that 
Bell repeatedly disavowed.  
  
Given the training that Leave of Absence Coordinator 
Jones and Leave of Absence Lead Rush received on 
accommodation requests and their key roles in O’Reilly 
Auto’s co nsensus -driven process between the Leave of 
Absence Team and managers in the field, the weight of 
the evidence supports the conclusion that O’Reilly Auto 
perceived a risk that refusing to evaluate Bell’s true 
accommodation request (and insisting on a revis ed Fitness 
for Duty Form when the original was sufficiently clear 
under the circumstances) violated Bell’s right to a 
reasonable accommodation. See Burnett v. Ocean 
Properties, Ltd. , 422 F. Supp. 3d 369, 386 (D. Me. 2019)  
(“[T]he record shows that two individuals in the corporate 
office of a large hotel company, one of whom works in 
the human resources dep artment, were aware of [the 
plaintiff’s accommodation] request [but did not respond], 
which supports a reasonable jury finding that the 
organization knew their actions were in violation of 
federal law.”); cf. McDonough , 452 F.3d at 23  (“In light 
of the important role that Title VII plays in modern 
personnel management, we cannot conclude on this 
record that a reaso nable jury would be compelled to find 
that these [high -ranking department officials involved in 
personnel management] were unaware that retaliating 
against an employee for assisting with another 
employee’s sexual harassment claim violates federal 
law.”).  
  
*20 Additionally, it would have been within the weight of 
the evidence for the jury to conclude that O’Reilly Auto’s 
insistence on evaluating and rejecting an interpretation of 
a disabled employee’ s accommodation request that he had 
repeatedly disavowed was egregious misconduct and thus 
O’Reilly Auto recognized the risk that its conduct would 
violate the law. See Kolstad , 527 U.S. at 539, 119 S.Ct. 
2118  (“[P]ointing to evidence of an employer’s egregious 
behavior would provide one means of satisfying the 
plaintiff’s burden to ‘demonstrate’ that the emplo yer 
acted with the requisite ‘malice or reckless indifference.’ 
” (alterations omitted) (quoting 42 U.S.C.A. § 
1981a(b)(1) )); cf. Burnett , 422 F. Supp. 3d at 386  
(“[R]epeatedly ignoring a paraplegic employee’s request 
for an accommodation to allow him to more easily access 
his workplace could be viewed by a jury as the type of 
egregious misconduct that shows [the defendant] was 
aware it risked violating [the plaintiff’s] rights in failing 
to accommodate him.”).  
  
The foregoing conclusions are not altered by the 
somewhat ambiguous phrasing of Bell’s accommodation request contained within his final email to O’Reilly Auto. 
Given the wording of the Fitness for Duty Form and 
Bell’s testimony that he repeatedly described his 
accommodation request to O’Reilly Auto as a cap on his 
scheduled hours without any limitations on his ability to 
perform his unscheduled duties, the evidence is not 
grotesquely lopsided against finding (1) that O’Reilly 
Auto was sufficiently on notice of the accommodation 
request that Bell described at trial and (2) that O’Reilly 
Auto perceived a risk that it was violating Bell’s right to a 
reasonable accommodation by insisting that Bell obtain a 
revised Fitness for Duty Form when the original was 
sufficiently clear. See Luson , 966 F.2d at 12  (“If the 
weight of the evidence is not grotesquely lopsided, it is 
irrelevant that the judge, were she sitting jury -waived, 
would likely have found the other way.” (alteration 
omitted) (quoting Freeman , 865 F.2d at 1334 )). 
  
Nor is the preceding analysis disturbed by Weitzel’s trial 
testimony that she believed that Bell should pick and 
choose his unscheduled  duties depending on how he was 
feeling. O’Reilly Auto did not communicate with Weitzel 
prior to Bell’s termination and did not directly seek or 
receive her opinion regarding Bell’s unscheduled hours. 
Additionally, the jury could have reasonably accepted 
Bell’s testimony over Weitzel’s as to what the two of 
them agreed to or interpreted Weitzel’s testimony as 
consistent with Bell’s. Thus, Weitzel’s trial testimony 
does not undermine the conclusion that, at the point in 
time that Bell was terminated, it was within the weight of 
the evidence for O’Reilly Auto to have perceived the risk 
that it was operating in violation of the ADA and MHRA.7 
 7 
 O’Reilly Auto does not challenge the weight of the 
evidence as to liability; however, to the extent that it is 
logically necessary to address that issue as to Bell’s 
first theory of liability in order to conclude that punitive 
liability was within the weight of the evidence for this 
theory of liability, I conclude as follows. It would have 
been within the weight of the evidence for the jury to 
find that O’Reilly Auto fa iled to reasonably 
accommodate Bell when it insisted on a revised Fitness 
for Duty Form because the evidence was not 
grotesquely lopsided against a finding that the 
requested accommodation was reasonable and had been 
communicated with sufficient clarity. See Tobin v. 
Liberty Mut. Ins. , 553 F.3d 121, 129 (1st Cir. 2009)  
(noting that an accommodation request must  be 
sufficiently direct and specific to provide notice to the 
employer); EEOC, Enforcement Guidance , 2002 WL 
31994335,  at *8  (“An employer cannot ask for 
documentation when ... the individual has already 
provided the employer with sufficient information to 
substantiate that s/he has an ADA disability and needs 
the reasonable accommodation requested.”).  
 
 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  18 
  
c. Analysis of the Weight of the Evidence Regarding 
Punitive Damages for Bell’s Second Theory of 
Liability  
*21 Bell’s second theory as to how  O’Reilly Auto 
violated his right to a reasonable accommodation is that 
O’Reilly Auto violated its duty to engage in the 
interactive process in good faith and that a reasonable 
accommodation could have been identified if only 
O’Reilly Auto had acted in goo d faith.  
  
An employer violates the right to a reasonable 
accommodation if it has a duty to engage in an i nteractive 
process with an employee who requests an 
accommodation and the employer fails to engage in good 
faith. See EEOC v. Kohl’s Dep’t Stores, Inc. , 774 F.3d 
127, 132 (1st Cir. 2014)  (“[A]n employee’s request for 
accommodation sometimes creates ‘a duty on the part of 
the employer to engage in an interactive process.’ ... We 
must emphasize that it is impera tive that both the 
employer and the employee have a duty to engage in good 
faith ....” (footnote omitted) (quoting Enica , 544 F.3d at 
338)); Jacques v. Clean -Up Grp., Inc. , 96 F.3d 506, 515 
(1st Cir. 1996)  (“There may well be situations in which 
the employer’s failure to engage in an informal interactive 
process would constitute a failure to provide r easonable 
accommodation that amounts to a violation of the 
ADA.”). The touchstone of the “case -by-case” analysis, 
Kohl’s , 774 F.3d at 132 n.5  (quoting Kvorjak v. Maine , 
259 F.3d 48, 52 (1st Cir. 2001) ), as to whether an 
employer has a duty to engage in the interactive process 
in good faith is what a reasonable employer would have 
done, see Jacques , 96 F.3d at 515  (“[C]ases involving 
reasonable accommodation turn heavily upon their facts 
and an appraisal of the reasonableness of the parties’ 
behavior.”); Calero -Cerezo v. U.S. Dep’t of Just. , 355 
F.3d 6, 24 -25 (1st Cir. 2004)  (“In sum, the record offers 
sufficient ev idence from which a factfinder could 
conclude that the defendants, being aware of plaintiff’s 
disability and of her request for accommodation, failed to 
make a reasonable response.”); 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, app. 
(“Once an individual with a disability has requ ested 
provision of a reasonable accommodation, the employer 
must make a reasonable effort to determine the 
appropriate accommodation.”). “[L]iability for failure to 
engage in an interactive process depends on a finding that 
the parties could have discovere d and implemented a 
reasonable accommodation through good faith efforts.” 
Trahan v. Wayfair Me., LLC , 957 F.3d 54 , 67 (1st Cir. 
2020) . 
  
The trial evidence supports a finding that O’Reilly Auto perceived and was recklessly indifferent to the risk that it 
was violating its duty to engage in the interactive process 
in good faith. Both Jones and Rush were trained on the 
ADA, and Rush specifically testified that she understood 
the need to engage in an interactive process. Despite 
Bell’s repeated clarifications, O’Reilly Auto insisted on 
evaluating Bell’s accommodation request as if he were 
seeking a 45 -hour cap on both  scheduled and unscheduled 
hours. There is no evidence that O’Reilly Auto ever 
re-evaluated Bell’s request after the company’s 
understanding of the request evolved. Although O’Reilly 
Auto had contacted medical providers to obtain additional 
information abo ut other employees’ accommodation 
requests, it did not do this for Bell despite numerous 
invitations. After O’Reilly Auto decided that its version 
of Bell’s accommodation request was unworkable, there 
were no efforts internally or with Bell to develop an 
alternative accommodation that would have allowed him 
to continue as the store manager in Belfast. The jury 
could have reasonably found that the first reassignment 
that O’Reilly Auto offered Bell —a two -step demotion 
with more than a 50% pay cut —was not a se rious offer 
and that O’Reilly Auto continued in this vein when it later 
offered Bell $12 per hour to be the assistant manager in 
Belfast. Further, Bell was the one who had to raise with 
O’Reilly Auto the fact that the company was hiring an 
assistant manage r at the Belfast location. It was within the 
weight of the evidence for the jury to have found that 
O’Reilly Auto received Bell’s $13 -per-hour counteroffer 
but never responded. Finally, Bell learned that the 
interactive process had ended only when he recei ved his 
COBRA notice in the mail indicating to him that he had 
been fired.8 
 8 
 O’Reilly Auto does not challenge the weight of the 
evidence as to liability; however, to the extent that it is 
logically necessary to address that issue as to Bell’s 
second theory of liability in order to conclude that 
punitive liability was within the weigh t of the evidence 
for this theory of liability, I conclude as follows. It 
would have been within the weight of the evidence for 
the jury to find that O’Reilly Auto had a duty under the 
circumstances to engage in the interactive process and 
failed to do so in good faith. It is also within the weight 
of the evidence to conclude that the parties could have 
identified the reasonable accommodation of a 45 -hour 
cap on Bell’s scheduled hours with no restrictions on 
his unscheduled hours, or the reasonable 
accommod ation of a higher cap on Bell’s scheduled 
hours with no restrictions on his unscheduled hours.  
 
 
*22 Thus, the weight of the evidence supports a finding 
that O’ Reilly Auto perceived but recklessly disregarded 
its duty to engage in the interactive process in good faith 
even without considering the conduct of District Manager 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  19 
 Watters. Moreover, although the evidence may be subject 
to other interpretations, it is no t against the weight of the 
evidence to conclude that Watters “combat[ted]” Bell’s 
accommodation request by mischaracterizing the scope of 
Bell’s unscheduled duties to the Leave of Absence Team. 
It would also be within the weight of the evidence to 
conclud e that Watters never communicated Bell’s 
$13-per-hour counteroffer to anyone else at O’Reilly 
Auto.  
  
Citing Kolstad , 527 U.S. 526, 119  S.Ct. 2118 , O’Reilly 
Auto argues that Watters’s conduct cannot be considered 
when deciding whether punitive damages were available 
because he was not a member of O’Reilly Auto’s upper 
management. But Kolstad  did not announce such a 
standard. It is enough that the employee “act[ ] in a 
managerial capacity,” Romano v. U -Haul Int’l , 233 F.3d 
655, 669 (1st Cir. 2000)  (citing Kolstad , 527 U.S. at 
542-43, 119 S.Ct. 2118 ), which calls for a fact -intensive 
inquiry focused on the employee’s type of authority and 
amount of discretion, Kolstad , 527 U.S. at 543, 119 S.Ct. 
2118 . The employee must be “important” but “perhaps 
need not be the employer’s ‘top management, officers, or 
directors,’ to be acting ‘in a managerial capacity.’ ” Id. 
(quoting Schlueter & K. Redden, Punitive Damages  § 
4.4(B)(2)(a) (3d ed. 1995)).  
  
The evidence supports a finding that District M anager 
Watters was acting in a managerial capacity with respect 
to Bell’s accommodation request. He was Bell’s 
immediate supervisor and, as a practical matter, his 
determination that Bell’s requested accommodation was 
unworkable was conclusive. He was also  Bell’s primary 
contact at O’Reilly Auto during the interactive process. 
Nor is the evidence grotesquely lopsided against a finding 
that Watters perceived a risk that he was violating the 
duty to engage in the interactive process in good faith. He 
oversaw many stores as district manager; he testified that 
he understood that he was supposed to review Bell’s 
accommodation request in a fair, reasonable, and 
objective manner; he had been trained on O’Reilly Auto’s 
protocols for handling accommodation requests; and 
O’Reilly Auto had essentially delegated to him 
responsibility for conducting the interactive process. 
Finally, the jury could have fairly concluded that it is 
egregious behavior for a supervisor to adopt a combative 
approach to a disabled employee’s ac commodation 
request, which is additional evidence that Watters 
perceived the risk that his conduct might violate the ADA 
and MHRA.  
  
Thus, Watters’s conduct, while not essential to my 
conclusion that it was within the weight of the evidence 
for the jury to  find that O’Reilly Auto acted in the face of a perceived risk that its conduct would violate the duty to 
engage in the interactive process in good faith, supports 
the same conclusion. So long as the evidence in support 
of the jury’s verdict is not “grotes quely lopsided,” it must 
be affirmed.9 Luson , 966 F.2d at 12  (quoting Freeman , 
865 F.2d at 1334 ). For the reasons I have explained, that 
standard is met here.  
 9 
 In reaching my conclusions regarding the weight of the 
evidence for both of Bell’ s theories of liability, I have 
taken into account the clear -and-convincing -evidence 
standard for punitive liability under the MHRA. See 
Burnett , 987 F.3d at 69 . 
 
 
 
 
D. Excessive Punitive Damages  
Lastly, O’Reilly Auto argues that the jury’s $750,000 
punitive damages award violates federal and Maine 
common law and constitution al due process.10 Under the 
common -law standard, “ a district court will not disturb 
the jury’s compensatory or punitive damages award 
unless the award is “ ‘grossly excessive,” “inordinate,” 
“shocking to the conscience of the court,” or “so high that 
it would be a denial of justice to permit it to stand.”  ’ ” 
Mercado -Berrios v. Cancel -Alegría , 611 F.3d 18, 28 (1st 
Cir. 2010)  (quoting Wagenmann v. Adams , 829 F.2d 196, 
215-16 (1st Cir. 1987) ). In contrast, due process 
considerations prohibit “grossly excessive or arbitr ary 
punishments,” and courts must at least consider the 
following “guideposts”: “(1) the degree of 
reprehensibility of the defendant’s misconduct; (2) the 
disparity between the actual or potential harm suffered by 
the plaintiff and the punitive damages awa rd; and (3) the 
difference between the punitive damages awarded by the 
jury and the civil penalties authorized or imposed in 
comparable cases.” State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. v. 
Campbell , 538 U.S. 408, 416, 418, 123 S.Ct. 1513, 155 
L.Ed.2d 585 (2003) . The First Circuit has examined at 
least the first and third guideposts of the due process 
analysis when applying the federal common -law test. 
Mercado -Berrios , 611 F.3d at 30 . “When evaluating a 
motion for a new trial on damages, or for remittitur, the 
court considers the evidence in the light most favorable to 
the prevailing party.” Rodríguez -Valentin , 27 F.4th at 22 . 
The same is true for a due process challenge. Romano , 
233 F.3d at 673 ; see also Rodríguez -Marín v. 
Rivera -González , 438 F.3d 72, 84 -85 (1st Cir. 2006)  (“A 
punitive damages award will stand unless we find it 
‘certain that the amount in question exceeds that 
necessary to punish and deter the alleged misconduct.’ ”  
(quoting Romano , 233 F.3d at 672 )). 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  20 
  10 
 Courts must analyze the remittitur of damages for 
state-law claims in accordance with state -law standards 
when those standa rds depart substantively from the 
federal common -law remittitur standard. Suero -Algarín 
v. CMT Hosp. Hima San Pab lo Caguas , 957 F.3d 30, 
40, 45 (1st Cir. 2020) . At the hearing on July 20, 2022, 
the parties agreed that the Maine common -law standard 
for remittitur is the same as the federal common -law 
standard, so I apply only the federal common -law 
remittitur standard.  
 
 
*23 When a defendant raises both common -law and due 
process arguments that an award is excessive,  a court 
must evaluate the common -law argument first. Sony BMG 
Music Ent. v. Tenenbaum , 660 F.3d 487, 490 (1s t Cir. 
2011) . However, O’Reilly Auto’s motion presents its due 
process arguments first and then incorporates those 
arguments into its common -law argument by reference. 
Bell does the same. Because the parties have organized 
their discussions around the d ue process guideposts, I 
begin by recapping their arguments and by evaluating the 
merits of their disputes on each sub -issue. Then I apply 
the federal -common law standard. Because I conclude 
that remittitur is inappropriate, I next apply the 
constitutional  standard. I conclude that the punitive 
damages do not violate due process.  
  
 
 
1. The Parties’ Arguments  
a. Reprehensibility  
In the context of due process challenges, the Supreme 
Court has advised that “[t]he most important indicium of 
the reasonableness of a punitive damages award is the 
degree of reprehensibility of the defendant’s conduct.” 
State Farm , 538 U.S. at 419, 123 S.Ct. 1513  (quoting 
BMW of N. Am., Inc. v. Gore , 517 U.S. 559, 575, 116 
S.Ct. 1589, 134 L.Ed.2d 809 (1996) ). The parties’ 
briefing tracks th e five factors that the Supreme Court has 
identified as relevant when evaluating reprehensibility: 
whether “[1] the harm caused was physical as opposed to 
economic; [2] the tortious conduct evinced an 
indifference to or a reckless disregard of the health o r 
safety of others; [3] the target of the conduct had financial 
vulnerability; [4] the conduct involved repeated actions or 
was an isolated incident; and [5] the harm was the result 
of intentional malice, trickery, or deceit, or mere 
accident.” Id. “The existence of any one of these factors 
weighing in favor of a plaintiff may not be sufficient to sustain a punitive damages award; and the absence of all 
of them renders any award suspe ct.” Id. 
  
 
i. Physical Harm  
O’Reilly Auto contends that its conduct resulted in no 
more than emotional harm to Bell that did not manifest as 
physical symptoms. However, the trial record, viewed 
most favorably to Bell, reveals that Bell was physically 
harmed because his Tourette syndrome  tics are painful 
(notwithstan ding pain -reducing medications) and they 
increase in frequency with stress and sleep deprivation. 
Dr. Robinson (a psychologist and Bell’s expert witness) 
testified that O’Reilly Auto’s decision not to let Bell 
return to work as a store manager caused Bell’ s symptoms 
to spiral and interfered with Bell’s sleep. Although 
O’Reilly Auto’s conduct was nonviolent, the jury could 
have reasonably concluded that O’Reilly Auto’s failure to 
accommodate Bell increased the frequency of his painful 
tics. See Williams v. First Advantage LNS Screening Sols. 
Inc., 947 F.3d 735, 751 (11th Cir. 2020)  (concluding that 
this factor weighed in favor of the plaintiff when 
“emotional distress manifested itself in physical 
symptoms”; namely, “diminished appetite, insomnia, and 
headaches”).  
  
 
ii. Indifference to Health or Safety  
O’Reilly Auto states without explanation that it did not 
exhibit indifference to Bell’s health or safety. Bell asserts 
that O’Reilly Auto knew that Bell suffered from 
depres sion, Tourette  syndrome , and 
attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder and required an 
accommodation but declined to reasonably accommodate 
him, causing his symptoms to worsen. Bell points to 
testimony that he began to experience suicidal ideation  
after O’Reilly Auto prevented h im from returning to 
work.  
  
I have already decided that it is within the weight of the 
evidence to conclude that O’Reilly Auto exhibited 
reckless indifference toward the risk that the company 
was violating Bell’s right to a reasonable accommodation, 
which  amounted to indifference to his health. 
Additionally, given that O’Reilly Auto understood that 
Bell experienced depression, the evidence viewed most 
favorably to Bell supports the inference that O’Reilly 
Auto acted with indifference to Bell’s health and s afety 
by recklessly flouting federal and state 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  21 
 disability -discrimination laws when it was foreseeable 
that doing so would harm Bell’s mental health.  
  
 
iii. Financial Vulnerabi lity 
*24 O’Reilly Auto concedes there is “some” evidence that 
Bell was financially vulnerable but contends that Bell’s 
counsel exaggerated that evidence when he stated that  
Bell had maxed out his credit cards and was still dealing 
with lingering credit card debt. ECF No. 262 at 30. I have 
already addressed that argument and concluded that this 
misstatement of the evidence was not prejudicial. At this 
point, the proper inquir y is whether the evidence viewed 
most favorably to Bell indicated that he was financially 
vulnerable.  
  
Bell points to his testimony that it was financially trying 
when his disability insurance benefits expired and he had 
to pay for his health insurance ou t of pocket. Bell would 
have accepted a pay cut from his store manager salary of 
around $42,000 to a $13 -per-hour assistant manager 
position to stay employed at the Belfast store. O’Reilly 
Auto did not budge from its offer of $12 per hour. The 
jury could r easonably infer that Bell’s willingness to 
accept a reduction in pay reflected that his financial 
circumstances were dire. The parties also stipulated that 
Bell did not surpass his O’Reilly Auto salary of $42,000 
until March 2018, two and a half years afte r he was 
terminated. Viewed most favorably to Bell, the evidence 
established that Bell was financially vulnerable because 
he had few financial resources and little negotiating 
leverage or earning power in the employment market.  
  
 
iv. Repetition  
O’Reilly Auto argues that there is no record evidence that 
its failure to accommodate Bell was anything other than 
an isolated incident.  Bell responds that Rush’s testimony 
established that the Leave of Absence Team was 
insufficiently trained and failed to properly review the 
determinations about the reasonableness of proposed 
accommodations that it solicited from managers in the 
field.  
  
Regardless of what the evidence revealed about the 
competency of the Leave of Absence Team, there was no 
evidence that O’Reilly Auto inappropriately rejected any 
accommodation request other than Bell’s or failed to 
appropriately engage in the interactive p rocess with other employees. Any inference that O’Reilly Auto failed to 
accommodate other employees is pure speculation.  
  
 
v. Malice, Trickery, or Deceit  
O’Reilly Auto argues that, even if its conduct were 
viewed as recklessly indifferent, that does not amount to 
malice or intent to deceive. Bell insists that there was 
substantial trickery or deceit by Watte rs in the form of 
false information that he provided to the Leave of 
Absence Team about Bell’s duties and the manner in 
which Watters negotiated with Bell over possible 
demotions.  
  
Viewed in the light most favorable to Bell, the evidence 
showed that Watte rs’s actions constitute malice, trickery, 
or deceit. In particular, the jury could have supportably 
found that Watters viewed himself as “combatting” Bell’s 
accommodation request, and that he did combat it by (1) 
exaggerating Bell’s unscheduled duties and (2) by telling 
Bell that he would get back to him about the $13 -per-hour 
counteroffer but then failing to raise the issue with anyone 
else within O’Reilly Auto and failing to respond to Bell.  
  
Taking all f ive reprehensibility factors together, they 
weigh against remittitur. I now turn to the second 
guidepost.  
  
 
b. Disparity Between Punitive Damages and Actual 
Harm  
O’Reilly Auto  argues that anything more than a 1 to 1 
ratio between Bell’s punitive and compensatory damages 
is unreasonable because Bell’s compensatory award was 
substantial. Bell responds that the ratio between his 
punitive damages and his compensatory damages plus h is 
backpay is presumptively constitutional because it is in 
the single digits and that his compensatory award was 
relatively low.  
  
*25 “The second and perhaps most commonl y cited 
indicium of an unreasonable or excessive punitive 
damages award is its ratio to the actual harm inflicted on 
the plaintiff.” Gore , 517 U.S. at 580, 116 S.Ct. 1589 . The 
actual harm inflicted on Bell is the sum of his 
compensatory damages and backpay, which together 
reflect the jury’s judgment of the award necessary to 
make him whole.11 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  22 
  11 
 See Tse v. UBS Fin. Servs., Inc. , 568 F. Supp. 2d 274, 
314 (S.D.N.Y. 2008)  (“Gore  instructs that the Court 
should first consider the  ratio of the punitive damages 
award to compensatory damages, including back 
pay.”); Chopra v. Gen. Elec. Co., 527 F. Supp. 2d 230, 
245 (D. Conn. 2007)  (“The Court finds that plaintiff’s 
harm constitutes his emotional harm and his economic 
loss as reflected in his front pay and back pay 
awards.”); Baker v. John Morrell & Co. , 266 F. Supp. 
2d 909, 962 (N.D. Iowa 2003)  (comparing punitive 
damages to compensatory damages plus backpay).  
 
 
The Supreme Court has “been reluctant to identify 
concrete constitutional limits on the ratio between harm, 
or potential harm, to the plaintiff and the puni tive 
damages award.” State Farm , 538 U.S. at 424, 123 S.Ct. 
1513 . However, “few awards exceeding a single -digit 
ratio between punitive and compensatory damages[ ] to a 
significant degree” —in other words, punitive damage 
awards significantly more than ten times greater than the 
plaintiff’s actual harm —“will satisfy due process.” Id. at 
425, 123 S.Ct. 1513 . Indeed, “an award of more than four 
times the amount of compensatory damages might be 
close to the line of constitutional impropriety.” Id. (citing 
Pac. Mut. Life Ins. v. Haslip , 499 U.S. 1, 23 -24, 111 S.Ct. 
1032, 113 L.Ed.2d 1  (1991) ). The First Circuit has noted 
that a 3 to 1 ratio does not approach an impermissible 
punitive award, Tapalian v. Tusino , 377 F.3d 1, 8 -9 (1st 
Cir. 2004) , and, in one instance, approved of a 19 to 1 
ratio, Romano , 233 F.3d at 672 . 
  
Relatively large punitive awards are more tolerable when 
“a particularly egregious act has resulted in only a small 
amount of e conomic damages.” State Farm , 538 U.S. at 
425, 123 S.Ct. 1513  (quoting Gore , 517 U.S. at 582, 116 
S.Ct. 1589 ). Conversely, “[w]hen compensatory damages 
are substantial, then a lesser ratio, perhaps only equal to 
compensatory damages, can reach the outermost limit of 
the due process guarantee.” Id. 
  
The ratio of punitive damages to Bell’ s actual harm is 
6.41 to 1. That ratio is, of course, not significantly greater 
than 10 to 1. However, it is above 4 to 1, the threshold 
that the Supreme Court has described as close to the line 
of constitutional impropriety. The award of $117,000 in 
compe nsatory damages plus backpay is neither especially 
small in relation to the egregiousness of O’Reilly Auto’s 
conduct nor substantial enough to suggest that a 1 to 1 
ratio is the appropriate benchmark. For these reasons, the 
ratio of 6.41 to 1 places Bell’s  punitive damage award on 
the higher end of what is permissible but not dramatically 
so. 
  
 c. Notice of Possible Civil Penalties  
“Comparing the punitive damages award and the civil or 
criminal penalties that could be imposed for comparable 
misconduct provides a third indicium of excessiveness.” 
Gore , 517 U.S. at 583, 116 S.Ct. 1589 . Under this 
guidepost, courts must “accord ‘substantial deference’ to 
legislative judgments concerning appropriate sanctions 
for the conduct at issue.” Id. (quoting Browning -Ferris 
Indus. of Vt., Inc. v. Kelco Disposal, Inc. , 492 U.S. 257, 
301, 1 09 S.Ct. 2909, 106 L.Ed.2d 219 (1989)  (O’Connor, 
J., concurring in part and dissenting in part)). “Decided 
cases are relevant, but positive law —statutes and 
regulations —are even more critical.” Zimmerman v. 
Direct Fed. Credit Union , 262 F.3d 70, 83 (1st Cir. 2001) . 
“[T]he most prudent choice would be to follow the 
judgments embedded in the text of the statute up on which 
the suit is founded.” Id. “Accordingly, a punitive damages 
award that comports with a statutory cap provides strong 
evidence that a defendant’ s due process rights have not 
been violated.” Romano , 233 F.3d at 673 . “Moreover, a 
reviewing court should  search for comparisons solely to 
determine whether a particular defendant was given fair 
notice as to its potential liability for particular 
misconduct, not to determine an acceptable range into 
which an award might fall.” Zimmerman , 262 F.3d at 83 . 
  
*26 O’Reilly Auto contends that it did not have notice 
that a jury might award $750,000 in punitive damages. 
More specifically, O’Reilly Auto cites to the applicable 
$300,000 cap for combined compensatory and punitive 
damages from the ADA and the applicable $500,000 cap 
on combined compensatory and punitive damages from 
the MHRA.12 See 42 U.S.C.A. § 1981a(b)(3)(D) ; 5 
M.R.S.A. § 4613(2)(B)(8)(e)(iv) . I pre viously ruled that 
O’Reilly Auto had waived these statutory damage caps by 
failing to plead them as affirmative defenses. See Bell v. 
O’Reilly Auto Enters. , No. 1:16 -cv-00501, 2022 WL 
782784, at *4 (D. Me. Mar. 15, 2022) . Nonetheless, 
O’Reilly Auto contends that the existence of these caps 
weighs in favor of reducing the jury’s verdict because 
they are relevant to the  issue of notice: O’Reilly Auto had 
notice that the combined total recovery of compensatory 
and punitive damages would not exceed $500,000 (i.e., 
the higher of the two caps) because the caps do not stack. 
Bell responds that the two caps do stack and thus B ell’s 
punitive award is smaller than the $800,000 combined 
cap, meaning that O’Reilly Auto had sufficient notice of 
the possibility of a $750,000 punitive award.  
 12 
 I note for clarity that the ADA’s and MHRA’s caps do 
not include backpay. See 42 U.S.C.A. § 1981a(b)(2) ; 5 
M.R.S.A. § 4613(2)(B)(8)(d) . 
 
 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  23 
 O’Reilly Auto raises this issue in a short paragraph in its 
memorandum of law with no citations except to two of its 
prior briefs. O’Reilly Auto previously raised the issue of 
how the ADA’s and the MHRA’s caps interact when it 
moved to reduce the verdict to the statutory maximum, 
but I did not reach that issue because I concluded that 
these affirmative defenses had been waived. Id. I address 
the issue now because it was previously fully briefed and 
is relevant to the excessiveness analysis.  
  
O’Reilly Auto focuses on the fact that, if Bell were 
permitted to recover $300,000 under the ADA and 
$500,000 under the MHRA, it would be impossible to 
allocate the $750,000 in punitive damages without 
assigning some punitive damages to each claim. Citing 
the rule against double recovery , O’Reilly Auto argues it 
would be an impermissible double punishment  if Bell 
were awarded punitive damages under the ADA and the 
MHRA for the same misconduct. For this point, O’Reilly 
Auto relies on out -of-circuit authority. See, e.g. , Mason v. 
Okla. Tpk. Auth. , 115 F.3d 1442, 1459 (10th Cir. 1997)  
(“Although the rule against double recovery arises most 
often in the context of compensatory damages, it applies 
to punitive damages as well.” (footnote omitted)), 
overruled on other grounds by  TW Telecom Holdings Inc. 
v. Carolina Internet Ltd. , 661 F.3d 495, 497 (10th Cir. 
2011) . 
  
“[T]he law abhors duplicative recoveries.” Dopp v. HTP 
Corp. , 947 F.2d 506, 517 (1st Cir. 1991) . “That is to say, 
a plaintiff who is injured by reason of a defendant’s 
behavior is, for the most part, entitled to be made 
whole —not to be enriched.” Id. In Sanchez v. Puerto Rico 
Oil Co. , 37 F.3d 712, 725 (1st Cir. 1994) , the First Circuit 
stated, howeve r, that “the considerations that operate to 
bar multiple recoveries are conceptually and legally 
inapplicable to punitive damages.” That is because 
“[p]unitive damages are directed at deterring and 
punishing defendants ; they are not designed to 
compensate plaintiffs for losses.” Id. Thus, the First 
Circuit held that it was permissible to punish a defendant 
for the same conduct twice: once with punitive liquidated 
damages under a federa l statute and again by applying a 
statutory doubling provision to compensatory damages 
under a Puerto Rican statute. Id. 
  
O’Reilly Auto argues that this portion of Sanchez  is dicta 
because the First Circuit suspected that the doubling 
mechanism was compensatory rather than punitive. But 
the court explicitly avoided deciding that issue of Puerto 
Rican law and instead approved the award because the 
award was acceptable even if the doubling had been 
punitive (and thus the defendant had been punished twice 
for the same misconduct). Id. The First Circuit has since described Sanchez  as having “held” that there is no 
freestanding prohibition against double punishment. 
Rodriguez -Torres v. Caribbean Forms Mfr., Inc. , 399 
F.3d 52, 67 (1st Cir. 2005) . 
  
*27 Given Sanchez , allocating some of the jury’s punitive 
damage award to Bell’s ADA claim and some to his 
MHRA claim does not constitute an impermissible double 
punishment because such a prohi bition does not exist in 
this circuit. Indeed, a court in this district rebuffed a 
double -punishment argument about these same two 
statutes. Burnett v. Ocean Props., Ltd. , 422 F. Supp. 3d 
400, 429 -30 (D.Me. 2019)  (rejecting the argument after 
holding that the issue had been waived).  
  
O’Reilly Auto attempts to distinguish Sanchez  by arguing 
that the statutes at issue here evince legislative intent to 
prohibit double punishment. In Sanchez , the court 
observed that “legislative intent” and “statute ... 
considerations” may limit punitive damages. 37 F.3d at 
725. The First Circuit has since reiterated that “statutory 
construction considerations” may prevent double 
punishment. Rodriguez -Torres , 399 F.3d at 67 . According 
to O’Reilly Auto, such statutory -construction 
considerations exist here because Congress and the Maine 
State Legislature enacted the caps in order to limit 
employers’ exposure to large damage awards.  
  
O’Re illy Auto’s statutory argument is untethered  from the 
text of the ADA and MHRA. The ADA’s cap limits only 
damages “awarded under this section.” 42 U.S.C.A. § 
1981a(b)(3) . The MHRA’s cap applies to damages 
awarded “under this subparagraph” and “under this 
section.” 5 M.R.S.A. § 4613(2)(B)(8)(e) . Neither statute 
(1) condition s the award of punitive damages on what 
punishments are imposed under other statutes or (2) limits 
punitive damages from other sources. Moreover, the First 
Circuit has in effect already concluded that § 1981a(b)(3)  
contains neither of those limitations with respect to 
compensatory damages. 399 F.3d at 65 -66. In 
Rodriguez -Torres , the court held that it was appropriate to 
divide the entirety of a $250,000 compensatory damages 
award between parallel federal and state claims 
notwithstanding the applicability of a $200,000 cap on 
damages under § 1981a(b)(3) . Id. There was no 
suggestion that the federal cap meant that t he award under 
the federal claim needed to shrink to offset the award 
under the state claim or vice versa.13 
 13 
 The meaning of the ADA’s damage -cap provision is 
especially important because, although O’ Reilly Auto 
does not specify which statute should bow to the other 
in order to achieve the proposed reduction to $500,000, 
O’Reilly Auto is likely making an argument about the 
interpretation of § 1981a(b)(3) ; namely, that the ADA 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  24 
 award shrinks to $0 in reaction to a $500,000 award 
under the MHRA. If O’Reilly Auto were instead 
arguing that that the MHRA award shrinks to $200,000 
to accommodate a  federal award of $300,000 (or that a 
$300,000 award under the ADA requires an MHRA 
award of $200,000), that would not solve O’Reilly 
Auto’s specific objection: the award of punitive 
damages under two statutes for the same misconduct.  
 
 
Additionally, the ADA’s savings clause provides that 
“[n]othing in this chapter shall be construed to invalidate 
or limit the remedies, rights, and procedures of ... any 
State or political subdivision of any State or jurisdiction 
that provides greater or equal protection fo r the rights of 
individuals with disabilities than are afforded by this 
chapter.” 42 U.S.C.A. § 12201(b)  (West 2022). That 
provision reveals Congress’s intent to allow awards in 
excess of the ADA’s caps, notwithstanding the 
congressional goal of limiting employers’ exposure to 
large awards. Finally, although the Fifth Circuit held that 
the cap imposed by a T exas statute was coextensive with 
the ADA’s cap, rather than additive, that result was 
implied by the fact that the state and federal cap 
provisions were “identical.” Giles v. Gen. Elec. Co. , 245 
F.3d 474, 492 (5th Cir. 2001) . The MHRA is 
distinguishable because the Maine Legislature imposed a 
$500,000 cap instead of duplicating the ADA’s $300,000 
limit, evinci ng legislative intent to do more than enshrine 
the ADA in state law. Accordingly, statutory -construction 
considerations do not foreclose allocating some of the 
jury’s punitive -damage award to each of Bell’s claims.  
  
*28 Indeed, First Circuit case law suggests exactly the 
opposite: that a district court should  allocate punitive 
damages across parallel federal and state claims to 
maximize a plaintiff’s recovery. In Rodriguez -Torres , a 
$200,000 cap under § 1981a(b)(3)(c)  applied to the 
plaintiff’s federal claim, while a parallel Puerto Rican 
claim had no cap. 399 F.3d at 65 . The jury had awarded 
$250,000 in compensatory damages without s pecifying 
how that amount was to be distributed across the parallel 
federal and commonwealth claims, plus another $250,000 
in punitive damages under the federal claim. Id. The 
distric t court had maximized the plaintiff’s recovery by 
allocating $1 in compensatory damages and $199,999 in 
punitive damages to the federal claim and allocating the 
other $249,999 in compensatory damages to the 
commonwealth claim. Id. Affirming that allocation, the 
First Circuit held that a district court must “consider[ ] the 
unspecified award as fungible between the state and 
federal claims and allocat[e] the award so as to maximize 
the plaintiff’s recovery while adhering to [ § 
1981a(b)(3) ’s] cap.” Id. at 66 . “[W]here the jury makes an 
unapportioned award, there is no basis for believing that the jury favored applying the damages to the federal over 
the state claim,” and “the most plausible reading of the 
jury’s verdict in such circumstances is that the jury 
wanted the specified sum awarded to the plaintiff no 
matter the count to which the award was eventually 
assigned.” Id. “Allocating damages in this fashion is thus 
consistent with the district court’s general obligation to 
preserve lawful jury awards to the extent possible.” Id. 
The same logic applies to punitive damages with greater 
force because “[p]unitive damages are directed at 
deterring and punishing defendants ; they are not designed 
to compensate p laintiffs for losses.”14 Sanchez , 37 F.3d at 
725. 
 14 
 Rodriguez -Torres  also suggests that, even if the First 
Circuit had recognized a rule agai nst double 
punishment, it would not be violated by allocating a 
single award of punitive damages across parallel 
federal and state claims. Because the allocation in 
Rodriguez -Torres  did not violate the rule against 
double recoveries, the First Circuit must have 
conceptualized the compensatory damages in that case 
as a singular but piecemeal recovery that made the 
plaintiff whole without enriching her. See Johnson v. 
Howard , 24 F. App’x 480, 485 (6th Cir. 2001)  
(unpublished) (“Although a double recovery may not 
be had, the jury is not  prohibited from allocating a total 
damages award between different theories of 
recovery.”). Accordingly, dividing an unallocated 
punitive -damages award effects a singular but 
piecemeal punishment, not multiple punishments. 
Moreover, the cases in which the  First Circuit has 
addressed potential double punishment involved facts 
distinguishable from those here because those cases 
involved both a punitive damages award and another 
form of punishment (i.e., a statutory mechanism that 
doubled the compensatory awa rd), not the division of a 
single award of punitive damages across parallel 
claims. See Sanchez,  37 F.3d at 7 25; Rodriguez -Torres , 
399 F.3d at 66 -67. 
 
 
O’Reilly Auto argues that this case is distinguishable 
because i t involves parallel claims that are both capped, 
rather than one capped claim and one uncapped claim. 
Again, there is no textual support in either the ADA or 
MHRA for reducing punitive -damage awards to offset 
punishments imposed by other means. O’Reilly Au to’s 
argument also runs counter to a recent decision within this 
district applying Rodriguez -Torres  and involving the caps 
from the ADA and MHRA. See Burnett , 422 F. Supp. 3d 
at 427 -28. In Burnett , the jury awarded $200,000 in 
punitive damages under the ADA, $300,000 in punitive 
damages under the MHRA, and $150,000 in unallocated 
compensatory damages. Id. at 405 -06. The ADA’s 
$300,000 cap and the MHRA’s $500,000 cap applied. Id. 
at 427 . Citing Rodriguez -Torres , the court allocated the 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  25 
 compensatory damages equally across the parallel federal 
and state claims, thereby preserving the jury’s entire 
award despite the existence o f the two caps. Id. at 427 -28. 
For the reasons already discussed, the Fifth Circuit’s 
analysis of a ca pped Texas law with an “identical” cap 
provision to the ADA is distinguishable. See Giles , 245 
F.3d at 492 . Finally, it is not clear that the presence of a 
second cap weakens the rationale of Rodriguez -Torres : 
District courts must maximize a plaintiff’s recovery 
despite § 1981a(b)(3) ’s cap when the state cause of action 
allows for unlimited damages, and there is arguably less 
tension between § 1981a(b)(3)  and the First Circuit’s 
maximization rule when the total damages are constrained 
by a second cap.  
  
*29 In sum, O’Reilly was on notice that the combined 
maximum compensatory and punitive award across the 
ADA and MHRA is $800,000, not $500,000. Thus, Bell’s 
combined compensatory and punitive damage award of 
$825,00 0 would slightly exceed the combined $800,000 
cap if these affirmative defenses had not been waived.15 
Nonetheless, a punitive damage award of $750,000 is 
possible under the caps and thus O’ Reilly Auto had notice 
of the possibility, which is the ultimate question under 
this third guidepost. That result is supported by the district 
court’s decision in Burnett , where the court reasoned that 
the fact that a $350,000 punitive damage award “falls 
within the statutory maximums” under the ADA and the 
MHRA is strong evidence that the award did not violate 
due process.16 422 F. Supp. 3d at 432 . 
 15 
 Again, the ADA’s and MHRA’s caps do not include 
backpay and thus Bell’s $42,000 backpay award does 
not count toward the $800,000 cap. See supra  note 12.  
 
 
16 
 Burnett  is also the most closely analogous case, 
although, as already stated, compliance with a statutory 
cap is more meaningful under this guidepost than 
awards in comparable cases. As discussed above, 
Burnett  involved a paraplegic employee who sought an 
accommodation of push -button, automatic doors and 
whose employer never responded to him. Burnett , 987 
F.3d at 61 -62. He eventually injured his wrist  using the 
doors and resigned. Id. The jury awarded $200,000 in 
punitive damages under the ADA, $300,000 in punitive 
damages under the MHRA, and $150,000 in 
unallocated compensatory damages. Burnett , 422 F. 
Supp. 3d at 405 -06. By stipulation of the parties, the 
court reduced the total punitive damages to $350,000, 
although the court was unclear as  to the basis for the 
stipulation. Id. at 426 & n.7 . Notwithstanding that 
stipulation, this case provided notice to O’Reilly Auto 
that a failure -to-accommodate claim could result in a 
jury award of at least $500,000 in punitive damages, 
which is less than $750,000 but does not reflect a troubling lack of notice. See Zimmerman , 262 F.3d at 
84 (“[A]n award of $400,000 is not so far removed 
from the $300,000 figure as to render the award unf air. 
‘Fairness’ in this context is a protean concept, and we 
must leave room for a certain amount of play in the 
joints.” (citation omitted)).  
 
 
 
 
2. Applying the Common -Law R emittitur Standard  
“[T]ranslating legal damage into money 
damages —especially in cases which involve few 
significant items of measurable economic loss —is a 
matter peculiarly within a jury’s ken.” Trainor v. HEI 
Hosp., LLC , 699 F.3d 19, 32 (1st Cir. 2012)  (quoting 
Sanchez , 37 F.3d at 723 ). Accordingly, a jury’s damage 
award is due “great deference,” and “a verdict will be 
reduced or set aside only if it is shown to exceed any 
rational appraisal or estimate of the damages that could be 
based upon the eviden ce before the jury.” Loan 
Modification Grp., Inc. v. Reed , 694 F.3d 145, 154 (1st 
Cir. 2012)  (quoting Segal v. Gilbert Color Sys., Inc. , 746 
F.2d 78, 81 (1st Cir. 1984) ). Put differently, under the 
federal common -law t est, a punitive damages award 
cannot be grossly excessive, inordinate, shocking to the 
conscience of the court, or so high that it would be a 
denial of justice to permit it to stand. Mercado -Berrios , 
611 F.3d at 28 . 
  
Before applying the common -law standard, I note that my 
analysis under this standard is not limited to the three due 
process guideposts. The ultimate  question is whether the 
jury’s punitive damage award is grossly excessive in light 
of the relevant evidence. Sony BMG Music Ent. v. 
Tenenbaum , Civil Action No. 07 -11446, 2012 WL 
3639053, at *2 (D. Mass. Aug. 23, 2012)  (applying the 
federal common -law test in light of the factors articulated 
in the unobjected -to jury instructions). I instructed the 
jury as foll ows:  
*30 The purpose of a punitive damage award is to 
punish a defendant or to deter a defendant and others 
from similar conduct in the future. Thus, in deciding 
whether to award punitive damages, you should 
consider wheth er O’Reilly Auto may be adequately 
punished by an award of compensatory damages only, 
or whether the conduct is so malicious or reckless that 
compensatory damages are inadequate to punish the 
wrongful conduct. The amount of punitive damages 
that you award must be reasonably related to the harm 
to Mr. Bell, including the harm caused by the 
reprehensibility of O’Reilly Auto’s conduct. You may 
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  26 
 consider whether punitive damages are likely to deter 
or prevent other persons or corporations from 
performing wrongfu l acts similar to those O’Reilly 
Auto is alleged to have committed.  
Other factors you may consider in determining an 
appropriate amount of punitive damages include, but 
are not limited to, whether Mr. Bell was financially 
vulnerable; whether O’Reilly Auto’ s conduct involved 
repeated actions or was an isolated instance; and 
whether the harm to Mr. Bell was the result of 
intentional malice, trickery, deceit, or mere accident. 
You may consider whether O’Reilly Auto violated its 
obligation to, in good faith, en gage in the interactive 
process with Mr. Bell that I described to you earlier. 
You may also consider O’Reilly Auto’s net financial 
worth.  
I then clarified that (1) my reference to “whether O’Reilly 
Auto may be adequately punished by an award of 
compensator y damages only” should have been written to 
refer to both the compensatory damages and backpay that 
the jury had already awarded to Bell and (2) the reference 
to “O’Reilly Auto’s net financial worth” should instead be 
understood by the jury to mean “the nu mber of its 
employees,” which was stipulated to be 43,685. ECF No. 
254 at 108:15 -109:10. O’Reilly Auto did not object.  
  
In light of the foregoing discussion of reprehensibility, the 
ratio between the punit ive award and Bell’s harm, and 
O’Reilly Auto’s notice of possible penalties —and the fact 
that it would have been reasonable for the jury to infer 
that a company the size of O’Reilly Auto would be 
deterred only by a relatively large punitive damage 
award —I conclude that remittitur is not supported under 
the common -law standard.  
  
 
 
3. Applying the Due Process Standard  
“An award ‘grossly excessive’ with respect to [the 
interests of punishment and deterrence] violates the Due 
Process Clause, which requires that an individual have 
fair notice of the penalty to which his conduct could 
expose him.” Méndez -Matos , 557 F.3d at 52  (quoting 
Gore , 517 U.S. at 574, 116 S.Ct. 1589 ). The due process 
analysis is largely a matter of the three guideposts 
discuss ed above: reprehensibility, the ratio between the 
punitive award and actual harm, and the penalties 
authorized by statute or imposed in similar cases. See id. 
In light of the foregoing analysis, I conclude that the 
jury’s $750,000 award does not offend due process.17 
 17 For both the federal common -law remittitur analysis  and the due process analysis, I would reach the same 
result even if Watters’s conduct were not attributable to 
O’Reilly Auto and thus the fifth factor in the 
reprehensibility guidepost favored O’Reilly Au to. 
 
 
I reach that conclusion solely based on the three 
guideposts, but I note that the First Circuit has indicated 
that they are not necessarily exhaustive. Zimmerman , 262 
F.3d at 81  (“These guideposts should [not] be treated as 
an analytical straitjacket .... Other pertinent factors may 
from time to time enter into the equation.”). Courts have 
recognized that deterrence may be a relevant factor under 
a due process analysis. See Allen v. Rouse , CIVIL 
ACTION NO. 00 -10981, 2009 WL 10729103, at *6 (D. 
Mass. July 17, 2009) . To the extent that the size of an 
award necessary to adequately deter O’Reilly Auto may 
be considered under the  due process standard, that 
consideration bolsters the conclusion that a total award of 
$750,000 in punitive damages is not unconstitutional 
because the depths of O’Reilly Auto’s financial resources 
can be reasonably inferred from the size of its workforce  
of 43,685 employees. Compare  State Farm , 538 U.S. at 
427, 123 S.Ct. 1513  (“The wealth of a defendant cann ot 
justify an otherwise unconstitutional punitive damages 
award.”), with id. at 427 -28, 123 S.Ct. 1513  (“Wealth 
provides an open -ended basis for inflating awards when 
the defendant is wealthy.... That does not make its use 
unlawful or inappropriate; it simply means that this factor 
cannot make up for the failure of other factors, such as 
‘reprehensibility,’ t o constrain significantly an award that 
purports to punish a defendant’s conduct.” (alteration 
omitted) (quoting Gore , 517 U.S. at 591, 116 S.Ct. 1589  
(Breyer, J., concurring))), and Romanski v. Detroit Ent., 
L.L.C. , 428 F.3d 629, 648 (6th Cir. 2005)  (“[W]e must 
take into account the [defendant’s] wealth to ensure that 
the punitive damages award will further the interests it is 
designed to advance; but we must also ensure that our 
exacting appellate review results in an award that is not 
significantly higher than is necessary to further those 
interests.”).  
  
 
II. CONCLUSION  
*31 O’Reilly Auto’s Motion for  New Trial or for 
Remittitur (ECF No. 262) is DENIED . 
  
SO ORDERED.  
  
All Citations  
Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC, --- F.Supp.3d ---- (2022)   
 
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  27 
 --- F.Supp.3d ----, 2022 WL 4016824   
End of Document  
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  
 
 
 
 
