TESTIMONY OF BRIAN BELL IN OPPOSITION TO LD 960 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Brian Bell, I am a Maine resident who 
brought a case under the Maine Human Rights Act and so have ﬁrsthand knowledge about how 
this bill would limit the Act and impact Maine employees. I urge you to oppose LD 960. 
In 2014 I was hired by O'Reilly Auto Parts as a Store Manager at their Belfast store. I was 
good at the job. In 2015, my medical provider determined that I needed some accommodations 
to allow me to perform the job with my disabilities. My employer denied my request for these 
accommodations and eventually I was terminated from myjob. I did my best to ﬁnd other work 
but was still unemployed for months and then worked in jobs that paid less for years. I did pick 
myself back up after the termination, but it was a difﬁcult time. 
After my termination I connected with a lawyer and pursued claims under the Maine 
Human Rights Act and Americans with Disabilities Act. My case went on for over seven years, 
involved two trials, an appeal to the ﬁrst circuit, and a petition for cert to the US Supreme Court 
by O'Reilly. In October 2021 my case went to the ﬁnal jury trial. The trial was in the federal 
court in Bangor and so the jurors came from all across northern and eastern Maine. I testiﬁed at 
the trial. My wife and a psychologist also provided testimony about how the termination of my 
employment had impacted me. It felt good to see the jurors listening to the evidence about 
what had happened and how I was impacted. 
The jury came back with a verdict ﬁnding that O'Reilly had violated the Maine Human 
Rights Act and the Americans with disabilities act. They awarded my lost wages and $825,000 in 
compensatory and punitive damages. A group of my fellow Mainers did justice and determined 
the appropriate damages based on the evidence. 
The verdict was a game changer for me and my wife. If the Maine Human Rights Act 
were amended in the way proposed in this bill, then the court would have been required to take 
away 40% of the verdict. This would have had a substantial negative effect for me and my 
economic situation. 
The laws already have damages caps. This bill would decrease the available damages 
even more and further limit the ability of Maine jurors to award what they feel is appropriate 
after hearing all the evidence. For many large corporations, the current caps are already 
negligible, with a company like O'Reilly making more money in an average hour of national 
operations than the caps impose. Further limiting these caps would be less of a deterrent and 
more akin to a statement that discrimination is legal with a fee. This would be a terrible thing 
for employees in Maine and it would be a bad thing forjustice. For these reasons I ask that the 
Committee vote that LD 960 “ought not pass" . Thank you.
