Littler Mendelson, P.C. 
1 Monument Square 
Sulte 60° 
Portland, ME 04101 
Steven J. Silver 
207.699.1130 direct 
207.774.6001 main 
207.358.2636 fax 
ssilver@|ittler.corn 
March 21, 2023 
BY HAND DELIVERY 
Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: L.D. 960 - An Act Regarding the Limits on Civil Remedies Available Under the Maine 
Human Rights Act 
Dear Chairs Carney and Moonen: 
My name is Steve Silver. I am a resident of South Portland, an attorney at the law ﬁrm of Littler 
Mendelson, and an adjunct professor at the University of Maine School of Law. I am here today 
to testify in support of L.D. 960. 
This bill presents two technical clariﬁcations of the Maine Human Rights Act that are necessary 
due to recent judicial decisions that have and will continue to harm all employers in Maine without 
remedial action. 
First is a clariﬁcation under Section 3 that the cap on compensatory and punitive damages set out 
in Section 1(e) cannot be waived. This seems obvious given that the caps are speciﬁcally delineated 
in the statute. Every employee, employer, and attorney knows what the caps are, because they are 
clearly stated. However, the United States District Court for the District of Maine is now treating 
damages caps as optional and waivable, which creates signiﬁcant uncertainty for employers. This 
issue arose out of a March 15, 2022 ruling in Bell v. O’Reilly Auto Enterprises, LLC., l:16-cv- 
00501-JDL. The defendant employer in that matter, O’Rei1ly Auto, never contested that it 
employed more than 500 employees. As such, the highest cap of $500,000 applied to it. Whena 
jury awarded more than that to the plaintiff in that case, the Court refused to apply the cap, because 
it ruled that statutory damages caps are mandatory affirmative defenses that can be waived. Since 
O’Reilly did not plead a defense that the caps should apply, the Court ruled that it waived the 
statutorily mandated caps." 
Speciﬁcally, Chief Judge Levy ruled in Bell that even though a statutory limitation on liability is 
not enumerated among the listed defenses in F ed.R.Civ.P. 8(0), “the ADA’s and MHRA’s damage 
|ittler.com
Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matt Moonen 
March 21, 2023 
Page2 
caps are properly treated as afﬁrmative defenses. ” (ECF No. 258 at p. 3). Thus, the statutorily 
mandated caps on compensatory and punitive damages are now treated as waived or “forfeited ” in 
this Court unless a defendant asserts an applicable affirmative defense in its responsive pleading. 
Id. at p. 9. This sea change prompted major surprise from the defense bar and was the source of 
signiﬁcant discussions at the Maine State Bar Association ’s Annual Employment Law Update last 
spring. The ruling has also led to a flood of motions by defendants seeking to amend pleadings to 
assert this afﬁrmative defense. 
Passing LD 960 would clarify that the damages caps are the actual caps and are not waivable. This 
will reduce needless ﬁlings seeking clarity on the caps and provide certainty to civil defendants. 
The second clariﬁcation that LD 960 provides is the prevention of double recovery under the 
Maine Human Rights Act. Again, the Act speciﬁes the maximum amount of compensatory and 
punitive damages available to plaintiffs. That amount is up to the legislature. Currently, the 
legislature has set forth bands of caps starting at $50,000 for the smallest employers and $500,000 
for the largest employers. The judiciary, however, is now permitting litigants to exceed those caps 
by stacking damages. 
In that same Bell v. O’Reilly Auto case, the Court issued a later ruling in September of 2022 
expressly permitting the plaintiff to stack damages such that the maximum amount of recovery for 
compensatory and punitive damages was $800,000 instead of $500,000. The Court reasoned that 
the plaintiff could combine the $300,000 cap provided under the Americans with Disabilities Act 
and the $500,000 cap under the MHRA for a total of $800,000. Permitting this stacking of damages 
is a double recovery that most courts do not permit. In the Bell case, the issue was failure to 
accommodate an employee ’s alleged disability. By permitting both caps to apply, the defendant 
was punished twice under the ADA and the MHRA for the same misconduct. 
The Court acknowledged that whether a statute permits double punishment is up to “legislative 
intent.” The Court engaged in statutory analysis to conclude that the MHRA was silent as to how 
its damages caps interact with other federal or state statutes. The Court reasoned that “[t]he MHRA 
is distinguishable because the Maine Legislature imposed a $500,000 cap instead of duplicating 
the ADA’s $300,000 limit, evincing legislative intent to do more than enshrine the ADA in state 
law.” (ECF No. 267 at p. 67). However, I believe the legislature ’s intent of providing a higher cap 
than the ADA was to treat the federal law as the ﬂoor. Some states, like Texas, use the same 
damages as the federal law. Maine raised the ﬂoor, but I do not believe the legislature meant to 
more than double the available damages. This is why LD 960 seeks to clarify and specify exactly 
what the legislature intended. If, as the judge in Bell stated, the MHRA I silent on how the caps 
interact with other federal and state laws, now is the time for the legislature to speak up. 
liltler.com
Senator Anne Carney and Representative Matt Moonen 
March 21, 2023 
Page3 
If you agree that double punishment is unfair, then you will pass LD 960. Otherwise, there is 
signiﬁcantly increased exposure for employers operating in Maine that will, I’m afraid, make 
Maine a less desirable place for employers to conduct business in. 
I am happy to answer any questions you may have now or in the future. 
Sincerely, 
Jaw Steven J. Silver 
SJ S/ss 
|ittler.com
