Transportation Committee Hearing 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and Members 
of The Transportation Committee. My name is Robert 
Pullen, I reside in Levant, Maine, and I am before you 
today to speak in support of LD 1848, “Resolve, to 
Designate the Route 15 Bridge Located in the Town Of 
Kenduskeag the William S. Pullen Bridge”. 
Committee members, 
My name is Bob Pullen, nephew of William Pullen for 
whom the Kenduskeag Stream Bridge on Route l5 in 
Kenduskeag will hopefully named. I am humbled and 
honored that I have been given an opportunity to present 
why I feel this is a most worthy undertaking. 
My Uncle Bill was one of 12 children seven girls and ﬁve 
boys born to Ervin and Amy Pullen of Kenduskeag. He was 
a very good student, athlete, son, brother and patriot. After 
high school Bill ventured to Connecticut where he worked 
at Pratt and Whitney building airplane engines for the war 
effort and where he met his ﬁancé Sissy. Bill, by beinga 
defense company employee, would not have had to enlist 
but he felt it his duty. Bill and his four brothers enlisted and 
went their respective ways. Bill was in the Army. His ﬁrst 
taste of war after training was the bloody battle of Anzio in 
Italy. Bill was one of only three of his division to survive. 
After Anzio he was put in a training capacity of showing 
his new reinforcements, green from the States, including 
ofﬁcers, noncoms and foot soldiers, the technique of being 
an infantryman in these severe conditions. After a brief 
period of the training Bill and his company headedto
liberate Rome. After the liberation of Rome, Bill and his 
company pushed on towards Paris. Once in France, Bill got 
his ﬁrst R&R. He sent a letter home telling of how nice the 
French people were and how much he missed home. After 
a brief respite it was on towards Paris. Bill’s platoon was 
put on point in look out for reported advancing German 
troops. In a small town called Gamult Bill’s unit was 
ambushed by German machine gun nests and he was killed. 
Months later Bill’s body was found and in a mass grave 
and was then buried in a military graveyard in France. Bill 
was the only person from Kenduskeag to die in World War 
II and it is for this reason I believe bestowing this honor in 
his memory would be warranted. It would not only mean so 
much to the Pullen family but would exemplify the bravery 
and dedication of the men of Kenduskeag. Bill’s only 
remaining sibling is his 101 year old sister Clarissa 
McClure of Maryland. I’m sure this would be a truly 
intense moment for her and a reminder to my generation of 
a man who we’ve only heard about in family reunion 
conversations and gatherings of his extraordinary bravery 
and dedication. I sincerely thank you for your time.
