Angela Holmes
Brooks
LD 162
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services,
My name is Angie Holmes and I am a graduate student in the School of Social Work 
at the University of Maine. I am a member of a student advocacy team, and I am 
writing to you today to voice our support of LD 162 "An Act to Establish a Substance
Use Disorder Hotline and Consultation and Clinical Supervision Program" sponsored 
by Representative Madigan.
As incumbent social workers, we recognize that there are few fields in our profession 
that are not greatly impacted by substance use disorders. As I am sure you are all 
aware, Mainers have been hit especially hard by the opioid epidemic and there is a 
high prevalence of substance abuse and misuse in our great state.
What I would like to highlight in my testimony today is surrounding the difficulty that
many face who are in active recovery. There are several over-the-counter and 
prescribed medications that are particularly detrimental to the success of those who 
are in recovery. I think that many are obvious such as prescriptions to alleviate pain, 
sedatives, and stimulants. However, there are several that are not as well-known 
including allergy and cough medications, weight loss supplements, over-the-counter 
herbs for depression, and anti-diarrheal and other medications utilized for 
gastrointestinal upset. This is not common knowledge for some professionals that do 
not specialize in substance use treatment.
This hotline can help assist medical professionals in making decisions for their 
patients and clients who are in active recovery, so as not to inadvertently trigger a 
relapse into substance use. We see this as a helpful tool for those who are not 
specifically trained in substance use so that they may provide the best support and 
care for their patients.
We urge you to vote "Ought to Pass" on LD 162. Thank you for your time and all that
you are doing for our great state of Maine.
Sincerely, 
Angie Holmes
