 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony of the Maine Chapter of Pediatrics in favor of LD 162 an Act to Establish 
a Substance Used Disorder Hotline and  Consultation and Clinical Supervision 
Hotline 
 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer and members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services Deborah Hagler MD, MPH, FAAP, 
resident of Harpswell, immediate past president of the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics testifying in favor of LD162- an Act to Establish a 
Substance Used Disorder Hotline and  Consultation and Clinical Supervision. 
 
 
Substance use disorders affect the entire household. In 2019, 50% of children in the 
foster care system in Maine were placed outside of the home because of a  parent’s  
substance use disorder.1 Nationally, approximately 1 in 10 children lived in a 
household where one parent had an alcohol use disorder in the past year and 1 in 35 
lived in a household where one parent had an illicit substance use disorder. These 
children are at a higher risk of experiencing abuse and neglect and interacting with 
the child welfare system and developing a substance use disorder themselves.2  
 
 Alcohol is a neurotoxin. Infants prenatally exposed to alcohol are at risk for the 
development of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders which can result in lifelong 
learning deficits, behavioral problems, emotional dysregulation, and individuals with 
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum disorders are at a higher risk of suicide.3 
 
Offering support to clinicians engaged in treatment individuals with substance use 
disorders offers treatment for the entire household. The Maine Chapter strongly 
supports the creation of a consultative hotline  that will connect clinicians treating 
substance use disorders with additional resources and expert advice to help serve 
their patients.  In the Pediatric world, models for these types of consultative hotline t 
services already exist to help clinicians in primary care caring for youth mental 
health and behavioral health problems through Pediatric Psychiatry Access 
Programs. Most of these programs are modeled after the first program started in 
pediatric psychiatry access program begun in Massachusetts in 2004. These 
programs provide a “hotline” that connects clinicians with a  child and adolescent 
psychiatrist to assist with diagnostic clarity, community  behavioral health resources 
and medication management. In addition, the Massachusetts program connects 
primary care  clinicians caring for youth with adolescent substance use disorders with 
experts in adolescent  addiction.4 Maine has a Pediatric Psychiatry Access Program 
called the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership5 and with appropriate 
recruitment this service could be added to existing consultative services. These 
programs have increased clinician comfort in caring for youth with these challenges 
and increased access to treatment. Providing this type of service for all clinicians 
caring for people with substance use disorders is likely to do the same . We strongly 
encourage you to support this bill. 
 
References: 
 
1. 2021 Maine Annual Child Welfare Report  
2. Children Living With Parents With an SUD- CBHSQ  
3. FASD the Basics  
 
4. Massachusetts Child Psychiatry Access Program  
5. Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership Program  
 
 
 
  
