 
 
Testimony in Support 
LD 1559 An Act to Advance the State's Public Transit Systems by Reinvigorating the Public Transit 
Advisory Council and Increasing Funding 
 LD 1566, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Recommend Strategies to Achieve the Goal of 
Eliminating Traffic Fatalities and Serious Injuries 
LD 1634, An Act to Grant Municipalities the Authority to Set Certain Lower Motor Vehicle Speed Limits 
Without a Department of Transportation Speed Study 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Transportation Committee;  
On behalf of the Maine Real Estate and Development Association (MEREDA), I am testifying in support 
of LDs 1559, 1566, and 1634.  
MEREDA is Maine’s premiere trade association representing commercial real estate and the state’s 
housing creators. MEREDA members are housing creators, engineers, architects, designers, bankers, 
lawyers, brokers, and many other organizations involved in the real estate industry. MEREDA’s guiding 
principle is the promotion of responsible real estate development – responsible real estate development 
is community development. Through the advocacy efforts of its Public Policy Committee, MEREDA works 
to advance a more fair, practical, and predictable policy landscape for housing creation in Maine.  
MEREDA supports the three proposed bills because they take aim at helping create safer, more walkable 
communities across our state – this will not only encourage traffic and pedestrian safety but will 
accelerate the revitalization of communities by promoting a transit-conscious approach to policymaking. 
For many Mainers, owning a car is a significant expense. Cars are also the number one contributor to 
greenhouse gas emissions in Maine. Providing better pedestrian and transit options for our new and 
revitalized community centers will promote a healthier lifestyle, a healthier planet, and a better 
environment for real estate development.  
MEREDA hopes the Transportation Committee will support these bills and continue to consider ways to 
break down barriers between our state and local transportation laws to ensure that communities have 
the tools they need to accelerate housing creation while maintaining a safe and desirable community. 
We believe the state and municipalities must work closely on transportation issues, and we perceive this 
as one way to encourage more local and regional acceleration of that partnership.  
Please support LDs 1559, 1566, and 1634 as part of a step toward rebuilding the transportation and 
living environment for Maine.  
Sincerely 
Elizabeth M. Frazier 
On behalf of Maine Real Estate & Development Association 
efrazier@pierceatwood.com 
