Good afternoon again to the members of the Committee and thanks for your work on LD 1566. 
My name is Sarah Cushman and I support this bill. 
 
As I’ve shared previously, I volunteer as the Faith Representative for the Moving Maine Network 
and am also a transportation planning consultant specializing in public transportation, 
pedestrian, and bicycle projects.   
 
For years, I’ve worked specifically on improving safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders 
and carpoolers, and reducing fatalities and injuries. But we need to move beyond reducing to 
eliminating. This bill will bring Maine into alignment with Vision Zero work that’s being done on 
the local, state and federal levels across the U.S., including elsewhere here in New England. That 
is, we will become another important leader in working to eliminate roadway fatalities and 
injuries entirely. 
 
The risks of injury and death are ever-present for all of us and I think about it as I drive the 
Turnpike, I-295, and local roads.  
 
I also think about how we are all pedestrians at some point in the day, and the risks we 
encounter crossing the road to the mailbox, walking to where our cars are parked, getting to the 
bus stop, walking to school, etc. For example, I was participating in a City of South Portland site 
walk out by Pape Chevrolet, looking at safety barriers for kids who live in Brick Hill and Redbank, 
who were walking back and forth across Exit 3 of I-295 to Skillin Elementary and Memorial 
Middle School. While we were there, we talked with adults passing by on foot, who work at the 
Mall and other nearby locations. They mentioned some parts of their walk have no sidewalks or 
pedestrian crossing signals. I drove by a few months later and saw snow heaped on several of 
those sidewalks, and imagined the danger of folks having to walk sections of those busy arterial 
streets, out in traffic. 
 
I think about them biking as well. I live in Portland and riding my bike in the pre-dawn hours to 
catch a bus at the Portland Transportation Center, I have come across other bicyclists departing 
after the end of their shift at Tyson/Barber Foods on St. John Street. I’m grateful we’re all able to 
ride on the bike paths near there in the dark. But as folks split off in their various directions, I 
think about how their vulnerability increases, with the surrounding high traffic areas and minimal 
or no bike facilities, and poor lighting, etc. 
 
I think about the need for us to eliminate fatalities and injuries as my 16 year-old daughter bikes 
to her job, too. I think about it as I ride in the front passenger seat, now that she has her license, 
and I realize how hard it is for her to see pedestrians crossing the road at night because of poor 
lighting, or whether to slow down to wait to pass a bicyclist. I also think about my mother-in-
law, who died last year after a 10-year battle with Parkinson’s disease, who struggled to safely 
use her walker or her wheelchair to access services, get around her neighborhood, and 
participate in social activities. (And how, if we’re all fortunate to live long enough, mobility 
devices will be a part of our own futures).  
 
We need to be fully committed to eliminating traffic fatalities and injuries altogether. Thank you 
for your discernment and I urge you to vote Aught to Pass. 
 
 
Sarah Cushman
Portland
LD 1566
Thanks for your time and sorry I need to leave the hearing at 4:20 and will miss 
testifying by Zoom. Appreciate everyone's time on all this important work!
