Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, 
My name is Scott Vlaun. I am the Executive Director of the Center for an Ecology-Based 
Economy (CEBE) in Norway, and an active cyclist on the roads of rural western Maine. I am 
also a member of Spoke Folks, a worker-owned cooperative that hauls trash and recycling 
in our community using bicycles and trailers. I am writing today in support of LD 1566 - A 
Resolve to Establish a Vision Zero Task Force to Recommend Strategies to Achieve 
the Goal of Eliminating Traffic Fatalities and Serious Injuries. 
In my work as an organizer with CEBE, we run a bike share program in town, have hosted 
bicycle safety workshops, and are working with the state, town of Norway to create a safe 
bike/ped route from our downtown to Robert’s Farm, Shepard’s Farm and Lake 
Penneseewassee Park, all significant recreation areas for our community. To access these 
important resources requires travel on a road with a 50 mph speed limit where people 
regularly park on the shoulder, making unsafe conditions for cyclists and pedestrians, 
especially youth that use the road to access the trails and waterfront. Furthermore, many 
other roads in our area lack any safe shoulder to ride or walk on, creating unsafe 
conditions. We have found it difficult to work with local and state government to build a 
safe bike lane along our lake front and to advocate for safer shoulders on our rural roads. 
There just does not seem to be the financial resources, or interest in building out 
transportation infrastructure in our rural area for other than cars and trucks. 
We have already experienced tragic accidents between cyclists and pedestrians on our 
roads in Western Maine. As we press to reduce vehicle miles traveled on our roads to limit 
GHG emissions in line with Maine’s climate goals, and as people experiencing lower 
incomes are left out of the Electric Vehicle transition, we need to increase the safety on our 
roads to ensure an end to traffic fatalities in our region.  
Through our work at CEBE we also interface with many people who would consider using a 
bicycle or walking to replace a car trip if they felt safe on the roads, which most do not. 
Others in our community cannot afford to own a car and are forced to risk death or injury 
to access basic service and recreational resources. LD 1556 will put Maine on the path to 
safer streets and highways, encourage more cycling and walking, foster equity in our 
transportation system, increase community health, and move Maine towards its important 
climate goals. Please vote “ought to pass” on this important bill.  
Thank You, 
Scott Vlaun 
Center for an Ecology-Based Economy 
Scott Vlaun
Center for an Ecology-Based Economy
LD 1566
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation,
My name is Scott Vlaun. I am the Executive Director of the Center for an 
Ecology-Based Economy (CEBE) in Norway, and an active cyclist on the roads of 
rural western Maine. I am also a member of Spoke Folks, a worker-owned 
cooperative that hauls trash and recycling in our community using bicycles and 
trailers. I am writing today in support of LD 1566 - A Resolve to Establish a Vision 
Zero Task Force to Recommend Strategies to Achieve the Goal of Eliminating Traffic
Fatalities and Serious Injuries.
In my work as an organizer with CEBE, we run a bike share program in town, have 
hosted bicycle safety workshops, and are working with the state, town of Norway to 
create a safe bike/ped route from our downtown to Robert’s Farm, Shepard’s Farm 
and Lake Penneseewassee Park, all significant recreation areas for our community. To
access these important resources requires travel on a road with a 50 mph speed limit 
where people regularly park on the shoulder, making unsafe conditions for cyclists 
and pedestrians, especially youth that use the road to access the trails and waterfront. 
Furthermore, many other roads in our area lack any safe shoulder to ride or walk on, 
creating unsafe conditions. We have found it difficult to work with local and state 
government to build a safe bike lane along our lake front and to advocate for safer 
shoulders on our rural roads. There just does not seem to be the financial resources, or
interest in building out transportation infrastructure in our rural area for other than 
cars and trucks.
We have already experienced tragic accidents between cyclists and pedestrians on our
roads in Western Maine. As we press to reduce vehicle miles traveled on our roads to 
limit GHG emissions in line with Maine’s climate goals, and as people experiencing 
lower incomes are left out of the Electric Vehicle transition, we need to increase the 
safety on our roads to ensure an end to traffic fatalities in our region. 
Through our work at CEBE we also interface with many people who would consider 
using a bicycle or walking to replace a car trip if they felt safe on the roads, which 
most do not. Others in our community cannot afford to own a car and are forced to 
risk death or injury to access basic service and recreational resources. LD 1556 will 
put Maine on the path to safer streets and highways, encourage more cycling and 
walking, foster equity in our transportation system, increase community health, and 
move Maine towards its important climate goals. Please vote “ought to pass” on this 
important bill. 
Thank You,
Scott Vlaun
Center for an Ecology-Based Economy

