 
 
4/24/2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation,  
My name is Zoe Miller and I facilitate the Moving Maine Network. We are a multi-sector, 
statewide collaborative working to ensure all Mainers have access to transportation regardless 
of background, destination, or geography. I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 1566 
“Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Recommend Strategies to Achieve the Goal of 
Eliminating Traffic Fatalities and Serious Injuries.” I regret that I cannot testify in person today 
because of health issues. 
Increasing safety on Maine’s roads and sidewalks is a top priority for the Moving Maine 
Network. We are especially concerned with the needs of people who are traveling outside of a 
motor vehicle. We know that many are doing so because they cannot drive or cannot afford to 
have a vehicle. This includes people with disabilities, older adults, people with low incomes, and 
youth.  
This resolve gives Maine access to the most effective tools for preventing injuries and deaths. 
Vision Zero strategies have been used for 25 years and have proven to be effective in reducing 
crashes. There may be resistance to this bill because of the perception that Maine has already 
adopted Vision Zero strategies. However, Maine has been using the Toward Zero Deaths (TDZ) 
approach, not Vision Zero. The two approaches are NOT the same. TDZ is more centered on 
individual behaviors and lacks discussion of important contexts that impact human behavior 
such as land use, access to a vehicle, or poverty that may impact the mode choice or behaviors 
of people in different communities beyond the design of a road in its strategy. 
This resolve also creates more shared responsibility for solving the problem of traffic fatalities 
and severe injuries. It should be up to only MaineDOT and Maine Highway Safety Bureau alone 
to solve this problem. By creating a cross-sector, interdepartmental action plan for eliminating all 
traffic fatalities and severe injuries, this resolve brings the needed players together to address 
this problem. This includes people who have been personally impacted by traffic crashes and 
representatives from public health, economic development, and municipal transportation 
planning. 
In closing, the Moving Maine Network supports LD 1566 because Maine deserves the most 
effective tools for making roads and sidewalks safe places for all Mainers. 
 
Sincerely,  
Zoe Miller, Facilitator, Moving Maine Network 
1 
 Zoe@movingmaine.org 
