1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 5/11/23 
  
LD 1268 – An Act to Provide for a Local Motor Vehicle Excise Tax Exemption for 
Qualifying Volunteer Firefighters and Emergency Medical Services Persons 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1268 – An Act to Provide for a Local Motor Vehicle Excise Tax Exemption for 
Qualifying Volunteer Firefighters and Emergency Medical Services Persons. 
This bill gives municipalities the option to provide an exemption from 
annual excise tax for one vehicle owned, separately or jointly, by a resident of that 
municipality who is a volunteer firefighter or volunteer emergency medical 
services person, as long as that vehicle is used to perform those volunteer services.  
While there is an existing municipal option exemption in 36 M.R.S. § 1483-
A, there remains a concern that allowing municipalities to opt-in to an exemption 
may violate the Maine Constitution, article IX, section 9, which forbids the 
Legislature from surrendering the power of taxation. 
Due to the manner in which the exemption is drafted, unlike most other 
vehicles exempt from the excise tax, the vehicles in question would become 
subject to personal property tax in lieu of the excise tax.  However, allowing 
2 
 municipalities to opt-in to a property tax exemption would raise more serious 
concerns under the Maine Constitution, article IX, section 9. 
It is unclear how an applicant could provide “official documentation” for 
eligibility requirements such as use of the vehicle in responding to calls.  Since the 
bill does not specify that a resident has to be a volunteer firefighter/emergency 
medical services person for the municipality where they reside, proof of eligibility 
may be even more difficult to document in those situations. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
