égigiu 
5 -i,-' .;" "%1.~. 
"grit. f?’ i.> 
-1 3 
It 
1:‘--'1 '‘ 
2:“ Y 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
Vicki Doudem 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
18 Trim Stmet AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Camden, ME 04843 (207) 287-1400 
(207) 542-1990 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Victoria.Doudera@legis1ature.maine. gov 
May 11, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Vicki Doudera presenting 
LD 1268, An Act to Provide for a Local Motor Vehicle Excise Tax Exemption 
for Qualifying Volunteer Fireﬁghters 6? Emergency Medical Services Persons 
Before the Yoint Standing Committee on Yitxation 
Good day Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation. My name is Vicki Doudera and I represent House 
District 41, the towns of Camden and Rockport. I am before you today to introduce LD 
1268, An Act to Provide for a Local Motor Vehicle Excise Tax Exemption for 
Qualifying Volunteer Fireﬁghters and Emergency Medical Services Persons. 
This bill was suggested to me by a selectboard member in Rockport, and I was happy 
to sponsor it last session and bring it forward again this session. As someone who 
served for several years as a ﬁrst responder for the Camden First Aid Association, I 
know ﬁrsthand how heavily many small towns rely on volunteers for emergency 
services. These are positions that entail extended and unpredictable hours, a small 
amount of pay -— if any -— and a considerable amount of stress. My daughter —in-law 
has recently joined the Hope Fire Department, and it is a huge time commitment for 
her, a mother of two small boys, but she is proud to be giving back to her community 
in this important way. 
According to the Maine Fire Chiefs Association, 92% of ﬁreﬁghters in Maine are 
volunteers. Of the 433 Maine ﬁre departments, 338 have volunteer chiefs. These 
statistics show that a high proportion of our towns are relying on dedicated 
volunteers. What the numbers do not show is that it is becoming increasingly diﬂicult 
to ﬁnd them. Our Emergency Medical Services (EMS) are also suffering. The previous 
Legislature formed the Blue Ribbon Commission to study EMS, and the commission 
issued a report in December outlining recommendations. 
District 41: Camden and Rockport
“EMS in the state is in crisis,” the report says. “EMS services in Maine are at the edge 
of a cliff, or over it, and changes must occur to ensure that when someone calls witha 
medical emergency, EMS services are able and ready to assist.“ 
Some of Maine's most inﬂuential leaders have recognized this problem. Senator Susan 
Collins spoke about the issue back in 2019 at the annual ﬁreﬁghter memorial service in 
Augusta. She said: 
"We face some real challenges in the state of Maine where most of our ﬁre departments 
are staffed by volunteers -- and increasingly, they're ﬁnding it difficult to get 
volunteers to participate. “ 
This bill offers one way to help with recruitment of volunteer ﬁreﬁghters and EMS 
volunteers, as well as retention of those already in a department. LD 1268 would allow 
municipalities to adopt an ordinance extending a vehicle excise tax exemption to these 
dedicated volunteers. lt’s up to the town whether or not they decide to offer this 
exemption. A municipality ’s ordinance would require documentation that the 
ﬁreﬁghter or EMS volunteer actively served and that the exemption applies to one 
vehicle that is used to respond to calls. A town can require additional eligibility 
criteria, such as duration of service, minimum call response and training 
requirements. 
A few arguments you will hear against this proposal: 
1. The Maine Constitution, Article IX, Section 9, provides: “The Legislature shall 
never, in any manner, suspend or surrender the power of taxation, ” and yet in 
Maine law we already have an existing local option excise tax exemption in 36 
M.R.S. § 1483-A, which allows a municipality to, by ordinance, exempt from 
excise tax vehicles owned by a resident on active duty military service who is 
either permanently stationed outside Maine or deployed for more than 180 days 
outside of Maine. It is true that we should be cautious when considering 
expanding the number of excise tax exemptions because the tax is an important 
revenue source to municipalities, but municipalities also face the issues of 
dwindling ﬁrst responders and all the attendant problems that creates. 
2. The Maine Municipal Association has raised the concern that this approach 
could raise inequities. By tying the value of the beneﬁt to the amount of excise 
‘ Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services, 
https ://www.mainepublic.org/health/2023-0 l-1 6/commission-releases- ﬁnal-report-for-improvingemergency-medica 
l-services-in-maine 
2Maine Fire Departments Seek Full Time and Volunteer Employees 
https://Wwwnewscentermaine.com/article/news/local/as-seen-on-tv/maine-0areer- ﬁreﬁghters-paid-fourth-lowest-sal 
a1y-in-nation-study-shows/97-9d5 5 1097- l 3 89-4b94-9b2a-b89d98d20e66 
District 4i: Camden and Rockport
taxes paid, rather than on a set dollar amount, they argue that the program will 
provide greater beneﬁts to volunteers with new vehicles, than that provided to 
the owners of older vehicles. 
I have heard this concern and would be happy to amend this to a ﬂat amount —a 
discount on the volunteer ’s excise tax, if you will. Again, this incentive would only be 
offered on the vehicle that the ﬁreﬁghter or EMS volunteer used for calls, and only in 
towns that elected to offer it. 
Another option suggested by MEMUN could be to expand the volunteer program 
established in Title 36, §6232, sub-§1-A. Here is the statute describing that program: 
1-A. Volunteer program. A municipality may by ordinance adopt a program that permits 
claimants who are at least 60 years of age to earn beneﬁts up to an annual maximum of $1,000 or 
100 times the state minimum hourly wage under Title 26, section 664, subsection I, whichever is 
greater, by volunteering to provide services to the municipality. A program adopted under this 
subsection does not need to meet the requirements of subsection 1, paragraph B or C. Beneﬁts 
provided under this subsection must be related to the amount of volunteer service provided. 
Beneﬁts received under this subsection may not be considered income for purposes of Part 8.A 
municipality may by ordinance establish procedures and additional standards of eligibility fora 
program adopted under this subsection. 
If the committee felt this was a more appropriate avenue for assisting municipal 
volunteer recruitment eiforts for these vital positions, I will be happy to work with 
your analyst to include volunteers who are at least 18 years of age and serve their 
communities as a volunteer ﬁreﬁghter or emergency medical service personnel. 
However we choose to help these volunteers who risk life and limb to come to the aid 
of their fellow citizens, I stand ready to help. We need to assist our communities to 
keep these vital positions ﬁlled, so that when one of our friends or neighbors calls 911, 
a capable volunteer responds. This bill is a small but important step to allow towns to 
show that they value the volunteerism of ﬁrst responders, and will help — even ina 
small way — with their expenses. 
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Wdwi M)“-1"“- 
Re;b1'esentatz' ve Vicki Doudera 
District 41: Camden and Rockport
