Testimony on Mining Bills Thursday, April 13 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Granlich, members of the committee. I am Alice Bolstridge, 
born and grew up near the Bald Mountain site. Every legislative session, from 2012 to 2017, I 
studied risks and benefits of mining that site, and I participated in the public outpouring of 
opposition to proposed regulations to weaken 1991 mining regulations to make it less 
burdensome for the site owner to mine it. The regulations passed in 2017 became the “most 
restrictive in the nation,” but most restrictive is a low bar for truly effective protection of the 
environment and human health.1 I support rules that will strengthen protections in current law 
and oppose weakening.  
I oppose LD 1361, LD 1363, and  LD 1433 which seek to remove lithium and radioactive 
thorium and  uranium from protections of the current mining law without provisions for 
regulations to adequately protect the environment and human health.2  
I support LD 1508 if it is amended to include all metallic mineral mining. A moratorium would 
at least allow time to consider known and documented risks of lithium mining and to amend the 
current law to reduce hazards of metallic mineral pollution.3 
I support LD 1471 which includes provisions for human-health impacts and allows other 
environmental protections not provided in current law.4 
I support LD 1495 if it can be amended to change the proposed commission members to include 
mining experts who are peer-reviewed environmental scientists without financial ties to the 
mining industry.5  
I support LD 1564 which would stop unregulated mining allowed in the current law during 
exploration if a proposed amendment is adopted.6  
 In all the extensive research I have done since 2012 to understand the science of metallic metal 
mining, I have found no credible evidence that any science exists at this time to adequately 
protect the environment. Until such science exists, please, at least support all efforts to 
strengthen protections and reject all efforts to weaken them. Please see attached “Notes and 
Sources” for more detailed facts and examples.  
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.  
Alice Bolstridge, Ph. D. 
bolstridgea38gmail.com   
https://alice1938.blogspot.com/   
 
  
Testimony on Mining Bills 2 
 Notes and Sources 
1. Maine’s wet climate is especially vulnerable to mining toxins and pollutants leaching into its 
many lakes, rivers and tributaries which recreation and sporting industries depend on. “Jeff 
Reardon, [. . .] conservation director for Trout Unlimited, an opponent of the Bald Mountain 
mine, stated, “I’m worried about the groundwater and runoff water they can’t reach to treat.” 
[. . .] Mountains of sulfide-bearing waste rock, tailings, and debris excavated from the mine will 
continue to leach highly acidic water for decades, possibly centuries after the mine has closed. 
Meanwhile contaminated water in the pit will seep into ground-water that flows from a mountain 
at the headwaters of Maine’s ecologically sensitive trout fishing region.” 
(https://www.resistmainemining.org/mining-in-maine/ ) 
2.  LDs 1361, 1363, and 1433. At one lithium mining site, fish, cows, and Yaks were found dead 
in a nearby river from toxic chemicals leaked from a lithium mine.  Radiation hazards are, I 
hope, well-known. The industry risks inadequate protective measures to prevent radiation 
hazards and to remediate past failures in storage of radioactive waste with extremely long half-
lives. “Extremely risk averse measures need to be taken with new mining endeavors.” (Matthew 
Stevens, Environmental Impacts of Uranium Mining, March 9, 2017, Stanford University, 
Winter 2017,  http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2017/ph241/stevens1/    
https://carmamaine.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/CARMA-Fact-Sheet.pdf     
https://www.conserve-energy-future.com/causes-effects-mining-human-health-environment.php )  
3. LD 1508. I have concerns that this bill and the current law rely only on measures that would 
punish non-compliance after harm has been done, harm that could last in perpetuity. We need 
regulations to prevent harm before it happens.  
4. LD 1471. In discussion of environmental impacts, human-health impacts are frequently 
overlooked, but metallic metal mining is among the most hazardous occupations in the world. I 
know someone who worked at the exploration of Bald Mountain  in the 1970s who told me about 
a coworker who was hospitalized from toxins exposed to the air he was breathing.  
5. LD 1495. Of educational forums on mining I have attended featuring peer-reviewed experts in 
mining metallic minerals, they all had ties to the industry. In one, three experts lectured on the 
geology, technology advancements, and safety improvements. None mentioned the 
environmental or human-health risks, and they left no time for questions.  The Environmental 
Studies professor who hosted that forum, later gave a presentation at Bald Mountain on the 
geology of the area.  He started by proclaiming, “I am not a politician, and I won’t be getting into 
the political debate about the issue.” He ended by showing a slide of an Amish horse and buggy 
and saying, “We need these metals. Do you want to go back to this?” My unspoken answer: Yes, 
if our only choice is that or poisoning our world. I grew up on a subsistence level farm with a 
horse and no buggy as elegant as the Amish one. We were never hungry. I believe there are more 
choices, and we can do much better by investing in finding and developing healthier science, 
wiser scientists, and more sustainable choices.  
6. LD 1564. See note 4. 
