» 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
-3 6 2 STATE HOUSE STATION '?l2§'~<v"'°i “" /'0 
AUGUSTA, mm 04333-0002 
(207) 28'/-1440 
\@‘@v TTY: (207) 237-4469 
Michael Soboleski 
ll Snowy Ridge Road 
Phillips, ME 04966 
Cell Phone:(207) 400-7233 
Michael.soboleski@legislaturemaine. gov 
Senator Bremer, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. I am Representative 
Mike Soboleski of the 73rd District in the Western Mountains. I am here 
today to present LD 1433 “An Act to Exclude Pegmatites from the 
Deﬁnition of “Metallic Mineral”. 
There is an error with a comma. In the last sentence, please disregard the 
comma between metals and minerals and place one between pegmatite 
and metals. I will amend the change prior to the work session. Thank 
you. 
LD 1433 simply states that a pegmatite is not a Metallic Mineral. In 
drafting this Legislation I intend to ensure that all rules, regulations, 
procedures, policies, and protections under Chapter 200 are not 
disturbed. I intend to ensure that the Mining Act Regulatory Structure 
for permitting, oversight, accountability and enforcement authority are 
not disturbed. I intend to ensure the Water Quality Standards of the 
Department of Environmental Protection are not disturbed. In other 
words, I do not want to re-invent the wheel. This Legislations intent is to 
open the doorway to allow the safe, humane, and environmentally 
responsible quany mining of Lithium. My knowledge of the actual 
mining process is limited, so I’ll leave the technical aspects of it to the 
experts who will be offering testimony behind me. 
House District 73
Batteries are a necessary part of our world. Everyone uses many of them 
every day. Chances are — you have one with you right now. Chances are 
— you own a minimum two to three dozen of them right now. Chances 
are — if you lost all your batteries, you’d be out of touch, stranded, 
disconnected, and defenseless. We need Lithium. 
On April 2, 2021, Governor Janet Mills signed an executive order to 
accelerate Maine’s progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions from 
transportation, by calling for a “clean transportation roadmap” , a key 
piece of that overall effort estimates Maine will need 219,000 light-duty 
electric vehicles on the road by 2040 to meet that emissions target. We 
need Lithium. 
Additionally, the Governor ’s accelerated push for solar and wind power 
has heightened the demand for batteries even higher. 
On February 24, 2022 the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the 
Director of the U. S. Geological Survey (USGS), classiﬁed Lithium a 
critical mineral. We need Lithium. . 
A February 15, 2023 National Defense article states: By 2030, global 
demand for batteries is expected to increase more than ﬁve times, and 
U.S. demand nearly six times. We need Lithium. 
We, as a nation, have a responsibility to mine Lithium wherever we ﬁnd 
it, and that includes right here in Maine. 
Our biggest rival on the global stage is China. China has the sixth largest 
reserves of lithium in the world. In 2019 they mined 7500 tons of 
lithium making them the third largest producers in the world. They also 
control 80% of the world’s mineral processing. They are a threat. To 
offset that threat, on March 22, 2023 Albemarie Corporation announced 
a 1.3 billion dollar Lithium processing plant in Chester County, South 
Carolina. In Arizona, LG Energy Solutions has announced they will 
quadruple their initial budget to $5.5 billion dollars for their new battery 
production facility in Queens Creek.
As I previously stated, we have aresponsibility, not only to the citizens 
of Maine but to the citizens of our nation and the citizens of our world to 
do our part. LD 1433 ensures we do it in a safe, humane and 
environmentally responsible way. 
Thank you for your consideration and I’ll be happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
House District 73
