Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the ENR Committee:  
I represent no agency or entity other than myself and write testimony in opposition to  LD 1081 , as proposed.  
I’d start with a few questions to help clarify this proposal for me:  
1.) What does  ‘’bulk’’ mean i n the eyes of the drafter ? 
2.) Is the ‘’bulk’’ more than 10 gallons and it is leaving the munici pality, terri tory, and/or watershed?  
3.) What does ‘’withdrawn from ’’ mean, in the eye s of the drafter?  
4.) There are a number of commercial bulk water exporters who withdrawal water from watersheds  and 
aquifers that subsequently feed the se very types of lakes and ponds , as they are connected. Are all of 
these large bulk exporters of water now required to pay the State 10% of retail pr ice for the water that 
they take, beyond the dispropo rtionately and unre asonably low rates set by the PUC and water utilities 
for this use?  
5.) The 10% of retail price  appears to only go to the conservation protection of the waterbody, what about 
impacts to the surrounding communities and t hose in the affected watershed to do not own direct 
access waterfront to the lake or pond?  
Ponds and lakes are part of the hydrological  cycle, connected to aquifer and aquifer recharge areas.   
As such, this bill introduces further complexity and legalit ies surrounding lar ge-scale bulk water extraction, as 
the State is attempting to reign in control over it ’s water, assure the impacts are being reviewed and approved 
regionally, defining these types of uses, d efining what is reasonable, making sure Maine is not accepting 
unfavorable contract terms and durations, removing conflicts of interest in our water agencies, boards, and 
committees, affirming so cial and economic equality, and protections surrounding our precious resource.  
For this bill to be competent and reasonable, the focus must be more specific , additional definition s are needed , 
and the State needs to complete its legal  duties and obligations  to define  the extraction export use , define 
reasonable use of water , and understand local and regional impac ts beyond a wellhead/source  and reaffirm 
home rule  approvals,  as well as administration , and enforcement . This not yet been completed by the State 
since 2005 , as both the 2005 Water Co mmittee  and the 2022 Water Committee punted these significant work 
activiti es down the road  for someone else to figure out.  
 
I urge the committee to  vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1081 , as the intent of the drafter is unkn own and as 
written this bill may have much larger  negative  unintended consequences.  
