 
_____________________________________________________ ________________________  
 
Maine Indoo r Air Quality Council Testimony  in Support of  
LD 1353:  An Act to Adopt a Model Residential Ventilation Design & Installation Standard  
 
The Maine Indoor Air Quality Council (“MIAQC” or the “Council” ) is a 501(c) (3) nonprofit organization  
dedicated to creating healthy, productive and environmentally sustainable  indoor environments in 
Maine.  Our efforts focus on the development of education, communications, and advocac y for safe and 
healthy indoor environments where Maine citizens live, work, play and learn.  
 Dear Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
The Maine Indoor Air Quality Council submit s this testimony in support of LD 1353, an Act to Adopt a 
Model Residential Ventilation Design & Installation Standard.  
 
Testimony:  
 1) High er Performance Homes Need More Than Exhaust -only Ventilation  
 
• Maine is making a significant in vestment in both its new and existing house stock.  The current 
building energy code requires a significantly tighter building envelope than prior code versions.  The pending energy code will make those  building  envelopes even tighter.  
 
• A large number of M aine homes  rely on natural ventilation (no mechanical fan), or exhaust -only 
ventilation (kitchen and bath fans vented outdoors).  The Council believes that neither of these 
strategies is adequate in higher performance homes to move fresh air across a build ing space 
and to exhaust out pollutants.   
 
• The best  ventilation strategy is  recovery ventilation.  Recovery ventilation not only provides 
fresh air to areas where people spend most of their time (bedrooms, living rooms), it is also the 
most energy -efficient ventilation option.  
 
2) CSA F -326 Provides Essential Guidance for the Design and Installation of Residential Ventilation  
 
• ASHRAE 62.2, is a minimum acceptable ventilation standard for residential buildings that is 
currently a mandatory part of Maine’s building code (MUBE C).  ASHRAE 62.2 provides  designers 
and installers with guida nce on how much  fresh air is required in a home.  ASHRAE 62.2, 
however, does not provide professionals with guidance for what to do with that fresh air once 
it’s in the home.  
 
• CSA F- 326 bridges the gap between how much air to bring and how to deliver it to  the areas 
where people spend most of their time.  This includes guidance for the design and installation 
P.O. Box 2438, Augusta, Maine 04338  
Telephone:  207/626- 8115 
Fax:  207/626- 9015 
E-Mail:  christy@maineindoorair.org   
Web:  www.maineindoorair.org    
 
of recovery ventilation systems.  
 
3) Adopting CSA -F326 as a voluntary model standard does not conflict with Maine’s existing codes 
or standards.  
 
The CSA -F326 complements Maine’s existing codes and standards, including Maine’s ASHRAE 62.2 
ventilation code.  Systems designed in accordance with CSA F -326 will meet or exceed  the 
provisions of the ASHRAE 62.2 standard.  
 I have attached a copy of MIAQC’s  tip sheet on residential ventilation, as well as some more detailed 
information about the CSA F -326 standard.  
 The Maine Indoor Air Quality Council is willing to answer any questions or provide additional information to assist you at the work session.  
 Respectfully submitted by:  
 
Christine G. Crocker, Executive Director  
Maine Indoor Air Quality Council  
Telephone: 207 -626-8115; E -mail: christy@maineindoorair.org
  
April 19, 2023  
 * * * * * * * *  
 
  

About CSA  F-326 
 
What is CSA F -326 
 
“This Standard defines the requirements for performance, installation and application, and 
performance verification of mechanical ventilation systems”   
 
CAN/CSA -F326 -M, “Residential Mechanical Ventilation Systems,” is a comprehensive performance 
standard. It gives experienced ventilation system designers the flexibility to design a variety of 
residential ventilation systems that satisfy those requirements.   
 
CSA-F326 is the only available standard in North America that in forms users on proper design and 
installation of recovery ventilation systems.  
 
Why a Model Residential Ventilation Design & Installation Standard?  
 We are creating increasingly tighter residential buildings.  Our current ventilation code, ASHRAE 62.2 informs users how much fresh air to bring  in, but limited guidance on how to design systems to deliver 
that air to the occupants.  
 In Maine, we are continually building homes with energy efficiency and performance in mind. With increasing oil and electricity costs, everyone wants their energy bill as low as possible, while minimizing environmental impacts. However, tightening our houses also potentially keeps excess moisture, particulates, and pollutants trapped, which we inevitably breathe. Having a reliable way of getting rid of the stale air and replacing it with our clean outside Maine air is in our and our homes best interest. CSA F- 326 is a Canadian standard, and can be more applicable to Mainers because we share a similar 
climate with them.  
 Adding the C SA F -326 standard as a model standard increases the likelihood that recovery ventilation 
systems, which are preferred in higher performing homes, are designed and installed to perform as intended.  
 Adding the CSA F -326 standard provides Maine municipalitie s with an option to improve both the 
healthfulness of the residential environments within their communities, as well as the long -term 
sustainability of their housing stock.   
 LD 1353 establishes CSA F- 326 as a ventilation option that l ocal jurisdictions c an choose, on their own, 
to adopt .   
 Adoption of the CSA F -326 standard does not replace or conflict with the ASHRAE 62.2 standard .  It 
complements the ASHRAE 62.2 standard.  
 Why Use CSA -F-326?  
 It is the only available standard in North America that sets  minimum standards for the installation of 
recovery ventilation systems.  
 
Meeting CSA -F-326 will meet or exceed ASHRAE 62.2 airflow requirements.   
 
CSA-F-326 has specific design, installation, and verification guidance when compared to ASHRAE 62.2  
 ASHRAE 62.2 allows for Infiltration and Window Opening credits, CSA -F-326 does not. Allowing for air 
leakage is not only energy -inefficient, it  is also unreliable :  users cannot control where, or when, there 
will be sufficient ventilation to meet their needs.  
 
CSA-F-326 sets pressurization and depressurization limits for ventilation systems, and dictates when 
make -up or relief air may be necessary.  
 
CSA-F-326 has established training and certification programs in Maine  and Canada, with plenty of 
training options  for designers, builders, HVAC contractors, codes officials, and others . 
 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO) and the National 
Cancer Institute, 80% of our cancers have an environmental cause. 
And, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency says that our #1 
environmental threat is indoor air pollution. Think about it…how much time do you spend indoors? If you are like most Americans, the answer is, A LOT . On average, Americans spend 90% of their time indoors.
What can you do to prevent exposure to things in your home that might 
make you sick?  There are two strategies to effectively deal with indoor 
air pollutants:
•  Strategy #1 -  Don’t bring pollutants in. This is called source control. 
Preventing pollutants from entering your home in the first place is a 
key strategy for healthier indoor air quality.
•  Strategy #2 –  For pollutants that do get inside your home, give 
them a reliable way to get out to minimize exposure to you and your 
family. The primary strategy to remove pollutants from your home is 
ventilation .
How should you best ventilate your home?
There are several ways to ventilate your home .  Options include:
Natural Ventilation:
Natural ventilation relies on air moving in and out of a home without the assistance of a mechanical fan. Natural ventilation includes air that 
may come in through open windows as well as holes in the foundation, 
walls, or attic. There are two big problems with naturally ventilating homes in Maine. First, natural ventilation is inconsistent. Sometimes the natural forces will move enough air in and out of a home to ventilate 
it and sometimes they won’t. Wind and temperature are the driving 
natural ventilation forces and both of these can change on a daily if not hourly basis. Second, natural ventilation provides unpredictable distribution of fresh air throughout the home. Unless the fresh air 
pathways are uniform throughout the home, some rooms will get air 
exchange and some won’t. And, the tighter and more energy efficient a home is, the more likely it is that pollutants will get trapped indoors, 
making you and your family sick.
Ventilating Your Home
 
www.maineindoorair.org We know  there are 
things in our homes 
that can make us 
sick. From radon 
gas coming up 
through the ground 
to mold, dampness, 
dust, allergens, 
pests, and chemical 
contaminants—many things in your 
home are simply not 
healthy for you and 
your family.

Mechanical Exhaust Ventilation:
Using exhaust fans to remove pollutants as they are gener ated can reduce your 
exposure to them. Kitchen range hoods, bath fans, clothes dryer exhausts, 
and combustion appliance vents (all of which should be ducted directly to the 
outdoors) can capture pollutants at their source and remove them immediately. 
While you can get reliable movement of air out of a home by running exhaust fans, exhaust ventilation doesn’t guarantee delivery of fresh air to you and your family, nor can it remove pollutants from the entire  home.
Energy Efficiency Note:  Natural ventilation and mechanical exhaust 
ventilation are NOT energy-efficient.  100% of the energy used to warm indoor air is wasted when that air leaks out or is mechanically exhausted from 
your home, and 100% of the incoming fresh air requires extra energy to heat it 
to comfortable levels. 
Balanced Ventilation with Heat or Energy 
Recovery: 
Balanced  ventilation with heat or energy recovery 
is the most reliable and energy-efficient solution 
for providing whole house ventilation. A balanced 
ventilation system with heat/energy recovery is a 
simple network of ducts with a central ventilation unit. Balanced ventilation delivers fresh air to all areas of your home as well as removes stale air and pollutants out of all areas your home. The system is extremely energy-efficient, because outgoing warm air 
passes next to incoming fresh air within the central 
ventilation unit itself, thus pre-warming that air without added energy cost.  As much as 60-95% of the energy needed to heat air to comfortable indoor temperatures is recaptured and transferred during this 
process.
Ventilating Your Home (p. 2)
Build Tight, Ventilate Right
Modern construction trends call for  very tight, energy-efficient homes.  Without adequate ventilation, 
pollutants can get trapped indoors, making you and your family sick.  You can improve your home 
environment by making responsible choices about what you bring into your home.  Adequate ventilation, 
however, is needed to remove pollutants that do get in.  Ventilation is a critical component of an energy-
efficient, sustainable, healthy home.  Select a ventilation strategy that provides you with the best control of your indoor environment, and that delivers fresh air to you and your family. 
 
www.maineindoorair.org 
