 
 
 
Marc h 29th, 2023  
 
Senator  Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 1111: An Act Concerning Contracts and Agreement for 
Large -scale Water Extraction  
 
Senator  Lawrence , Representative  Zeigler, and members of the  Energy, Utilities, and Technology  Committee:   
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submi tting testimony in opposition to L.D. 1111. Unfortunately, due to a 
scheduling conflict, I am unable to deliver my testimony live in person, but we felt it was important to go on 
record and will be sure to be present for the work session.  
 
If passed, this legislation is intended to limit consumer -owned water utilities’ ability to enter  into contracts . It 
would limit the ability of a consumer -owned water utility from entering into  a contract for large -scale water 
withdrawal to a term longer than three years. It would also require a vote of the legislative body of each 
municipality and township “within the watershed” to approve the contract. We have serious concerns over this 
as it creates some uncertainty about what type of vote it would be and who would be involved. Additionally, it 
creates less predictability for the companies who may enter  contracts  for longer than 3 years.  
 
We believe L.D. 1111 is unnecessary and we have the co nfidence in our local water utilities to do the right thing 
and we believe they are trusted stewards of our water resources in Maine and in their local communities. We 
believe water utilities are fully capable of making decisions related to the management and protection of their 
water resources, including entering into contracts for large -scale water withdrawal. We already have state laws 
that provide  public notice and an opportunity for public input for these contracts. In addition, these contracts 
must be  approved by the Maine Public Utilities Commission to be sure they don’t harm ratepayers or affect the 
ability of the water district to perform its duties.  
To be clear, we believe the current arrangements have benefits for the ratepayers. Limiting the term of the 
contract to three years eliminates much of the certainty that is beneficial to ratepayers. The short -term contract s 
would also make it challenging for  companies  to plan operations and ultimately invest in such a sh ort-term 
arrangement.  It is critical that when debating public policy, we enact laws and create policy that make Maine a 
 
 
 better state for investment and allow our companies who currently operate here to have invest in new 
infrastructure which is critical f or their future success in Maine.  
We would respectfully ask the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 1111. Thank you.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
