Re: LD 1111 (HP 707) 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable 
Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, 
 
Please support LD 1111.  It will provide a reasonable common sense 
approach for planning water availability and usage for many small 
businesses, farms, municipalities and even for supplying adequate 
water and waste management to housing developments for young 
families.    
Periodic drought and unusual weather patterns, such as Maine is 
currently experiencing, can have a devastating effect, even in the short 
term, on the quality and quantity of water. Thus, a limit on large scale  
water extraction to a maximum of 3 years by “water companies” will 
help protect from  large scale extraction of water that leaves the area.   
Water extraction corporations are frequently venture capital and /or 
multinational, and have great diversity and deep financial reserves. 
They plan to extract, transport, and sell Maine’s water over long time 
periods placing smaller local endeavors at great risk. These long term 
contracts for water extraction have detrimental effects  on the local 
communities planning and resiliency. 
Western Maine is already having water problems in areas where long 
term corporate water extraction is occurring.  14% of the 194 
respondents in the town of Brownfield reported that their wells have 
gone dry in the last 10 years (Town of Brownfield Comprehensive Plan, 
2023). 
At a Fryeburg town meeting in 2019 concerns were expressed about 
the long erm effects of a contract allowing 45 years of water extraction.   
The hydrologist responded that “climate trends may decrease aquifer 
levels”.  Despite a contract for 45 years of continuous extraction, a 
“more detailed model” was needed. Significantly, private wells were 
not taken into account. (Conway Daily Sun, 1/15/19). Since then, levels 
of the Lovewell and Round Ponds in Fryeburg have continued to 
decrease.  In neighboring Sweden, anecdotal reports of dug wells going 
dry during the summer are becoming more frequent. 
Many aspects of a community’s activities can be affected by allowing 
long term water extraction such as waste management, land values, 
municipal income, out door activities such as fishing, bird watching, 
tourism and housing development.  
Requiring local approval is vital since the community provides the 
“boots on the ground” perspective and will be the first affected by the 
decreasing water levels from large scale long term water extraction, 
particularly when compounded by changing climate trends and unusual 
weather patterns. Local approval is vital for transparency and 
governance. 
With documented drought and unusual water patterns, exceedingly 
long-term large-scale extraction of water should be prohibited.  Long 
term large scale water contracts, such as 45, 15 or even 5 years, place 
Maine at risk.  Especially for those who need a guarantee of water 
availability in a constantly changing environment in order to prosper 
and plan for the future. 
Please support LD 1111.  
Thank you. 
 
Bruce Taylor                                                                                                                         
Sweden, 04040 
 
