Corey Lane
Porter, Maine
LD 1111
March 30, 2023
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and EUT Committee Members 
(Senators Grohoski & Harrington, and Representatives Babin, Boyle, Dunphy, Foster,
Geiger, Kessler, Paul, Runte, and Warren),
As a citizen and taxpayer of Porter, Maine, I write to you in support of LD 1111 “An 
Act Concerning Contracts and Agreements for Large-scale Water Extraction”  I 
appreciate your time and consideration on this important matter.
At a time when clean drinking water is becoming more scarce every day, the passing 
of LD 1111 would add some of the needed protections to Maine’s drinking water 
supplies, all of which are common sense for all that rely on it. The time of worrying 
about the profits of the Large-Scale Extractors needs to end as the citizens of Maine 
have been taken advantage of for way too long. 
Sec. 1. 35-A MRSA §6109-B: Contracts being limited to three years are needed due 
to the changing climate. This includes periods of drought that leave many with dry 
wells which, as you likely know, is incredibly expensive to resolve leaving many in a 
financial crisis.  Continuing to allow Large-Scale extractors to take advantage of our 
essential resource without this limit on the length of the contract is not practical. 
Without this limit, citizens of Maine would remain at risk for the profit of 
corporations as they laugh all the way to the bank. Limiting large scale extractors to 
three year contracts in our home rule state is just common sense and it is long 
overdue.  
Sec. 2. 35-A MRSA §6109-B, sub-§1-A: Maine is a home rule state and requiring 
local approval when considering contracts, agreements, extensions, and renewals 
gives important decisions like this back to the people where it belongs.  The addition 
of this section is common sense for the protection of the citizens of the State and is 
long overdue. 
Sec. 3. 35-A MRSA §6109-B, sub-§2, A-1. This is another common sense 
amendment that is long overdue.
Sec. 4. 35-A MRSA §6109-B, sub-§4, Transparency issues and lack of attention to 
detail (such as whether a company has met all approvals required) are, unfortunately, 
not uncommon. This amendment  is essential for the protection of the citizens of 
Maine and is long overdue. 
 
In closing, the State of Maine has been taken advantage of by Large-Scale Extractors 
for far too long.  LD 1111 closes some of the gaps that have benefited for profit 
companies at the expense of the citizens of the State of Maine.  It is time that citizens 
in our home rule State have some control over our water which we all rely on to 
survive and the passage of LD 1111 would be a step in that direction.  
Please vote in support of LD 1111 the added protection of the health, safety and 
welfare of the citizens of the State of Maine. 
Sincerely, 
Corey Lane
Resident and taxpayer of Porter, Maine

