 
 Senator Mark Lawrence, Representative S. Paige Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technologies 
Committee ( Senators Grohoski & Harrington, and Representatives, Babin, Boyle, Dunphy, Foster, Geiger, Kessler, Paul, 
Runte, and Warren ) 
 
I represent no agency or entity, only myself as a resident, taxpayer, voter, and property owner in full support of LD1111  as 
it is written.  This committee and the legislature ha ve the power  over this problem ; ‘’exceptions shall be subj ect to future 
legislative limitations of the right to transport water ’’ (Title 22 section 2660 -A subsection 3A ).  
 
Some folks at Maine Municipal Association  squabble d last week that this effort to ‘’reaffirm local control and community 
participation ’’, will cause in -fighting and be a nuisance . Maybe, but we have not had this conversation for decades, and 
been restricted by the State from doing so.  I tend to take a more a ctive  approach regarding democracy , the rule of law, 
and integrity . Without th ese three things, having a government  really doesn ’t matter, does it ? 
 
Since the 1999 Maddux v. Giles  ruling nearly a generation ago , the State has still avoided : (1) defining this extraordinary 
and non -traditional water use ( bulk water extraction/export ), (2) studying regional impacts to communities outside of a 
nomi nal wellhead buffer , or (3) defining  what the reasonable use of water is . After a flurry of  private activity  from 2000 -
2006 to gain co mplete dominance over the b ulk water export  market  here  in this State , Maine actually went  in reverse  and 
(4) proceeded to weaken ou r water pro tections  from 2005 -2013  (122nd, 123rd, 124th, 125th, 126th legislatures ), in complete 
opposition to  the 1989 -1990 Maine Water Board Report findings  and recommendations : 
 
2005 public law, chapter 4 82 part A section 2 (LURC/MEDEP permitting weakened , removed prohibitions on impacts to 
other regional land uses , eg. new farms , etc…) – LD1643 (122nd Legislature)  
2007 public law, chapter 399 sections 4, 5, 6, and 7  (requirement for a water to be exported to a place  or people in need  
was removed , exceptions from export law expanded ) – LD1743 (123rd legislature)  
2009 public law, c hapter 37 section 1  (actions regarding water exempted from FOAA  and local control undermined ) – 
LD238 (124 legislature)  
2011 public law, chapter 682 section 38  (LURC/MEDEP permitting weakened , requirement for community and area ‘’need 
for the use ’’ removed ) – LD1798 (125th legislature)  
2013 public law, chapter 381 part B sections 2 and 31  – (definition of large -scale transportation of water and prohibition 
restrictio n exceptions from the transport of water  law was  broad ened/expanded ) - LD1392 (126th legislature)  
 
Over the last five y ears or so  I’ve heard or read the buzz phrase below from State legislators, various token committees, 
and even bulk water extractors/exporters : ‘’We need to assure economic and social equality and local priorities in 
development’’ , but to me, talk is cheap and the actions  (and inactions ) of the State and private speculators over the past 
generation speak s volumes .  
 
Sure, the State has created several token ‘’Water’’ committees through legislation since the 1999  court ruling , but as noted 
above, t hey both have continued to kick-the-can on local impacts, figuring out what is reasonable  use, or defining this use , 
and worked toward gnawing a way at our protections that  Water Board of 1989 made clear needed to be strengthened .  
 
Until MDWP and BEP appointees are held to the standards of M.R.S.A. 5 Sections 18 and 19 , ANY  state-led effort regarding 
our water resources strains credibility and will continue to fail to meet the sniff test. Our financial disclosure and conflict of 
interest laws for executive appointees are weak, allowing those with substantial  financial interest s (e.g. dictating the profit 
and risk of their mother  company ) to sit on influential State boards that exert ed heavy sway over the  actions ( or inactions ) 
of the 2005 and 2022 water committees  and shaped their recommendations  and future legi slation . Maine’s financial 
disclosure requirements even conflict with Federal Law  (Section 402 of the Federal Pollution Control Act, 33 USC, Sec. 
1342 ), in regard to lax standards for appointments to several powerful entities that mak e and steer  water decisions in 
Augusta.  Let’s get that taken care.  
 
  
Regarding ‘’Absolute Dominion’’ , it is construed that there is ample evidence of  waste, neglect, and interference in the 
propagation  and concealment of this undefined use  over the past generation that  justifiably nullif ies any c laim to that 
antiquated right . Mainers need to define what reasonable use  is and move into the 21st century, as we’re a generation 
behind and getting fleeced because we are not keeping up. 
 
The PUC -BEP-MDWP -Public Water Utilities have continue d to skirt local land use reviews and approvals  base d on gaps and 
conflicts in ou r laws  (hence LD1111 with local approvals and a reasonable 3 -year contract limitation ), and Maine even 
went  so far as to then shield bulk water extraction /transport  activities from FOAA  transparency to the public  (See MRSA 
35-A Section 6109 -B subsections 5.A.1 and 5.B implemented in 2009) , completely concealing the actions of numerous State 
agencies and boards  from view and accountability . The exemption from FOAA  introduced in 2009  is extremely disturbing , 
and telling. 
 
It’s quite clear that the PUC and other groups ( BEP/MDWP/Public Water Companies ) do not have the legal authority to 
evaluate impacts outside of the ir tiny wellhead  or to administer and enforce a use that causes impacts on communities , 
and they admitted they wouldn’t e ven know where to begin . That is the legal requirement, duty, and authority of 
municipalities  (Maine Supreme Court Case Law ( Taylor v. PUC - PUC 15 -89 - 5.12.16 ) ruled that the MPUC does not have the 
authority to consider impacts beyond the immediate impacts on the facility when approving long -term contractual 
agreements for bulk water extraction export.)  
 
So if the PUC, BEP, MD WP, and Water Utilities don’t administer use permitting and long -term comprehensive planning for 
each and every town they impact , or even know how or where to begin  (as they have previously admitted ), then  why have 
the statutory tools and obligations of political subdivisions be en circumvented regarding bulk water export? ( examples 
below ): 
Size of use, size of development, percentage of impervious, percentage of impervious in relation to acreage, set -backs,       
screening, buffering, noise, infrastructure and traffic impact analysis, property tax rates (to address school and road tax 
burden incre ases), permitting (outlining evaluation facets and impact reviews), permit fees (to cover administration costs), 
impact fees (road degradation and violated truck routes), covering consultant -engineering -testing -monitoring -enforcement -
public safety -legal la bor costs, conflict of interest ethical standards for consultants, extraction volume metrics (defining Uses 
and priorities, which was tabled/ignored by both the 2005 -2007 AND 2022 Water Board s), written approval from all 
municipalities sharing an affected watershed and a quifer for this use, additional testing, type of testing/monitoring, extent of 
reporting, and low -flow policies, are ALL under the authority and control of the municipalities, reinforced by the State of 
Maine legal construct, and implied to address current  regulatory loopholes  and assure economic and social equality.  
The PUC -BEP-MDWP -Water Utilit ies also mistakenly discount and even  firesale ‘’time’’ , which is possibly even the  more  
valuable resource  being given away in th e bulk water extraction/export equation. Maine rates have still not been updated 
properly for this undefined extraordinary and non -traditional use , even after two decades, and this is a fundamental  duty 
and responsibility of the PUC  to appropriately manage . ‘’Time ’’ is the  critical metric for humanity that we take for grant ed, 
and need we need to value it when we allow  or have to clean  up the  problems that we create.  
 
On a side note, s ince roughly two -thirds of the bulk water export extraction and export properties in Maine are in Tax 
Increment Financing  (TIFs) , it is even more critical that local use review and approval is not circumvented by the PUC -BEP-
MDWP -Public Water Utilities , hence LD1111 . Areas of a community  who don’t have the political clout or  savvy  to nudge 
their way into ‘’TIF inclusion zone s’’ end up subsidizing it  and eventually falling into disrepair themselves , just like the  ring of 
decay and despair around , say, downtown  Las Vegas. TIF has been found to  predominantly exist for the benefit of a few  at 
the expense of the remainder , and  it is being phase d out by other States that previously  touted it.  
 
  
 
Regarding Maine’s water resources, I  tend to rely on the 1989 Water Board Report , as it was prior to the flurry of water 
speculation, positioning, and lobbying from 2000 -2006, or the dilution of our water pro tections from 2005 -2013, and the 
findings in this report are  in the best interest of all Mainers . I suppose a picture is worth a thousand words:  
 
I’m not interested in being the next the San Joaquin Valley, Flint Michigan, Charleston West Virginia, or even the 
Passamaquoddy/Eastport area here in Maine, and no one can say with any certainty what our resources will look like in 40 -
50 years, no one , and it is even less certain now given the pervasiveness of PFAS  that has been poisoning our soils, waters, 
and families  for nearly two generations . Right now, if I wanted to start a farm in say Fryeburg Maine, I can ’t, because the  
large -scale water contract already consumes so much of the aquifer that there is not enough capacity  left for new 
agriculture . Let that sink in for a  minute:  One of the oldest farming communities in Maine can ’t even expan d food 
production because of an undefined and un controlled  water use. 
 
I’m not interested in any entity  engaging in predatory and anti -competitive conduct that is unfortunately facilitated by  
Maine’s loose rules, a ny entity  with intent to fully control the water  export market  here in Maine , and an y entity that has a 
dangerous probability of success if we co ntinue to do nothing.   
 
I’m also not thinking about how to get as much of our water out of our state for as cheap  and fast  as possible to pad my 
investor ’s stock values , while controlling the narrative  here  to salvag e my reputation , long -term impacts be damned . 
 
LD1111 is about local democracy, Home Rule, economic equality, social equality and  long -term sustainability , which is why I 
support it.  
 

 
 In closing, over the past generation, Maine has inadvertently weakened public transparency as well as avoided social and 
economic  equity regarding bulk water export speculation . The result has been  an uncontrolled use that has not been 
defined, a use causing local and regional impacts that ha s not been quantified or evaluated, amounts of water  moving  
out of state  or wrapped in 3 layers of plastic that is unreasonable, and all occurring  with in complete obscurity, while  
Maine  and th e citizenry get  near nothing in return  and can ’t be assure d of their future with water . 
 
It is hopeful we will be willing to right the ship  before things get more out of hand  than they already are . I hope that you all 
will read  the 1989 Water Board report  it in its entirety before rendering a decision , and  schedule future workshops in order 
to drill down into the history of Maine ’s effort to weaken it ’s water protections, and  to explore the  positions and people  
appointed who influenc ed that direction.  
 
I urge the Committee to vote Ought To Pass on LD1111 , as it is competent, reasonable, and a needed course correction that 
has been a long time coming.  
 
Thank you.  
Dan 
Dan Davis
Porter
LD 1111
Attached.
