1 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 1111 An Act Concerning Contracts and Agreement for Large -scale Water  
Extraction  
Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology   
Public Hearing  
March 30, 2023  
 
Chair Senator Lawrence; Chair Representative Zeigler; and Honorable Committee 
Members:  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT of LD 1111 An Act 
Concerning Contracts and Agreement for Large -scale Water Extraction. My name is 
Jacquelyn Ellio tt and I live in Waterboro. My wheelhouse is waste management policy. 
For almost thirty years I have advocated for policy that protects the environment , public 
health , and the rights of impacted communities.  Waste is a verb and something we 
choose to do – whether it be what we throw away o r how we use our water resources . 
Clean water resources are of primary importance . Water sustains life and the supply is 
not infinite and is increasingly fragile due to  continued abuse .  
Recurring theme s in my advocacy over the decades ha ve been the failure s of 
legislation and regulation. In part, that  can be attributed to lack of foreknowledge and 
unforeseen consequences. However, we are gaining knowledge  and ignorance can no 
longer provide an excuse . Looking forward, r egulators cannot do what they have no legal 
basis for doing. Laws provide the necessary structure for how we function together  in 
mutually beneficial ways.  Regulations and rules refine the application of those laws . We 
can allow  we are living the reality that our choices matter. As relates to water resources,  
Maine  citizens are  experiencing  the unfolding nightmare of water contaminated with 
PFAS forever toxic chemicals. There is a scramble  to discover  if there are effective ways 
to reclaim those poisoned waters . That remains an unanswered question. Decision 
2 
 
makers  ignored warnings1 more than two de cades ago to stop spreading waste sludge on 
our farmlands  above our aquifers and groundwater sources.  The concerns then were 
heavy metals such as mercury and lead and pathogens. Even  today, we continue to 
discharge millions of gallons of effluent poisoned with PFAS and other toxics into our 
rivers  with the expectation that we will have a future with clean water resources sufficient 
to sustain life .  
Our precious water resources need our care. Maine is facing periods of drought 
where wells are going dry and farmers are suffering  the hardship s of crop failures and 
challenges to provide  water for their livestock. Municipal water supplies have had to 
insti tute conservation measures and some communities have been forced  to rely on 
trucked -in water to meet their needs.  Large water withdrawals and exportation of 
Maine’s resources are having negative impacts across the State and region and current 
law does not provide an effective mechanism for municipalities and abutters to have 
meaningful participation in permitting decisions. The result of current law has been 
outcomes that are exploitive of Maine’s  valuable water resources  and disregard the rights 
of many.  Adding to the concerns, evidence  supports that large withdrawal activities 
approach near monopolist ic status.  
 Maine  should follow the admonition of our motto DIRIGO and consider  the future  
with a n informed  precautionary and preventative approach. The stakeholder table must 
represent shared rights directed at sustainability and equality. LD 1111 move s us in a 
direction  where we view  our aquifers and groundwater as a shared resource 
unconstrained by lines on a map or property boundaries.  The framework that LD 1111 
proposes encourages a democratic process that is locally accountable; engenders  
 
1 Parnell, Harris K., October 2001, Toxic Sludge in Our Communities: Threatening Public Health 
and Our Farmlands, https://communityactionworks.org/wp -content/uploads/toxic -sludge -
in-our-communities.pdf   
 
3 
 
cooperation in a  more inclusive management approach; and accommodates the realities 
of climate disruption.  
Decision ma kers with the power and responsibility have not yet met the challenge 
of conserving and stewarding Maine’s valuable and irreplaceable water resources. 
Current law s and regulation s do not have authority to consider long -term effects of bulk 
water extraction  contracts  and leave important unresolved issues unaddressed . Rights of 
municipalities and abutters are being unreasonably dominated by powerful vested 
interests . That can no longer be endured. LD 1111 begins the process of shifting the 
paradigm as well as resolving conflicts of interest involved with the present  entities having 
oversight and regula tory authority  and moves them to compliance with federal law.  
Thank you for considering my comments and I ask that The Committee vote 
OUGHT TO  PASS  on LD 1111 .  
Jacquelyn Elliott  
148 West Road  
Waterboro, ME  04087 -3210  
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@rodrunner.com   
 
