150 cantor smear. suns5 
£‘1»‘~ , nueusrams 0432:: 
M, ~@k ‘ OFFJCE 4207) 523 9511 
Maine Water Utilities Association F“ W79 523351’? 
._.-~ 
organized 1925 \!l"§¥WJ!'\'iIU3.0fQ 
March 30, 2023 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Paige Zeigler J12, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD llll An Act Concerning Contracts and Agreement for Large-scale Water Extraction 
Dear Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Zeigler and Members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association opposes this bill. Current law provides adequate oversight and 
protection for the public. 
About MVVUA. MWUA is a is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides support for 
water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Conclusion: This bill looks to remedy a local issue with a state wide regulation. LD llll is in 
response to a handful of instances where consumer owned water utilities are selling water to Poland 
Spring. Municipalities have the power to regulate land use locally, and some do regulate water 
extractions. This bill would strip the authority of all water district trustees statewide to sell water to 
certain users, as well as the authority to enter into contracts that would beneﬁt the customers that they 
represent. These local issues should be handled locally, by municipal ordinances, not with a statewide 
imposition on every district ’s home rule authority. 
Not only should the terms of these contracts not be limited to 3 years, they should not be in State 
statute at all. 
Protection of the Resource 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), Land Use Planning Commission (LUPC), 
Maine Department of Health and Human Service’s (DHHS) Drinking Water Program, and the Maine 
Public Utilities Commission (MPUC) each play a statutorily deﬁned role in regulating groundwater 
withdrawal and use in Maine. 
Maine DEP 
DEP’s role is comprehensive and effective. 38 MRS § 480-B deﬁnes Signiﬁcant Groundwater Well 
and the Standards set forth in 38 MRS § 480—D specify that operation of a signiﬁcant groundwater well 
will not have an “undue unreasonable ejﬁct on waters of the State, water-related natural resources 
and existing uses, including, but not limited lo, public or private wells within the anticipated zone of 
contribution to the withdrawal. In making ﬁndings under this subsection, the department shall 
consider both the direct effects of the proposed withdrawal and its eﬂects in combination with existing 
water withdrawals".
The permitting standard quoted appears in the Department ’s Site Law (38 M.R.S § 484 (3F), the 
NRPA (38 M.R.S. §480-D (10)), the Bulk Water Transport permitting program at DHHS’s Drinking 
Water Program (22 M.R.S.§ 2660-A, (3D)), and in LUPC’s statutes (12 M.R.S. § 685-B, (4C)). By 
including this standard in each of these laws, no matter where a new signiﬁcant groundwater extraction 
is proposed in Maine or which regulatory agency deals with the application, it will be required to meet 
the same regulatory standards to provide groundwater protection. The agencies involved also 
coordinate with each other to ensure the consistency of these reviews 
Maine DHI-IS Drinking Water Program 
As noted above, the Maine Drinking Water Program regulates the transport of water in accordance 
with 22 MRS §2660-A: Restrictions on transport of water. The transport of water for commercial 
purposes by pipeline or other conduit or by tank vehicle or in a container, greater in size than 10 
gallons, beyond the boundaries of the municipality or township in which water is naturally located or 
any bordering municipality or township is only allowed if the above referenced Standards, quoted 
above, are met. MPUC is a review agency under the Bulk Water Transport Permit program. 
Maine Public Utilities Commission 
MPUC, under 35- A l\/[RS §6l09—B has oversight and approval authority relative to any contract or 
agreement between a consumer-owned water utility and another entity that involves the large-scale 
extraction of water and the large-scale transportation of water. 
A public meeting is required, as is public notice to each of the utility’s customers, the PUC, the Office 
of the Public Advocate, the municipality or municipalities where the source of water is located and ina 
newspaper of general circulation in the area served by the consumer-owned water utility. 
A Case History: Rumford Water District Compliance with 35-A MRS § 6109-B and MPUC 
Docket 2018-00022 Request For Approval to Lease Property & Supply Groundwater to Nestle 
Waters North America Pertaining to Rumford Water District 
The MPUC process that Rumford Water District (RWD) followed to secure approval to sell 
groundwater to Nestle Waters North America is instructive, as it relates to discussion of LD 111 1. 
There were two major aspects, which are summarized, with a synopsis of timetable and events, below. 
Compliance with 35-A MRS § 6109-B: Prior to ﬁling the Request For Approval to Lease Property & 
Supply Groundwater to Nestle Waters North America (MPUC Docket 2018-00022) RWD complied 
with the Water Agreement requirements under the following timetable: 
0 January 4, 2017 — RWD Trustees move to open negotiations with NWNA. 
0 March 1, 2017 Trustees held public meeting to update public on status of negotiations with 
NWNA, sought questions and comments from public. 
Q May 31, 2017 Trustees held second public meeting, and at this time provided notice pursuant to 
35-A MRS 6109-B that public meeting on proposed Agreements would be held on July 12, 
20 1 7. 
0 July 12, 2017 meeting — Trustees present to public terms and conditions of proposed 
Agreements, provided opportunity for comment. A handful of people comment, some in favor 
and some opposed. In response to a comment, parties revised a provision in Agreement
pertaining to the redundancy project, designed such that each of the RWD wells could serve the 
entire customer base. 
v August 15, 2017 — Trustees vote to sign Agreements with NWNA. 
The MPUC Docket 2018-00022 Process: RWD ﬁled this Petition application on January 22, 2018. 
The Commission order was issued on July 13, 2018. In the Petition RWD sought approval under 35-A 
MRS sections 703(3—A) and 1101. 
Section 1101(4) authorizes the Commission to exempt transactions involving utility property “that do not 
materially affect the ability of a utility to perform its duties to the public” from review and approval under 
section 1101(1)(A). In the decision (Commission Order) the Commission certiﬁed, pursuant to 35-A 
M.R.S. § 1101(4), that the Amended and Restated Water Purchase and Facility Agreement (Water 
Agreement) between the Rumford Water District (District) and Nestle Waters North America Inc. 
(N WNA), ﬁled on May 16, 2018, does not require Commission authorization under 35-A M.R.S.§ 
1 1 0 1 ( 1 )(A). 
Additionally, the Commission found that the Water Agreement satisﬁed the requirements of a Special 
Rate Contract under 35-A M.R.S. § 703 (3 ~A), and that the District entered into the Water Agreement 
in compliance with 35-A M.R.S. § 6109-B. 
The initial Petition application included the application for Signiﬁcant Groundwater Well Permit under 
the Natural Resources Protection Act. On May 2, 2018 RWD ﬁled a copy of its NRPA Signiﬁcant 
Groundwater Well Permit, which had been issued by the DEP on May 1, 2018. 
Processing of this application included a number of interactions among RWD, Commission staff, 
intervenors and others. There were 21 items in this docket. This process was thorough and rigorous. 
LD 1111: Proposed Revisions to 35-A MRS §6109-B 
Consumer-owned water utilities are governed by trustees who are either directly elected or appointed 
by elected municipal ofﬁcials. They are governmental entities operating in the public eye, subject to 
Maine’s Freedom of Access Act. Other governmental bodies in Maine are empowered to make 
decisions in the best interest of their constituents. Water utilities in Maine have prudently exercised 
this authority for over 100 years. This bill would strip trustees of their authority to enter into certain 
contracts by requiring a vote of municipal leaders throughout a supply’s watershed, place unreasonable 
limitations on such contracts, and quite honestly is an infringement on Home Rule. Currently the 
Statue requires a notiﬁcation process and public meeting, which allows for public involvement and 
also various agencies ’ review and approval, providing adequate oversight while maintaining the 
authority of trustees. We do not oppose transparency; we do oppose an infringement on the authority 
of duly elected or appointed trustees of a quasi-municipal entity chartered by the Maine Legislature. 
Please note that the “watershed ” of large water supplies such as Sebago Lake or Lake Auburn include 
vast areas and many municipalities. The same holds true for groundwater sources of supply that are 
associated with and recharged by rivers and streams. By way of example, the Rumford Water District 
well, which provides Water to NWNA, has a 163 square mile watershed This would give veto power 
over a water district board of trustees, to any one of many legislative bodies that do not represent the
customers of the water supply, and would require an additional vote every 3 years as contracts would 
expire. This does not make sense and is very bad public policy. 
Please be aware that there are numerous interconnections and long tenn contracts to sell water between 
several utilities in Maine. These include Kennebec Water District to Oakland, Bath Water District to 
Wiscasset Water District, and on Route One, except for a small gap between Freeport and Brunswick, 
the water systems are interconnected from Kittery to Edgecomb. 
Contracts to sell water as deﬁned in this bill, and contracts between interconnected water utilities, 
involve signiﬁcant investment into both inﬁastructure and permitting. The terms of the contract reﬂect 
what is prudent to justify the agreement and to make the investment feasible. Water system managers 
and their trustees are best positioned and are the most qualiﬁed to develop and manage these 
agreements. 
We urge the Committee to report out LD 1111 Ought Not To Pass. 
Sincerely,
7 
@*%¢““~‘r~/%/ 
Jeffrey McNelly, Liaison 
Maine Water Utilities Association 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director, MVVUA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
