Lissa Widoff 
PO Box 21  
Freedom, ME 04941 
 
March 30, 2023 
 
Greetings Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and EUT Committee Members, 
 
My name is Lissa Widoff, I live in Freedom, ME and I am writing in support of LD 1111 “An Act 
Concerning Contracts and Agreement for Large-Scale Water Extraction”. I am an ecologist, 
planner and environmental professional who has worked in a variety of capacities in Maine 
natural resource matters since 1980. 
 
This bill is simply long overdue. We all agree that Maine is blessed with abundant water that 
serves many community, individual and economic needs. However, as we see across the 
country and across the globe, the privatization of water, especially of groundwater, is a trend 
that Maine can do much more to protect itself from. As demands on water resources grow from 
industry and development, and new harms upon our water resources come to light, like PFAS 
contamination, anything we can do to strengthen the public interest in water protection and set 
limits for water extraction and related uses is welcomed.  
 
LD 1111 is a very modest step in the direction of more oversight over how private water 
resources are contracted to private parties for extraction, as it once was before a similar law 
was overturned in 2006. As you all know, Maine law places ownership of water in the hands of 
whomever holds the land title. This does little to acknowledge both cumulative impacts upon 
and uses of the shared waters beneath the surface of the land. Most states recognize water 
rights as a separate ownership right in the “bundle” of rights that accompany land ownership, 
which allows more realistic negotiations about how the limited water resources of a river, aquifer 
or other body, can meet community needs now and in the future. LD 1111 would allow for a 
more holistic and watershed approach to water resource management. 
 
Placing a 3 year limit on contracts allows for a much needed control and oversight of how 
promised practices are proceeding and be able to make adjustments in a timely way. Loopholes 
exist in how water extraction projects are evaluated (as noted in Taylor v. PUC - PUC 15-89 - 
5.12.16 ) whereby MPUC does not have the authority to consider impacts beyond the immediate 
impacts on the facility when approving long-term contractual agreements for bulk water 
extraction export. Allowing this perspective to continue instead of taking steps to better stewad 
our water resources simply makes no sense.  
 
Without reviewing the years and years of prior efforts to recognize the vulnerability and the great 
value of Maine;’s water resources, as I am sure others will do, I urge you to support LD1111 as 
a first step in ensuring that the ecological, natural resource and community values of water will 
be better protected and regulated, before we all find ourselves high and dry from essentially a 
giveaway of our water resources for private gain.  
 
Thank you for your consideration, 
 
Lissa Widoff 
 
 
