LD 1111 - An Act Concerning Contracts and Agreements for Large-Scale Water 
Extraction 
March 30th, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee, 
My name is Luke Sekera - Flanders, I come here from Orono, where I am studying 
Political Science at the University of Maine, but l grew up in Fryeburg, one of many 
communities whose circumstances should affirm the urgency of supporting the bill 
before you. 
ln 2012, our private water supplier entered an agreement with Poland Spring, allowing 
them to extract millions of gallons of groundwater for bottling and export for 45 years. 
Poland Spring secured this contract without the consent of the town’s residents. My first 
time delivering a speech was at the PUC hearing on the contract, which only happened 
because of public outcry after the closed door negotiations were made known to the 
public. 
Rather than making my acquaintance with state government in school, l have done so 
as a member of one of the communities it has failed to protect. As I said in the town hall 
a decade ago, under the conditions of the Fryeburg contract, l would not have a say in 
the matter until l am 54 years old. 
Shortening the length of these contracts is reasonable and necessary. There is already 
a precedent in Maine state law for three year limits to these contracts. Watersheds do 
not begin and end at town lines, and the impacts of bulk water exports affect more than 
one community. We need our laws to better reflect scientific reality. 
We can no longer afford to take these water sources for granted. Abundance alone is no 
justification to have anything but robust protections for groundwater and the people that 
depend on it. With climate change rapidly altering the condition of water sources and 
access worldwide, we don't know for sure where our region will stand in the coming 
decades. The crisis of PFAS contamination, which is rapidly growing in public 
awareness and urgency, adds further uncertainty. Already a quarter of the world’s 
population does not have access to clean drinking water, and with current trends this 
number will rise. With these factors in mind, should we not be able to revisit these 
contracts frequently, in accordance with environmental well being and the needs of the 
community?
This is not about targeting a single company or industry. it is about protecting the water 
sources we rely on as more of the world faces strained access to drinkable water. lt is 
about taking precaution with our lives’ most important and delicate foundation. it is 
about the youth, and the many generations to follow whose capacity to live in peace and 
prosperity will be shaped by our actions, especially with such a vital element as water. 
Thank you for hearing me today, 
Luke Sekera - Flanders
