Nancy Cconway
Hollis
LD 1111
Greetings Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and EUT Committee Members,
My name is Nancy Conway.  I live in Hollis, ME and I am testifying in support of LD
1111 “An Act Concerning Contracts and Agreement for Large-Scale Water 
Extraction”.
Passage of this bill would allow municipalities to better understand the impact of 
large-scale water extraction/export on our communities, through the 3-year 
permit/contract renewal process.  Municipalities would have the opportunity to review
more up-to-date data, address concerns, as well as request changes to 
permits/contracts as deemed necessary.   This is an important step toward ensuring 
more local control of our most precious resource.  
In recent years, we have experienced severe drought conditions which impacted some 
local people’s ability to access water.   We also do not know the full extent of PFAS 
contamination of our groundwater.  We need to do everything possible to protect our 
aquifers.    By limiting the length of permits/contracts for large-scale water extraction 
to three years, followed by the permit/contract review process, this can be more easily
accomplished.  Any potential damage to aquifers, streams, and ponds could be averted
before severe harm is done.  
Hollis has the largest bottling plant in North America. We have no “review system.” 
This does not make for a good working relationship. There is a disconnect between 
the large-scale water extractor/exporter, Town officials, and the residents. Many of 
our concerns go unanswered. That is why I so strongly support LD 1111.  The 3-year 
permit/contract renewal process would ensure the engagement of municipalities, thus 
allowing for the concerns of residents to be addressed. If we are going to allow such 
large-scale water extraction/export, it needs to be a working partnership. The best way
to ensure accountability is to limit the length of the permits/contracts to three years, 
with a rigorous permit/contract renewal process. 
Respectfully,
Nancy Conway
 

