Nels Liljedahl
Fryeburg
LD 1111
Hello Committee Members;
I would like to express my support for LD1111 through this written testimony.
I have been a resident of Fryeburg, Maine for almost thirty years and love being here 
due to the many and various natural ecosystems and opportunities to recreate in 
natural settings. One place I visit frequently is Round Pond, which is on Fryeburg 
town land that is leased to the Eastern Slopes Regional Airport. This is a 4 acre pond 
that is up to twelve feet deep at normal water levels, and is nearly entirely spring fed, 
with no inlet or outlet. Surrounding the pond is a globally rare ecosystem called 
Outwash Plain Pond Shore Community, with only 5 of these exemplary communities 
existing in Maine. There is another one nearby on Davis Pond which is a little smaller
but has the same rare characteristics. One time I was ice skating on Round Pond and 
counted 39 round areas of black and thinner ice, showing me the locations of all the 
springs.
The water levels in both of these rare and fragile ponds have been steadily dropping 
since I started making regular observations 8 years ago. Now the water level in Round
Pond is only 9 feet deep. This is having a detrimental effect on the Outwash Plain 
Pond Shore Community. I am fully convinced that the bulk extraction of the water in 
the aquifer below these ponds are the cause of these drops in water levels.
Poland Spring has a contract to extract bulk water from this aquifer for another 10 
years before the contract is even reviewed again. The contract allows 20 years with an
additional 5 automatic renewals equaling 45 years with no public input. This is way 
too long! If LD 1111 is passed this would allow other communities to have more 
input and scrutiny of any bulk water extraction contracts, for the long term benefit of 
the community.
I am also in support of allowing other municipalities within a watershed where bulk 
water extraction is proposed to have legal authority. Water travels across municipal 
boundaries and it only makes sense to take the concerns of all affected by water use 
no matter where the municipal boundary lies.
 
