Sherri Billings
Fryeburg
LD 1111
Dear Committee Members: 
I am writing in support of LD1111.
A little background about me is that I have lived in Fryeburg, Maine for the past 12 
years, I am a UNH Natural Resource Steward, and a member of the Fryeburg 
Conservation Committee. I was present at the PUC meeting in 2013, where almost all 
of those testifying were pleading and bringing logical reasoning to stop a 45 year bulk
extraction contract for Poland Spring. Many of our citizens testified against the 
contract, and I specifically recall testimony that was allowed, but not would not 
become a part of the record, because the speaker was from over the state border in 
New Hampshire. This person specifically cited what LD1111 puts forth – The 
realization that extraction at the cite in Fryeburg over the center of the Wards’ Brook 
aquifer would affect the “edges” of the aquifer bowl, long before measures in the 
center showed decrease in volume. And that there was much concern beyond the 
borders of Fryeburg when it came to the 45-year extraction contract.
In my town we are seeing the decrease in Ward’s Brook Aquifer water volume by 
observing a very special spring fed pond called Round Pond. The pond has decreased 
in size dramatically. Year after year I have gone to observe the nature and enjoy the 
pond and it seems like it won’t be long before it disappears altogether. If you take a 
look at it you can see the vegetative shore line is now several feet from the edge of the
pond and that distance is increasing. The pond has significantly decreased in 
circumference and depth. The pond is a visual representation of what is happening to 
our aquifer, because the pond exists due to the springs that feed it from underground. 
It is a rare ecosystem and it is disappearing,
If LD 1111 is passed, it would allow other communities to have more input and 
scrutiny of bulk water extraction contracts, as they should because the water within 
the aquifer cannot be contained within municipal boundaries. It makes sense to listen 
to all that are available to speak about what affects them, especially when it comes 
water, an essential element for life.

