Stephanie Bartusis
Denmark
LD 1111
Greetings Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and EUT Committee Members. 
My name is Stephanie Bartusis; I live in Denmark, ME. I am testifying in support of 
LD 1111 "An Act Concerning Contracts and Agreement for Large-Scale Water 
Extraction"
My fiancé, Cliff, and I moved to Denmark, the town, ecosystem, and water that raised
him. The water, the soils, the creatures great and small here infused him with a deep 
appreciation, respect, and responsibility to be a steward of the web of life with this 
place. We are growing food and taking care of the forest we have the privilege and 
pleasure to live with.
That said, a rather sour spectre haunts this town, and that is Denmark's toxic 
relationship with Poland Spring, who steals under contract, up to one hundred million 
gallons of water each year. Poland Spring pumps the pristine water, siphons its life 
into plastic, and trucks it all over the country under a brand it has no real 
responsibility to protect. Even if each bottle were only one dollar, that is one hundred 
million dollars a year that Poland Spring takes from the ground here. There is little 
opportunity for the residents here to affect a different dynamic with this parasitic 
water extraction. That is because the contract is on a 5 year renewal basis and the 
selectpeople, whose interests regarding Poland Spring are not publically transparent, 
make the final decision to renew the contract. 
With the climate changing, and prolonged droughts becoming more common, and 
snowpack not as abundant as previous, it is unacceptable that a remote company has 
this kind of control over this community's most precious living "resource". This 
resource being not only the basis for not only the tourism economy here, yet life itself.
We can say "No Farmers, No Food" all day, yet No water, No Anything.
I implore this legislative group to consider life with the long view. Protecting and 
democratizing the water in Maine will perhaps be the most important decision you 
make considering what is at stake for our communities here and now, and our future 
generations to come.
In Denmark, a paltry gift to light up the baseball field is a slap in the face to the 
children of Maine from a company with zero interest in their future well-being, which
is priceless, a company with self-interest to drain the lifeblood of this land and 
exchange the future for abstract dollar symbols. 
As the state slogan "Dirigo" "I lead" and being on the land of The People of the 
Dawn, where the star that is the sun first illuminates and bursts the dew of the dark 
star studded nights, 
can we please lead by example with each step rooted in: love, empathy, justice, amd 
the spirit of cooperation to walk a path with back turned to privatization and profit? 
Can we walk a path on a journey towards a world where the water that sustains and 
connects us all can join us at the table where we can dream a healthier world for all, 
together? 
Thank you,
Stephanie Bartusis, farmer.
