William Harriman
Fryeburg,Me.
LD 1111
 I decided I needed to add a few more comments on this proposed law...
   First,the water utilities that sell bulk water for export are not the only ones who do 
or can extract bulk water.
  The bulk extraction in Denmark has NOTHING to do with a water utility.Neither 
does the former WE Corp well and 2 others in Fryeburg(SF Corp)..
   Which means the ONLY monitoring being done is done with local resources though
the MDWP permitted and oversaw the installation of all those commercial wells...
  The state should be doing the monitoring of these aquifers...And paying for it 
through the bulk sales and not force locals to "foot the bill" and deal with big 
corporations with small town budgets..
  This is NOT about taking Home Rule rights away from towns..Towns should be 
notified BEFORE any new commercial well is installed within the town and be 
informed about all baseline studies and monitoring well installation.Once the baseline
study is done, then the company that wants to install the well can come to the town 
with their request to install the well and how it will benefit the townspeople..
  These are some ideas.A different place to start...
  We need to stop acting like we need to sell bulk water.Poland Spring needs 
us...Poland Spring usually pays for the studies and monitoring..Let them pay the state 
to do it ethically...It will  benefit all involved...
  I want to mention again that the BIGGEST problem is at the state level....
  Though there's plenty of evidence to prove it I will bring up one....
   In MPUC docket 2012-00487, EVERY MPUC commissioner had to either recuse or
resign because of their conflict of interest.Welch was the worst in that he was there at 
the beginning and switched from MPUC commissioner to private attorney for 
Fryeburg Water Company in 2008 when  Nestle bought Pure Mountain Spring..
   One of those commissioners(Mark Vannoy) is now vice-president of Maine Water 
Co.......
  Maine has a problem that's FAR deeper than a need for local public hearings every 3
years....
  It appears that the state officials involved were in a big hurry to get our water to 
Nestle..All about money......
  I am against this proposed law in any form....In my opinion based on what I know 
any new "laws" need to address what I see as the "capture" of our public agencies...
   After dealing with the MPUC recently in docket 2022-00161 I made a statement 
into the record that bears repeating here...
  
  The MPUC is working as a "public defender" for the private corporations instead of 
being a "public advocate" for us.....
  And why is it so hard to find out who lobbied for this bill? Are they not proud of 
it?They should be telling all and making it public that it's their idea..Not hiding.I think
that tells us all just how bad this proposed law is....How can I find out  who lobbied 
for this without having it cost me I don't know how much?
  There's FAR more to all of this than most know.....
