Maine Education Association 
Hg Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove \/ice President I Beth French Treasurer 
” 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
‘@=* ~ 9”‘; 
Testimony 
In Support of» 
LD 753 An Act to Allow Retired Teachers and Educational Technicians to Be Recertified 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
March 14, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certiﬁed teacher. The MBA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as Well as many retired 
educators. 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 753, An Act to Allow Retired Teachers and 
Educational Technicians to Be Recertiﬁed. 
I am sure we all hope never to experience another global pandemic. COVID-l9 took a huge toll on our 
educator workforce. It also impacted other sectors, of course, but given the educator shortages we were 
already seeing prior to March 2020, the number of vacancies for positions needed to provide the 
instruction and the programs our students deserve is especially difficult to address. As we talked more 
about the shortages, I heard from some retired educators that they would consider helping out by coming 
back to our schools, but their certiﬁcations had lapsed. I have to say, we have incredibly dedicated 
retired educators who continue to care about students in our state. But once your certiﬁcation lapses, you 
have to start the entire process over to become certiﬁed again. LD 753 would allow for those who do 
wish to come back to do so, as long as it is within a reasonable span of time. I can’t say that there will be 
droves of retirees returning to our schools. There may be some who, like the ones who reached out to 
me, would like to help. There may be some who, given their pensions and the social security offsets, 
ﬁnd themselves wishing they had held off on their decision to retire. Whatever the number of educators 
that might like to retum to our schools, if this makes it possible for even just a few to do so, especially in 
these challenging times, it will make a difference for students. I would just add that a few of the retirees 
that I spoke with also said that the fees for recertiﬁcation were a barrier they could not easily afford to 
overcome. If there could also be a remedy for that, it surely would help as well. 
There are a number of proposed bills looking at Ways to help address the shortages we are seeing. LD 
753 may not help in a big way, but if it helps even a little, it is worthy of your consideration. 
We urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 753. 
Respectfully, 
./°454rc6¢ Qzdca /,7§‘L' 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 0440i 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME Uh"/36 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207»-622-586é I 207~888»~20'70 tax I wwvv.maineea.org
