State of Maine 
DEPARTl\/[ENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Michael Peny, Acting Director of the Office of Higher Education and Educator 
Support 
In Support of: L.D. 753 
An Act to Allow Retired Teachers and Educational Technicians to Be Recertified 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Senator Rafferty 
Co-sponsored by: President Jackson 
Date: March 28, 2023 p 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee: 
My name is Michel Perry, and I serve as the Acting Director of the Office of Higher Education 
and Educator Support Services, which includes the certification team. I am here today to speak 
on behalf of the Department of Education in support of LD 753, An Act to Allow Retired 
Teachers and Educational Technicians to Be Recertified. This bill proposes that a retired teacher 
or educational technician could be eligible to receive renewed certification after lapse. 
As you are all aware, the Maine education community continues to struggle with an educator 
workforce shortage. Creating a pathway for retired teachers to more easily return to the 
classroom could offer some immediate relief to the field as we continue to strengthen the 
educator workforce. Our retired teachers are a valuable resource to our education field, and we 
support the ﬂexibility this bill provides for bringing them back into the classroom. 
The Department has two suggestions for this bill. First, we hope the Committee will consider 
adding the condition that the retired teacher had been in good standing prior to retirement. 
Second, we hope the Committee will consider reducing the time of lapsed certification to 5 years 
rather than 10 years, recognizing that the classrooms of today are significantly different than 
those of 10 years ago._ 
The Department supports LD 753, An Act to Allow Retired Teachers and Educational . 
Technicians to Be Recertified with the suggested changes and we will be available to provide 
additional information on LD 753 during the upcoming work session.
