S HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
I 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
, T‘ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brennan@lcgislaturemaine.gov 
April 12, 2023 
Testimony of Represen tative Michael Brennan introducing 
LD 1402, An Act to Provide an Additional Allocation in the School Funding 
Formula to Cover Tax-exempt Property or a Large Economically 
Disadvantaged Student Population 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good aftemoon, Senator Rafferty and fellow members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee. My name is Michael Brennan, and I represent House District 115, which includes a 
portion of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 1402, An Act to Provide an Additional 
Allocation in the School Funding Formula to Cover Tax-exempt Property or a Large 
Economically Disadvantaged Student Population. 
In January, the non-lapsing account in General Fund Purpose Aid (GPA) to education hada 
balance of $36 million. The Essential Programs and Services (EPS) formula allocates over $1 
billion a year in state funding to local school districts. Given the many factors that contribute to 
allocate funds, the GPA account has historically experienced surpluses. In fact, legislation was 
paused in the mid-1990s to address this issue. 
Since the ftmds in the GPA account have been ratiﬁed by the Legislature and the Governor, I am 
proposing that the funds stay in the account and be allocated to communities based on the 
number of students identiﬁed through free and reduced lunch. A school district would also 
qualify if 15% of the property in the district were tax exempt. The bill would require the school 
district to submit a plan identifying how and when to assist economically disadvantaged students. 
The current school funding fonnula places a signiﬁcant weight on property valuation to 
determine “wealth” in a school district. 
There is a direct relationship between property taxes and school funding. A recent report showed 
that over the past year, property taxes across the country increased twice as fast when compared 
to the rate of increase in 202 l. The report noted that property taxes in the Northeast continue to 
be higher than other parts of the country. 
District 115: Part ofPortlancl
This bill will provide additional resources to families and students who are most in need and 
communities struggling with propeity taxes. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
District H5: Part of Portland
