STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC 
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
 
JANET T. MILLS                                       HEATHER JOHNSON 
                                GOVERNOR                                                                              COMMISSIONER 
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333-0059 
PHONE: (207) 624-9800•FACSIMILE: (207) 287-2681   
WWW.MAINE.GOV/DECD 
Testimony of Heather Johnson 
On LD 1418 An Act Concerning Single-use Disposable Water Bottles and Water Refill Stations 
May 3, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources, my name is Heather Johnson, and I am the Commissioner of the Department 
of Economic and Community Development. I am submitting this testimony in opposition to LD 
1418, An Act Concerning Single-use Disposable Water Bottles and Water Refill Stations. 
We know that this bill is well-meaning. However, the Department does have concerns about the 
burden on businesses of requiring them to provide a water refill station within their establishment. 
The Department is opposed to the requirements in the bill which relate specifically to business 
owners who offer uncarbonated, unflavored drinking water for sale. 
A key strategy identified in the 10 Year Strategic Plan is to maintain a stable business environment. 
We must provide predictability and transparency to support current and future investments in 
Maine. While some of the retail establishments that offer uncarbonated, unflavored drinking water 
for sale are large – like grocery stores and wholesale clubs – there are many more which are small 
businesses like convenience stores and sandwich shops. This places different levels of financial 
burden on businesses to comply with the bill’s provisions. It is our position that it is best for 
businesses to make decisions about whether and how to provide water refill stations based on their 
individual financial and operational needs and constraints.  
Thank you for your time, and your consideration of this bill.  
