 
1284 Main St,  
Washburn, ME 04786  
 
May 3, 2023  
 
Chair, Senator Brenner  
Chair, Representative Gramlich   
Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
OPPOSING LD 1418 An Act Concerning Single -use Disposable Water Bottles and Water 
Refill Stations  
I am the owner of Country Farms Market in Washburn, ME .  
We respect the laudable intent of the bill to reduce bottled water packaging waste , however, 
Maine ha s a strong proven history of recycling with a successful bottle redemption program.  
Small independent stores serve as the backbones of our communit ies.  Offering free, refillable 
water stations directly cuts into  our viability and  margins. Local, independent grocer y stores, like 
mine,  operate at a 1 -2% bottom -line profit and efforts that further deteriorate our margins are 
concerning.  Bottle d water is the health iest beverage  option with a strong  margin , in fact, the 
highest margin is in the smaller  quantity bottles packaged for convenience  (35-40%) , the exact 
products that the refill stations would compete against.  
 
Bottled water  sales  help offset the high cost of doing business here in Maine.  Maine is a 
challenging state to do business  — for examp le, the Labor and Housing Committee recently 
voted with a majority in favor of a bill seeking to  raise the minimum wage to $15/hour next year 
(on top of the $1+ annual increase we’ve already been experiencing), electricity rates have 
increased more than 30 %, plus increased costs for employee benefits and health insurance , on 
top of the looming  anticipated Paid Family Medical Leave program (which is rumored to cost 
$400  million annually).  
 
I urge you to stop adding additional pressures , requirements , and costs  to run a business here in 
Maine. Let’s leave it up to the businesses if they’d like to offer an alternative water option to 
their customers.   
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
Mark Kelley, Owner  
(207) 455 -8057  
countryfarmsmarket@gmail.com  

