 
HEADQUARTERS                       NAMANOW.ORG  
1777 N. Kent Street 
Suite 1010 
Arlington, VA 22209 
 
 
May 5, 2023 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Maine State Legislature 
Augusta, ME 
 
Dear Chair Brenner, Chair Gramlich, and committee members:  
 
On behalf of the National Automatic Merchandising Association (NAMA) and our state affiliate, 
the New England Refreshment Services Association (NERSA), I ask you to oppose LD 1418: An 
Act Concerning Single-use Disposable Water Bottles and Water Refill Stations, which would harm 
the drink choices available to consumers, whether adopted as introduced or as amended to prohibit 
sales of water bottles on state or capitol grounds. 
 
NAMA represents the United States convenience services industry, with its core membership 
comprised of owners and operators of vending machines and micro markets, office 
coffee/tea/water, and pantry services providers, as well as the manufacturers of refrigerated 
vending machines. NERSA represents an industry that employs over 600 Mainers, contributes over 
$13 million in taxes, and is responsible for over $120 million in annual economic impact in Maine.  
 
We applaud the Legislature’s desire to improve sustainability. Our industry has been a leading 
voice in the phaseout of hydrofluorocarbon refrigerants in vending machines. The industry has 
almost completely transitioned to new, advanced refrigerants with almost no global warming 
potential, and we continue to partner with the US Department of Energy to research and develop 
more environmentally friendly refrigerant solutions. 
 
However, prohibiting the sale of water bottles will limit consumer choice and access in state 
facilities. Visitors to the capitol, to state universities, and to other state buildings and grounds 
frequently do not bring their own bottles, so a ban on the sale of individual bottles would eliminate 
their ability to have a convenient source of water by their side throughout the day.  
 
Our industry is also committed to increasing healthy options in vending. NAMA members have 
pledged to increase the percentage of better-for-you food and beverage options to 33% over three 
years, which represents a nearly 40% increase over initial levels. Unfortunately, this ban would 
prohibit our members from offering one of our healthiest beverages – water. 
 
On behalf of NAMA and NERSA, we ask for an Ought Not to Pass committee vote. Thank you 
for your consideration, and please contact me at mhogg@namanow.org if you have any questions. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Michael Hogg 
Manager, State Affairs 
National Automatic Merchandising Association   
