 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 1418 - An Act Concerning Single-use Disposable Water Bottles and Water Refill Stations 
April 28, 2023 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony in opposition LD 1418 - 
An Act Concerning Single-use Disposable Water Bottles and Water Refill Stations, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), 
who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
As drafted, this bill preempts home rule, constitutes a mandate on municipal government, and 
targets a single product that is necessary for municipalities to have on hand to support first responders and 
crisis situations from residents with undrinkable tap water to management of traffic accidents and 
structure fires.  
Municipalities need access to portable and individualized water to support first responders on 
large scale disasters, managing events, accidents, and to provide life sustaining hydration in the event of 
an emergency. Municipal officials can declare an emergency that is specific and localized, however this 
bill only allows the Governor to declare an emergency where bottled water could be used. This is 
inappropriate and unachievable in the midst of a local disaster.  
Municipalities, where they have resources, have been placing bottle filling stations adjacent to 
public water fountains however this bill forces municipalities to install such stations in all public 
buildings, regardless of the existence of drinking fountains. This includes all buildings owned or managed 
by municipalities including those not routinely visited by the public and unlikely to be used. Communities 
who have placed these in spaces where appropriate have advised they are a significant cost and run 
around $8,000. These costs would need to be assumed by the state unless it receives 2/3 vote to override 
the requirement from both bodies of the legislature.  
While officials share concerns around plastic bottles in general, targeting bottled water 
exclusively unnecessarily complicates municipal operations and takes away community choice and 
agency to determine what their priorities are without achieving a reduction of waste, or elimination of 
need. For all these reasons, municipal officials urge you to remove the application to local units of 
government entirely from this bill or vote ought not pass on LD 1418.  

