 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:   May 3, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Environment and Natural Resources  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 1418, An Act Concerning Single -use Disposable Water Bottles and Water 
  Refill Stations  
 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources: I am writing today on behalf of the 
University of Maine System (UMS) to inform your consideration of LD 1418, An Act Conce rning 
Single -use Disposable Water Bottles and Water Refill Stations .   
Maine’s public universities are committed to stewardship of our state’s natural resources and to 
reducing the environmental footprint  of our campuses . Last year, UMS Trustees committed to 
divesting from fossil fuels, which followed a reduction in our own universities’ carbon emissions 
by more than  one-third over the past 15 years  through efficiency upgrades and transitioning  
from heating oil to lower -carbon  alternatives . We are proud that  our R1 flagship, the University 
of Maine, is a global leader in climate science and cutting -edge research and development to 
advance biobased materials, including for food and beverage packaging.   
Across our campuses, water filling stations are readily accessible and their use is highly 
encouraged. However, bottled water is still sold in university vending machines and dining/retail 
locations, which are operated by  contracted  third-party vendors . Additionally, at some campus 
events, bottled water is provided  as bulk distribution of water in cups would be impractical .  
We are concerned that as proposed, LD 1418 could have unintended consequences for our 
campus communities. Specifically, banning bottled water sale s could spur increased 
consumption of other  less healthy  beverages , like sugary soda. That was the finding at the 
University of Vermont  (UVM) , where a student campaign led to a prohibition on bottled water 
sales on campus and use of single -serving bottles actually increased , according to research 
published in the  peer-reviewed American Journal of Public Health .   
Additionally, this Committee should be aware that  consistent with federal law,  State law requires 
that blind and visually impaired individuals be given preference in the establishment and 
operation of vending facilit ies in public buildings, and if that is not feasible, that a portion of  
income from vending  operations in public buildings be directed to the Business Enterprise 
Program (BEP) within the Maine Department of Labor. UMS estimate s that we remit  about 
$2,200 in  reven ue from campus vending  bottled water sales each year to the BEP .  
Given UVM’s experience, we are unsure if LD 141 8 would result in reduced vending sales on 
public university campuses and in other public buildings , and thus , less funding for the BEP’s 
activities to broaden economic opportunities for blind residents of Maine . We encourage the 
Committee to consult with  Maine DOL as part of its consideration of this legislation.  
UMS  appreciate s the intent of this bill and share its supporters’  commitment to reducing plastic 
pollution . Please  let me know if I can provide additional information  for your work session  about 
the potential impact of LD 141 8 on Maine’s public universities.   
