CLAC lV[EMORAN_DUM/TESTIMONY 
LD 453 (NFNA) 
TO: Senator Anne Carney 1 
Representative Matt Moonen6 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC) » 
c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov 
RE: LD 453, An Act to Require the Recording of Grand Jury Proceedings 
DA: February 28,2023' 
Members of the Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* were divided on the merits 
of LD 453, and accordingly respectfully submit the following testimony neither for nor against LD 
453.1 
A grand jury does not determine guilt or innocence, but determines whether there is 
probable cause to go forward with a prosecution. In Maine, murder and all Class A, B andC 
crimes must be presented to a grand jury in order to be prosecuted, unless the defendant waives 
indictment. Maine Const., art. 1, § 7; M.R.U.Crim. P. 7. Maine’s grand jury proceedings are 
conﬁdential. M.R.U.Crim. P. 6(d), (e). Whether and under what circumstances proceedings of the 
grand jury may be recorded or transcribed are separate questions governed by court rule. 
M.R.U.Crim. P. 6(f), (g). A grand jury’s decision not to indict is conﬁdential criminal history 
record information, 16 M.R.S. § 7()_3(2)(D), subject to the protections of the Criminal History 
Record Infonnation Act, 16 M.R.S., Chapter 7. These rules and statutes should be reviewed in 
light of the proposal. 
CLAC members in favor of the proposal support the goal of preserving evidence for future 
trial purposes. Other members questioned whether there has been a demonstrated need for the 
change to current law, and noted the substantial additional resources that would be required for 
court personnel (e.g., clerks, judges, marshals), court reporters or other recording methods, and 
transcription costs. . 
*CLAC is an advisory body established by the Legislature. 17-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357. It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed. by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.
