        
 
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                             
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION  
SHIRA BURNS , EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
                                                                                                               
 “An Act to Require the Recording of Grand Jury Proceedings ”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
Public Hearing Date: February 28, 2023  
Testimony in Opposition  of LD 453  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary . My name is Shira Burns and I represent th e Maine Prosecutors Association. I am here to 
testify in opposition  of LD 453.  
 
The summary of this bill speaks about recording grand jury in the same manner and to the same 
extent as the proceedings of federal grand juries.  However, this would be comparin g apples to 
oranges. T he use of the grand jury in federal proceedings differ greatly from the use of the grand 
jury in state matters which really changes the analysis of the usefulnes s, time burden and cost 
burden for enacting this legislation.  
 
Federal gr and juries are used as an investigative body to elicit testimony from witnesses, including 
cooperating individuals . Many criminal federal cases use cooperating individuals  in their cases. 
During th ese proceedings, an indictment is no t always sought  as the proceeding is just used to 
solidify the testimony of the witnesses at that time. It truly can be used an investigative tool.  
 
Unlike federal grand juries, the State does not use the grand jury as an investigative body to elicit 
testimony from witnesses. C ases are presented to the grand jury to determine if there is probable 
cause to mov e forward with the case and an indictment or no b ill is issued . That is it. Furthermore, 
in the vast majority of the cases, the State only has one officer testify to the fac ts of the case since 
the rules of evidence do not apply in these proceedings. The most common situation is that the court 
officer for the police department will familiarize themselves with the arresting officer’s police 
report, any other witness statements , and any evidence associated with the case and present that to 
the grand jury. Most likely, this officer will not even testify at any future trial because of the rules 
of evidence.  The recording of that testimony d oes not provide any value for the crimina l justice 
system  as it exists in Maine state courts , just burdens it with another task.  
 
Furthermore, state grand jury proceedings are guided by our Maine Rules of Unified Criminal 
Procedure. In those rules, there is a whole section on how someone can requ est a grand jury 
proceeding to be recorded. The Court has laid out the standard as “good cause shown.” The rules 
also lay out the procedure for preparation and disclosure of a  transcript of the proceedings and state 
that a party must show a particularized need for the Court to be able to order it. Again, comparing  
this to the federal grand jury proceedings, the authority to record the proceedings come from the 
federal rules, not statute.  
      STATE OF MAINE
  
 
 
 144 SwedStreet    
Caribou, ME 04736 -2353  
207-498-2557  
FAX 207 -493-3493   _____  
   
 
27 Riverside Drive    
Presque Isle, ME  04769 -2730  
207-764-0504  
FAX 207 -764-2046  _____  
   
 
25 School Street    
Suite 210  
Houlton, ME  04730  KATHRYN SLATTERY  
DISTRICT I 
 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS  
DISTRICT II 
 
NEIL MCLEAN 
DISTRICT III 
 
MAEGHAN MALONEY  
DISTRICT IV 
 
R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
 
NATASHA IRVING  
DISTRICT VI 
 
ROBERT GRANGER  
DISTRICT VII 
 
TODD R. COLLINS  
DISTRICT VIII  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This bill is looking to usurp the Court’s rules that are in place regarding the recording of grand jury 
proceedings. Recording and preserving all grand jury cases will be creating layers of complexity, 
inconvenience, and cost. It is a solution in search of a problem.  
 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association is in opposition of  LD 453.  
 
 
Shira Burns , Esq.  
Executive Director  
Maine Prosecutors Association  
Shira.burns@maineprosecutors.com  
