  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walter F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
    
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523- 9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
 
March 3, 2023  
 
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augus ta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 453 --  An Act to Require the  Recording of Grand Jury Proceedings   
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL supports  LD 453. 
 
This bill is an important bill that would simply require that grand jury proceedings be 
recorded.  As it st ands now, a grand jury convenes and hears sworn testimony under 
oath concerning facts and circumstances of crimes.  That information is known to the 
prosecutor, but it is never provided to a defendant because it is simply not recorded at 
all. 
 
Recording of grand jury proceedings would involve nothing more than el ectronic 
recording of the testimony of the witnesses.  This bill does not require that the 
recordings spe cifically be provided to a de fendant who is indicted.  The bill here just 
requires  that there be a recording in the first pla ce, and if a defendant wishes to have a 
copy of any recording, a motion would need to be made to the court . 
 
This bill would promote the integrity of the criminal justice system because if a 
witness testified at a grand jury in a manner that was totally inconsistent with their 
trial testimony, the grand jury testimony would be available for cross -examinati on.  
Under Maine law at this time, there is no requirement tha t any of the proceedings 
before the grand jury be recorded, despit e the fact that a prosecutor is in the gr and 
jury room the entire time that a witness is testifying and has the full and complete 
knowledge of what was testified to  before the grand jury.  W hile the de fendant is not 
permitted to be at the gran d jury to hear the testimony , at the very  least the defendant  
should be allowed, upon motion to the court, to have access to this information about 
the defendant ’s very own case.  
 
Thank you for the oppor tunity to address  this issue.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee  
  
 
  
             
  
             
                          
                          
 

