L.D. 1762: An Act to Require the Bureau of Labor Standards to Create and Distribute in Workplaces a 
Veterans' Benefits and Services Poster 
 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committee, 
My name is Brandt McCollett. I am an Army Veteran and the Chair of IAM Local Lodge S6’s 
Veterans Committee. I would like to start by thanking Troy Jackson for bringing this issue to Congress for 
consideration. Local S6 represents over 4200 employees at Bath Iron Works where we work hard to 
provide the best quality ships for the U.S. Navy. BIW is one of the largest employers in the state and 
currently has 922 Veterans and active service members on their payroll, many of whom do not 
understand all of the benefits and resources that are available to them. The well-being of my fellow 
service members is something I hold near and dear to my heart. That is why I am here today to voice my 
support and Local Lodge S6’s support for this bill. I believe that the benefits of providing this information 
will significantly outweigh any cost associated with it. I believe that providing this information at 
workplaces around the state will save the lives of veterans who suffer only because they are unaware of 
the resources they have earned through sweat and blood. It goes without saying that homelessness, 
substance abuse, and mental health issues plague too many of our service members who return to 
civilian life. Upon leaving military life, some veterans are unaware they may have underlying issues that 
are impossible to overcome independently. It could take years for these issues to come to the surface 
and by then their place of employment may be their only connection to a community. To be frank, it 
would be shameful if we did not have unanimous bi-partisan support for this bill. I would also encourage 
making these boards available to all places of business, no matter the size of their staff. The effort 
necessary to create and distribute these boards is trivial compared to the struggle of those who willingly 
chose to protect our country. It is our duty as citizens of this free nation to support the vulnerable men 
and women who offered themselves up to preserve the freedom that promises liberty and justice for all.  
