Testimony of IBEW Local 104 Assistant Business Manager, Tim Burgess, speaking in 
support of LD 1762, “An Act to Require the Bureau of Labor Standards to Create and 
Distribute in Workplaces a Veterans Benefits and Services Poster.”  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee . My name is Tim Burgess I am a Veteran, an Assistant BM for IBEW local 
104 and one of 11 nationwide representatives on the IBEW ‘s international Veterans  Advisory 
Committee, representing the IBEW’s 2nd district (the six New England states)  
I am testifying in support of LD 1762,  an Act to Require the Bureau of labor Standards to Create 
and Distribute in Workplaces a Veterans Benefits and services poster.  
Veterans benefits and information services have improved 150% since I left active duty in 1988, 
back then your instructions were … don’t let the door hit you to hard on the way out.  
Regardless of what year you were discharged or how much or how little info you were given, 
most Veterans have only one thing on their minds… getting home. It may be months or years 
until you realize that you have an issue and need to talk to someone. At th is point in time , those 
phone numbers , sheets of paper  and business  cards with website addresses on  them  are now 
buried at the bottom of an olive -green  sea bag or rucksack .  
It is possible to find these items, but not in a timely manner when you may be sta ring down an 
immediate crisis . 
A large percentage  of veteran’s  crises are triggered in the workplace , for a variety of reasons . 
Having  this poster in a conspicuous place at work reminds the Veteran that there is always 
some one to call.  
I will not be taking  the full 3 minutes allowed for this testimony, because I believe that this will 
be an easy decision for the committee . Whatever costs are  associated with implementing this 
workplace  poster , are sure to be  minimal compared to the cost of not doing it.   
  
 
  
Tim Burgess
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 104
LD 1762
Testimony of IBEW Local 104 Assistant Business Manager, Tim Burgess, speaking 
in support of LD 1762, “An Act to Require the Bureau of Labor Standards to Create 
and Distribute in Workplaces a Veterans Benefits and Services Poster.”
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee. My name is Tim Burgess I am a Veteran, an Assistant BM 
for IBEW local 104 and one of 11 nationwide representatives on the IBEW ‘s 
international Veterans Advisory Committee, representing the IBEW’s 2nd district (the
six New England states)
I am testifying in support of LD 1762, an Act to Require the Bureau of labor 
Standards to Create and Distribute in Workplaces a Veterans Benefits and services 
poster.
Veterans benefits and information services have improved 150% since I left active 
duty in 1988, back then your instructions were… don’t let the door hit you to hard on 
the way out.
Regardless of what year you were discharged or how much or how little info you 
were given, most Veterans have only one thing on their minds… getting home. It may
be months or years until you realize that you have an issue and need to talk to 
someone. At this point in time, those phone numbers, sheets of paper and business 
cards with website addresses on them are now buried at the bottom of an olive-green 
sea bag or rucksack. 
It is possible to find these items, but not in a timely manner when you may be staring 
down an immediate crisis.
A large percentage of veteran’s crises are triggered in the workplace, for a variety of 
reasons. Having this poster in a conspicuous place at work reminds the Veteran that 
there is always someone to call.
I will not be taking the full 3 minutes allowed for this testimony, because I believe 
that this will be an easy decision for the committee. Whatever costs are associated 
with implementing this workplace poster, are sure to be minimal compared to the cost
of not doing it.  

