lﬁ9 
'13? ll 
iii? 
Peggy Rotundo THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 21 13 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony introducing 
LD 879, “An Act to Place Restrictions on Candidate Speech and Clothing, Buttons and Other Items 
at Voting Places” 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Committee On Veterans and 
Legal Affairs, my name is Peggy Rotundo and I represent Lewiston in the Senate. I am here today to 
introduce LD 879, "An Act to Place Restrictions on Candidate Speech and Clothing, Buttons and 
Other Items at Voting Places” 
This bill amends and clarifies the current law — Title 21-A, section 682 — that places restrictions 
on political activities at the voting place and within 250 feet from the entrances to the voting place. 
Currently a person may not inﬂuence or attempt to inﬂuence another person's decision regarding 
a candidate for an office or a question that is on the ballot. Additionally, a person may not display 
advertising material with one exception. If a person is at the polls for the purpose of voting, that 
person is allowed to wear a campaign button with its longest dimension not exceeding three inches. 
This bill strikes the current exception for advertising on campaign buttons and instead allowsa 
voter to wear "clothing, a campaign button or a hat that displays the name of a candidate or an 
advertising message if the message does not expressly advocate for the passage or defeat ofa 
question or candidate on the ballot for the election that day.” In other words, a voter - nota 
candidate - could wear a t-shirt that says "Peggy Rotundo" but could not wear a t-shirt that says 
"Elect Peggy Rotundo" or "Send Peggy Rotundo Back to the Senate" . Conversely someone could not 
wear a shirt that says "Defeat Peggy Rotundo, vote for her opponent" . The bill clarifies that someone 
could stand at the polls and say "I am a friend of Peggy Rotundo," but not say "I am a friend of Peggy 
Rotundo, be sure to vote for her today." 
I am happy to answer any questions you might have. Thank you for your consideration of this bill 
and this attempt to clarify what can and can't be said and worn at the polls. 
Chair, Appropriations and Financial Aﬂairs Committee 
StateH0use: (207)287-1515 * Fax: (207)287-1585 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTI? 711 
Peggy.R0tundo@legislature.maine.g0v * legislature.mainexgov/senate
