MAINE MUNICIPAL 
ASSOCIATION SlNCE1936 
60 Community Drive I Augusta,ME 04330-91486 
1-200-asz-eves (in state) 1 (c) 201-eza-aaza 
<0 201-624-012-2 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 1381, An Act to Create Fairness in Maine ’s Motor Vehicle Excise Tax by Basing the Tax on 
the Sale Price 
p April 26, 2023 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 1381 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association ’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest. 
In 2019, municipalities statewide raised $4.9 billion to fund county and school 
assessments, as well as to provide the municipal services that residents, business owners and 
visitors need. Of that total, 74% was funded with revenues generated at the local level. While 
property taxes accounted for the lion’s share of municipal source revenue, at roughly $258 
million, the excise tax revenue generated helped to reduce from $16.37 to $14.50 the statewide 
mil rate necessary to fund local government services. Reducing the amount of excise tax 
revenue collected simply shifts additional burdens onto the regressive property tax. 
While municipal officials understand that LD 1381 provides reimbursement for 100% of 
the lost revenues, it is a risk that local leaders are unwilling to take. Because the revenue 
assessed is an excise tax, and not a property tax, the Legislature is not required to reimburse 
communities. The constitutional requirement to fund at least 50% of lost revenue applies only to 
the property tax. If the bill is enacted, the Legislature could at any time reduce or completely 
eliminate the reimbursement. 
Furthermore, it is anticipated that the proposed process will shift additional 
administrative responsibilities and costs onto municipalities. Will adjustments need to be made 
to tax collection software? What process will be put in place to allow municipalities to seek 
reimbursement? 
In a nutshell, municipal officials do not believe that the Legislature should make it more 
difﬁcult or expensive to collect needed municipal revenue. 
If the Legislature believes individuals who are able to negotiate better deals or have 
access to higher valued trade-in vehicles are deserving of additional beneﬁts, then state resources 
~ not otherwise committed to local govermnents — should be used to provide the additional 
beneﬁts. The property taxpayers simply cannot afford it. 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about the Association ’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kdufour(£>memun.org or 1-800-452-8786.
