Stacey K. Guerin 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 4 Augusta, Maine 04333 
THE MAINE SENATE 
13 l st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Stacey Guerin 
Presenting L.D. 1381, An Act to Create Fairness in Maine’s Motor Vehicle 
Excise Tax by Basing the Tax on the Sale Price 
Before the Taxation Committee 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation: I am Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent District 4, which includes all of Piscataquis 
County and ll communities in Penobscot County. I am before you today to present L.D. 1381, 
An Act to Create Fairness in Maine ’s Motor Vehicle Excise Tax by Basing the Tax on the Sale 
Price. 
I regularly hear from constituents who are struggling to get by; between the increase in cost of 
living, medical bills, and taxes, there are many people faced with difficult ﬁnancial decisions. 
Over the years, there have been numerous proposals to cut down costs — from reducing income 
tax, capping medical costs, and even eliminating dog registrations, if you’ve served in this 
building a While you have likely heard them all. 
One idea I have heard about most from constituents is to add honesty and fairness into how 
Maine vehicles are taxed. Currently, excise tax for most vehicles sold in the State of Maine is 
based on the Manufacturc-:r ’s Suggested Retail Price (MSRP). This legislation seeks to change the 
way excise tax is calculated by basing it off the actual purchase price. 
Being a relatively rural state, we greatly rely on a having a vehicle to get to-and-from work, the 
grocery store, and appointments. When you total up the cost of purchasing a vehicle, sales tax, 
excise tax, inspection, and insurance, you realize that a great deal of money is spent on owninga 
vehicle. Moreover, that amount does not even begin to address the thousands of dollars people 
pay in gas and vehicle repairs each year. Why must something that is so critical for people to 
succeed be so costly to operate? 
With budget projections robust, now seems like an appropriate time to adjust the way we 
calculate excise tax. In making this change, I believe Mainers will be able to experience needed 
ﬁnancial relief. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
