A _ HQUSE UP REPRESENTATIVES 
5,3,3 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Auousrn, MAINE 04333-0002 
l§=*-» 'rW’»i_~»‘ 
, (207) 287-1440 ‘wt 6 
ITY: (207) 287-4469 
Joshua Morris 
P.O. Box 246 
North Turner, ME 04266 
Phone: (207) 754-7829 
J oshua.Morris@legislature.maine.gov 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, distinguished members of the 
committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am Representative Joshua Morris, and I have 
the honor of representing the people of Leeds, Turner, and Wayne. I am here today to 
present LD 656, An Act T 0 Prevent Electioneering on General Election Ballots by 
Candidates Nominated by Petition. 
This bill is about aligning standards between party candidates and unenrolled 
candidates. Party candidates have their registered political party listed on the ballot 
under their name. Currently, unenrolled candidates are allowed to use up to three words 
to describe their party designation. This bill would repeal that provision and require that 
the ballot reﬂect their registration status. 
On January 10th , 2020 in her veto message of LD 5 l7 of the 129"‘ legislature, the 
“nickname ” bill, Governor Janet Mills wrote, “I am concerned about the potential of 
turning the ballot into an electioneering instrument. It is unclear whether any limitations 
would be permitted if, for example, a nickname such as "The Greatest" or "The People's 
Hero" were requested. ” Both examples that the Governor sites in her veto message can be 
used as party designations under the current law. 
By enacting this bill, we are preventing candidates from using the ballot as an 
electioneering instrtunent. We do not allow candidates to campaign within 250 feet of the 
polling place; We should also not permit having slogans printed on the ballot as a political 
designation. Party candidates can only have their name and political party on the ballot. 
There is ample opportunity during the campaign to print slogans on signs, palm cards, 
and mailers that promote their candidacy without having their message printed on the 
ballot as well. 
District 91 Leeds, Turner & Wayne
Furthermore, there is a process by which people with similar philosophical beliefs can go 
about creating a new party. Political parties invest a lot of time, money, and energy in 
registering voters and growing their numbers. Allowing unenrolled candidates to come up 
with a party designation for the ballot seems like an end run around that process. 
I thank the committee for their consideration, I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have. . 
District 91 Leeds, Tumer & Wayne
