Testimony of Maria Fuentes  
Maine Better Transportation Association  
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
LD 713 – Resolution , Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Dedicate a 
Portion of Sales and Use Taxes from All Motor Vehicle Sales and Motor Vehicle -related Sales to 
the Highway Fund for Road and Bridge Capital Improvements.  
 
March 7, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative  Perry,  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation .  My name is Maria Fuentes, Executive Director of the Maine Better 
Transportation Association  (MBTA) , and on behalf of the MBTA, I speak today in support of 
LD 713.    
Our organization represents over 700 members who plan, design, build, maintain,  or use 
our transportation system including transportation contractors, engineers and suppliers, 
bus and rail companies, airports and port interests, and others committed to inve sting in 
our transportation infrastructure to boost the state’s economy and quality of life.  
Many legislators are aware  of the crushing needs of our transportation system .  Maine has 
an underperforming Highway Fund,  and this has been the case  for decades ; it has remained 
largely flat and has not enjoyed the prosperity of the General Fund .  This is no  surprise 
since its main funding sources is  the per-gallon excise tax , which  is declining as fuel 
efficiency continues to increase , and electric vehicles increase in popularity .  Like many, we 
have been waiting for many years for the federal government to step up and fully support 
the states – as they did when the country built the interstate  - but that partnership has 
declined due in large part  to gridlock in Washington, D.C.  Federal fuel taxes have not been 
increased since 1993 .  Certainly a bright note in Washington has be en the passage of the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law . While the formula funding for the states only increased 
marginally, there are new grant programs which  Maine has historically been very 
successful with, especially since Senator Susan Collins is on an Appropriations C ommittee 
and has made transportation  a priority.  We are concerned that Maine may not be able to 
come up with the ma tching funds needed to compete for the new grant programs available, 
regardless of how effective our delegation is at securing money for our state.   
MBTA understand that this b ill would blow a hole in the G ener al Fund, but we still wanted 
to test ify because we know something must be done to c reate sustainable  funding for the 
Highway Fund.  The MaineDOT has done cost -cutting, belt tightening, and even reclassified 
their entire highway system so that scores of miles of roads can expe ct nothing more than 
“Light Capital Paving, ” - what we used to call “Skinny Mix ” - once every seven years.  F orget 
about safety projects like rehabil itation, or reconstruction which can include paved 
shoulders – something critical t o those who commu te by foot or bicycle .   
In the  130th Legislature, a group of legislators and transportation leaders met for over a 
year as part of  the Blue -Ribbon  Commission  on Highway Funding .  That group agreed 
unani mously that the shortfall in the Highway Fund was $230 million – but that was 
assuming  a $100 milli on General Fund bond every sing le year , making the shortfall $330 
million per year.  With the inf lation that we have seen in construction along with 
everything else, the number must  be even higher . 
The funding problem is not a new one .  Since the King Administration, every governor and 
Legislature have supported paying back DOT general obligation bonds with General Fund 
revenues.  That is a considerable contribution.  The state is fortunate that the Gover nor and 
past Legislatures have  recognized that the highway budget is cratering, and Governor Mills 
has proposed , and the Legislature has passed significa nt fund ing from the General Fund for 
the Highway Fund.   
As the state gets more desperate for funds, we abandon more parts of our transportation 
system.  For several years now, MaineDOT reaffirmed their focus away from rehab ilitation  
and highway reconstruction, and toward more preservation.  Current  funding levels have 
driven our Department of Transportation to get out of the highway reconstruction 
business.  In stead , it has had  no choice but to make skinny mix and other pavement 
treatments the core of their highway capital program.  
To their credi t, MaineDOT has historically rank ed highly in studies that show they have low 
administrative  costs  compared to many other states, and that they use their scant 
resources efficiently.  They have cut their overhead and operations significantly.  In fact, 
over the course of a few budget cycles, MaineDOT  reduced its workforce from by 
approximately 20%.  That is unheard of for a  state agency.   
But there is only so much cutting and prioritization that a state agency can do.  Again, we 
are gratefu l that the current Governor and past governors a nd legislators - have been very 
generous with issuing large bonds for transportation . 
If the Legislature is unwilling to increase user fees, such as the fuel tax, and the Maine DOT 
has already made signif icant cutbacks, then the only venue left is to share in existing state 
resources – or the state’s General Fund.  This resolution recognizes the tremendous 
support the transportation sector contributes to the General Fund .  As such, we  support 
having more money c ome out of the General Fund to support transportation  needs, one of 
the bread -and-butter  responsibilities of government . 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify , for your attention and for your service to the state 
of Maine.  
