TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Tuesday, March 7, 2023 
LD 713 - “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
to Dedicate a Portion of Sales and Use Taxes ﬁom All Motor Vehicle Sales and 
Motor Vehicle-related Sales to the Highway Fund for Road and Bridge Capital 
Improvements ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee - good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against LD 713, 
“RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Dedicate a Portion of Sales and Use Taxes from All Motor Vehicle Sales and 
Motor Vehicle-related Sales to the Highway Fund for Road and Bridge Capital 
Improvements. ” 
LD 713 proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to dedicate 50% of the 
revenue from sales and use taxes imposed on sales of motor vehicles and sales 
related to motor vehicles to the Highway Fund, beginning in July 2024. This bill 
raises concerns from the perspectives of tax policy, impact on other revenue fund 
transfers, tax administration, and ease of taxpayer compliance. As to concerns 
about balanced tax policy, this proposal would reduce on an ongoing basis 
approximately $200 million a year of General Fund revenues and present a 
possible conﬂict with dedicated funds for the Multimodal Transportation Fund. In 
addition, motor vehicle sales represent one of the most volatile sources of our sales
1
tax base. While transferring 50% of vehicle sales to the Highway Fund may 
provide a signiﬁcant increase to transportation funding in some years, there will be 
other periods where this revenue will decline significantly as it did during the 
2007-09 recession. 
Further, there are several concerns with the lack of clarity of the language of 
the proposed Constitutional amendment. These points should be addressed prior to 
any enactment of the Resolution, as once an amendment to the Maine Constitution 
has been ratiﬁed, the language cannot easily be changed. 
First, as drafted, it is unclear if the phrase “sales of motor vehicles and sales 
related to motor vehicles ” includes the rental or lease of a motor vehicle; if it does, 
the resulting sales tax revenue would also be included in the 50% transfer to the 
Highway Fund. This provision should be clariﬁed in the bill. Further, if rental or 
lease of a motor vehicle is included in that phrase, there would be a conﬂict with 
required revenue transfers into the Multimodal Transportation Fund, which under 
current law includes 100% of the sales tax revenue derived from the short-term 
rental of automobiles. 
Second, the phrase “sales related to motor vehicles ” should be deﬁned to 
clarify whether it includes sales of mechanical parts of a motor vehicle, vehicle 
accessories, and equipment that is attached to a vehicle — for example, a snowplow 
attached to a pickup truck. 
Next, it is unclear if the intention of the bill aligns with the use of the tenn 
“motor vehicle” which is deﬁned under the sales tax law to include all-terrain 
vehicles and snowmobiles, which are not typically operated on the public roads 
and highways.
2
Further, retailers of items related to the sale of motor vehicles are not limited 
to auto repair shops or automobile dealerships; for example, motor vehicle oil and 
windshield wiper ﬂuid may be purchased at big-box retail stores. Maine Revenue 
Services would need to add at least one line to the sales tax return to allow retailers 
to report those sales separately from the retailer ’s other taxable sales that are 
subject to the general rate, which could prove burdensome for those retailers. 
Finally, use tax reported on a Maine income tax return is not itemized by 
item type, and so MRS currently has no way to identify the amount of use tax 
reported on an income tax return that should be included in the proposed revenue 
transfer. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives ﬁrom MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
