Testimony in Support of LD 713:
a Resolution, Proposing
an Amendment to the
Constitution of Maine to Dedicate a Portion of Sales and Use Taxes from All Motor
Vehicle Sales and Motor Vehicle-related Sales to the Highway Fund for Road and Bridge
Capital Improvements”
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Taxation, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as director of policy for
Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a nonpartisan, non-profit
organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic freedom in Maine.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 713.
Bonding millions of dollars every year to cover the highway fund shortfall is an
abdication of public duty and responsibility. Sadly, this has been the norm in Maine for
many years. The only reason it hasn’t occurred in the last two years is because of
massive injections of federal money to the state budget.
That federal spending has driven sustained inflation, which is causing Mainers
real financial pain. Lawmakers should be seeking any opportunity to shore up the
necessary functions of government (administration of justice, public safety, and
infrastructure) before funding other programs. Unfortunately for taxpayers, legislators
and the governor have used—and continue to use—the General Fund as an infinite pot of
money with which to fund their next pet projects before taking care of necessities.
This is precisely why LD 713 is such an important bill. It would ensure that
funding basic infrastructure is accomplished first, by dedicating a portion of sales tax
revenue related to automobiles to the Highway Fund, so that the state does not need to
continue bonding for transportation-related costs when the federal pandemic giveaways
have dried up.
Over 2022, Maine Revenue Services reported nearly $5.5 billion of taxable sales
from “all transportation related retail outlets.” This means that these sales brought in
about $300 million in sales tax revenue to the General Fund last year.
1
Given that the current Highway Fund shortfall is about $232 million, as
measured in 2019, dedicating less than half of these funds—possibly just the sales tax
revenue from vehicle sales—could easily fix the entire Highway Fund shortfall in just
one budget cycle. This shortfall figure has not changed much since 2019.
1
h t t p s : / / w w w . m a i n e . g o v / r e v e n u e / t a x e s / t a x - p o l i c y - o f f i c e / s a l e s - t a x - r e p o r t s
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

Our history shows completely backward priorities. The money is there, so this
problem is one of a lack of will. One of the most important roles that the Maine state
government has held for decades is the maintenance of roads, bridges, and other vital
transportation infrastructure.
Please deem LD 713 “Ought To Pass” to ensure that this crucial operation of the
state will be funded more sufficiently than in the past. Thank you for your time and
consideration.
