One Weston Court, Box2 
DV. .0 
207.430.8334 
The Maine Coalition 
to End Domestic Violence 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
OPPOSED to LD155o: 
“An Act to Authorize the Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Thursday, April 27, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Andrea Mancuso, and lam writing on behalf 
of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ to provide our perspective on LD 
1897, “An Act to Authorize the Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes.” 
We appreciate the desire for changes to the criminal legal system in our state and 
have welcomed being included in these important conversations. As our leaders 
contemplate what actions should be taken to limit the collateral consequences of criminal 
convictions, careful thought must be given both to unintended consequences and the 
criminal legal system's accountability to victims of crime. Conversations convened by 
through various commissions and working groups over the last several years have 
highlighted that attempting to categorize which crimes we are most concerned about and 
which we are not, as well as what processes should be utilized to give convicted individuals 
some form of relief from collateral consequences is complex and does not readily lend itself 
to simple solutions. 
For example, and relevant to the proposal in LD 1550, attempting to draw a line 
between “violent” and “non-violent ” crimes risks missing at least two crimes that we 
believe the state should consider very carefully before eliminating records: stalking and 
violation of a protection from abuse order. Research has long borne out that these two 
courses of conduct — though not having violence as an element of the crime themselves - 
are associated with higher risk of lethal violence. In its 12*“ Biennial Report, Maine's own 
Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel (the Panel) observed stalking present in 8 of the 15 
homicides reviewed by the Panel and noted stalking behaviors preceded the homicide in 80% 
of the intimate partner cases reviewed? The Panel further observed that “ ‘low level’ 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
abuse and violence in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts to more 
than 5,000. 
1 
See “Voices Against Violence: The 12”‘ Biennial Report of the Maine Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel,” 
(2018) 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of3 
violations of Protection From Abuse Orders may in and of itself be an indication of 
manipulation and dangerousness, not dependent on whether the individual behaviors or 
violations were extreme or violent. ”3 
The exemptions proposed by LD 1550 do attempt to acknowledge the need to treat 
domestic violence crimes differently, and this is a concept we would urge the Committee to 
support generally. However, it is unclear from the proposed bill if the intention is to capture 
all crimes against a family or household member or dating partner, or if the intention is to 
more narrowly define “domestic violence ” as the Maine Criminal Code defines “crime 
involving domestic violence ” - referring to convictions for those crimes speciﬁcally 
enumerated as “domestic violence ” in Title 17-A (domestic violence assault, domestic 
violence criminal threatening, domestic violence terrorizing, domestic violence stalking or 
domestic violence reckless conduct) and a violation of a protection from abuse order under 
Title 19-A, section 4113.4 Relying on either of those exclusively raises concerns. Our criminal 
justice system data demonstrates that, frequently, perpetrators are entering into plea 
bargains that drop the domestic violence prefix, particularly as it relates to these crimes. 
Thus, looking only to the title of the crime, as opposed to the underlying relationship 
between the perpetrator and victim, risks further incentivizing perpetrators to avoid 
convictions for the crimes that are denoted as domestic violence crimes in order to avoid 
this exemption for expungement. If the Committee were to define domestic violence asa 
crime against a family or household member or dating partner, looking only at the 
underlying relationship of the victim, it may want to consider that Violation of a Protection 
Order is technically considered a crime against the public order, and not a crime against the 
person the order purports to protect, as are a number of other crimes. 
Constitutionality issues aside, expungement, as opposed to sealing, also makes it 
functionally impossible for a crime victim to later obtain the relevant documents concerning 
the crime; documents that may be helpful to supporting future litigation either in family 
court or in other civil actions. Our laws allow for civil suits for damages to be brought within 
six years of the cause of action commencing. This consequence of not being later able to 
obtain what might be useful documentation is particularly impactful in this proposal, as 
there is no mention of whether or not a crime victim has a right to be notified of the 
convicted person's petition for expungement. if crime victims are to be notiﬁed, who is 
responsible for providing that notification? MCEDV also notes for the Committee that while 
organizations representing victims of domestic violence and sexual assault have resourced 
themselves to be able to ensure the voices of those we serve are represented in policy 
discussions, crime victims writ large are not; that does not make consideration of them any 
less worthy. 
More broadly, we ask you to consider that the effects of crime on the person who 
has been harmed can last for decades — financially, emotionally, and sometimes physically. 
3 ld. at page 28. 
4 15 M.R.S. § 1003(3-A).
One Weston Court, Box2 
Dv‘ Augusta, ME 04330.
, 
207.430.8334 
The Maine Coalition 
to End Domestic Violence 
Expungement erases that harm for the harm doer, as if the harm never happened. It does 
not do that for crime victims. There are other ways to decrease the economic and social 
collateral consequences of criminal convictions for those who have been convicted - like 
sealing records from the public and ban the box policies - that do not so universally 
invalidate the experiences of crime victims. 
This Committee is also considering LD 1662, “Resolve, To Reestablish the Criminal 
Records Review Committee. ” The work of that group of interested parties over the last 
several years resulted in the enactment of a record sealing statute in the 130*“ Legislature. 
The Committee has broad representation to think through all of these issues and many 
others over time. MCEDV would suggest to the Committee that is an appropriate method for 
considering all proposals that seek to accomplish addressing the long-term collateral 
consequences of criminal records than attempting to address these proposals piecemeal. 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective with you. MCEDV 
and our member programs are available to support the Committee ’s work on this proposal 
in whatever way might be helpful. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: andrea@mceclv.org 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
