*§¢ 
s\*»\
, 
Eric Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 1550, An Act to Authorize the 
Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes 
Before the Judiciary Committee 
Thursday, April 27, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, 
Poland, and Durham. l am before you today to present L.D. 1550, An Act to Authorize the 
Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes. 
We have all made mistakes. I bet we all know constituents who made a mistake asa 
young adults, faced a conviction, served their time, and learned their lesson, but decades later, 
they still struggle as that conviction follows them for the rest of their lives — a scarlet letter that 
impacts their ability to hold a job and secure housing. 
Informed by Christian ethics that values redemption, our society values second chances. 
The legislation before you today is authored in that spirit. As written, L.D. 1550 would afford 
people with Class C, D, and E offenses on their record the opportunity to petition the court that 
convicted them — ﬁve years after the completion of their sentence -— to have their record 
expunged and a clean slate granted. 
It is important to note there are exceptions to this. In order to qualify, the individual must 
not have any subsequent convictions or pending criminal charges. Further, crimes that involve 
domestic violence, bribery or corruption, or the victimization of a minor or an individual 65 
years of age or older would not qualify under this proposal. 
This legislation is modeled upon bipartisan criminal justice reform, signed into Kentucky 
law in 2016 by the former Republican Governor, Matt Bevin. Urging the importance of these 
reforms for his state, Governor Bevin said, “It is critical that there is an opportunity for 
redemption, that there is an opportunity for second chances, because America is a land that was 
founded on these principles. ” 
Thank you all for your time and consideration.
