      
                     
 
Sen. Carney , Rep.  Moon en, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary,  my name is 
Judith Meyer . I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the 
Morning Sentinel .  
I write o n behalf of the Maine Press Association  in opposition to  LD 1550, An Act to Authorize the 
Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes . 
* * *  
When the Criminal Records Review Committee was formed and convened in 2021 , on which a 
representative of the Maine Press Association served, we wer e tasked with coming  forward 
with a recommendation on what criminal records, if any, might qualify for expungement .  
The committee – which included more than two dozen stakeholders in law enforcement, prison 
reform, public access, victim advocacy groups and other interested parties -- met for months 
and came forward with a number of recommendations, but could not settle the question of  
how expungement might work in Maine, or whe ther there may be options other than 
expungement to seal certain records . Throughout  these conversations, there was great unease 
about  expung ing felony -level crimes, including Class C crimes , which ar e included in th e bill 
before you .  
Class C crimes in Maine , punishable by up to five years in prison and $5,00 0 in fines,  include 
aggravated operating under the influence, felony theft, and aggravated criminal mischief, 
among other significant crimes , like  assault  (not nonviolent) . It is also important to recogn ize 
that a Clas s C felony convi ction can be, and often is, the result of a plea agreement in which a 
defendant pleads down from a higher- level felony . 
There are certain Class B level crimes  that, while misdemeanors, involve violence , including 
aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon that resu lts in bodily injury . Criminal threatening 
and terro rizing are also both Class B crime s.  
There was robust debate surrounding  these and other issues , including whether expungement 
should be crime -specific rather than c rime classification specific , and while there was some 
agreement on some issues and members of the Criminal Records Review Committee were 
making progress on a recommendation, we did not have time to complete our research and 
make a recommendation in the time allotted  for our work . 

Given the amount of research that has already been gathered and the level of discussion that 
has already been held on this concept by members of the Criminal Records Review Committee, 
the Maine Press Association opposes this bill and requests that Judiciary move further 
discussion back to a reconstituted Criminal Records Review Committee for recommendation.  
  * * *  
The Maine Press Association (MPA), founded in 1864, is one of the oldest professional news 
organizations in the nation. Our goals, as spelled out in our charter and by -laws are to promote 
and foster high ethical standards and the best interests of the newspapers, journalists, and 
media organizations of the state of Maine that constitute its membership; to encourage improved business and editorial practices and better media environment in the state; and to improve the conditions of journalism and journalists by promoting and protecting the principles of freedom of speech and of the press and the public’s right to know.  
 
