‘ 
. C 1 r~
V st" 
Q14‘! oi-“xx 
2022-2023 
OFFICERS 
President 
Amber L. Tucker 
President-Elect 
Jeremy Pratt 
Vice President 
Matthew D. Morgan 
Treasurer 
Walter F. McKee 
Secretary 
Sarah E. Branch 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS 
Dylan R. Boyd 
Andrew Edwards 
Devens Hamlen 
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason 
Harris Mattson 
Joseph Mekonis 
Stacey D. Neumann 
Neil Prendergast 
Luke S. Rioux 
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swanson 
Robert T. Van Horn 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR 
Tina Heather Nadeau i\/l.i\lNE ASSQCIATION OF QRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS 
P0. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 041128642 
(207) 523-9869 
rnainemacci|@gmaiicom 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary 
5 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 1550 “An Act to Authorize the Expungement of Records of Nonviolent 
Crimes” and LD 848 “An Act to Expunge Certain Nonviolent Drug Crimes.” 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary: 
MACDL supports LD 1550 and LD 848. 
LD\l550 proposes a straight-forward petition process for a person to seek expungement of 
a narrowly tailored class of crimes after a 5-year waiting period. Mainers deserve a vehicle 
like LD 1550 to get a “c1ean slate.” - 
An expunged conviction is critical for many people to get meaningful employment. All 
too many employers run background checks and remove applicants from consideration 
based on a minor criminal record that is years old. People are greater than the worst 
mistake they ever made and deserve a true second chance. 
A criminal record may also affect loan and housing applications. There are already too 
many barriers for poorer people in Maine without adding the life-long stigma of a criminal 
conviction. 
The majority of states (37) have laws allowing for sealing or expungement of limited 
felonies (e.g., drug offenses) and the majority of misdemeanors. “50-State Comparison: 
Expungement, Sealing & Other Relief, The Restoration of Rights Project, 
https://ccresourcecenter.org/state —restoration~profiles/50-state-comparisonjudicial- 
expungement-sealing-and-set-aside-2/ (last accessed April 24, 2023). LD 1550 takesa 
step in the right direction by adding Maine to this list of 37 states. 
Despite its support, MACDL does urge the committee to consider expanding coverage in 
at least two areas. First, Engaging in Prostitution is a Class E misdemeanor found in Title 
17-A Chapter 35 that should be eligible for expungement. A charge of Engaging in 
Prostitution is oftentimes a sign that the “perpetrator ” is a victim of sex trafficking. People 
convicted of this crime deserve to the possibility of expungement. Second, the fact thata 
person over 65 is the victim of a crime should not automatically bar a petition for 
expungement. People over 65 years of age are capable and no more likely to be victims of 
many crimes than someone in their 30s. Criminal mischief or other property crimes, for 
example, where the victim is over 65 are just as deserving of expungement when the 
convicted person has reformed and stayed out of further trouble. 
LD 848 is essentially identical to LD 1550 in form except that it only allows for 
expungementof misdemeanor and felony drug possession charges. People convicted of 
these charges most certainly deserve the option to seek expungement when they have done 
the incredibly hard work of overcoming their substance abuse problems and become 
productive members of society. MACDL strongly supports LD 848 for this reason. LD 
848, however, should be expanded to include the additional narrowly tailored set of 
criminal convictions contemplated by LD 1550 in addition those discussed above.
Expungement and/or sealing laws are some of the most effective and important tools to encourage and 
reward rehabilitation for people convicted of crimes. These laws create an equality of opportunity in 
employment and housing while also recognizing the importance of dignity and self~respect for people that 
can truly change themselves for the better. 
For all these reasons, MACDL supports LD 1550 and LD 848. 
Sincerely, 
/v*é)/(/ 
Matthew D. Morgan, Esq. 
MACDL Vice President //’
, 
_/ 
\_/
