 
 
 
Contact: Meg Helming, COO, YMCA Alliance of Northern New England  
P: 207.232.9896 E: meg.helming@nneymcas.org 
 
Testimony of Meg Helming before  
the Committee on Judiciary 
in opposition to 
LD 1550: An Act to Authorize the Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes 
 
April 27, 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Meg Helming and I’m the COO for the YMCA Alliance of Northern New 
England, which represents the 15 YMCAs in Maine. The YMCA opposes LD 1550: An Act to 
Authorize the Expungement of Records of Nonviolent Crimes. 
 
The YMCA serves more than 85,000 Mainers each year through our various programs, 36,000 of 
which are children under the age of 18. We are the largest childcare provider in the state, 
providing safe and nurturing care to children in our early childhood education programs, 
before/afterschool programs, and day and overnight camp. We take the health and safety of the 
children in our care incredibly seriously, and implement a variety of strategies to mitigate risk. A 
critical component of our child safety strategy is conducting criminal background checks during 
the hiring process. We are concerned about policy changes that may prevent us from being able 
to identify people that could pose a serious risk to our program participants, especially youth. 
 
We ask the Committee to think of our organization and others that work with vulnerable 
populations when considering the potential implication of policy changes around sealing or 
expunging criminal records. While this bill specifies that certain crimes are not eligible for 
expungement, our understanding of the crimes that would be eligible remain concerning for us, 
including aggravated OUI, felony theft, and aggravated criminal mischief. 
 
Thank you for taking our concerns into consideration. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
YMCA Alliance of Northern New England 
 
Maine YMCAs: 
 
Auburn-Lewiston YMCA • Bangor Region YMCA • Bath Area Family YMCA • Boothbay Region 
YMCA • Central Lincoln County YMCA • Down East Family YMCA • Kennebec Valley YMCA • 
Mount Desert Island YMCA • Old Town-Orono YMCA • Penobscot Bay YMCA • Sanford-Springvale 
YMCA • State YMCA of Maine • Waldo County YMCA • YMCA of Greater Waterville • YMCA of 
Southern Maine 
 
