 
 
Maine Departm ent of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 27, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding  LD 1550 , An Act to Authorize the Expungement of 
Records of Nonviolent Crimes . This bill would allow for a person convicted of a Class C, D, and E  crime 
to petition the court where the person was convicted to expunge all records of the crime 5 years after the 
completion of the person’s sentence. Expungement would not be available for persons who have 
subsequently been convicted of a crime or has pendi ng criminal charges or for crimes involving 
violence, domestic violence, sexual offenses, bribery corrupt practices, or any crime where the victim 
was a minor or age 65 or older.  
 
OCFS does not have a position on expungement generally  but does have concern s about the unintended 
consequences of this bill, specifically the possibility it could limit the information available to the 
Department as it seeks to understand an individual’s criminal history .  
 
OCFS’ access to criminal history information is important for two significant reasons related to child 
safety. First, OCFS uses criminal history information to inform child welfare investigations as our staff 
seek to make decisions regarding child safety a nd well -being . Second, OCFS is tasked with completing 
federally required background checks on individuals working in child care programs and children’s 
residential care facilities (CRCFs). T he parameters of these background checks and what could exclude 
someone from holding certain positions with these types of providers are specified in regulation and 
OCFS is concern ed that this  bill has the potential to put OCFS out of compliance with those  regulations. 
If this bill passes , OCFS will have to seek technical assistance around expungement from federal 
regulators to fully determine the impact.  
 
OCFS believes there are crimes that would qualify for expungement under this bill that would be 
relev ant to child safety . For example, a parent with a history of multiple OUIs or drug charges. OCFS’ 
investigations are highly case -specific,  and it would be difficult to make any broad assumptions about 
what criminal history information may or may not be rel evant to individual investigations into child 
safety and well -being.  
 
The language of this bill leaves room for interpretation which is concerning when attempting to 
determine what could be expunged pursuant to this bill. For example, OCFS needs additiona l 
information to understand what would constitute a “crime of violence”? Would stalking be considered 
violent?  
  
  
OCFS has attempted to develop a list of crimes that are likely to qualify for expungement but would be 
of concern from the child welfare persp ective . They include:  
 
Class C  
• Aggravated criminal mischi ef  
• Aggravated OUI (depending on whether or not this is considered a violent offense)  
• Criminal mischief  
• Trafficking/furnishing counterfeit drugs  
• Various scheduled drug crimes  
 
Class D  
• OUI 
• Criminal restraint  
• Criminal use of disabling chemicals  
• Aggravated criminal invasion of computer privacy  
• Various drug crimes  
 
Class E  
• Disorderly conduct  
• Various drug crimes  
 
OCFS believes that the more information staff have available in assessing a family’s situation to 
determine child safety the better the decisions they make will be. Criminal behavior is extremely 
relevant in some cases and OCFS wanted to make sure you had this information to consider the full 
implications of this proposed bill.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services  

