,8 _ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
T. 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
lee (207) 287-1400 
Daniel J. Ankeles TTY5 MAINE RELAY 711 
7 Beech Drive 
Brunswick, ME 04011 
Daniel.Ankeles@legislature.maine. gov 
Cell Phone: (207) 756-3793 
Tuesday, April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Dan Ankeles 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business 
Presenting LD 941, An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment 
Authority and the Town of Brunswick to Design and Carry Out Improvements to the Storm Water 
System and Other Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station. 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and honorable members of the Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am Representative Dan 
Ankeles, and I serve House District 100, a central slice of Brunswick that includes our downtown, Bowdoin College, 
Mere Point, Maquoit Bay, the Mere Brook Watershed, and, most importantly for the purposes of this hearing, the 
former Brunswick Naval Air Station. It’s an honor to present LD 941, An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the 
Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority and the Town of Brunswick to Design and Carry Out 
Improvements to the Storm Water System and Other Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air 
Station. 
I come before you today to begin the work of solving a serious policy problem in my district that has both regional 
and statewide implications. Alongside me are B1unswick ’s town manager, John Eldridge, the Executive Director of 
the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority (MRRA), Kristine Logan, and Brunswick ’s Environmental 
Planner, Ashley Charleson. Also, this measure is co-sponsored by the four members of the Brtmswick delegation, 
the entire Sagadahoc County delegation and the Senator from Lincoln County. 
The goal of this legislation is to begin a long-range planning process for the replacement of aging conventional and 
environmental infrastructure on the former Brunswick Naval Air Station, known today as Brunswick Landing. This 
is a process of such a large scale and expense that it requires state-level buy-in and cooperation between 
stakeholders to ensure that we accomplish our goals efﬁciently and with the least possible ﬁscal and environmental 
harm to all of our constituents. 
And again, I cannot emphasize enough to members of this committee that I put in this legislation because Brunswick 
and MRRA cannot do this work alone. This cannot be written off as a local problem. If the infrastructure and storm 
water management systems are allowed to fail, or if we as a state don’t speak to the federal govemment with one 
voice when it comes to PFAS remediation, the success story that began with the air station’s closure will come to an 
end, and our region’s loss will be Maine’s loss. 
There are others testifying who will be able to give you a closer approximation of the number of years until the 
situation is critical, but I can say we would be making a mistake as a state if we did not take the opportunity to begin 
doing the public policy equivalent of preventative health care before it’s too late. 
District 100: Brunswick (part)
Brunswick Landing is, to the best of my knowledge, the fastest growing commercial and residential area in the 
southern midcoast region. Under both the current governor and the previous governor, the former airbase had the 
second most successful p0st~closure economic recovery in the nation. We have an airport, businesses of all types 
and sizes, a BIW facility, a satellite campus of SMCC, national guard facilities, a major public recreation complex, 
senior housing, a memory care facility, a major nature preserve and trail network, one of the state’s only microgrids, 
a tech incubator facility, the Maine Technology Institute, an actual rocket ship company and even the Maine Space 
Consortium. So many of us have been working hard over the years to integrate this unique property into the rest of 
Brunswick, and the potential is there to succeed. 
And yet both the Landing’s conventional and its environmental infrastructure - speciﬁcally the storm water 
management systems - are simply getting too old. And that is bad news, not just ﬁnancially and for residents ’ quality 
of life. It’s also bad news for the surrounding watersheds, waterways and drinking water well ﬁelds. 
There is one ﬁnal complicating factor that raises the stakes, especially when we’re talking water quality: Everything 
I’ve just explained is made worse by the fact that Brunswick Landing also happens to be a signiﬁcant PFAS hotspot, 
thanks largely to all the ﬁreﬁghting foam that was used when the air station was active. In fact, the testing and 
remediation of multiple hazardous materials, not just PFAS, is why the Navy has been conveying parcels on 
Brunswick Landing at such a careful pace. And it’s the reason why that process is still very much ongoing. 
Others behind me can talk in more depth about what this means, but just know that it’s not nearly as simple as 
asking “Well, the federal government ofﬁcially declared all the PFAS chemicals to be hazardous chemicals, so 
doesn’t that make them responsible for all of this?” I wish that were case, but I will tell you that the more 
coordinated we are, the better we are going to do with the feds - and LD 941 will surely help. 
We want this committee to come away from this hearing understanding that the state has a major interest in 
facilitating preventative action, and that doing so is key to the continued enviromnental and economic health of the 
southern midcoast region. 
One aside, there is a misconception that the prosperity the Landing’s initial success has brought has made our town 
goverrnnent rich. That’s not actually what happened, and we have people here who can walk you through why if 
you’re curious. 
Now, when I was staff and used to teach members about best practices for working bills, I used to tell them, 
whatever you do, never ever put in concept draﬂs. I feel quite sheepish now, but I say this to you so that you 
understand that I did not take this step lightly. The bill began as a concept draft to buy time for stakeholder plamiing 
at the local level and for consulting with various departments within the executive branch to determine whata 
realistic and purposeful ﬁrst step might look like. 
I’m relieved to report to this committee that these communications were successful on a number of levels. The town 
and the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority are united in the ask we are making today, and multiple 
departments and ofﬁces within the administration are willing to participate in this crucial ﬁrst step of a multi~year 
process. 
Thanks to your top-notch committee analyst, we have an amended proposal that should be in front of you now. So 
what I’m going to do is quickly take you through that proposal before wrapping up my testimony with a ﬁnal call to 
action. 
The amendment would begin by striking the current concept draft language and replacing it with a legislative study- 
a change that is actually far more exciting than it sounds. 
There is a very clear format in this building for how legislative studies work. Basically, someone from OPLA staffs 
a group of stakeholders who meet four times during the offseason to consider the key questions they’ve been asked 
to tackle. The group then delivers a report back to you, the committee, by the end of the year. Then you are given the 
authority to report out a bill to implement the recommendations that the group comes up with. 
District I00: Brunswick (part)
Legislative studies typically cost between $2,500 and $2,750. And whether they pass doesn’t just depend on money 
but also on whether the Legislature can spare a staff member to help nm the meetings. But I will say that given 
what’s a stake and given what we would get out of this process, to call this legislation a bargain would be 
dramatically understating it. 
The makeup of a study committee can include a minimum of three people and a maximum of thirteen. The partisan 
balance of the lawmakers appointed to study committees is typically even. LD 941, as amended, asks for a group of 
nine people: An employee of the Town of Brunswick, the Executive Director of MRRA, a member representing 
DECD, a member representing DEP, a member of an enviromnental advocacy group (we have been working closely 
with an ideal candidate for this role on Brunswick Landing for years), and one member from each of the four major 
caucuses in the House and Senate. I will pause to note here that DECD and DEP are both aware that they are named 
here, have indicated a willingness to each lend us a staff member for this work and will likely be testifying ina 
neither-for-nor-against posture. 
Now. among the questions the group should answer as it attempts to come up with a long-range plan: 
' What is the true scale, cost, and scope of the work that needs to be done? 
' How should we divide the responsibility for the work and the cost? 
' What does an optimal order of operations look like? 
' What do we gain by accomplishing this work? 
' What do we risk by continued inaction? 
' How can we get this work done while navigating the issues of PFAS contamination, EPA involvement and the 
Navy’s property conveyance process and remediation work? 
' What is the best way for the state to speak with one voice‘? 
' In what ways could we work with our four members of Congress? 
~ How do we best leverage available federal funding sources? 
I’ll close by reiterating to the committee that LD 941 is the essential ﬁrst step in a multi-year effort to prevent 
further inﬁastmcture and enviromnental degradation on Brunswick Landing and continue the remarkable successes 
that have done so much for my region and indeed the entire state. Please give us the chance to dig deeper and do 
some of the necessary hard work in the offseason. Please charge us with providing recommendations and please 
accept the authority to begin to act on those recommendations in the next regular session. 
I am happy to attempt to answer questions or seek out answers in advance of the work session. Please also take 
advantage of my colleagues from back home. They have a lot of knowledge but only a three-minute time limit, and 
they are eager to help clarify anything you might be curious about. 
Thank you for getting through this lengthy testimony with me and for the opportunity to address you today. 
District 100: Brunswick (part)
Proposed Amendment to LD 941 
(oﬂered by Rep. Ankeles) 
Committee: IDEA 
Date: 4-4-23 
LD 941 — An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority 
and the Town of Brunswick to Design and Carry Out Improvements to the Storm Water System 
and Other Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station 
Amend the title of the bill to read as follows: 
Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study Improvements to Critical and Enviromnental 
Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station 
Amend the bill by striking out everything after the enacting clause and before the summary 
and inserting the following: 
Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not become 
effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and 
Whereas, evaluating the need to replace, repair and upgrade critical conventional and 
environmental infrastructure throughout the entirety of the former Brunswick Naval Air Station 
is of critical importance to the health, safety and prosperity of the State and the southern 
midcoast region; and 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within the 
meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as immediately 
necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, therefore, 
Sec. 1. Commission established. Resolved: That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 
Commission to Study Improvements to Critical and Enviromnental Infrastructure at the Former 
Brunswick Naval Air Station is established. 
Sec. 2. Membership. Resolved: That the commission consists of 9 members as follows: 
1. Two members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including a 
member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature, with 
preference given to members who cosponsored LD 941; 
2. Two members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House, 
including a member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the 
Legislature, with preference given to members who sponsored or cosponsored LD 941; 
3. One member representing the Ofﬁce of the Town Manager in the Town of Brunswick, 
appointed by the President of the Senate; 
4. One member representing an organization comprised of Brunswick area residents that 
advocate for a safe enviromnent, appointed by the Speaker of the House; 
5. The commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, or the 
commissioner ’s designee;
The commissioner of the Department of Economic and Community Development, or the 
commissioner ’s designee; and 
6. The executive director of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority, or the 
executive director ’s designee. 
Sec. 2. Chairs. Resolved: That the ﬁrst-named Senate member is the Senate chair and 
the ﬁrst-named House of Representatives member is the house chair of the commission. 
Sec. 3. Appointments. Resolved: That all appointments must be made no later than 30 
days following the effective date of this resolve. The appointing authorities shall notify the 
Executive Director of the Legislative Council once all appointments have been completed. After 
appointment of all members, the chairs shall call and convene the ﬁrst meeting of the 
commission. If 30 days or more after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all 
appointment have bene made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may 
grant authority for the commission to meet and conduct its business. 
Sec. 4. Duties. Resolved: That in conducting the study the commission shall: 
l. Evaluate the need to replace, repair and upgrade critical conventional and 
enviromnental infrastructure throughout the former Brunswick Naval Air Station for the purpose 
of protecting the health and safety of residents, businesses, nonproﬁt organizations and the 
former naval air station's ﬂora and fauna; 
2. Review ongoing federal and state remediation and safe storage efforts with respect to 
perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances, perﬂuorooetanesulfonic acid and 
perﬂuorooctanoic acid, also known as PFAS, PFOS and PF OA, respectively, and other known 
hazardous chemicals in order to ensure that any plan to replace, repair or upgrade the 
infrastructure identiﬁed in subsection 1 is consistent with such efforts; and ' 
3. Develop a long-range plan for the replacement, repair and upgrade of critical 
conventional and environmental infrastructure throughout the Brunswick Naval Air Station. In 
developing a long-range plan under this subsection, the commission shall consider the following:               
The scale, cost, and scope of the work that needs to be done; 
. Who should be responsible for the work and the cost of the work; 
. What is an optimal order in which to do the work; 
. What is gained or accomplished by doing this work: 
The risks associated with not doing the work: 
The best way to accomplish the work while navigating issues related to PFAS 
contamination, federal regulation involvement and issues related to the 
conveyance of federal property; 
G. Whether the approach recommended by the commission is consistent with State’s 
larger approach to PFAS contamination; 
H. Whether there is a role that Maine’s congressional delegation can play in assisting 
to accomplish the work; and 
I. Identifying available federal funding and grant assistance that may be available.
4. Staff Assistance. Resolved: That the Legislative Council shall provide necessary 
stafﬁng services to the commission, except that Legislative Council staff support is not 
authorized when the Legislature is in regular or special session. 
5. Report. That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, no later than January 1, 2024, the 
commission shall submit a report that includes its ﬁndings and recommendations for presentation 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business. The Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business is authorized to submit legislation related to the report to the Second Regular 
Session of the 131*‘ Legislature. 
Emergency clause. In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation takes 
effect when approved. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment establishes the Commission to Study Improvements to Critical and 
Environmental Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station, which is a 9-member 
commission directed to: 
1. Evaluate the need to replace, repair and upgrade critical conventional and 
enviromnental infrastructure throughout the entirety of the former Brunswick Naval Air 
Station for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of residents, businesses, 
nonproﬁt organizations and the former naval air station's ﬂora and fauna; 
2. Review ongoing federal and state remediation and safe storage efforts with respect to 
perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances, perﬂuorooctanesulfonic acid and 
perﬂuorooctanoic acid, also known as PFAS, PFOS and PFOA, respectively, and other 
known hazardous chemicals in order to ensure that any plan to replace, repair or upgrade 
the infrastructure identiﬁed in subsection 1 is consistent with such efforts; and 
3. Develop a long-range plan for the replacement, repair and upgrade of critical 
conventional and environmental infrastructure throughout the Brunswick Naval Air 
Station. 
The commission is required to submit a report no later than January 1, 2024, for presentation to 
the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business, which is authorized to submit legislation to the Second Regular Session of the 131$‘ 
Legislature.
