April 4, 2023 
Testimony of: lohn Eldridge, Town Manager - Town of Brunswick, Maine 
Before the: loint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and 
Business 
In Support of: LD 941 - "An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment 
Authority and the Town of Brunswick to Design and Carry Out Improvements to the 
Storm Water System and Other Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station" 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement, and Business: 
My name is lohn Eldridge, and I am the Town Manager of the Town of Brunswick, Maine. I am pleased to be 
speaking today in support of LD 941, sponsored by Representative Ankeles. 
In 2005, the Base Realignment and Closure Commission voted to close Brunswick Naval Air Station. In 
response, state and local officials rallied to establish the Brunswick Local Redevelopment Authority which was 
succeeded by the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority (MRRA). The last planes and military personnel 
left in 2011 and the transfer of Navy properties began. Those transfers included the base infrastructure - the 
electric distribution system; the water and sewer systems; the stormwater management systems; and the roads 
and sidewalks. For the most part, this infrastructure was transferred without improvement. In other words, in 
"as is" condition. It was left to MRRA to devise a plan and secure funding for improvements. 
As the former base has been evolving into Brunswick Landing, it has been generating jobs and taxes. Since 2013, 
the Town of Brunswick has allocated to MRRA nearly 50% of the property tax revenues generated at Brunswick 
Landing. However, these taxes are nowhere near adequate to meet the staggering cost of the infrastructure 
improvements required, by some estimates more than $20 million. As of today, MRRA has been able to set aside 
only a small portion of the funds that will be required to address stormwater management and road 
improvements. The stormwater issues are particularly acute. In some areas of the property, groundwater, with 
detectable contamination, infiltrates the system by design. Most if not all this water is discharged to Harpswell 
Cove or the Androscoggin River. Because the stormwater collection systems are imbedded in or adjacent to the 
roadways, the stormwater system improvements must be addressed in coordination with roadway 
improvements. Otherwise, the roads will never meet Town of Brunswick ’s standards for acceptance. Without 
Town acceptance, the roads and stormwater systems will remain MRRA’s, and ultimately the State's, 
responsibility. 
Recognizing the urgency to address these needs, we seek assistance, technical and financial. MRRA and the 
Town have been working collaboratively to establish partnerships with state and federal officials. We are 
hopeful that our congressional delegation can secure the lion's share of the funding needed for the 
improvements. After all, the federal government left behind the conditions that must be addressed. However, 
success will depend on state participation, and that is the main purpose of LD 941. It will establish a state/local 
group tasked specifically with developing a plan to address these needs. 
A significant portion of the local, regional, and state economies depend on the success of the redevelopment of 
Brunswick Landing. If the infrastructure needs are not addressed, MRRA will not be able to continue attracting 
high quality investments that lead to high quality jobs. Worse, failure to collectively address the deteriorating 
conditions, will put in jeopardy the current investments and jobs. 
The Town of Brunswick stands ready to work with MRRA and our state and federal partners in this critical 
work. LD 941 acknowledges the importance of this endeavor and signals that the State is ready to engage with 
its partners in working for continued success of the redevelopment effort.
