MRRA 
/, "s 
Redevelopment Authority 
Testimony of: 
Kristine Logan, Executive Director - Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority 
Before the: 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business 
In Support of: 
LD 941 — “An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority and 
the Town of Brunswick to Design and Carry Out improvements to the Strom Water System and 
Other Infrastructure at the Former Brunswick Naval Air Station. 
Cross Building, Room 202 
Augusta, ME 04333 
April 4, 2023 
TOPSHAM Brunswick%r 
r 
V, 1 COMMERCE PARK gEtx E c u T 1 v E A 1 R P 0 RT 
*3 
lligltélilkihl ai Road u Brunswicl7{,ll/lEo1oiil" 2oy:7gl8l6l§i;l5a;<:W2o7;7lg3:6l§To Email; info@i£r}é.J5 u Ww;v.;;a;a.;i;
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of." Kristine Logan, Executive Director — Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority 
Before the: Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, 
and Business 
In Support of: LD 941 — “An Act Facilitating the Efforts of the Midcoast Regional 
Redevelopment Authority and the Town of Brunswick to Design and Carry Out 
Improvements to the Storm Water System and Other Infrastructure at the Former 
Brunswick Naval Air Station” 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement, and Business. My name is Kristine Logan, and I am the 
Executive Director of the Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority (MRRA), and I am here today 
to share information in support of LD 941, sponsored by Representative Ankeles. 
In 2005 the Department of Defense made the decision to close the NavalAir Station in Brunswick 
Maine (NASB). At that time, the NASB employed 4,863 military members, 714 civilians, and 
generated $140 million dollars in payroll. The Maine State Legislature created MRRA to manage the 
transfer of property from military to civilian use. A Master Reuse Plan was created directing the utility 
systems be turned over to their respective districts and the Town of Brunswick. 
Currently, the Brunswick Landing is home to 160 companies who employ over 2,500 people. There 
are 700 units of housing, a general aviation airport, seven educational institutions, and over 1,000 
acres of land preserved for recreation and conservation. To further understand the scope of MRRA’s 
responsibility, the former base property is comprised of 3300 acres of land, 27 miles of paved roads, 
17 miles of water pipe, and 15 miles of electrical power lines that provide 3.5 megawatts of power to 
the Brunswick Landing campus. Over the past 15 years, MRRA has been making improvements and 
investments into the inherited utility systems and slowly turning them over to the respective districts. 
MRRA invested $2,367,129 upgrading sewer lines and pump stations, $1,924,825 into upgrading the 
electrical infrastructure, and $616,162 into improvements to the domestic water system. As you can 
see, there has been a considerable effort made to maintain and improve the utility systems, but the 
cost associated with the improvements that still need to be made, is overwhelming. 
MRRA’s is on track to meet the full potential of the redevelopment effort: 13,800 total jobs created and 
full payroll replacement. If funds are not available to improve systems, it is likely to negatively impact, 
or even stop, future developments. These developments include the attraction of innovative 
companies from outside the State making investments in the Brunswick Landing, the creation of 
much needed housing which includes affordable housing units, the creation of the Midcoast Athletic 
Recreation Complex (MARC), the opening of an Aviation Mechanics Technician School (AMTS), and 
further growth at the Brunswick Executive Airport. These developments are critical to the economic 
growth and recovery of the Brunswick region and the State. Not only are the future developments in
jeopardy, but we risk current developers leaving to find locations where the infrastructure can better 
support their projects. 
Without the ability to upgrade our infrastructure, we will not be able to support new and existing 
economic activity. Our ability to attract new businesses to the State will begin to fade. We need your 
assistance. l am confident that with the proper investments, the redevelopment of the former Naval 
Air Station Brunswick will continue to foster a sustainable, thriving economy in Midcoast Maine, 
providing new business opportunities, housing, and jobs for region.
