 
  
 
Written Testimony of the Acquired Brain Injury Advisory Council  
May 1, 2023  
 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1617 
Resolve to Increase Access to Brain Injury Waiver Services 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony on behalf of the Acquired Brain Injury 
Advisory Council (ABIAC) regarding LD 1617, Resolve to Increase Access to Brain Injury Waiver Services.    
Formed in 2002 to support a grant and later established in statute, the ABIAC has been in existence to 
provide advice and oversight to the Department of Health and Human Services and the Maine 
Legislature for the last 20 years.   
 
On behalf of the Council, we would like to thank Representative Libby for introducing the bill as well as 
the bipartisan support from Senator Grohoski and Representatives Hepler, Landry, Perry, Rana, Sargent, 
Skold and Terry.  It’s heartening to know that Maine’s leadership is aware of issues impacting the ever-
growing brain injury community and willing to take action for the betterment of others. 
 
One premise of the bill as introduced on May 1 by Representative Griffin is that by increasing rates for 
MaineCare’s Section 18 level 1 providers, the result will be that level 1 service providers can increase 
capacity by drawing more direct care workers with the incentive of better pay.  Some individuals 
currently residing in 24/7 level II group homes could then taper services by moving from a 24/7 model to 
a level I model at a reduced cost.  The theory, as we understand it, is that the newly vacated level II 
waiver slots would have the added benefit of providing opportunities to brain injury survivors currently 
stuck in hospitals or long-term care nursing facilities with no place to go.  
 
In general, the Council supports actions that would increase access to services, though our members 
have had many conversations on the complexity of the issue.  We wish the solution was straight 
forward:  one where all the system has to do is pull the lever on increasing direct care wages through 
rates, and then every person needing a service receives the right service in a timely way.  Indeed, this is 
the way the system should work. Unfortunately, it is a shared view of the Council that several levers—
though increasing rates are among a multi-faceted solution—may need to be pulled simultaneously in 
order to effect the intended change, increase provider capacity, reduce wait list numbers, return 
Mainers served out-of-state home again, and provide avenues for those currently in nursing homes and 
hospitals to safely move to home and community placements.  It may be beyond the scope of LD 1617 
to address what the Council envisions for systems change, but our recommendations involve improving 

 
 the direct care wage component in provider rates for numerous brain injury services (not just level I), 
increasing provider capacity, increasing service options in-state to include neurobehavioral services, 
improving awareness of services, and improving transportation reliability and access as a multi-pronged 
approach to addressing overall access to brain injury services. 
 
The Council has been troubled by the increasing number of people on the Section 18 waiver wait list.  
Please refer to the ABIAC’s 2022 annual report, presented to the JSCHHS on February 1, 2023, that 
noted the Section 18 wait list has doubled in the last two years. Please see the excerpt below from the 
annual report.  
 
 
At the April 24, 2023 ABIAC meeting, a state liaison from Office of Aging and Disability Services shared 
that efforts to tidy the wait list had been completed in early 2023, for example, removing members that 
may now be receiving services under another waiver, like Section 21, or removing members that had 
died while awaiting Section 18 services, bringing the current wait list count down to 182 plus 59 funded 
offers.  Learning that more than one person had died while waiting for services was a troubling fact, 
though we recognize that people pass for a variety of reasons and may have died for reasons unrelated 
to waiting for care.  OADS reports that there is currently no data on a MaineCare member’s length of 
wait, but we are encouraged to hear that the Department is working on pulling this data for future 
review. 
 
The Council did not have enough information to comment on the rate methodology proposed in the bill, 
but encourages sponsors to work in collaboration with the Department given the rate codification law 
that went into effect last year.   
 100155197454857
050100150200250300
2020 2021 2022Number of People with ABI
Time in YearsMaine People with ABI Waiting for Services
Wait List Funded Offers
 
 The Council received conflicting information about care coordination and telehealth components of the 
bill.  There was one suggestion by an ex-officio member that changes were already underway to 
increase care coordination to 400 units after the first year as well as to provide for telehealth options.  
The Secretary of State website still lists 200 units after the first year.  In the event changes have not 
already been made, the resolutions proposed in the bill related to care coordination would likely have a 
positive impact on brain injury survivors.  Both increased access to care coordinator and opportunities 
for care via telehealth appear on the surface to be in alignment with the brain injury state strategic plan, 
which is currently in the final stages of development. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration of our testimony. Please do not hesitate to contact us with 
questions. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Jennifer Jello, Co-Chair     Leland Glynn, Co-Chair 
Acquired Brain Injury Advisory Council   Acquired Brain Injury Advisory Council  
Email: jen.jello@sevitahealth.com    Email: wlfgrp@aol.com 
Telephone: 207-239-0124    Telephone: 207-215-7064  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
