  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 1 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1617 – Resolve, to Increase Access to Brain Injury Waiver Services  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information and express our concerns with  LD 1617, Resolve, 
to Increase Access to Brain Injury Waiver Services . This resolve directs the Department to seek approval 
from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to amend the brain injury waiver, Maine Care 
Benefits Manual, Chapter III, Section 18, Allowances for Home and Community -Based Services for Adults 
with Brain Injury , to increase Home Support (Residential Habilitation) Level I rates for services provided 
to MaineCare members by an amount in the s ame proportion as the difference between the Chained 
Consumer Price Index on the date the rate was last adjusted and the Chained Consumer Price Index on the 
effective date of this resolve. It requires the increase in reimbursement to go to direct support e mployees. 
It also allows up to 400 units of care coordination each year rather than only in the first year of receiving 
services under the waiver. The Department is directed to explore opportunities to provide additional 
telehealth services, including care  coordination services, provided by both licensed medical personnel and 
non-licensed personnel.  
 
Section 1 of this bill would require the use of a different inflation index for Section 18 than for other 
services.  This introduces changes to current rate rei mbursement methodology, undermining the rate 
reform process and principles established last year in P.L. 2021, ch 639, which was passed in the last 
legislature as LD 1867, An Act to Codify MaineCare Rate System Reform . The intent behind that bill was 
to establish “… a rate -setting system for the development and maintenance of MaineCare payment models 
… to be consistent with efficiency, economy, and quality of care; that are adequate to support MaineCare 
member access to services; and that are equitable and data-driven.” The Department opposes changing 
reimbursement methodology and carving out unique exceptions for specific services or providers, which 
contributed to the historical inconsistencies in rates that led to P.L. 2021, ch 639. Ch. 639 directs the 
Department to adopt a rule specifying cost of living adjustments for specific services and the Department 
is in the process of doing so; enacting this bill would interfere with that ongoing work.  
 
Section 2 of this bill  is unnecessary as the Department’s rul e making schedule currently includes amending 
the MaineCare Benefits Manual, Ch. II, Sec tion 18 to remove the current rule language of a reduction in 
units from 400 to 200 units every year after the initial year. The Department is not presently  reducing  care 
coordination units below 400 units  after the initial year , and the Department’s approved waiver application 
with CMS already includes an annual limit of 400 units for care coordination.  
 
 
 Section 3 of this bill  is unnecessary as Ch apter  I Section 4 of the MaineCare Benefits Manual, Telehealth 
Services , permits the use of telehealth for medically necessary covered services to include care 
coordination under the brain injury waiver.  
 
Section 4  of this bill  undermines the Department’s rate reform process a nd principles , as outlined above  
with respect to Section 1.  
 
Section 5  of this bill  would be administratively burdensome as it would require a process in which the 
Department reviews providers ’ business practices, “to the satisfaction of the Department,” w hich is not 
the current practice, nor does the Department have resources to review every provider’s payroll.  
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact us. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

