 
 
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
May 5,  2023 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 182, An Act to Create a 9 -month Time Limit on General Assistance  Benefits for Able -bodied 
Adults Without Dependents  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 182, An Ac t to Create a 9 -month Time Limit on 
General Assistance Benefits for Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents . The proposed legislation 
seeks to implement a time limit the time  an individual may be eligible for General Assistance 
benefits to 275 days within a 5 -year period when that individual is an able -bodied adult and has no 
dependents .  
 
The Department opposes this bill due to the  negative impact it would  have on a client ’s ability to 
meet their basic needs.  This proposal  will create hardship for those who need assistance the most and 
does not account for the nuance of individual client’s needs  and situations.  Current high costs for 
food and housing are at  a critical level putting Maine’s most vulnerable at risk.  Restricting  resources 
that help meet the basic needs of Mainers at a time when the state is building back economically 
from an existing national public health emergency is not in the best interest for the State.   
 
Implementation of this bill would require municipalities to not only determine if individuals are 
able-bodied, but also to track the days of assistance issued to all clients who are able -bodied without 
dependents and without employment.  The requirement to determine the added level of eligibility 
criteria and track the duration of assistance granted would create a burden on municipalities.  For 
these reasons, the Department is opposed to  LD 183. 
 
DHHS is committed to working with stakeholders to review and make recommendations for 
improving the General Assistance program. We wanted you to be aware of the above information as 
you consider this bill going forward.
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pe lotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  

