  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso  In SUPPORT  of LD 35  “An Act to Establish Adult Protective 
Services Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, 
Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of Incapacitated and Dependent Adults”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services    
Tuesday, March 14 , 2023  
  
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services,  I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to 
End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in Support of LD 35, “An Act to Establish Adult Protective 
Services Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, 
Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of Incapacitated and Dependent Adults.”  
 
Advocates and volunteers at Maine’s  domestic violence resource centers are 
mandated reporters for both suspected child abuse and neglect as well as for suspected 
abuse, neglect or exploitation of incapaci tated or dependent adults. As points of contact 
within their communities who are often the first trusted professional to hear an abuse or 
neglect disclosure, these are obligations that our advocates and volunteers take seriously. 
Many service  providers hav e ongoing, collaborative  working relationships with the Office of 
Child and Family Services ; their work with OCFS staff is a near constant reminder of t heir 
obligations to report child abuse and neglect ; and the concept of “child” is clear . The 
obligation to report abuse, neglect or exploitation of incapacitated or dependent adults is 
frequently not as ever -present  in the daily work of many service  providers, and the technical 
nature of who qualifies as an incapacitated or dependent adult is not always as e asily 
understood.  
 
Those who are mandated reporters should be required to get training regarding  that  
obligation. That training should include supporting mandated reporters in understanding 
why reporting abuse, neglect and exploitation is important and ho w best to make the 
required report. This bill represents an important recommendation from the Maine Elder 
Justice Roadmap . It is sound public policy that supports some of Maine’s most vulnerable 
citizens, and we hope you will support it.  
 
Contact Information:    
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers  (DVRCs)  across the 
state, as well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine.  Last year, these programs together served more 
than 12,000 Maine survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children.   
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650-4356  
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org   
