, 
vf‘-,w,. _E'$* 
M H < :A Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Benjamin Hawkins, Director of Public Affairs 
Maine Health Care Association 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services - 
March 15, 2023 at 1:00 PM 
Neither For Nor Against LD 35, An Act to Establish Adult Protective Services Training 
Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, Neglect, or 
Exploitation to Enhance Protection of incapacitated and Dependent Adults 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Ben Hawkins, and I serve as the Director 
of Public Affairs of the Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 nursing 
homes, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical 
Institutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
I am here today to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 35. We appreciate the intent of 
this legislation and thank Senator Moore for bringing forward the very important issue of 
protecting incapacitated and dependent adults. This bill as drafted would require professionals 
mandated to make reports of abuse, neglect and exploitation of incapacitated and dependent 
adults pursuant to the Adult Protective Services Act to complete training on mandated reporter 
responsibilities once every four years. 
Per the Federal Register, Title 42, Chapter IV, Subchapter G, Part 483, some staff working in 
long term care facilities already are required to complete mandated reporter training and do so 
on an annual basis. I have provided the citation here:
§ 483.95 Training requirements. 
A facility must develop, implement, and maintain an effective training program for all 
new and existing staff; individuals providing services under a contractual arrangement; 
and volunteers, consistent with their expected roles.~A facility must determine the 
amount and types of training necessary based on a facility assessment as specified at _§ 
483.70{ei. Training topics must include but are not limited to- 
(a) Communication. A facility must include effective communications as mandatory 
training for direct care staff. 
(b) Resident's rights and facility responsibilities. A facility must ensure that staff 
members are educated on the rights of the resident and the responsibilities of a facility 
to properly care for its residents as set forth at § 483.10, respectively. 
(c) Abuse, neglect, and exploitation. In addition to the freedom from abuse, neglect, 
and exploitation requirements in § 483.12, facilities must also provide training to their 
staff that at a minimum educates staff on- 
(1) Activities that constitute abuse, neglect, exploitation, and misappropriation of 
resident property as set forth at § 483.12. 
(2) Procedures for reporting incidents of abuse, neglect, exploitation, or the 
misappropriation of resident property. 
(3) Dementia management and resident abuse prevention. 
Further excerpt from § 483.95: 
(g) Required in-service training for nurse aides. In-service training must- 
(1 ) Be sufficient to ensure the continuing competence of nurse aides, but must be no 
less than 12 hours per year. 
(2) Include dementia management training and resident abuse prevention training. 
(3) Address areas of weakness as determined in nurse aides’ performance reviews and 
facility assessment at § 483. 70{ei and may address the special needs of residents as 
determined by the facility staff.x 
(4) For nurse aides providing services to individuals with cognitive impairments, also 
address the care of the cognitively impaired.
2
LD 35 would expand training requirements to additional categories of staff working in long term 
care. If passed, we request that our industry's existing training on abuse, exploitation, and 
neglect be considered for approval by the Department to meet this newly expanded 
requirement. This would help ensure that we do not duplicate trainingrequirements and avoid 
any possible confusion. Thank you for 002the opportunity to provide comments today. I would 
be happy to answer any questions.
3
