Janet T. Mills R/Iaine Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor Commissioner ’s Ofﬁce ' 
11 State House Station 
109 Capitol Street 
y Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
T el: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 287-3005 
.0 
T TY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D. 
Com m lssioner 
Testimony of the Office of Aging and Disability Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
In Support of LD 35 An Act to Establish Adult Protective Services Training Requirements for 
Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, Neglect, or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of 
Incapacitated and Dependent Adults 
Hearing Date: March 15, 2023‘ 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Erin Salvo, the Associate Director of Adult Protective Services (APS) within the 
DHHS Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability Services. I am here today to speak in support of LD 35, An Act to 
Establish Adult Protective Services Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report 
Suspected Abuse, Neglect, or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of Incapacitated and Dependent 
Adults. We are very grateful to Senator Moore for her sponsorship of this Department bill. 
This bill seeks to require professionals who are mandated reporters to Adult Protective Services 
to receive training on their mandated reporter responsibilities once every four years. 
Currently, the Adult Protective Services Act requires certain professionals to report to Adult Protective 
Services when they suspect abuse, neglect, and exploitation of an incapacitated or dependent adult. APS 
offers a self-paced online training via the DHHS website, and approximately 1650 individuals 
completed this training in Calendar Year 2022. APS also offers in-person training to organizations and 
associations on the APS process and mandated reporting. In both settings, the training is roughly 45 
minutes to an hour. However, these training opportunities are currently voluntary for mandated 
reporters, as the APS Act does not include a provision that requires these professionals to receive any 
type of training on their responsibilities as APS mandated reporters. 
In December 2021, the State’s ﬁrst-ever Elder Justice Roadmap was published, based on the work of the 
Elder Justice Coordinating Partnership established by Govemor Mills via Executive Order. The Elder 
Justice Roadmap includes several recommendations to prevent, detect, and combat elder abuse, and this 
bill reﬂects a top priority recommendation outlined in the Roadmap — to ensure that mandated reporters 
can identify red ﬂags of abuse, neglect, and exploitation, are aware of their duty to report, and know 
how to initiate a response by contacting APS. Requiring mandated reporter ‘ training would enhance 
APS’s ability to reach mandated reporters and reduce the likelihood that abuse, neglect, and exploitation 
of incapacitated and dependent adults goes undetected and unreported. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and to 
make myself available for questions at the work session.
