The Maine Long-Term Care % 61 Winthrop Street - Augusta, ME 04330 
1-800-499-0229 ~ Fax 207-621 0509 
OMBUDSMAN Program 
LD 35: An Act to Establish Adult Protective Services Training Requirements for Professionals 
Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, Neglect, or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of 
incapacitated and Dependent Adults 
IN SUPPORT 
March 15, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laura Harper. I am a Senior Associate 
at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today to present testimony in support of this legislation 
on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program. 
The Ombudsman Program provides statewide advocacy services on behalf of older and 
disabled residents of nursing homes, assisted housing, assisted living and for recipients of 
home care services. Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals who experience 
barriers in accessing the long-term services and supports they need when they are ready for 
discharge. 
This legislation requires that professionals mandated to make reports of abuse, neglect, and 
exploitation of incapacitated adults complete training on mandated reporter responsibilities once 
every four years. This requirement is a priority recommendation included in the Elder Justice 
Roadmap that was developed through the work of the Elder Justice Coordinating Partnership. 
The Partnership was established by Governor Mills in 2019 by executive order, bringing 
together a multidisciplinary group from both the public and private sectors to plan strategies for 
prevention, identiﬁcation and response to the abuse of older adults in Maine. The Ombudsman 
served as a member of the Partnership. 
in 2020, an estimated 40,000 Mainers overage 60 experienced some form of abuse. (Elder 
Justice Roadmap report 2022) When an older person experiences abuse there are often serious 
physical and mental health, ﬁnancial and social consequences, including: physical injuries, 
premature mortality, depression, cognitive decline, ﬁnancial devastation. The role of mandated 
reporters is critical in identifying and reporting abuse. Training for mandated reporters is a best MLTCOP@MaineOmbudsman org
practice and will help to assure that individuals are well prepared to meet the important 
responsibility of identifying the signs of abuse, neglect and exploitation and for making a report. 
Finally, this training requirement mirrors what is in place for mandated reporters of the abuse of 
children. It makes sense that training for all mandated reporters in Maine be consistent. 
Thank you for your consideration.
