1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
March 15, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 35 An Act to Establish Adult Protective Services Training 
Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, 
Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of Incapacitated and 
Dependent Adults before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Health and Human Services
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer a few words 
in support of LD 35.  Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit 
legal services organization and our mission is to provide free legal assistance 
to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are threatened.
As you know, the Elder Justice Roadmap is a comprehensive plan carefully 
designed to make a significant difference in preventing and remediating 
instances of abuse of vulnerable older adults. Last week you unanimously 
voted to support several initiatives in the Biennial Budget that are top 
priority recommendations in that plan. The education requirement proposed 
by LD 35 was not in the Biennial but it is another top priority of the Elder 
Justice Roadmap. We anticipate that the Fiscal note will either be minimal or 
not require funds beyond DHHS existing resources. The language in 
Appendix B on page 73 of the Roadmap states the recommendation and 
explains how it may be implemented. Here’s what it says:  
“TOP PRIORITY RECOMMENDATION 
Mandate training for mandatory reporters and enhance the training given to 
individuals and groups by Adult Protective Services and others on 
mandatory reporting responsibilities. 
2Implementation
The statute would need to be changed to make training mandatory. This 
could be modeled after the approach used in the child abuse area.
Currently, Adult Protective Services (APS) offers a general online training 
to mandated reporters that addresses the definitions of abuse, neglect, and 
exploitation (including examples of each and how to spot red flags). At the 
end of the training slide deck, the user is directed to a page to enter their 
name, organization, and profession, there is a short quiz, and upon 
completion of the quiz the user receives an electronic certificate of 
completion. APS receives a monthly report of the data collected through this 
process...” https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline-
files/EJCP_Roadmap.pdf
The APS online training mentioned in the Roadmap can be viewed on the 
APS mandated reporter page. Here is the link to that page: 
https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/oads/get-support/aps/mandated-reporters
The APS Mandated Reporter Online Training power point is located under 
the Additional Resources heading on the far right. If you wish to view just 
the power point, this is the direct link: APS Mandated Reporter Online 
Training (PowerPoint). 
We urge you to view the online training page. We hope that you conclude 
that it would not be unreasonably burdensome to engage in this type of 
training every four years. The creators of the Roadmap believe “…that it is 
likely that increasing the number of individuals aware of red flags of abuse 
and making current mandated reporters aware of their duty to report would 
help in stopping abuse experienced by older adults.” We agree. 
Thank you for letting us share our thoughts with you and we hope that you 
vote in favor of passing this bill.    
