3 - 
5 5; 2“ 5 Senator Marianne Moore /3/at 
3 State House Station 
Senate d Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
- 
(207) 287-1505 
Marianne. M00re@legislature. maine. gov 
.S' e/zale".@t2ma2-I 6 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished 
members of the Health and Human Services Joint Standing Committee. My name 
is Marianne Moore. I proudly represent Senate District 6, which includes all of 
Washington County along with 16 Communities in Eastern Hancock County as 
well. 
I am here to introduce LD 35, ”An Act To Establish Adult Protective Services 
Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, 
Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of /ncapacitated and Dependent 
Adults” .I 
l was asked by the Department to submit this bill, requiring professionals who are 
mandated reporters to Adult Protective Services to receive training on their 
mandated reporter responsibilities once every four years. 
As a co-chair of the Legislature's Aging Caucus and a member of the Age-Friendly 
State Advisory Committee that developed Maine's 2020 State Plan on Aging,I 
have seen firsthand what a critical piece the Adult Protective Services work is to 
ensure the older and vulnerable Mainers can live healthy, productive lives free 
from abuse, neglect, or exploitation. 
In this Committee, often when we discuss ”Mandated Reporters" we do so in the 
context of Child Protective Services. There is an analogous group of mandated 
reporters who are required to report abuse, neglect, and exploitation of 
incapacitated or dependent adults. 
This bill, which will be described to you in greater detail by the Department ’s 
Director of Adult Protective Services, will ensure those reporters are properly 
trained with a short, online, or in-person training provided by the Office of Aging 
and Disability Services (OADS). While this training already exists, it is optional, and 
the Elderlustice Roadmap published in December 2021 identified requiring this 
Fax: (207)287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service I -800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
training for all mandated reporters as a priority as the state works to improve 
prevention, detection, and response to elder abuse. 
l ask for your support of this important bill and will do my best to answer any 
questions at this time. Please note you'll hear next from Erin Salvo from OADS 
who I am sure has all the answers. 
Thank you!
