 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
March 15, 2023  
 
Senator  Joe Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209 Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re:  LD 35: An Act to Establish Adult Protective Services Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance 
Protection of Incapacitated and Dependent Adults  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci , Representative Meye r, and Standing Members of the 
Committee On Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Staci Converse and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine 
(DRM). DRM is Maine’s designated Protection and Advocacy Agency and our  
mission is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding 
opportunities for people with disabilities in Maine.  
 
I write  to express DRM’s  strong support for "An Act to Establish Adult Protective 
Services Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected 
Abuse, Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of Incapacitated and 
Dependent Adults." This bill would require professionals mandated to make reports 
of abuse, neglect and exploitation of adults pursuant to the Adu lt Protective Services 
Act to complete training on mandated reporter responsibilities once every 4 years.  
 Currently, there are no training requirements for mandated reporters working with adults. This bill seeks to bring the statute in line with the training requirements for 
mandated reporters working with children, which already require mandated reporters 
to take training at least once every 4 years.  This would help ensure that professionals 
mandated to make reports of abuse, neglect, and exploitatio n of adults are properly 
trained to recognize and report suspected cases. This would help protect adults from 
further harm and ensure that reports of abuse, neglect, and exploitation are made in a 
timely and effective manner.  
 In conclusion, DRM urges you to support "An Act to Establish Adult Protective 
Services Training Requirements for Professionals Mandated to Report Suspected Abuse, Neglect or Exploitation to Enhance Protection of Incapacitated and Dependent Adults." Thank you for your attention to this  important issue.  
 Sincerely,  
   Staci Converse  
Managing Attorney  
    
 
 

