 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108   glad.org   
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
Re: LD 1624 , An Act to Streamline the Process for Amending a Birth Certificate of an Adult 
When Genetic Parentage is Not Disputed  
Testimony of GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  (GLAD)  
April 26, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative  Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee , on Health and Human Services : 
 
My name is Mary Bonauto and I am an attorney at GLBTQ Legal Advocates & 
Defenders (GLAD) and work in New England and nationally. Thank you for the opportunity to 
submit this testimony in opposition to LD 1624 .1   
 
By way of background, children’s and parents’ security and well -being requires , among 
other things, clarity in their legal re lationships . Maine law recognizes th at families are formed 
in myriad ways and ensures that children are treated equally regardless of how and from whom 
they came into the world  (e.g. a doption, assisted reproduction, married or unmarried parents) . 
Consistent with the law of many s tates, although a genetic link  is one of t he bases for  
establishing parentage, the law also recognize s as parents those who stepped up to raise 
children when a genetic contributor was unknown or uni nterest ed in being a parent and 
fulfilling those responsibilities. Rights and responsibilities  flow from  legal parentage  and the 
law protects those legal relationships from incursion. No one way of becoming a legal parent is 
superior to another.  
 
Legal  parentage is not synonymous with genetic parentage .  One of the oldest legal rules 
about paren tage is the marital presumption of parent age.  That r ule presumes a child born to a 
married couple is the child  of both  because that rule provides stability for children and famil ies 
whether the married couple had a child  through sex ual activity, adopt ed, used assisted 
reproduction or one had an ext ramarital affai r. In addition , because children must not be 
penalized based on the circumstances of their birth, the law in Maine and many other states 
recognizes a nonmarital presumption  of parentage when an individual and the woman giving 
 
1 GLAD understands  that genetic or igins are important to many people  and that technology now 
makes it possible for some to locate their genetic progenitors.  For this reason, GLAD attorney 
Patience Crozier s erves on the Uniform Parentage Act National Enactment Committee , and 
encourages states to enact Article 9 of the UPA 2017 to provide  clear guidelines for access to 
medical and identity information for children conceived through the use of donor gametes.  See 
UPA ( 2017), § § 901-906 available at 
https://www.uniformlaws.org/HigherLogic/System/ DownloadDocumentFile.ashx?DocumentFile
Key=ce291d6c -41bd -7205 -eae9-66a77c8b60dc&forceDialog=0 . 
 
2 
  
birth have together “held out ” the child  as their own.  P arentage is reflected  on Maine birth 
certificates regardless of genetic connection.  See  19-A M.R.S. §1881.   
 
A birth certificate reflects a child’s legal  parentage and is the key document used to prove 
the existen ce of a legal parent -child relationship, to prove identity, and to access myriad 
benefits.2   
 
This bill – which amends a law recently passed which we think was unwise – is 
unnecessary and upends the current system of how birth certificates function  in the legal 
system .  The proposed Section 2767 -A would allow an adult born in Maine to replace one of 
their parents on a birth certificate with a (claimed) genetic parent.  By doing so, this bill 
undermine s existing legal  parent -child relationships , typically in place for many years, by 
promoting genetic connection alone as the factor for changing an adult’s birth certificate.  
 
We are concerned that the law and this proposed amendment  threaten s to create instability 
for fa milies.   It allows the removal, without notice or process, of a legal parent from a birth 
certificate . But what is the effect of doing so?  The bill creates confusion by not indicating 
what impact, if any, an amended birth certificate would have on an indi vidual’s  actual legal  
parentage .  It is important to note that  a birth certificate, while evidence of legal parentage, is 
not legal parentage.   This law is extremely problematic, and this session’s bill – which 
attempts to speed up this process by not requ iring DNA testing if there is no dispute – renders 
the law even more troubling.  
 
The bill changes the law so that there is DNA testing only in a dispute: "If the genetic 
parentage of the person to be named on the amended birth certificate is disputed by t he person 
listed on the birth certificate or by the other genetic parent  listed on the birth certificate, 
evidence ...."  (emphasis added).  But the bill wrongfully assumes that everyone listed on a birth 
certificate is a genetic parent, wh ich certainly is not the case  for the reasons set out above. 
Additionally, since the legal parent on the birth certificate gets no notice of this process, they 
have no ability to dispute it.  
 
Please consider  this hypothetical:  A Maine  individual  was born into a marriage to a mother 
and father who  raised them.  As a child of a marriage, the mother and father are the child’s 
legal parents, and they are listed on her birth certificate.  At age 18, the child takes a direct -to-
consumer DNA test, and she discovers that her father is not her genetic fath er.  It could be that 
her mother was sexually assaulted or had an extra -marital affair or conceived using  donor 
sperm.  Regardless of the scenario, under this law, the child could remove her father from her 
birth certificate and replace her legal father wi th the name of the man who she is connected to 
genetically. The law requires the consent of the genetic “parent,” but not of the legal parent, so 
 
2  According to the State of Maine “Facts you Should Know about Your Child’s Birth 
Certificate,” the birth certificate “is a legal document.  Filed at the time of birth, it provides proof of age 
and identity.  This is important for inheritance reasons and for obtaining rights to travel in foreign 
countries.  The Birth Certificate is also needed in most cases, for the following:  Social security, 
entrance to school, work permits, travel, driver’s license, marriage licens e, welfare benefits, entrance to 
the armed forces.”   Available at:  https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/pub lic-health -systems/data -
research/vital -records/documents/pdf -files/Facts -Childs -Birth -Certificate.pdf     
 
3 
  
the state is stripping a legal parent from their child’s birth certificate without any notice or 
process.    
 
 If an ad ult individual from Maine  wishes to have a legal tie with a genetic parent and 
wishes to have a correct birth certificate reflecting that tie, that adult can undergo an adult 
adoption.3  Adult adoption is a very straightforward process, and it esta blishes a legal parent -
child relationship with clarity and allows the correction of a birth certificate.   
 
 Additionally, if the goal is for an adopted person to have an original birth certificate to 
reflect their genetic parents, then there are other mod els to consider such as Oregon, where a 
bill is pending to allow adoptees to amend their original birth certificate but coupled with 
language that provides that the original birth certificate is not legally effective. 4   
 
In summary, GLAD respectfully opposes LD 1624 .  Thank you for the opportunity to 
submit testimony, and please do not hesitate to contact me with any further questions.  
 
Sincerely yours,  
 
 
Mary L. Bonauto, Esq.  
GLAD  
257 Deer ing Ave., #203  
Portland , ME 04103  
 
 
 
 
  
 
3  In the realm of choice and autonomy, Maine law is careful to put autonomy in the hands of 
adopted people.  Maine law allows for the creation of a new birth certificate after adoption ,  Maine is 
one of only 9 states that allow full access to original birth certificates ( “OBC s”) BCs.  See 
https://adopteerightslaw.com/maine -obc/ It is critical to note that current Maine law does not provide 
for certified copies of OBC s because o nly one birth certificate should be certified and thereby operative 
for legal purposes.  Maine law allows adoptive parents and adoptees over 18 to direct  that they do not 
want a new birth certificate after adoption.  See 22 M .R.S. 2765 .  Adoptees over 18 can direct that their 
birth certificate reflect that it is amended after court action and  to note what data has been changed  with 
an asterisk .  See 22 M .R.S. 2764 (2 -A (A)).   
4This is consistent with the Model Vital Statistics Act.  See Section 24 at page 42 available at 
https://naphsismy.sharepoin t.com/personal/cldmn_naphsis_onmicrosoft_com/Documents/Shared%20wi
th%20Everyone/FinalMODELLAWSeptember72011.pdf   
