 
May 2 , 2023  
 
Senator Mark Lawrence  
Chair  
Comm ittee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
Dear Chair Lawrence , 
 
On behalf o f Canadian Pacific Kansas City (CPKC) through our subsidiary, the Central  Maine & 
Quebec Railway US, Inc.,  I respectfully submit  the following  testimony  to express our opposition to 
Legislative Document No. 1791, S.P. 716 . CPKC firmly believes that the proposed legislation  
seriously unde rmines the railroad industry’s ability to maintain its safety standards to protect the 
public, its own employees , and employees of the private broadband utilities . In addition, as written, 
S.P. 716  infringes directly on the constitutional rights of each and every railroad operating in the 
State of Maine, including CPKC . 
On its very face , the proposed amendment  to Sec. 1. 35 -A MRSA § 711 implicates due process 
and equal protection concerns . Its expansive definition o f railroad property and lack of geographic  
limitations will allow private broadband utilities, among others, to piggyback on preexisting 
installations over or alongside railroad right -of-way wi thout providing any opportunity for the railroad 
to even object, much less take steps to ensure that such additional strain on existing structures or 
installations could be accomplished safely and without presenting additional risk to rail equipment 
and in frastructure. Safety concerns are not limited to structures and installations, but extend to our 
employees, the employees of the pri vate broadband utilities who would be accessing railroad 
property without consent of the railroad, and the public. The legislation ’s expansive authority to 
private broadband utilities potentially exposes the railroads to liability to the extent such addit ional 
installations result in violation s of the railroad’s license s or contract s with the entities  who properly 
worked  with the  railroad s for the original installation s.  
Additionally , both § 711 and the proposed Sec. 5 35 -A MRSA § 9411, if enacted as written, could 
result in depriving railroads  of the full use of their property without adequate compensation  for 
expenditures necessary t o ensure that installations are reasonably safe . This raises the specter of Arielle Giordano  
Assistant Vice President  
US Government Affairs  
 
 
1341 G Street NW  
Suite 1100  
Washington DC, 20005  
 
T (202)585 -0250  
C 202-815-5309  
arielle.giordano @cpkcr.com  
 
 
government takings without just compensation in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution . 
With such grave safety and constitutional consequences,  CPKC must  strongly  oppose  progressing 
this bill through the legislature. Additionally, given the potential impact to  railroad operations, S.P. 
716 would likely run afoul of the Interstate Commerce Commission Termination Act, which 
preempts state and local laws infringing on the Surface Transportation Board’s exclusive 
jurisdiction over “transportation by rail carriers,” which includes “railroad property, facilities, and 
equipment … .” 49 U.S.C § 10501(b); Union Pacific R.R. Co. v. Chicago Transit A uth., 647 F.3d 
675, 678 (7th Cir. 2011).  
Finally, S.P. 716 ’s disregard for  the railroads’ existing safety protocols and engineering standards 
for utility installations generates  significant  concern . 
At the end of the day, CP KC is simply asking for fair treatm ent and  the opportunity to ensure the 
safety of its employees, the utility employees, and the public . We appreciate the opportunity to 
comment and look forward to  continued engagement on this cri tical safety matter.  
For the foregoing reasons, CP KC respectfully submits the above opposition  to S.P. 716.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
 
 
 
Arielle Giordano  
AVP 
US Government Affairs   
 
 

