 
 
 
May 2nd, 2023  
 
Hon. Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Hon. Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in Opposition to  L.D.  1791: An Act to Make the ConnectMaine Authority 
Responsible for Attachments to and Joint Use of Utility Poles and to Establish Procedures for Broadband 
Service Infrastructure Crossing Railroad Tracks  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce apprecia tes the opportunity to provide written testimony in opposition to 
L.D. 1791.  
 
In our 2018 Making Maine Work survey, one of the top issues we heard from businesses in Maine was the need 
for access to reliable broadband connection. In that same report, the Chamber called for $100 million dollars of 
investment in broadband to Maine. We have now received hundreds of millions of dollars invested into Maine, 
and these funds are starting to be deployed to communities with the  help of the private sector. We apprec iate the 
sponsors intent of this legislation, and we share the same goal of trying to get as many Maine people connected 
to broadband in an affordable and responsible way. However, we are opposed to this legislation because we feel 
it is a significant shif t in current regulatory policy that could have negative consequences.  
 
First, we firmly believe that pole assets that are owned by a utility should be operated and controlled by the 
owners of the poles, and additionally we believe it is at the core regulation of the Maine PUC. We believe that 
the only regulatory agency that h as the resources and expertise to regulate pole access and pole attachment is 
the PUC, and that other agencies controlling them such as what is proposed in L.D. 1791 would be problematic. 
Shifting away from this would be a significant  change in the regulato ry landscape in Maine. Furthermore, it 
would create challenges as the costs and revenues associated with the ownership of utility poles are part of a 
formula done by T&D utilities, and rates charged to attach communication networks are linked to rates that  
ratepayers pay for electrical services in Maine. In our opinion, it appears L.D. 1791 would complicate the 
ratemaking process as the regulatory agency that is tasked with setting rates would now have an additional 
 
 
 regulatory agency to work with. We feel t he PUC has effectively regulated these issues and the joint use of 
utility poles, and any shift risks having an impact on ratepayers. Additionally, the MCA is responsible for 
issuing grants, we feel it could be a concern that the regulatory agency who is r esponsible for issuing grants 
would now be responsible for regulating pole attachments.  
 
For these reasons, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce is opposed to L.D. 1791 and we would respectfully 
ask the committee to vote, “ought not to pass”. Thank you and  I am happy to bring back any additional 
information to the work session.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
