 
 
 
20405439.1 Cobboseecontee Telephone Company, The Island Telephone Company, Hampden 
Telephone Company, Warren Telephone Company, Hartland & St. Albans Telephone 
Company, West Penobscot Telephone & Telegraph Company and Somerset Telephone 
Company, all “TDS” 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1791, An Act to Make the ConnectMaine Authority 
Responsible for Attachments to and Joint Use of Utility Poles and to Establish Procedures 
for Broadband Service Infrastructure Crossing Railroad Tracks 
May 2, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, my name is Joel Dohmeier, and I am the Director – Government & Regulatory 
Affairs for TDS and offer this testimony on behalf of TDS in opposition to LD 1791, An Act to 
Make the ConnectMaine Authority Responsible for Attachments to and Joint Use of Utility Poles 
and to Establish Procedures for Broadband Service Infrastructure Crossing Railroad Tracks. 
 
TDS is a telephone, video and internet provider serving over 31,000 customers in thirty-three 
communities across rural Maine. TDS began serving in Maine in 1971. TDS both owns and 
attaches to utility poles in Maine but are primarily a pole attacher. TDS is aggressively deploying 
fiber optics in our service territories throughout the state. We are currently spending over $25M of 
our own capital and in addition, have worked closely with the ConnectMaine Authority, which is 
now integrated into the Maine Connectivity Authority (MCA), in the two grant award programs 
(Connect the Ready and Reach Me) that MCA has overseen to further our fiber deployment in 
some of TDS’ highest cost to serve areas in the state.  
 
The reason behind our opposition to LD 1791 is several-fold. The Maine PUC is an effective, 
knowledgeable, and well-established agency that is staffed with experts in all pole related matters 
for telecommunications and energy utilities. In addition, Maine’s existing pole attachment rules 
and dispute resolution processes, which includes its Expedited Pole Attachment Complaint 
Process, are effectively governed by the Maine PUC to ensure fair and nondiscriminatory access 
to joint use infrastructure. As a pole owner and attacher in thirty-two states, TDS has first-hand 
knowledge that the state of Maine has some of the most progressive and effective pole attachment 
regulations in the country. Since its inception, the PUC has worked to ensure that Maine citizens 
have access to safe and reliable utility services. TDS is very satisfied with the fairness and balance 
of the pole rules and processes that the PUC oversees.  
 
LD 1791 proposes to take the authority to regulate pole matters from the Maine PUC and provide 
that authority to the MCA. There is no doubt that the MCA fills a vital role in the development 
and provisioning of broadband infrastructure within the state. The MCA has been, and will 
continue to be, responsible for the distribution of millions of dollars to enhance the state’s 
broadband infrastructure. This alone is an enormous undertaking, and the MCA has proven to be 
excellent in working through the complexity of the many rules and regulations that come with the 
important task of distributing state and federal funds. Having said that, the MCA is not staffed nor 
 
 
 
20405439.1 has the expertise to oversee pole related matters for the energy and telecommunications utilities, 
which is critical to Mainers, especially for internet service providers that are working diligently 
towards meeting the Governor’s goal of ensuring all Mainers have access to a high-speed 
broadband network by the end of 2024. The addition of such a critical responsibility to the MCA 
that does not have this expertise in pole related matters when the Maine PUC does, seems 
counterproductive and inefficient. This type of a transition would create regulatory uncertainty and 
unnecessary potential delays in the deployment of critical infrastructure.  
 
In summary, the state of Maine is well positioned to continue to move forward towards 
accomplishing its critical infrastructure goals by continuing to allow the MCA to focus exclusively 
on what they do best: digest, plan, develop and fund digital equity and broadband infrastructure 
initiatives, while also continuing to allow the Maine PUC to use their expertise to govern all pole 
related matters. 
 
 
 
