    
               
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1791  
"An Act to Make the ConnectMaine Authority Responsible for  Attachments to and Joint Use 
of Utility Poles and to Establish  Procedures for Broadband Service Infrastructure Crossing 
Railroad  Tracks " 
May 2, 2023  
 
Chairmen Lawrence and Zeigler  and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee , 
my name is Kate Gore,  Director of State Government Affairs in Maine for Char ter 
Communications. I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1791, An Act to Make the 
ConnectMaine Authority Responsible for Attachments to and Joint Use of Utility Poles and to 
Establish Procedures for Broadband Service Infrastructure  Crossing Railro ad Tracks . 
Charter has been an active partner with Maine in providing broadband services to 295 
communities in the state serving 466,000 customers , and w e employ over 750 Maine residents . 
We are  committed to expanding broadband services in Maine. In 2022 the company invested 
more than  $73 million dollars in technology and infrastructure  and expanded the reach of our 
network  to over 10,000 homes and businesses. In March  Charter announced an additional $82 
million dollar investment which will build on an alr eady established and robust network across 
the state.  
Charter shares  the sponsor’s interest  in finding  more efficient and less expensive solutions to 
pole  permitting and make ready process es, however we have several concerns with  this 
legislation as written.  The Maine Public Utilities Commission has decades of experience working 
through these challenging and sometimes contentious issues. The Maine Connectivity Authority , 
on the other hand,  was established less than two years ago f or the important purpose of 
expanding broadband through the disbursement of federal funding. Giving MCA th is new 
responsibility to  oversee pole  attachment  activities would be an unnecessary distraction at this 
time when all its energy should be focused on the critical task of disbursing funds for broadband 
deployment .   
As a result, w e believe that this very important policy decision requires more vetting and 
consideration .  While Chart er certainly welcomes  the opportunity to  review and enhance current 
processes , any cha nges must take into consideration the decades of experience th at Maine PUC 
staff has developed in the oversight of these highly technical regulatory issues.  

Regarding  the railroad crossing section of the bill, we have several  suggested changes, including 
language that ensures  that all providers can access this process . At the request of the committee, 
we could share these suggestions during the work session.  
 We would respectfully ask that the committee vote ought not to pass on this legislation. Thank 
you and would be happy to provide you with any information for the work session at your 
request.  
