 
 
Memorandum  
 
TO:   Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities  and Technology  
 
FROM:  Meghan Russo, Manager of Legislative and Constituent Services  
  Maine Department of Transportation  
 
DATE:   May 2, 2023  
 
RE:  MaineDOT Position on LD 1 791, An Act to Make the ConnectMaine Authority 
Responsible  for Attachments to and Joint  Use of Utility Poles and to Establish 
Procedures for Broadband Service In frastructure Crossing Railroad Tracks  
              
 
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities  and Technology , I am Meghan Russo , Manager of Legislative and Constituent 
Services for MaineDOT .  While MaineDOT is neither for nor against LD 1791  and the bill does 
not directly impact us , we do have some concerns we would like to share with the committee as 
you further deliberate on this proposal .   
 
Section one of the bill proposes to remove the Maine Public Utilities Commission’s (PUC) 
responsibility for the management and administration of attachments to utility poles.  The bill 
directs the ConnectMaine Authority to oversee this responsibility.  Removing the PUC’s 
oversigh t of utility pole attachments could prove problematic.  Currently any utility that wishes 
to connect to a utility pole is required to apply and obtain a license from the PUC.  This 
established process ensures that limited spacing concerns on poles are cons idered when licenses 
are issued.   
 
Section two of the bill establishes a procedure by which broadband service providers that need to 
cross a railroad track with infrastructure may apply to a railroad company for such a crossing.  
The bill requires that a ra il company approve a broadband service providers application and in 
the case the rail company objects they can appeal to the PUC.  MaineDOT believes that the 
language in section 2 may conflict with federal railroad regulations and  could  be federally 
preempted.  The committee may want to seek guidance on this section from the Maine Attorney 
Generals Office.  
 
Thank you.  
