 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Presenting of LD 1791, “An Act to Make the ConnectMaine Authority 
Responsible for Attachments to and Joint Use of Utility Poles and to Establish 
Procedures for Broadband Service Infrastructure Crossing Railroad Tracks” 
2 May 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology.  I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, 
and I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate.  I am here 
to present LD 1791, “An Act to Make the ConnectMaine Authority Responsible for Attachments 
to and Joint Use of Utility Poles and to Establish Procedures for Broadband Service 
Infrastructure Crossing Railroad Tracks.” 
 
I have introduced this legislation to provide the Legislature an opportunity to discuss two issues 
of concern in the deployment of high-speed, reliable broadband across Maine.  The first is the 
high costs and time delays that often attend to the pole attachment process.  It has been asserted 
that the pole attachments may be as much as 40% of the cost of building fiber networks in 
Maine.  As this committee knows, the Alden One project is presently collecting information to 
create a centralized database for pole attachments in the hope of reducing costs and helping 
expand broadband. Alden One is a joint use software system developed by Central Maine Power.  
I believe that, as this data is collected, it is time to assess whether the current system of having 
the pole attachment process managed by the pole owners is best for the public interest, or 
whether we ought to consider a third-party administrator for that role. 
 
The bill as drafted incorrectly calls upon the Connect Maine Authority to be the third-party pole 
attachment administrator.  Because of the current demands of processing legislation in the 
Revisors’ Office, I did not correct that to the Maine Connectivity Authority (MCA), which was 
the intended party, because the concept of third-party administration was the proposal rather than 
the assignment of that function to a particular entity.  Indeed, I do not believe that MCA at the 
present time is the appropriate entity to take this on, and I would leave deliberations on that to 
the committee if you have interest in pursuing the idea. 
 
The second part of this bill establishes procedures for either the railroad company or the 
broadband service provider to petition the Public Utilities Commission if the railroad company 
and broadband service provider cannot agree on the terms of the crossing of the railroad track.  
This is modelled on legislation at work in other states. 
 
I am grateful for your consideration of this legislation.  Thank you. 
