53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202 | Portland, ME 04101
Phone: 866-554-5380 | Fax: 207-775-5727 | TTY: 877-
434-7598
aarp.org/me | me@aarp.org | twitter: @aarpmaine 
facebook.com/aarpmaine | instagram.com/aarpme
March 2, 2023
L.D. 509, An Act to Amend the Net Energy Billing Laws to Require Net Energy Billing 
Credits to be Nonlapsing
BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE
TESTIMONY OF AARP MAINE: IN OPPOSITION
Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler, and the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology:
Good afternoon. My name is Alf Anderson, and I am an Advocacy and Outreach 
Director with AARP Maine. AARP Maine is a non-partisan, non-profit organization 
with more than 200,000 members statewide. I’m here today to testify IN 
OPPOSITION TO L.D. 509 AS PROPOSED.  
The purpose of this bill is to eliminate the current requirement of law that Net Energy 
Billing credits not otherwise “used” by the customer must expire after a year.  By “used” I 
mean that the customer has not otherwise offset their own usage with the surplus 
electricity generated by their rooftop solar system.  Under this proposal, the NEB credits 
will never expire and the customer could apparently continue to bank their credits during 
the life of their system.  
AARP opposes this proposal for several reasons.  First, the current Net Energy Billing 
mandate shifts costs to other distribution ratepayers because the “credits” allowed to be 
used by the rooftop solar customer include distribution services that are not avoided by 
the customer’s solar system, including the system poles and wires, billing system, 
metering system, call center, storm restoration, etc.  As a result, any proposal that would 
add to this cost shift burden current absorbed by non-solar customers should be rejected.
Second, the current law is designed to prevent customers from installing a system that is 
larger than their own household usage and this bill would eliminate that signal.
Finally, under the current law the excess credits not used at the end of the year are 
transferred to the funding of the Arrears Management Program to assist low income 
customers with high arrears balances to continue their ability to maintain essential 
electricity service.  This source of funding would apparently be eliminated with this bill.
Thank you,
Alf Anderson
Associate State Director, Advocacy & Outreach
 AARP Maine
