LD 509 - An Act to Amend the Net Energy Billing Laws to Require Net Energy Billing
Credits to be Nonlapsing
Maine State Legislature, Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee
131st Legislature
March 2, 2023
Position: Favorable
Testimony of Arcadia on LD509
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this legislation. Arcadia urges the Energy,
Utilities and Technology Committee to favorably report out this important legislation. Below is an
introduction to Arcadia and a brief explanation of why we support this legislation.
Introduction to Arcadia
Arcadia is building the software necessary for Mainers to realize the full benefits of clean
energy. Today, customers face a bewildering assortment of energy technologies – ranging from
energy efficiency and renewable energy to battery storage and electric vehicles – all of which
have unique capabilities, costs, and user experiences. Arcadia’s software makes it possible for
energy technology providers to delight their customers and move clean energy forward by
enabling a simple user experience that saves people money.
The Company’s software is revolutionizing community solar, making it easy for people to sign up
with guaranteed savings and without any risk. Today, Arcadia manages more than 150
megawatts of community solar across 34 projects in the state. Once energized, these projects
will serve approximately 22,500 energy users. Nationwide Arcadia works with more than 40
developers to manage 475 community solar projects representing a combined 1.3 gigawatts of
capacity, making it the largest subscriber manager in the country.
Support for LD509
The Maine NEB program allows all Mainers to access local renewable energy while receiving
guaranteed savings on power bills, each month. Of course, a community solar farm’s electric
output varies throughout the year, generally producing more in the summer and less in the
winter. The amount of credits generated by the solar farm vary in an identical manner.
To ensure subscribers receive reliable community solar credits and savings, it is essential that
their credits be allowed to rollover month-to-month without expiration, for the life of the project.
This allows projects to properly allocate credits to subscribers in a consistent, predictable
manner – and also ensures that subscribers receive the full value of their credits while
accounting for the variability of solar production and consumer usage occurring throughout the
project’s operation.
A r c a d i a    |    A d d r e s s :  5 5 5  1 1 t h  S t r e e t  N W  F o u r t h  F l o o r    |    W a s h i n g t o n  D C  2 0 0 0 5

When credits rolling over is prohibited after 12 months, subscribers are left with a confusing
outcome whereby their credits suddenly disappear because of an arbitrary 12-month time limit.
By now many subscribers are used to receiving their savings in the form of credits applied to
their monthly power bill, receiving an additional allotment of credits from the utility, often in an
amount of a few dollars may result in more questions from the consumer.
Ensuring customers have a reliable and comprehensible billing experience is essential to any
program’s success. Other leading community solar programs allow credits to rollover
indefinitely, including those in New York and Delaware.  We would be glad to provide the
statutory and rule language from those states if that proves useful to the committee during its
discussions.
Conclusion
Arcadia asks for a favorable report on LD509. We appreciate the opportunity to provide this
testimony and would be happy to answer questions. Please do not hesitate to contact me at
Aya.Takai@arcadia.com or 314-210-4792 if you would like to discuss further.
Sincerely,
Aya Takai
Policy Specialist
Arcadia
A r c a d ia    |   A d d r e ss: 5 5 5  11th  S tr e e t N W  F o u rth  F lo o r   |   W a sh in g t o n  D C  2 0 0 0 5

