STATE 0? I‘!/i.\§:\IE 
QFFl(,‘E or THE G()VERE\(}R 
8 ISTATE HOUSE STA'l"lO;\ ‘ 
At*<;tfs'r.t, MAENE 
04333-0001 
JANET MILLS DAN Bmzczss 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR or G0vERz\'0R ’s 
ENERGY OFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act To Amend the Net Energy Billing Laws to Require Net Energy Billing Credits to be 
Nonlapsing 
L.D. 509 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor ’ s Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies neither for nor against L.D. 509. 
This testimony is being provided as educational background regarding the topic of net energy billing 
credit expiration as the committee considers L.D. 509. This legislation removes the expiration date of 
twelve months for unused credits accumulated by a residential, commercial, or industrial customer 
participating in a net energy billing arrangement. it additionally strikes the provision that requires the 
Public Utilities Commission (PUC or the Commission) to apply unused kilowatt-hour credits to utility 
customer accounts enrolled in a utility's arrearage management program. 
Under current law and Commission rule (Chapter 313), customers participating in net energy billing 
accrue kilowatt-hour credits equal to the number of kilowatt-hours exported to the grid from the 
customer's net energy billing facility such as a rooftop solar array. The credits are applied to reduce the 
customer's bill on a 1 to 1 basis, beginning with the oldest credits the customer has accrued. In the 
Commercial and Industrial (C&l) tariff net energy billing program, customers accrue dollar credits ata 
rate set by the Commission, which must be applied to the customer's electricity bill. In the eventa 
customer has kilowatt-hour credits or dollar credits that have accrued but not been applied to a bill 
within a twelve-month period from when the credit was generated, the credit "expires" and the value of 
the credit is applied to a utility arrearage management program. 
lt is common for net metering programs to require credits to "expire" after twelve months, though some 
states do allow payments for surplus credits in limited circumstances. Periodic expiration of excess 
credits incentivizes participating customers to ”right-size" their net energy billing facilities to meet their 
own electricity needs on an annual basis. For solar facilities, production is typically higher in the spring 
and summer months, but lower in autumn and winter. Typical customers will size their system to "bank" 
credits during months of higher production and "spend" them in months of lower production. 
Without an expiration requirement, participating customers could oversize systems and seek 
opportunities to monetize their excess credits, creating an unintended secondary retail electricity 
market. Systems properly sized to meet annual customer load are unlikely to produce significant unused
1
credits, though actual production and usage of a system is reasonably expected to fluctuate depending 
on variations in system productivity and customer habits. if customers subscribed to a community net 
energy billing facility end up with excess credits, they should be encouraged to work with the facility 
manager to adjust their subscription size to better match their usage. 
if there is interest in moving forward with this legislation, the GEO is committed to working on it with 
the Committee. 
Thanks for your consideration of this testimony. 
Qa~&~_C=4- Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
