Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 509
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT 
Committee
Please take a couple minutes to read about how a well-to-do person in Germany is 
handling the government's monkeying with their electricity grid.
My Household Electricity And Gas Prices Rise 87% And 178% Respectiv...
By P Gosselin on 19. February 2023
Green energies making life in Germany unaffordable…we’ll have no heat and lights 
and be happy
We’ve all heard about the excruciatingly high energy prices Germans are forced to 
pay in the wake of the Energiewende (transition to green energies).
Yet, due to the fact that my own household had made a contract in 2021 that locked 
the heating gas and electricity prices for 2 years, our rates had stayed reasonably low. 
But that contract expires on April 1st, 2023, and last week we got the long awaited 
letter announcing the new prices from our gas and electric utility.
87% jump in Electricity Cost
Let’s start with electricity. Over the past 2 years we’ve been paying 21.77 euro-cents 
per kilowatt hour. Compared to other households that is a very low price
But beginning April 2nd, the price will skyrocket, almost doubling, to 40.63 
euro-cents a kilowatt-hour. That’s an 87% jump!
Hate to imagine what that would mean for an energy-intensive company.
Gas explosion
Next we look at the new natural gas prices, which are important, if we want to keep 
warm.
Below we see that old price was 5.6 euro-cents a kilowatt-hour = 3412 Btu, or 16.4 
EURO/million Btu, which expires on April 2nd, 2023.
On April 2nd, the new price jumps to a whopping 14.66 euro-cents per kilowatt-hour 
= 3412 Btu, or 42.96 EURO/million Btu , a hefty 162% price increase!
The EU likes to blame Putin for the high gas prices, but we all know what the real 
reason is:
Monthly that’s going to translate into some bills that are going to take some getting 
used to.
But my household is still one of the few lucky ones. Some 10 years ago we had 
installed 12.5 kilowatt capacity solar panels (10,000 kwh production annually), which
more than offsets the higher electricity prices.
Burning wood to keep warm
And late last fall, we installed a wood burning stove, which will keep the heating 
costs down, as we have a cheap supply of firewood.
Most other fellow citizens are less fortunate, though, because they don’t have those 
kinds of options, especially those who rent apartments.
Many double-income families are struggling and see little hope for the future.
Unfortunately the price hikes don’t end there.
High energy prices have caused the price of everything to surge…especially food.
Germany’s Energiewende is all pain and no gain.
Now, consider the pain felt by the not so well-to-do Maine people
Dan McKay    Dixfield
