.- 1f», 
MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer and Director of Government Affairs, 
on Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 807} An Act to Create the Small Communities Tourism Fund 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
My name is Alison Sucy and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association, a non-proﬁt, is the state’s largest 
tourism organization and the only one supporting members in every type of tourism business such as 
lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, guides, tour operators, amusements, and historical and 
cultural attractions. We’ve been promoting Maine and our members for over 100 years. We also operate 
on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kitteiy to Calais. I’m testifying 
Neither For Nor Against LD 807. 
We certainly support helping Maine’s small communities promote their events and increase tourism in 
all regions, but We believe this bill is redundant to what the Maine Office of Tourism (MOT) is already 
doing. The Department of Economic and Community Development manages the Tourism Marketing 
Promotion Fund, which is a dedicated, non-lapsing fund from which at least 10 percent of what is 
received “must be used for regional marketing promotion and regional special events promotion ” (5 
MRS §l3090-K). 
This is done through the Maine Tourism Marketing Partnership Program, administered by MOT, which 
provides marketing ‘funding for two special events per year through the Special Event Marketing Grant 
program (awards from $30,000-$60,000), for marketing efforts that help move organizations toward 
sustainable growth that contributes to the overall advancement of the tourism economy in Maine 
($5,000-$30,000) through the Enterprise Marketing Grant program, and to support community-oriented 
marketing projects and events through the Maine Communities Grant program (up to $5,000). 
Of the grants issued from the past four cycles (summer 2021 - winter 2022), only eight grants were to 
communities with a population of 10,000 or more (Portland, Bangor, Waterville, and Brunswick). 
Another ﬁve were statewide, multiple locations, or regional initiatives. These include many small 
communities as one grant was made to Northern Maine Development Commission to work ona 
Katahdin Woods and Water National Scenic Byway map. This beneﬁts many small, rural communities. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members include 
lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural and 
historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually 
produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933).
Maine Outdoor Brands received a grant to expand its Advenmre Local Maine campaign which provides listings of local guides, camping options, and places to hike, bike, kayak and more; and it integrates MOT’s Look Outfor ll/[E campaign which encourages safe and responsible usage of Mai11e’s lands and waters. Again, directing people towards these outdoor activities will help tourism in our smaller towns. Also, the Maine Grain Alliance received funds to create a series of events, several of which are held in Skowhegan. 
There were 19 grants awarded to communities with a population of less than 10,000 such as Eastport, Columbia Falls, Fort Fairﬁeld, Houlton, Presque Isle, Dallas Plantation, Dover-Foxcroft, Pittsﬁeld, Jackman, Belfast, Camden, and Rockport. Under the current process of awarding grants, small communities are already well represented. 
We are also concerned about specifying this one grant program in statute. The monies dedicated through the existing grant programs have been used wisely and effectively in promoting and expanding tourism throughout the state. Its effectiveness could be jeopardized if grant programs are set in statute, eliminating the ﬂexibility MOT currently has. Additional programs, rather than using the ones currently in existence, may make the available dollars spread too thin to make an impact. The Maine Ofﬁce of Tourism does a terriﬁc job utilizing the funds available and because the details of their current grant programs are not set in statute they have the ﬂexibility to use their expertise to adjust their programs as they believe will best serve the tourism industry in Maine. 
Although well-intended, we believe this bill is unnecessary and its objectives are already being met by the current MOT programs. Thank you for your time and consideration of our testimony. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourisn1~related businesses. incorporated in 1922, MTA members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittely to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933).
