,, . HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
§ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
p 4 =~_‘;§, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Anne Perry TTY: (207) 287-4469 
474 South St. 
Calais, ME 04619 
Phone: (207) 214-7000 
anne.pen"v@legislaturemaine.gov 
- March 21, 2023 
Testimony of Rep- . Anne Perry introducing 
LD 807, An Act to Create the Small Communities Tourism Fund 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business 
Good aftemoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee 
On Imiovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. I am Representative Anne 
Perry and I represent ten communities in Washington County. I am here to introduce LD 807, 
An Act to Create the Small Communities Tourism Fund. 
We can all see the struggle to recover from the COVID-l9 pandemic years. For small rural 
towns whose population has decreased in the 2020 census and with the signiﬁcant number of 
small business closures for the Canadian border towns, this means ﬁnding ways to bring people 
back to our area. Add to this the ever-changing world around us with the rise of technology, 
trade and aging population. We need to attract more people and business to our rural towns. 
We should be working to ensure rural communities have the tools they need to build on 
independent, long-lasting infrastructure that will bring back some of the Maine families we have 
lost. LD 807 is one step we can take to push for creative solutions that will attract small town 
tourism and create economic growth for Maine’s rural towns. This bill would establish the Small 
Communities Tourism Fund in the Department of Economic and Community Development 
housed in the Ofﬁce of Tourism to issue grants to small communities to promote tourism and 
events. 
Now, while it’s true there are programs inside of tourism that could support small communities, 
there is no targeted initiatives that serve smaller communities and events. There are several 
barriers for small communities creating new events, such as cost, infrastructure, promotion and 
capacity to organize an event can prevent success at each stage. 
Most of these events are hosted by volunteers who have little to no experience completing 
complicated applications and lengthy processes. They are also competing with professional 
District 140: Baileyville, Calais, Charlotte, Passamaquoddy Indian Township, Passamaquoddy Pleasant 
Point, Pembroke, Peny, Robbinston and Baring Plantation
organizations who host festivals, which attract thousands, and often these small organizations 
don’t have 501(c)(3) status which is typically required to qualify for grants. 
While $1,000 may make no difference to those larger festival organizers, it is exactly what small 
communities need to tackle those initial challenges and start or bring back their own events. LD 807 is an opportunity for the committee and the Department to target attention on spurring 
tourism for Maine’s rural communities. 
The return on small investments we make in rural communities is signiﬁcant. By providing 
modest support, we can ensure signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts for often-ignored towns. For 
example, Calais is a border community who for years have had a cross border festival called 
International Days. These were events organized by volunteers, which occurred on both sides of 
the border for ﬁve days, culminating with an International Parade that crossed the border from 
Calais to St. Stephen. This has not happened for two years because the usual fundraising has not 
occurred. My hope is that we have not lost this important event relationship to the pandemic. I 
am sure Calais is not the only town struggling to recoup some of its heritage. 
This may be the same in other communities across the state. We see events like the Millinocket 
Marathon, the Whoopie Pie Festival in Dover-Foxcroft and the Moxie Festival in Lisbon, which 
bring thousands of people to small communities. The beneﬁts of events like these are felt by so 
many businesses and serve to improve community pride. 
LD 807 would empower more rural Maine communities to honor their heritage and reinvent with 
an eye toward attracting tourism and strengthening economic growth. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 140: Baileyville, Calais, Charlotte, Passamaquoddy Indian Township, Passamaquoddy Pleasant 
Point, Pembroke, Perry, Robbinston and Baring Plantation
