Testimony of Nate Cloutier
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation Development Economic Advancement and Business
March 21, 2023
Neither for Nor Against LD 807, “ An Act to Create the Small Communities Tourism Fund” 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement, and Business Committee: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf 
of HospitalityMaine representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the 
state. HospitalityMaine is testifying neither for nor against LD 807, “ An Act to Create the Small Communities 
Tourism Fund .”
LD 807 would establish the Small Communities Tourism Fund within the Maine Office of Tourism (MOT). 
As stated in the bill, it would allow MOT to issue grants to “small communities.” It is our understanding 
that this would be duplicative of what is already in the purview of MOT and could be potentially problematic 
to enshrine in statute. This bill does bring to surface the important conversation around the role smaller 
and rural communities play in the State’s tourism marketing efforts. We have enjoyed working with Director 
Lyons at the MOT as well as other tourism and hospitality stakeholders such as the Maine Tourism 
Association and the Retail Association of Maine. We have had productive gatherings to share and discuss 
strategy to promote the shared goal of promoting effective tourism marketing. 
We offer the following questions for the Committee to consider:
How would “small community” be defined within Maine’s 530 plus localities? 
The bill proposes only to establish a fund without allocating funding, what would the funding 
amount be? 
What are potential problems that arise by codifying this grant into statute, and not other existing 
MOT grants?
We appreciate the Sponsor’s perspective and the reminder that has resulted from this bill, that smaller 
communities need more effective engagement in the State’s tourism plan.  In lieu of this bill, we would 
urge MOT to collaborate with the Maine Municipal Association and other municipal related groups for 
guidance how to best engage and market the State’s smaller communities. 
Thank you for your consideration. 

