TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE .|OlNT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 1185 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
to Develop a Hunting and Fishing Software Application 
SPONSORED BY: Senator POULIOT of Kennebec 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Cosponsored by Representative PERRY of Bangor and 
Senator: BLACK of Franklin. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 19, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the lnland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. lam Courtney Sirois, Marketing and Digital 
Communications Supervisor at Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, 
speaking on behalf of the Department, in support of L.D. 1186. 
This resolve directs Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to develop a 
software application that a person can download onto a mobile device to allow them to 
access many of the Department's public accessible website pages related to hunting and 
fishing, licenses and permits. The Department would be required to complete the 
development of this mobile application by December 21, 2024, so it is available for use 
by the public during the 2025 hunting and fishing seasons. 
We know that our hunters, anglers, trappers, and other outdoor enthusiasts continue to 
rely on digital resources. In 2022, 1.7 million people visited Maine Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife ’s website, 67% of those users viewed the website on a mobile 
device. More than 307,000 licenses and permits were purchased online, 63% of all 
license and permit sales. 
In the past six years, MDIFW has developed several helpful online tools to better 
support our hunters and anglers and to maintain and grow our license sales and 
revenue stream for the agency. Some of these tools include a map-based display of 
special fishing laws, an ArcG|S map of our Wildlife Management Areas which are open to 
outdoor recreation, monthly fishing reports teaching anglers where to fish and seasonal 
local tips, informational videos, resource pages, cooking videos, and more. Most
recently, the Department launched the online-self-registration option for wild turkey. 
These digital tools will continue to evolve and expand. 
In February of this year the Department formed an app committee to begin developing 
a mobile application. The committee is comprised of a representative of each MDIFW 
division including a game warden, fisheries biologist, licensing and technology director, 
wildlife biologist, and myself, marketing and digital communications supervisor; staff 
from the Office of Information Technology, and Tyler Technology representatives. The 
app will be developed by the NIC Division at Tyler Technologies. 
The app committee began by testing and examining apps developed by other State 
wildlife agencies, including Tennessee, Colorado, New York, and Texas to determine 
useful features, layout, and speed. The group then identified three focus areas for the 
app: 
1- License portal - The mobile app will allow users to purchase, download, and 
store fishing, hunting, and trapping licenses and permits for themselves and their 
family 
2- Fishing tools — This will include identifying your current location as well as nearby 
fishing locations and the laws that apply to each. 
3- Hunting and trapping tools - This will include identifying your current location, 
viewing maps of nearby Wildlife Management Areas, and viewing/downloading 
current hunting/trapping laws. 
To identify other priority features, the committee created a public survey which was 
shared on Facebook, lnstagram, and via email. The public could rate various features 
and enter their own suggestions. To date, more than 8,000 members of the public have 
completed the survey. The committee is currently evaluating public survey data. 
The app will be launched in multiple phases, improving and/or adding new features over 
time. We plan to launch phase one by December 2024. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
