at 
ﬁr A» 
\-~ _ ﬁr ' 
It :2‘ ,' 
ll 
_ ll 
c ___‘0 
‘~?4iri"@' 
Matthew G_ Pouliot THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District l5 l3 l st Legislature Augusta, Maine 0433? 
Testimony of Senator Matt Pouliot 
L.D 1186, Resolve, Directing the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to Develop a 
Hunting and Fishing Software Application 
April 19, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. I am Senator Matt Pouliot and I represent Senate District 15, which 
includes the towns of Augusta, Belgrade, China, Mount Vernon, Sidney and Vassalboro. I am here 
to present my bill, L.D 1186, Resolve, Directing the Department oflnland Fisheries and Wildlife 
to Develop a Hunting and Fishing Software Application. 
My bill is designed to direct a one-time appropriation of $250,000 from the general fund to the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife for the purpose of developing a software application 
that provides immediate access to public information. If passed, the department will be required 
to ﬁnalize its development by the end of 2024 and be ready for launch for the 2025 hunting and 
ﬁshing seasons. The information available will encapsulate matters pertaining to hunting, ﬁshing, 
licenses, permits, other relevant laws, outdoor conditions speciﬁc to region and activity being 
engaged in, and much more. 
To this point, the collective desire for a tool like this is palpable. The Department has already 
received almost 9,000 survey responses for this proposal along with a host of enthusiastic 
Stare House; (207) 287-1505 * Fax: (207) 287-1527 * Toll Free: 1-80!)-423-6900 * TT)’“ 71/ 
Mart.P0uli0t@legis/ature.mainegov * Web Site: legislature.nia1' ne,g0vﬂve1mre
Facebook comments. The good people of Maine share a rich history of outdoorsmanship and 
likewise overwhelmingly wish to ensure they enjoy a level playing ﬁeld and are in compliance 
with the various statutes in place, which, even to the most experienced among us, can be a tall 
order to fulﬁll. It stands to reason that if we in Augusta craft and codify certain standards of 
conduct, then Maine citizens ought to be equipped with the necessary tools and information to 
follow through on those standards - especially considering that, in many instances, individuals may 
be in violation merely because of innocent ignorance of rules and regulations that are somewhat 
obscure and abstruse. This application is poised to lift unnecessary burdens from citizens and law 
enforcement alike and improve outdoor experiences across the board. 
Thank you for your time and consideration on this matter.
