 
1 
 May 30 , 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney   
Chair  
Committee on Judiciary  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Representative Matthew W. Moonen  
Chair  
Comm ittee on Judiciary  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
RE: LD 1937  An Act to Remove the Confidentiality of the Transportation of Hazardous 
Materials by Railroad Companies  
 
 
Dear Chair Carney & Chair Moonen , 
 
On behalf of Canadian Pacific Kansas City (CPKC) through our subsidiary, the Central Maine & 
Quebec Railway US, Inc., I respectfully submit the following comments  to express our opposition 
to Legislative Document No. 1937  (LD 1937) . CPKC shares  the same commitment to safety as the 
State of Maine. However, it is clear to us that the proposed legislation will  undermine the safety 
and security of the first responders we work with, the communities we operate through, and our 
employees. In fact, LD 1937 would increase safety risks and presents a signific ant thre at to national 
security . Additionally, a s discussed in detail below, CPKC would be pre -empted from the proposed 
LD 1937.  Notwithstanding that, we are submitting our comments due to the impo rtance of the 
subject matter and hope that our views, gained from nearly a century and a half of rail operations 
across state and international borders, will be of assistance.   
 Arielle Giordano  
Assistant Vice President  
US Government Affairs  
 
 
1341 G Street NW  
Suite 1100  
Washington DC, 20005  
 
T (202)585 -0250  
C (202)815-5309  
arielle.giordano @cpkcr.com  
 
 
2 
 Operating safel y is a core principle at CPKC  and foundational to ever ything C PKC does. Indeed, 
protecting the safety of  our employees,  the communities we operate through , and the environment  
is fundamental to our decision -making; it drives our disciplined operating practices, capital 
investment, and company culture.  CPKC ’s dedication to safety resulted in it leading the industry 
with the lowest Federal Railroad Administration reportable train accident frequency in North 
America for the 17th straight year in 2022.   
When it comes to the transportation of hazardous materials, u nder common carrier obligations, 
CPKC is required by law to transport hazardous materials that have been properly prepared and 
offered for freight rail transportation in accordance with U.S. Federal Department of Transportation 
regulations . As a federally regulated rail carrier, CPKC’s movement of hazardous materials is 
subject to  a mature, complex and comprehensive set of federal  government  regulations and well-
established industry standards . CPKC and other railways make continual efforts and substantial 
investments designed to safel y transport  dangerous goods . As a resul t, rail transportation today is  
the safest way to transport dangerous goods o r hazardous materials over land. A ccording to 
information published by the American Association of Railroads , more than 99.9% of all hazmat 
moved by rail reaches its destination without a release caused by a train accident . Since 2000 , the 
freight rail hazmat accident rate is down 78%.  
The proposed legi slation presents significant safety and security concerns  and threatens the safe 
transportation of hazardous materials . LD 1937  proposes to eliminate the following statutory 
exception from the definition of “Public Records”:  
U. Records provided by a railr oad company describing hazardous materials transported by 
the railroad company in this State, the routes of hazardous materials shipments and the 
frequency of hazardous materials operations on those routes that are in the possession of a 
state or local eme rgency management entity or law enforcement agency, fire department or 
other first responder, except that records related to a discharge of hazardous materials 
transported by a railroad company that poses a threat to public health, safety and welfare are 
subject to public disclosure after that discharge. For the purposes of this paragraph, 
"hazardous material" has the same meaning as set forth in 49 Code of Federal Regulations, 
Section 105.5; …  
In practical terms, this change would mean that anyone could request , from any emergency 
response agency in the State , any railroad hazardous materials -related information at any time for 
any purpose.   
 
3 
 To be clear, emergency response agencies already have access to this type of information, both 
to help them prepare  for any potential emergency, as well as to respond to any emergency that 
occurs.  For example, the rail industry has developed an application, “AskRail”, which can be 
installed on the mobile devices of verified emergency responders to provide them with inf ormation 
in real time as to the contents of a particular rail car and the appropriate response to an incident 
involving those specific contents. Moreover, if a discharge of hazardous materials occurs and 
poses a threat to public health, safety, or welfare,  such records are already  subject to public 
disclosure. LD 1937  does not impact the access to information of either such category.  
Instead, what LD 1937  proposes to do is to make available – to anyone – core security -sensitive 
information.  The ramification s of this change would be extraordinary.  To put it plainly, CPKC 
believes that LD 1937 , as drafted, would result in material increased risks to the safety of the public, 
local communities, emergency responders, rail employees, the environment, rail infrast ructure, 
and, without overstatement, national security.   
CPKC considers information that, if disclosed, would be of operational utility to a person or persons 
seeking to harm CPKC’s infrastructure and thereby to adversely affect transportation security and  
public safety , to be security -sensitive information . All CPKC Security and Emergency Response 
Plans and commodit y flow data contain detailed security -sensitive information , including specific 
response resources, tactical resource deployment plans, and other information regulated by federal 
law.  
If anyone could obtain such information, the possibility that such information may be obtained by 
an individual or group with nefa rious intent and used to identify potential targets or to exploit 
vulnerabilities increases dramatically.  At the same time, LD 1937  would reduce the ability of 
railroads and/or law enforcement to detect and prevent potential threats before they are carried  
out. Even if a requestor’s intent is entirely innocent, the requestor may publicize the information or 
simply fail to institute appropriate cybersecurity protections.  Nor can the State of Maine control 
whether such information remains inside the State of Maine, or even inside the United States.   
To put the concern plainly, this change could make available a map of potential high value security 
targets to anyone, while making any management of access to or use of that information 
impossible.  As such, the pr oposal not only adversely affects transportation security, but could 
jeopardize critical infrastructure and materially increase risks to those that the proposal presumably 
intends to help protect:  the public and the emergency responders who may be called u pon to assist 
in the event of an incident.  
 
4 
 CPKC believes that thoughtful weighing of the security and safety concerns is essential.   
Particularly where those who can actually use the information for the benefit of the public – 
emergency responders – alrea dy have access to it . CPKC does not believe  that LD 1937  does 
anything to further public safety, whereas widely disseminating detailed information about potential 
vulnerabilities would create a material risk to public safety, not an enhancement.   
Furthermore, CPKC believes that LD 1937  is preempted by federal law s governing access to 
informatio n about critical infrastructure in the rail industry, including the movement of certain 
commodities  and proprietary information or security -sensitive information .  
Federal law requires that the state not release to the public information that Class 1 carriers provide 
the State about movement of unit oil trains.  The considerations that motivated that requirement 
likewise counsel against releasing to the public information that violent threat actors could misuse 
to cause a high -consequence hazmat incident.   
When the U.S. Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) began requiring Class 1 railroads to report 
to State Emergency Response Centers (SERCs) the frequency of trains carrying one million or 
more gallons of Bakken crude oil,1 U.S. DOT issued an explanatory Frequently Asked Questions 
(FAQ)  document.  Cognizant of the security impacts that its reporting requirements could have, U.S. 
DOT said the followi ng: 
This data is intended for those persons with a need -to-know; that is, first responders at the 
State and local level, as well other appropriate emergency response planners. DOT expects 
the SERCs to treat this data as confidential, providing it only to t hose with a need -to-know, 
and with the understanding that recipients of the data will continue to treat it as confidential. 
Accordingly, railroads may require reasonable confidentiality agreements prior to providing 
this information. Historically, railroad s and States have routinely entered into confidentiality 
agreements prior to railroads providing States with information on commodities transported in 
trains within their jurisdictions, as this information has traditionally been viewed as confidential 
from business and security perspectives. DOT believes that following precedent and sharing 
the data required by this EO under confidentiality agreements is appropriate.  
                                            
1 Emergency Restriction/Prohibition Order, Petroleum Crude Oil Railroad Carriers, Docket No. DOT -OST-2014 -0067 
(May 7, 2014) (EO 2014 -0067).  
 
5 
 Section 7302 of the FAST Act2 codified the requirements of EO 2014 -0067.  There, Congress 
mandated that U.S. DOT establish regulations on disclosing to SERCs the frequency of so -called 
"high -hazard flammable train" (HHFT) movements and, in doing so, that U.S. DOT - 
establish security and confidentiality protections, including protections from the  public release 
of proprietary information or security -sensitive information, to prevent the release to 
unauthorized persons any electronic train consist information or advanced notification or 
information provided by Class I railroads under this section.  
FAST Act, Section 7302(a)(6) (129 Stat. 1595)(codified at 49 U.S.C. 20103 note; redesignated as 
Section 7302(a)(5) by Section 26003 of Pub. L. 117 -58 at 135 Stat. 883).  
U.S. DOT's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) promulgated 4 9 
C.F.R. §174.312, "HHFT information sharing notification for emergency response planning," to 
implement Section 7302 of the FAST Act.  In doing so, PHMSA said that, to meet Section 
7302(a)(6)'s requirement to establish "protections from the public release of proprietary or security -
sensitive information,"  "If the disclosure includes information that railroads believe is security 
sensitive or proprietary and exempt from public disclosure, the railroads should indicate that in the 
notification." 84 Fed. Reg. 6910, 6914 (Feb. 28, 2019).  
Accordingly, 49 C.F.R. §174.312 provides that a railroad may notify a state that the railroad 
considers information that the railroad discloses to the state is security -sensitive.  Such notice, 
under federal law (Section 7302(a)( 6) of the FAST Act), prevents public disclosure of that 
information.  
Because PHMSA has acted under federal law in 49 C.F.R. §174.312 to prevent public disclosure 
of information that railroads label security -sensitive, the State may not allow disclosure con trary to 
that labeling.  "Laws, regulations, and orders related to railroad safety and laws, regulations, and 
orders related to railroad security shall be nationally uniform to the extent practicable."  49 U.S.C. 
§20106(a)(1).  A State may adopt or continue i n force an additional or more stringent law, regulation, 
or order related to railroad safety or security only when doing so meets this conjunctive, three -part 
test, that the law or regulation:  
"(A) is necessary to eliminate or reduce an essentially local s afety or security hazard;  
"(B) is not incompatible with a law, regulation, or order of the United States Government; and  
                                            
2 Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act, Pub. L. 114 -94, 129 Stat. 1312 (Dec. 4, 2015).  
 
6 
 "(C) does not unreasonably burden interstate commerce."  
LD 1937  fails at least parts (A) and (B) of this three -part test. The passage o f trains carrying 
hazardous materials is not unique to Maine or any of its communities, and the legislation's purpose 
to "[make] those records [provided by railroad companies describing hazardous materials 
transported in the State, the routes of hazardous materials shipments and the frequency of 
hazardous materials operations on those routes] subject to public disclosure" directly contradicts 
49 C.F.R. §174.312's provision that railroads may prevent public disclosure of records filed under 
that regulation b y designating them as security -sensitive.  
The same security sensitivity that motivated Congress in Section 7302(a)(6) of the Fast Act to 
prevent public disclosure of HHFT movements applies equally to prohibit public disclosure of all 
other hazardous materi al shipping information.  Every week events occur that remind us that violent 
threat actors are active in this world, many acting on motivations that are hard or impossible to 
understand.  Allowing public disclosure of railroad information about movements of  chemicals and 
other products that, if targeted and intentionally released from their rail containers, could cause 
significant public harm is facilitating the potential weaponization of that information by foreign and 
domestic violent threat actors, riskin g harm to Maine's citizens.   
Further, as you may be aware, the federal government is in the process of reviewing 
communications channels and protocols between the rail industry and emergency responders or 
other authorities.  CPKC urges the Legislature, at a minimum, to defer action on LD 1937  until the 
federal government has an opportunity to complete the process underway.  
As a final matter, it is important to take into consideration the stated objective of LD 1937  and 
consider if public disclosure of the data relating to the hazardous materials would be necessary.  
Public disclosure of said data will not deliver any public benefit, much less preserve public peace 
or health and safety as suggested in the preamble of the proposed amendment.  In  the absence of 
any public benefit, and in light of the potential safety and security harm, LD 1937 should fail. For 
example,  LD 1937  would have had no benefit in relation to an unfortunate derailment that occurred 
on CPKC’s line  in the State of Maine on April 15, 2023 or the ability of emergency responders or 
CPKC hazmat personnel to respond.  Although that derailment is being thoroughly addressed in 
other forums, CPKC will briefly highlight a few relevant distinctions to illustra te the point.   
The April 15, 2023 derailment occurred due to a track washout . State , local  and federal emergency 
response and environmental agencies had ready access to information about the train.  The 
majority of cars on t he train carried consumer goods -commodities  needed for every part of the US 
and Canadian economies -not hazardous materials or dangerous goods.  The incident resulted in a 
 
7 
 fire involving the locomotives  and four derailed lumber cars and n o other ca rs were impacted by 
the fire. Two intermod al cars carrying intermodal shipping containers derailed but were not involved 
in the fire.  There were drums of hazardous materials inside containers but no leaks or spills of the 
hazardous materials occurred from the intermoda l containers carrying the dru ms and there were 
no evacuations ordered or threats to public safety.     
CPKC e nvironmental response teams have and will continue to responsibly address any released 
diesel until such time as the remediation is complete in accordance with all applicable l egal 
requirements, and they have been working closely with state and federal environmental authorities 
throughout the process.   
With such grave safety and security  consequences, CPKC must strongly oppose progressing this 
bill through the legislature. At th e end of the day, CPKC wants to protect the safety  of the public, 
local communities, emergency responders, rail employees, the environment, ra il infrastructure, and 
national security.  
We appreciate the opportunity to comment and look forward to continued engagement on this 
critical safety and security matter.  
For the foregoing reasons, CPKC respectfully submits the above opposition to LD 1937 . 
 
Respectfully,  
 
 
 
 
Arielle Giordano  
AVP 
US Government Affairs   
 
 

