Brian Campbell Comment to 131st Maine Legislature
An Act to Study the Construction of a Nuclear Power Facility in the State
L.D. 458 
LR1906, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 1Brian Campbell BSEE Retired Chelmsford MA Comment on Maine 131 - HP 458
Maine’s only nuclear power plant, Maine Yankee in Wiscasset, closed 27 years ago following years of 
opposition from misguided De-Civilization, Malthusian so called environmental groups, that now want destroy 
and industrialize Maine’s mountains, oceans and Natural beauty with so called Renewable Energy. This must 
be sacrificed for the worship of Green Profits and on the altar to prevent Climate Change. 
Maine Yankee opened in 1972 and stayed open despite three citizen initiatives — 1980, 1987, 1992 — 
that were designed to force it to close.
Ultimately, cracks were discovered in the steam generator tubes and the company voted to close it 
permanently.  This had nothing to do with the Nuclear Side of the Plant and the Generators could of and 
should have been repaired, instead of Prematurely Closing 900 MWe of Non-Emitting Power far more than 
27 years later of Maine Renewable Wind, Solar and Hydro Power.  Maine Yankee was an Industrial Cathedral 
of Clean 24 / 7 900MWe Power far more Valuable than weather dependent Wind and Solar.  This Value is 
not reflected consumers energy bills.  Unreliable Wind and Solar are reliant on inefficient Gas Peakers for 
Backup, at 30% compared to 60% Combined Cycle Gas Electrical Generators efficiency.  A cleaner grid 
could be built with 90% Combined Cycle Gas Electrical Generators and NO expensive Renewables for much 
LESS cost, But New Gas pipelines will be necessary in Either Case.
ISONE and the Rube Goldberg Democrat politicians and green profits pushing offshore WIND is the 
Biggest Scam perforated on the Rate payers of Maine, this century.  Reducing Emissions is NOT the Goal 
of ISONE and NE Democrats but emulating Germany’s $560 Billion Dollar MISTAKE of trying to run a modern 
industrial economy on UNRELIEABLE so called Renewable Energy will be a failure in New England as in 
Germany who shut down all of their Clean Nuclear and Substituted Dirty Lignite Coal for some of the Highest 
emissions of any country in Europe, excluding Poland.
What Maine and New England should do is emulate ISO Ontario.  Between 2000 and 2014 Ontario 
Refurbished it’s CANDU Nuclear Reactors and has the Cleanest Grid in North America outside of Hydro-
Quebec, at 60% CLEANEST Nuclear Power.  See https://app.electricitymaps.com/zone/CA-ON Compare to 
any Grid World wide to see PROVEN NUCLEAR POWERED GRIDs with low EMISSIONS, which should be 
the GOAL.  Also Nuclear Grids are the LOWEST Price to Rate Payers which should be a Goal Also!  ISO 
Ontario Pay 1/3 less for electric compared to New England E-rates.   https://www.canfornuclearenergy.org/
Bottom-line, Nuclear combined with Hydro electrical generation and One original Seabrook two Reactor 
Electrical generation = 2500 MW and Maine could export half of it power to the rest of New England 
employing a $100K Salaried Highly skilled Union workforce that green profit Democrats hate.  
BUILD NUCLEAR POWER NOW!
Brian Campbell
Chelmsford, MASS
LD 689
Maine’s only nuclear power plant, Maine Yankee in Wiscasset, closed 27 years ago following 
years of opposition from misguided, De-Civilization, Malthusian so called environmental 
groups, that now want destroy and industrialize Maine’s mountains, oceans and Natural 
beauty with so called Renewable Energy. This must be sacrificed for the worship of Green 
Profits and on the altar to prevent Climate Change. 
Maine Yankee opened in 1972 and stayed open despite three citizen initiatives — 1980, 
1987, 1992 — that were designed to force it to close.
Ultimately, cracks were discovered in the steam generator tubes and the company voted to 
close it permanently.  This had nothing to do with the Nuclear Side of the Plant and the 
Generators could of and should have been repaired, instead of Prematurely Closing 900 
MWe of Non-Emitting Power far more than 27 years later of Maine Renewable Wind, Solar 
and Hydro Power.  Maine Yankee was an Industrial Cathedral of Clean 24 / 7 900MWe 
Power far more Valuable than weather dependent Wind and Solar.  This Value is not 
reflected consumers energy bills.  Unreliable Wind and Solar are reliant on inefficient Gas 
Peakers for Backup, at 30% compared to 60% Combined Cycle Gas Electrical Generators 
efficiency.  A cleaner grid could be built with 90% Combined Cycle Gas Electrical Generators 
and NO expensive Renewables for much LESS cost, But New Gas pipelines will be 
necessary in Either Case.
ISONE and the Rube Goldberg Democrat politicians and green profits pushing offshore WIND
is the Biggest Scam perforated on the Rate payers of Maine, this century.  Reducing 
Emissions is NOT the Goal of ISONE and NE Democrats but emulating Germany’s $560 
Billion Dollar MISTAKE of trying to run a modern industrial economy on UNRELIEABLE so 
called Renewable Energy will be a failure in New England as in Germany who shut down all 
of their Clean Nuclear and Substituted Dirty Lignite Coal for some of the Highest emissions of
any country in Europe, excluding Poland.
What Maine and New England should do is emulate ISO Ontario.  Between 2000 and 2014 
Ontario Refurbished it’s CANDU Nuclear Reactors and has the Cleanest Grid in North 
America outside of Hydro-Quebec, at 60% CLEANEST Nuclear Power.  See 
https://app.electricitymaps.com/zone/CA-ON Compare to any Grid World wide to see 
PROVEN NUCLEAR POWERED GRIDs with low EMISSIONS, which should be the GOAL.  
Also Nuclear Grids are the LOWEST Price to Rate Payers which should be a Goal Also!  ISO 
Ontario Pay 1/3 less for electric compared to New England E-rates.   
https://www.canfornuclearenergy.org/
Bottom-line, Nuclear combined with Hydro electrical generation and One original Seabrook 
two Reactor Electrical generation = 2500 MW and Maine could export half of it power to the 
rest of New England employing a $100K Salaried Highly skilled Union workforce that green 
profit Democrats hate.   BUILD NUCLEAR POWER NOW!

