Testimony in Support of LD 689,
“An Act to Study the
Construction of a Nuclear
Power Facility in the State”
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 689.
During the lifespan of the Maine Yankee Nuclear Power Plant, from 1972 to 1996,
the plant provided roughly 119 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity, supplying most of the
state's energy demand in that time.
1
Since its closure,
Maine has transitioned toward
alternative sources of electricity to fill the gap left by Maine Yankee’s absence. These
new sources include both heavily subsidized, expensive renewable options, as well as
fossil fuel generation. Today, the state’s largest power plant is natural gas-fired.
2
The result has been dirtier and more expensive electricity generation for the last
quarter-century. State lawmakers have been consistently searching for new, particularly
renewable energy sources, leading to the increasing focus on wind and solar farms.
These alternatives, however, are not only expensive and unreliable for the consumer, but
they are also expensive for the government as significant financial commitments are
necessary to build and support the operation of these options.
It is often claimed that our expensive electricity is a result of Maine’s cold
climate, but this is not at all the case. The average cost of electricity for Maine
residential consumers in October of 2022 was 23.06 cents per kilowatt-hour, while
residents of other northern, cold-weather states such as Wisconsin (16.19 cents)
Minnesota (14.95 cents) and North Dakota (11.73 cents) enjoy far cheaper electricity.
The reason Maine has such high energy costs is primarily a supply issue. Maine
currently generates less electricity than all but five other states, increasing pressure on
prices. Making matters worse, the energy we do produce is of a particularly expensive
and volatile type due to the deliberate choices Maine has made to emphasize expensive
and unreliable renewable energy sources.
The inherent reliability of nuclear power is due to its more-than-90% capacity
factor. A nuclear plant can run nearly 24/7, whereas solar panels and wind turbine
2
https://www.eia.gov/state/analysis.php?sid=ME
1
https://maineyankee.com/docs/MaineYankee.pdf
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

capacity is closer to 20-30% at best, because they can only create power when the sun is
shining or the wind is blowing, respectively.
3
When Vermont Yankee shut down in late 2014, it was the fifth-largest source of
generation in the region, making up 4% of New England's total electric generation, and
more than 70% of generation in Vermont. The United States Energy Information
Administration (EIA) noted that ISO-NE, the regional grid operator, would have to
make up Vermont Yankee’s lost 600-megawatts by either increasing the output of the
region’s four other nuclear plants, or from importing more energy, via hydropower from
Canada and natural gas from New York.
4
Ultimately, the latter took place, as monthly in-region nuclear generation from
after 2015 has averaged 17% less than between 2000 and 2014. In the same timeframe,
the region went from exporting an average of 876 gigawatt-hours per month to
importing
an average of nearly 1,300 gigawatt-hours
per month.
5
All of this has
occurred at a time of 5% lower overall regional demand, yet under significantly higher
prices.
Despite the sensationalist fear-mongering about nuclear power, it has proven to
be not only safe, but considerably safer (by a wide margin) than all other
energy-producing options.
6
Beyond the technology’s safety, nuclear power continues to be remarkably
inexpensive. In 2019, EIA estimated that the cost of electricity from new, advanced
nuclear power plants coming online in 2023 to be 7.75 cents per kilowatt-hour before
government subsidies.
7
Current energy generation in
Maine is nearly triple that cost.
Please deem LD 689 “Ought To Pass” and begin the conversation around
transitioning to not only a clean, but reliable, future of power generation. Thank you for
your time and consideration.
7
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/electricity_generation.pdf
6
https://ourworldindata.org/safest-sources-of-energy
5
Maine Policy Institute analysis of ISO-NE reports. 
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1D_9IM1jHM7ufQbPosH_a6I9WmNcOcwfr_6cN0pZa0wU/edit?u 
sp=sharing
4
https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=19811
3
https://www.energy.gov/ne/articles/nuclear-power-most-reliable-energy-source-and-its-not-even-close

