MAINE MUN|ClPAL 
ASSOCIATION SINCE was 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-94186 
l-800-452-8786 (in state) I (I) 207-623-81:28 
(f) 207~6Zli-0129 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support of 
LD 1456, Resolve, to Study the Eﬁect of Current Laws and Rules on the Expansion of Broadband 
April 18,2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee. My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting testimony in support of 
LD 1456 on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders elected by their peers to serve on the 
Association ’s Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish positions on bills of 
municipal interest. 
First and foremost, I want to extend the Association ’s gratitude to Sen. Grohoski for 
agreeing to sponsor LD 1456 on behalf of MMA’s Legislative Policy Committee, as well as to 
all the interested parties that provided feedback in advance of the public hearing to improve the 
legislation. This issue is of utmost importance to municipal officials and to that end, is one of 
the twelve bills on MMA’s 2023-2024 legislative platform. 
The purpose of this bill is simply to study how current policies, rules and regulations are 
impacting further expansion of quality broadband services throughout Maine, with a speciﬁc 
focus on pole attachment regulations, and to recommend improvements. Our members have 
shared numerous examples of how the process for gaining timely access to the municipally 
reserved space on utility poles has been frustrated. The concerns raised by municipal officials 
include a lack of response, abandonment of obsolete poles, inconvenient location in the public 
right of way, as well as, a partial or selective response, which in one community resulted in the 
“make ready” work for only a few in a sequence of poles. 
From the perspective of municipal leaders, the requested study is important for two 
reasons. 
First, as illustrated by the pandemic, there is an inequity that exists not only with respect 
to the quality of service, but to access as well, which needs to be addressed. Broadband access is 
becoming more vitally important to our individual health and economic prosperity. In some 
areas of the state, access to telehealth services, for example, can provide access to medical care 
that in some of our more rural areas is otherwise only accessible via a daylong trip to a major 
hub, when an appointment can be scheduled. Through one of the Association ’s member 
outreach efforts, we heard from a selectperson in a small rural community about the concern that 
during the pandemic students were gathering around town hall to access internet services 
necessary to complete homework assignments.
As the state becomes more dependent on electronic connectivity, improved access will 
become increasingly important to avoid adding to the existing inequities. 
This need leads to our members ‘second point. While the work that the state, 
municipalities, and industry have done to date has set the stage, far more needs to be 
accomplished, and quickly. It is time to reassess what is and is not working and do a better job 
for our residents and businesses. To that end, municipal govermnent leaders want to play a role, 
particularly in areas of the state where private investments are not economically beneﬁcial. It is 
what governments do; that is, step in to provide publicly funded services when it is not feasible 
for the private sector to do so. 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about the Association ’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kdutouri ﬁiimemun org or l-800-452-8786.
