Senator, District 7 ~‘ 
1 ~ 
Ellsworth, ME 04605 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature Nicole Grohoski P.O. Box 1732 
viQ
w 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 1456, “An Act to Facilitate the Expansion of Broadband ” 
Before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
18 April 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and fellow members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. As you know, my name is Nicole 
Grohoski and I am honored to represent the 22 communities of Senate District 7. I am here to 
present LD 1456, with an amended title, “Resolve, to Study the Effect of Current Laws and 
Rules on the Expansion of Broadband. ” 
In our efforts to expand broadband to as many Mainers as possible as quickly as possible, all 
solutions need to be on the table. Many communities are currently engaged in their own 
broadband planning efforts and some have concluded that municipal broadband — which can 
come in different forms — is the right choice for them. 
Regardless of who owns or operates internet infrastructure, the wires are almost exclusively 
strung on utility poles along our road rights-of-way. Attaching to poles can be challenging for 
entities that don’t own the poles, and different owners have different protocols for how to request 
and secure space on their poles. A significant portion of the time and cost for a broadband project 
can come from planning, insuring, and executing pole attachments. 
The amended version of this legislation is a study about current pole attachment laws and rules 
by the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) in consultation with the Maine Connectivity Authority 
(MCA). It focuses on how these regulations affect municipal broadband expansion through either 
public or public-private networks. Speciﬁcally, the study must review: l) wait times for the 
approval of pole attachments, 2) compliance with requirements that common space on poles be 
preserved, and 3) PUC enforcement of pole relocation or removal requirements. 
The PUC and MCA would collect information about commonly-experienced challenges related 
to pole attachments and present possible solutions for this committee to consider. Because these 
challenges are not only experienced by municipal broadband projects, but also privately- 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State HOUSE (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * TOll Free 1-800-423-6900 * l l Y 711 
Nicole.Groh0ski@legislaturemaine.gov * legislature.maine.g0v/senatei
f
%
l’ 
~/
l 
is; 
at
V
1
u
developed projects, I would be amenable to expanding the scope of the study. It would be 
interesting to know if pole owners are treating all would-be attachers similarly. 
This study builds on the work of this committee in previous Legislatures, and unfortunately, it 
appears that our work is not yet done. Projects are still being delayed by long approval processes 
and delayed make-ready Work. Poles are still abandoned in rights-of-way, sometimes obstructing 
sidewalks or impeding construction projects. I think our efforts have helped somewhat, so the 
goal of this study is to see what remains to be done. 
Thank you for your attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
2
