139 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04330    207-480 1478 www.maineddc.org  
55 April 2023 
 
In support of LD 1456, An Act to Facilitate the Expansion of Broadband 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology.  
 
My name is Rachel Dyer, and I am the associate director of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council. Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the 
Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD 
Council has been advocating for individuals with Developmental Disabilities (DD) for over 40 
years.  The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with members from 
across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of 
public and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for individuals 
with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, 
capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with 
developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated and involved in 
their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
 
Covid and its impact shone light on the utility of technology even as it increases the gaps 
experienced by Mainers who are poor, live in rural areas, and otherwise lack infrastructure and 
support to use it, including individuals with developmental disabilities. We have long known 
that people with DD are largely on the wrong side of the digital divide, lacking access to the 
tools that allow for online and virtual connection, due to the costs of hardware, the learning 
curve to understand how to use devices, and connectivity issues across the state, among other 
factors. While this bill is does not address the many aspects of the digital divide, addressing 
connectivity takes an important step in acknowledging how critical access is.   
 
 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.  
 
 

