I, STATE or MAINE 
=~ 
ft" 
V DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CoNsERvATIoN & FoREsTRY 
OFFICE or THE COMMISSIONER 
22 STATE HoUsE STATIoN 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 AMANDA E BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
APPROPRIATIONS AND FINANCIAL AFFAIRS 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 1156 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development, and 
Maintenance of T rails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Andy Cutko, and I am the Director of the 
Bureau of Parks and Lands (BPL). I am speaking on behalf of the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry (DACF) as neither for nor against LD 1156, An Act to Authorize a 
General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and Maintenance of Trails for 
Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation. 
BPL stewards some of the most iconic, scenic, and sought-after walking, hiking, and biking trails 
in the eastern United States, including trail systems like Tumbledown Mountain, Mount Battie, 
Old Speck, Bradbury Mountain, and the Cutler Coast. With more than 400 miles of non- 
motorized trails, our Bureau maintains trail networks in every Maine county, ranging from short, 
ADA-accessible footpaths along the coast to challenging mountain biking trails to rugged and 
remote trails suitable for multi-day backpacking adventures. By all accounts, however, the 
growth in recreational use we experienced during the pandemic has been sustained, and many of 
our hiking trails are at risk of being ‘loved to death.’ 
BPL also administers the state’s ATV and Snowmobile Programs, which add millions of dollars 
to the state’s outdoor economy. These programs manage nearly 650 miles of motorized trails on 
BPL lands, and working with private clubs across the state, we support roughly 6,000 miles of 
ATV trails and 13,000 miles of snowmobile trails on private lands. ATV and snowmobile 
registrations, like recreational uses of all types, have surged over the last several years; ATV 
registrations climbed 20% in the previous decade, and snowmobile registrations grew by 9%. 
The recent ATV Task Force estimated the funding needs at $4.5 million per year, more than 
twice the amount available, and the shortfall for the snowmobile program is more than $3 million 
I8 ELKINS LANE ....ma,.1.ne conservation /"W J17 .’- 
I r__:,:" V_ DEPARTMENT OF __ 
HARLOW BUILDING A ricunure Pu-nous. (207) 287 3200 
AUGUSTA, MAINE & ForestrY FAX‘ (207) 287'24°° 
/“/J ‘J
L/
dollars per year. In some cases, trails need to be closed to limit damage or mitigate safety 
hazards. In recent years the Bureau has either temporarily or permanently closed over 700 miles 
of ATV trails because of insufficient funding to maintain them. 
Maine’s motorized and non-motorized trails are the lifeblood of our recreational economy. In 
many locations, however, these trails suffer from heavy use, resulting in environmental damage 
(through erosion and sedimentation), dangerous footing, insufficient parking, and inadequate 
signage and safety. Three years ago, the Maine Conservation Corps assessed approximately 400 
miles of non-motorized trails on BPL lands, identifying obvious trail maintenance and 
improvement needs. The assessment revealed more than 3,900 locations of erosion, water issues, 
and failing structural elements. The necessary funding to address our Bureau’s needs is estimated 
at $20 million; this estimate is just for BPL lands and does not include construction costs for new 
trails. It is important to note that in addition to funding to administer the program, BPL would 
greatly beneﬁt from one full-time trail planner. 
In summary, the funding identified in this bill would ﬁll a vital role in supporting the state’s 
diverse and expansive recreational trail system, and it would complement BPL’s many existing 
efforts in this area. Thank you for your time. I would happily answer any questions now or at the 
Work session.
