Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/26/2023  
               1 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
 
To:  Maine Legislature Committee On  Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
From:   Maine Rail Transit Coalition , Tony Donovan, Managing  Director  
Date:    April 26, 2023  
Re: In Opposition to LD 1156  An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote 
the Design, Development and Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active 
Transportation  
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sach s, esteemed members  of the Appropriations Committee . 
 
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the Maine Rail 
Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) lobbies for federal, state, 
and local policies that promote equitable funding of transit services for al l. MRTC’s vision is a 
comprehensive transit design connecting passenger rail service with local transit systems to 
promote economic and environmental sustainability.    
 
The MRTC is here in Opposition to LD 1156 An Act to Authorize a General Fund 
Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and Maintenance of Trails for 
Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation . 
 
I write this on Earth Day 2023.  Earth Day, founded at a most critical time in Americ an modern 
history when everyone, across all spectrums of politics, gender , demographics,  and geography 
came together to recognize human impacts on the natural environment and how our acts can be 
doing harm to ourselves.  
 
We understand  that the off -road ATV and snowmobile industries  are great economic boon t o this 
State.  I am very aware that speaking out against these modes of recreation  sparks pushbacks  
from major, very influential  interests.   So, I will not dwell on the harm t hese machines do to that 
natural environment  we hold so dear.  However,  the MRTC is opposed to carbon based 
recreational use of trails , leading  to our opposition  to this bond.  
 
We have a problem one specific use of th is bond in this section of L D 1156 : 
Sec. 6. Disbursement of bond pro ceeds.  The Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry shall work with the  Department of Transportation in evaluating and 
making grant decisions on proposals that  would advance the Department of 
Transportation's statewide active transportation plan.  
 
Maine ’s Railroads were purchased by the state through Bonds issued  specifically for the eventual 
restoration  of train services, passenger,  and freight.  Not for trails.  
 
  
Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/26/2023  
               2 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
The one thing that is critical to understand  is when a railroad infrastructure  is torn out for 
the purpose of a recreational trail, the environmental  impac ts of motorized uses go beyond 
the pollution and impacts on waters and soils .  State funding for the removal of these vital 
transportation infrastructure  assets  destroys  any hope for a future that offers a economical 
and environmental  alternati ve to cars.  Cars, which according  to the Governors Climate  
council contribute 54% of pollution in Maine.  
 
The state funded the removal  of 88 miles of railroad serving the Downeast  communities  from 
Acadia to Calais.  The Sunrise Trail, built under the auspices that it would be a place for healthy 
recreation, is now actually a high -speed ATV and snowmobile  route.  The long-term impacts of 
removing a segment of the statewide  railway system may not be realized for years .  But it is 
certain no freight will operate on this corridor  ever again , much less passengers . 
 
The MeDOT new Active Transportation Plan references  conv ersion of state-owned “inactive ” 
railroads to recreational trails throughout  the document.  MeDOT has hired a st aff person to 
research and implement this policy.  MeDOT has budgeted over $11 million for the new Active 
Transportation P lan.   
 
This is reflective  of the current, well -organized movement by trail advocates to rip up railroads 
for recreational trails. Maine trail advocates seek to join th e so-called successes of the national 
Rails to Trails Conservancy  that has to date removed 12,000 miles of railroad infrastructure  in 
the country.  Maine has been on their list for a long time.  
 
Unitil it is firmly  established  that Maine ’s railroads have no use for train service , it is our 
position  that no taxpayer bonds should be used for removal  of the railroads.  In fact, we suggest 
just the opposite .  Transportation bonding should be used to leverage the  billions of federal  
infrastructures  dollars  to restore Maine -owned railroads , and there are several  legislative  acts in 
this 131st session that se ek to accomplish this , including LD 406, which directs the MeDOT to 
establish  a Vision Plan for train use of the certain state -owned railroad corridors .   
 
It is our position  that LD 1156 be Amended to exclude any expenditures on th e following 
railroads:  
• The St. Lawrence & Atlantic / Berlin Subdivision, 30 miles from Portland to 
Auburn/Lewiston  
• Lower Road, 40 miles from Brunswick to Augusta  
• Mountain Division, 55 miles from Portland to Fryeburg  
• Rockland Branch, 60 miles from Brunswick to Rockland  
 
Anthony J. Donovan,  Director  
 Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
84 Middle St.   Portland, Me. 04101  
(207) 329 -6732 Mobile  Mailto:  MElikesRail@Gmail.com  
  
Train Tim e 
