Testimony of the Environmental Priorities Coalition 
In support of LD 1156 
“An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue 
to Promote the Design, Development and Maintenance of Trails 
for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation ” 
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee 
April 27, 2023 
Good day Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee. My name is Beth Ahearn andI 
offer testimonyon behalf of the Environmental Priorities Coalition (EPC). The 
EPC is a partnership of thirty-seven conservation, environmental, and public health 
organizations who unify around a common agenda every year. The EPC represents 
over 120,000 members in Maine who want to protect the good health, good jobs, 
and quality of life that depend upon a healthy environment. LD 1156, “An Act to 
Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and 
Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation ” is one 
of the priority bills for our coalition this year. Thank you to Rep. Fay for 
sponsoring this priority legislation. 
LD 1156 will establish a Maine Trails Bond for outdoor recreation and active 
transportation. Maine has the potential to be a top-tier state in the nation with 
multi-use trails that support activities that contribute to our economy, environment, 
and quality of life. In every corner of the state, Maine trails are a critical resource 
for connecting Maine people and visitors with the natural world and for reaching 
destinations to work and play. 
During the pandemic, more people than ever discovered Maine trails for hiking, 
biking, snowmobiling, skiing, commuting, and other activities. Trails are an 
essential component of Maine’s $3 billion outdoor recreation economy, which
supports 41,000 jobs. Snowmobiling alone generates $460 million in direct 
spending in Maine and supports 2,200 jobs. Annual direct and indirect spending 
from snowmobiling exceeds $600 million. According to the National Association 
of Realtors, nearby trails and greenways raise property values by an average of 
3-5% -- and sometimes upwards of 15%. 
Maine has a huge need for investment in trail design, construction, and 
maintenance. Although Maine has many exceptional and diverse trails, trail 
groups and communities have identiﬁed a large backlog of maintenance projects 
that need attention. Funding also is needed to build trails that are accessible to 
individuals across the full range of abilities. New trails could support active 
transportation, reducing our dependence on fossil fuels. Existing state, federal, and 
private funding is insufficient to make Maine a nationally recognized destination 
for trails. 
A Maine Trails Bond will strengthen Maine’s economy and help protect our 
environment. A $30 million Maine Trails Bond would provide grants to 
nonprofits, municipalities, and other divisions of govermnent statewide to support 
non-motorized, motorized, and multi- use trails. Funding would be distributed over 
a 4-year period, and applicants would be required to demonstrate at least 20% in 
matching contributions. Funding would be managed by the Bureau of Parks and 
Lands (BPL), which has experience managing the federal Recreation Trails 
Program. BPL would coordinate with the Department of Transportation for any 
grant applications that help advance the Maine State Active Transportation Plan. 
We urge you to unanimously support LD 1156. Please invest in Maine trails to 
strengthen our communities, economy, and quality of life. Thank you for your 
time and attention.
