 
 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
  
     JANET T. MILLS                                     HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                      GOVERNOR                                                                                                 COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION •AUGUSTA •MAINE •04333- 0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800• FACS IMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMI TTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS AND 
FINANCIAL AFFAIRS  
 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  LD 1156 
 
An Act to  Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development , and Maintenance 
of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and A ctive Transportation  
 
April 27 , 2023 
 
Senator  Rotundo, Representative Sachs , and members of the  Joint Standing C ommittee  on 
Appropriations and Financial Affa irs, my name is Carolann Ouellette , and I am the Director of the 
Office of Outdoor Recreation. I am speaking on behalf of the Department of Economic & Community 
Develo pment (DECD)  as neither for nor against LD 1156, An Act to  Authorize a General Fund Bond 
Issue to Promote the Design, Development and Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Activ e Transportation. 
 The Maine Office of Outdoor Recreation  focus es on leveraging Maine’s assets and outdoor recreation 
heritage to grow  the outdoor recreation economy and build Maine’s outdoor re creation brand as part of a 
coordinated effort with partners from the public and private sectors. Outdoor recreation makes up 3.6% 
of Maine’s economy, making Maine one of the top five states in the country in the value outdoor recreation adds to statewide GDP  as measured by  the Bureau of Economic Analysis Outdoor Recreation 
Satellite Account  in its 2021 report . Outdoor recreation supports more than 30,000 jobs in Maine, 
accounting for 4.9 % of employment and providing more than $1.2 billion  in compensation, accounting 
for 2.8% of the state's wages.  Employment has grown 15.6% in Maine compared to an increase of 
13.1% for the United States.  The pandemic highlighted the need for close -to-home recreation, specifically  the importance of better 
access to the outdoors for all  as so many discovered the health benefits , both physical and me ntal, of 
spending time outside. This increase in participation by both residents and visitors has put a strain on ecosystems and infrastructure, reminding us of the ongoing challenges of overuse and revealing the  need 
for investment in , and increased access  to, trails and open spaces for re sident quality of life , deeper 
visitor experiences , and long- term sustainable  economic  development.  
  
 
 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
  
     JANET T. MILLS                                     HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                      GOVERNOR                                                                                                 COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION •AUGUSTA •MAINE •04333- 0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800• FACS IMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
Outdoor recreation fuels employment in other sectors, such as manufacturing, finance, retail, 
transportation, food services, tourism, travel and more. Outdoor recreation infrastructure has proven an invaluable asset for economic development offices and chambers of commerce s eeking to att ract new 
employers , and places  that inves t in outdoor assets attract employers and employees who value the 
work -life balance that outdoor access provide .  
 
Trails , more specif ically, make communities more attractive places to live , work  and vi sit. When 
considering where to move, homebuyers rank walking and biking paths as one of the most important 
features of a new community.  Trails often influence business location and relocation decisions. 
Companies often choose to locate in communities that offer a high level of amenities to employees as a means of attracting and retaining top- level workers. Trails are active transportation infrastructure  
providing safe alternatives for  bike and pedestrian traffic.   
 Maine’s Economic Development Strategy’s Att ract Talent section , ACTION B5  states: “ Promote 
“Quality of Place” investments. The quality of our recreational opportunities, historic places, and arts and culture are a draw for tourists and residents alike. Each area of Maine has special attributes. We will work directly with local communities to explore asset development that attracts and retains people .” 
 A recent economic analysis of the Eastern Trail completed by Camoin Associates and in partnership 
with Southern Maine Planning and Development Commission (SMPDC)  highlights a total annual 
economic impact of $44.6M associated with Eastern Trail use between i ts northern terminus in South 
Portland and the state border in Kittery with an  estimated roughly 250,000 users  annually based on 
recent trail counts, each spending an average of $118 per day. The trail also supports 364 jobs across the state, $12.5M in ear nings and $32.1M in sales . Snowmobiling generated $459 million in direct spending 
to the Maine economy and supported 2,279 jobs in the state during the 2018 –19 season, according to a 
2020 study by the University of Maine in collaboration with the Maine  Snowmobile Association (MSA) 
and the state Snowmobile Program.  Accounting for indirect and induced economic activity, the 
contribution of snowmobiling to Maine’s economy was over $606 million  Over the last few years, Maine has experienced some of the highest  in-migration  numbers  in decades  
and is poised to continue attracti ng talent  and businesses . Maine’s  abundant natural  resources  can be a 
cornerstone of the state’s long- term prosperity, if capitalized effectively  – helping drive a sustainable, 
environmenta lly responsible economy.   
 In summary, the funding identified in this bill would fill a vital role in supporting , and growing, Maine’s 
outdoor recreation  economy through investments in our trail s which are critical outdoor recreation 
assets .  Thank you for you r time. I would happily answer any questions now or at the work session. 
 
 
