LD 1156,  An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and 
Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation  
To: Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financia l Affairs, my name is Craig Anderson . 
I am the general manager and co -owner of Central Maine Powersports, located in Lewiston. We have 
been annual business members of over 80 snowmobile and ATV clubs every year for the past 18 years. 
We have supported our local clubs financially doing rides, and over the past 5 years created  a web site 
www.cmpsTrail fund.com to help direct the local ATV riding community to the 14 participating local ATV 
clubs for membership and volunteer support.  
We currently direct about 80 new club members annually, and do over 900 PSA radio commercials , 
spreading the word “If you ride the trails, join a club or Two - and consider volunteering ”.  
Our personal annual investment to  these programs ranges between $ 25,000.00 and $30,000.00, and the 
need is far greater . The pool of volunteers is an extremely under -served commodity , and the lack of 
financial  and law enforcement support for our recreational riding community is becoming de trimental.  
The only way clubs can continue to support the landowners, our trail network, and keep up with the 
volume of riders today is with sub - contractor assistance , and state financial support  
Over the past 10 years snowmobile registration has dropped  about 50%, and ATV registration has near 
tripled. The positive financial impact on our communities is well worth the state's  investment , and the 
riding season is now 12 months of the year, in Maine . The Maine Trails bond is an excellent foundation 
for support and collaboration with our communities , and businesses. The focus on 20% minimum 
matching funds will help spur business  involvement and keep the goals attainable by our club network.  
Sincerely  
Craig Anderson  
Central Maine Powersports  
  
