TOWN or 
p 145 Congress Street 
_ " 
j;<;:§;=a»~§ ~§*f” Rumford, Mame 04276 
(207) 364-4576 
Fax (207) 364-5642 
Senator Margaret Rotundo, Senate Chair 
Representative Melanie Sachs, House Chair 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
April 27, 2023 
Support for LD 1156, Authorization of a General Fund Bond Issue for Trails 
The Town of Rumford respectfully submits its testimony to the Committee in favor of 
LD 1156, “the Maine Trails Bond”. 
The Town recognizes the dozens of positive policy reasons in favor of outdoor recreation 
and active transportation. The data in favor of economic opportunities and improved 
public health outcomes are voluminous and far beyond the scope of our testimony. The 
Town also appreciates the broad public support of stakeholders across a wide spectrum of 
viewpoints, geography, and economic interests. 
We believe the most fundamental question for you as legislators is likely, “Whya 
bond?” . The simplest answer in favor of this bond vs. any other is its potential to provide 
an opportunity for Maine’s most distressed communities, especially rural small towns 
that Without the rapid investment that a bond enables will continue to stagnate and slowly 
decline. We believe this bond will help accelerate our own efforts already underway. 
We believe in the future of the rural economy. Change can happen. Population can and 
has been growing in our area. However there is more investment needed. One does not 
recover from 30 years of stagnation followed by 40 years of decline overnight. Without 
rapid investment in new infrastructure that promotes economic opportunity we believe 
that there will be many places in Maine which simply will continue to disappear. For 
many rural communities there are no viable alternatives for the creation of new 
opportunities other than through investment in outdoor recreation resources. 
It is for this reason most speciﬁcally that we support a bond issue. Our own success is in 
part dependent on continued growth in outdoor recreation and success for the smallest 
and less fortunate communities around us. We cannot succeed by leaving them behind in 
the dust. The Trails Bond will provide opportunities that enable Rumford and the small 
communities around us to leverage our present outdoor recreation opportunities and to 
seek further development of new trails. 
Without the bond the present level of slow trail development will continue and likely not 
reach the most vulnerable and most stagnant communities in time to enable a meaningful 
turn around in their economies in this decade, the next decade, or perhaps ever. We 
believe the decision here is about the continued existence of small communities in rural 
Maine. We are in favor of their continued existence and in favor of opportunities that 
Page 1 of2
allow us to continue to promote the combined growth of our communities through the 
network of snowmobile, ATV, hiking and multi-use trails that support our outdoor 
recreation economy. 
We appreciate your consideration of this legislation and ask for your support. 
Q»0 Georg%’Keefe 
Economic Development Director 
Town of Rumford 
Page 2 of2
