April 27, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations  
 
RE: LD 1156 – An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, 
Development and Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active 
Transportation  
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government Relations 
Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to 
submit written comments in support of LD 1156 – An Act to Authorize a General 
Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and Maintenance of Trails for 
Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conser vation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collabor ative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing rou ghly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
LD 1156 would support the design, development and maintenance of trails across our 
great state. These investments would result in new nonmotorized, motorized, and 
multi -use trails that could be enjoyed by Mainers and visitors alike.  
 
Access to nature and o utdoor spaces provides many benefits to people, including 
improvements to our physical and mental health as well as overall quality of life. 
Maine’s existing trail network already contributes to both our quality of life and tourism 
economies, but communiti es and trail groups have identified a large backlog of trail 
projects that would bring added benefit and need attention. As a landowning and trail 
maintaining organization, we know firsthand how critical these investments are and 
how expensive design, deve lopment, and maintenance of our beloved trails can be.  
 
TNC especially appreciates the requirement that priority “must be given to projects 
that follow sustainable design standards and incorporate accessibility and inclusive 
design standards”. TNC Maine is  currently working to develop an accessible “All 
Persons Trail” on one of our preserves in the Katahdin region. This work has been 
rewarding and we want more of these accessible trails to be developed across the 
state, but the design and build out can be m ore expensive than standard trails. We 
hope this investment will support and spur more accessible trails by offsetting the 
additional costs.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of LD 1156.  
