tiara staatt 
SKQWHIEGAMI 
Testimony in Support of LD 1156 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and 
Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation 
April. 27, 2023 
Good afternoon. Senator Rotundo. Representative Sachs. and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. Thank you for this opportunity to speak in support 
of LD 1156. 
My name is Kristina Cannon. I grew up in North Anson on a large dairy farm, and I have been a trail 
user since I could walk. My sister and I rode our snowmobiles to school. and we loved four-wheeling 
and walking our dog Buddy on wooded trails. These days I cross—country ski. look forward to annual 
backpacking adventures with my sister. and mountain biking has become my new favorite pastime. 
My husband and I ride local trails. but we also travel to Vermont to ride the Kingdom Trails each year. 
and we spent several days riding in Moab. Utah, this past fall. 
While trails have played a major role in my personal life. their importance has taken on a whole new 
meaning in my career. 
I'm in my eighth year as the Executive Director of Main Street Skowhegan. My organization isa 
nonprofit working to revitalize Skowhegan. In 2016 we led a community-wide effort to develop the 
Skowhegan Strategic Plan for Community Transformation. The plan' s goal is to make our towna 
thriving economic. cultural, and recreational destination where residents enjoy a high quality of life. 
One of our Economic Transformation Strategies is to enhance recreation and promote our natural 
resources. 
As a result, we are doubling down on this vision. \X/e are investing in outdoor rec infrastructure and 
providing free outdoor activities and gear to our local community members. 
In addition to building Maine's first whitewater park with the Northeast ‘s ONLY adjustable surf wave in 
our downtown river gorge—a project that currently awaiting environmental permits—Skowhegan is 
planning for 50 miles of multi-use trails accessible via our commercial district. 
We are in the throes of developing a trail master plan that will provide a roadmap for new 
construction and current trail maintenance. Once complete, our municipality and local nonprofits will 
use this plan to fundraise for trail projects. Having the opportunity to apply for trail funding via this 
bond would help Skowhegan continue to realize our vision for becoming an outdoor recreation 
mecca. 
65 Water Street. Unit1 
Skowhegan. ME 04976 
MainStreetSkowhegan.org
Even though construction has not yet begun on these projects, we have already seen positive 
economic impact. In January, the Bangor Daily News reported $650 million in investment in 
Skowhegan anticipated over the next few years. High Tide Capital is in the middle of a $15 million 
historic mill redevelopment; Maine Grains is planning for a multi—million-dollar expansion; and we 
have a number of local. young developers who are investing in properties and businesses. This is 
because people KNOW that outdoor recreation infrastructure will attract new talent. businesses. 
residents, and tourists —all of whom will support their investments. AN D, they believe in Skowhegan. 
Skowhegan has strategic direction and a great group of community leaders who have been 
bootstrapping for years to realize this vision. Like other small, rural towns. wejust need more capital 
to bring our goals to fruition. 
I urge the Committee and the Maine Legislature to approve this bond and send it to the voters in 
November. Like Skowhegan. the State of Maine needs to double-down on outdoor recreation 
infrastructure investment as a tool for economic development. 
Kristina M. Cannon 
Executive Director 
Main Street Skowhegan 
kristina@mainstreetskowhegan.org 
207-614-4078
