Linda Woods
Waterville
LD 1156
To: Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee
From: Linda Woods (Waterville)
Re: LD 1156: An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design,
Development and Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active 
Transportation
Date: April 24, 2023
I am writing in support of LD 1156, the “Trails Bond.”  As someone who enjoys 
being outside on a regular basis, I am grateful for the many miles of trails that 
currently exist in Maine.  At the beginning of the pandemic, my husband and I 
decided to explore as many new places as possible (while still finding time to visit our
favorites).  We logged a lot of miles that first year!  Each new place we discovered 
offered an opportunity to view a unique place.  Since we are Maine Master 
Naturalists, we paid close attention to the flora and fauna of the area.  Recent studies 
indicate being outside boosts immune systems and increases dopamine, the body’s 
“feel good” hormone. Additionally trails are beneficial to a municipality’s economy 
as well. When we traveled to these trails, we often stopped for lunch (or ice cream 
afterward!) nearby. 
Because of my love for the outdoors, I am involved with two groups who (I assume) 
will be applying for funding from this bond.   I am a member of the Kennebec 
Messalonskee Trails Board.  Currently we have 43 miles of walking trails in the 
Waterville area.  When I walk these trails, I see many others enjoying themselves.  
Kennebec Messalonskee Trails newest trail along the Sebasticook River in Winslow 
will end at Saint Joseph’s Nature Sanctuary.  I am on the planning committee for this 
destination.   As the name Saint Joseph Nature Sanctuary indicates, we are 
transforming what could now be described as a wasteland into a haven for individuals
to enjoy nature’s beauty.  Plans are underway for a nature trail with educational signs 
as well as permaculture gardens.  
 
As you can see, I have strong personal reasons for supporting this Maine Trails Bond. 
Trails are a benefit to many and a boost to a region’s economy.  Please vote to invest 
in Maine trails as a way to protect more spaces for the future generations to enjoy.
