Testimony by Matt Markot 
Executive Director, Loon Echo Land Trust 
In Support of LD 1156 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Matt Markot and l am the Executive Director 
of Loon Echo Land Trust. l appreciate this opportunity to testify before you today in strong 
support of the Maine Trails Bond (LD 1156). 
Loon Echo Land Trust works to conserve land in the northern Sebago Lake region, in the towns 
of Bridgton, Casco, Denmark, Naples, Harrison, Sebago, and Raymond. Since 1987, we have 
worked with communities, businesses, and organizations to protect more than 8,500 acres of 
land through conservation easements, land purchases, and land donations. 
We have more than 30 miles of trails on our protected lands, providing opportunities for tens of 
thousands of people annually to walk through forests, along rivers and streams, and up to 
stunning vistas at places like Pleasant Mountain and Hacker's Hill. In addition, our conservation 
lands host trails for motorized sports like snowmobiling and ATVing. 
As you consider this bill, please recognize that trails build themselves, and they're not self- 
maintaining. Trails are like any infrastructure. They require resources of time and money. 
That's why the Maine Trails Bond is so important. 
We have developed some amazing trails in our area that bring value to the lives of Maine 
people and visitors every day. Last summer, we celebrated the grand opening of a new 
accessible trail at Pondicherry Park in Bridgton. This project has helped rejuvenate a centrally 
located park, helping countless people connect easily with the natural world. The project also 
connects the downtown with stores, schools, and neighborhoods, thus serving as part of our 
community's transportation infrastructure. 
This project built on the success of the first accessible trail that we built at Peabody-Fitch 
Woods in Bridgton in 2020. The process of developing these trails has been transformative for 
our organization, and the community. We've built new relationships with organizations like 
Maine Adaptive Sports and are eager to move forward with more trail projects that reduce 
barriers to outdoor experiences and offer transportation alternatives for people in the 
communities we serve. 
Raising funds for projects like these is not easy, and the needs are large, which is why this bill 
presents such an exciting opportunity. Along with five other land trusts in our region, we 
recently commissioned an assessment of our collective trails systems (over 100 miles in 
Western Maine), and the low-end cost estimates for deferred maintenance projects alone 
exceed $1 million.
The Maine Trails Bond would be a reliable source of state funding that could leverage other 
resources, including volunteer labor, private funding, and federal funds, such as the Land and 
Water Conservation Fund and small grants provided by the Recreational Trails Program. 
Let me close by repeating my earlier message: Trails don't just happen. They require planning 
stewardship, and investment. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify in support of the Maine Trails Bond. I hope that you 
will pass this measure so that it can be considered by the people of Maine at the ballot box.l 
would be glad to answer any questions you may have.I
