April 27, 2023 
Senator Rotrrndo, Representative Sachs, and Members of the Appropriation and Financial Affairs Committee. 
My name is Patty Barber from Hiram, and I am testifying in opposition to LD 1156, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond 
Issue to Promote the Design, Development, and Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation. 
l am opposed to LD 1156 because parts of it are not fiscally responsible. In order to support a bond, there must be a positive return 
on investment based on facts, not speculation. 
As a prior President of the Hiram Snowmobile Club and with family that ATVs, I know that sleds and ATVs bring large amounts 
of money into the state coﬁ°ers, and funding their trails are a good return on investment. Gas taxes, Registration fees, Excise taxes, 
business support in large dealer fees and repair costs, not to mention food, lodging and clothing. So I support putting money into 
these trails. 
ATVs and snowmobiles use recreational trails. But recreational trails are not Active Transportation Trails. Active Transportation 
trails are by MDOT's own deﬁnition transportation byways, usually paved, that allow people to commute by non-motorized 
means. These byways speciﬁcally prohibit almost all motorized use- they NEVER allow ATV use. They SAY they will allow 
snowmobiles because they want the clubs to groom for them, but once the sleds‘ picks (or studded tracks) begin to destroy the 
paved surfaces, I am sure snowmobile use will be limited. 
Unfortrmately, and this will be a highly unpopular statement, Active Transportation corridors are not a good ﬁscal return on -~ 
investment. According to MDOT’s Active Transportation planner, these byways cost 1-2 million dollars a mile to build. There is 
no gas tax, no registration fees, no excise taxes, or large dealer or repair fees. There may be some lodging and food spending, butI 
have yet to see hard proof of the millions of dollars advocates say a local pedestrian corridor would bring in. And as for better 
physical and mental health, well we already have thousands of miles of trails available in Maine for this purpose, many of which 
could use some of these ﬁmds for upkeep. 
Active Transportation corridors are rmder the purview of the Maine_DOT by their deﬁnition, not under the Bureau of Parks and 
Land. Spending forActive Transportation should not be hidden within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 
but need to be subject to oversight and transparency through the designated l\/[DOT Department of Active Transportation. 
Right now, we have serious issues facing Mainers that need to be addressed Housing, healthcare, education, drug overdose 
prevention, and transit availability for those who don't or can't bike or walk long distances. We need to be responsible stewards of 
our tax dollars and target our spending on essential services, and those items which have a proven positive return on investment. 
Terminology and costs speciﬁc for Active Transportation needs to be removed ﬁ'om LD ll56 language. As\written, I am in 
opposition to this bond request. 
Thank you, 
Patty Barber Hiram 
fit"
