A_ 
R Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street B Augusta, Maine 04330 * (207) 622-3101 B Fax: (207) 622-4343 Q www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1156 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and 
Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation 
Pete Didisheim, Advocacy Director 
Natural Resources Council of Maine 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs. I am Pete Didisheim, the Advocacy Director for the Natural 
Resources Council of Maine. I am testifying today in strong support of LD 1156. 
l have had the pleasure of working on policy issues here at the State House for more than 25 
years, and I have rarely seen such a broad-based coalition in support of anything as l’m seeing 
today in support of the Maine Trails Bond. 
Attached to my testimony is a letter to lawmakers signed by 286 organizations, businesses, and 
towns from every corner of Maine. 
The list includes statewide groups such as Maine Tourism Association, Teens to Trails, Maine 
Trails Coalition, and Maine Youth Camping Association. ~ 
And business groups such as Aroostook Partnership, Maine State Chamber of Commerce, local 
chambers, and Maine Outdoor Brands. 
And individual businesses from L.L. Bean and the Kittery Trading Post to Flow Fold and Central 
Maine Powersports. 
And cities and towns from Calais and Caribou to Millinocket, Greenville, Rumford, and many 
more. 
And dozens of conservation groups, including the Environmental Priorities Coalition, Portland 
Trails, Maine Audubon, and land trusts from Downeast Maine to the Western foothills. 
And big players in Maine's outdoor recreation economy, such as Sugarloaf, the Maine 
Snowmobile Association, ATV Maine, and sporting camps from Portage to Grand Lake Stream. 
And the list goes on. 
And although the diversity of supporters of the Maine Trails Bond seems surprising, it's also not 
that surprising at all.
The trails of Maine are near and dear to us all, for hiking, biking, snowmobiling, skiing, running, 
walking, and many other activities. 
Our trails are part of our outdoor recreation infrastructure, but weare not investing in this 
infrastructure. 
We want our trails to contribute to Maine's economy and quality of life, but the state provides 
no significant funding for our trails. 
Since 2007, the Maine Legislature and the voters of Maine have approved 12 transportation 
and highway bonds for a total of $1.1 billion (see attached chart). But there has never beena 
trails bond. 
The 286 groups, businesses, and towns that already support the Maine Trails Bond are asking 
for your support. They are requesting that you pass this bill and send it to the November ballot, 
so that the voters of Maine can have the ultimate say in whether to invest their money in the 
design, development, and maintenance of trails for every type of use. 
At a time when so many things seem to be dividing us, this bill offers a rare opportunity to unite 
us around something we all value — our trails, the ones we have today, and the ones we could 
build for tomorrow. 
I appreciate this opportunity to share these remarks and would be glad to answer any questions 
you may have.
2
Letter to the Maine Legislature in Support of the Maine Trails Bond 
We support the Maine Trails Bond (LD 1156) to invest $30 million in the design, development, and 
maintenance of non~motorized, motorized, and multi-use trails statewide. This investment will contribute to 
l\/laine's economy and environment and our quality of life. 
ln literally every corner of the state, trails are a valued resource for connecting Maine people and visitors 
with the natural world and reaching destinations to work and play. Trails are an essential component of 
Maine's $3 billion outdoor recreation economy, which supports 31,000 jobs. Snowmobiling alone generates 
more than $600 million for Maine's economy each year. 
Although Maine currently has many exceptional and diverse trails, trail groups and communities have 
identified a large backlog of trail projects that need attention, and new funding is needed to build and 
maintain trails that are accessible to individuals across the full range of abilities. 
We urge the Legislature to support the $30 million Maine Trails Bond. 
Adaptive Outdoor Education Center 
Appalachian Mountain Club 
Aroostook Partnership 
Associated General Contractors (AGC Maine) 
ATV Maine 
Bath-Brunswick Regional Chamber of Commerce 
Bethel Area Chamber of Commerce 
Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
Can-Am Crown Inc. 
City of Calais 
City of Caribou 
City of Gardiner' 
City of Westbrook 
Downeast Sunrise Trail Coalition 
Environmental Priorities Coalition 
Franklin County Chamber of Commerce 
Greater Franklin Economic & Community 
Development~ 
High Peaks Alliance 
lsland Institute 
Kata hdin Chamber of Commerce 
Kennebec Valley Council of Governments 
Kennebunk-Kennebunkport-Arundel Chamber 
Kittery Trading Post 
L.L. Bean 
Main Street Skowhegan 
Maine Association of Planners 
Maine Audubon 
Maine Council on Aging 
Maine Outdoor Brands 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Maine Recreation and Park Association Maine Public Health Association 
Maine Snowmobile Association 
Maine Tourism Association 
I\/laine Trails Coalition 
Maine Youth Camping Association 
Moosehead Economic Development Corp 
Natural Resources Council of Maine 
New England Mountain Bike Association 
Northern Maine Development Commission 
Orono Economic Development Corporation 
Oxford Hills Chamber of Commerce 
Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce 
Rangeley Lakes Heritage Trust 
Saddleback Ski Area 
River Valley Chamber of Commerce 
Sebago Lakes Chamber of Commerce 
St. Croix Valley Chamber of Commerce 
Sugarloaf 
Sunrise County Economic Council 
Teens to Trails 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine 
Town of Belgrade 
Town of Bethel 
Town of Brunswick 
Town of Carrabassett Valley 
Town of Frenchville 
Town of Greenville 
Town of Millinocket 
Town of Rumford 
Wells Chamber of Commerce 
Western Foothills Land Trust 
York Region Chamber of Commerce
(Additional Supporters as of 4/27/23) 
122 Corson 
201 Power Sports, Inc. 
30 Mile River Watershed Association 
7 Lakes Alliance 
Acadia Mountain Guides Climbing School 
Addison Recreation Committee 
Allagash Brewing Company 
Alpenglow Adventure Sports 
Alpine Shop‘ 
Androscoggin River Watershed Council 
Andy Gagne Photography 
Arnold Trail Snowmobile Club 
Back Country Excursions of Maine 
Basin Pond Outdoors 
Bath Bicycle and Pedestrian Committee 
Baxter Brewing 
Baxter Outdoors LLC 
Bigelow Brewing Company 
Bike BS 
Black Mountain of Maine 
Blue Hill Heritage Trust 
Bold Coast Runners 
Bonney Woods Corporation 
Bradford Camps 
Brunswick-Topsham Land Trust 
Build Maine 
Busytown Bikes 
Cadillac Mountain Sports 
Cait Bourgault Photography 
Camden Rockport Pedestrian and Bicycle 
Committee 
Caribou Parks and Recreation Department 
Carrabassett Valley Recreation Department 
Ca rra bassett Valley Trails 
Carter's XC Ski Shop and Ski Center 
Casco Bay Trail Alliance 
Central Maine Powersports 
Chebeague & Cumberland Land Trust 
Chewonki 
Chimani 
Chris Bennett Photography 
Coastal Mountains Land Trust 
Coastal Rivers Conservation Trust Confluence Collective 
Dedham School Outing Club 
Dennysville Snowmobile and ATV Club 
Destination Moosehead Lake 
Disability Rights Maine 
DownEast Acadia Regional Tourism 
Downeast Coastal Conservancy 
Downeast Lakes Land Trust 
Downeast Salmon Federation 
East Coast Greenway Alliance 
Eastern Trail Alliance 
Elliotsville Foundation 
Falmouth Land Trust 
First Push Syndicate 
Flowfold 
Forest Society of Maine 
Fort Kent Outdoor Center 
Freeman Ridge Bike Park 
Frenchman Bay Conservancy 
Friends Camp 
Friends of A Fierce Chase Cross Country Ski Trails 
Friends of Acadia 
Friends of Casco Bay 
Friends of Hope Cemetery & Woods 
Friends of Taunton Bay 
Friends of Wells Dog Park 
Fryeburg Conservation Committee 
Georges River Land Trust 
Giri Hotel Management (Bethel Inn; Sebasco Resort) 
Go Beyond The Fence 
Gold LEAF Institute 
Good To-Go 
Granite Backcountry Alliance 
Great Pond Mountain Conservation Trust 
Great Works Regional Land Trust 
Greater Lovell Land Trust 
GrowSmart Maine 
Harpswell Heritage Land Trust 
Hawks Nest Lodge 
Healthy Community Coalition, Franklin 
Heart of Ellsworth 
High Peaks Alliance 
Hills & Trails Co.
Hirundo Wildlife Refuge 
Hostel of Maine 
Hiiga Heat 
Hurricane island Outward Bound School 
Hyperlite Mountain Gear' 
Inland Woods + Trails 
International Appalachian Trail 
Jung Restoration 
Katahdin Area Trails 
Katahdin Gear Library 
Katahdin Tourism Partnership 
Kennebec Estuary Land Trust 
Kennebec Land Trust 
Kennebec Messalonskee Trails _ 
Kennebec Trail Company 
Kennebec Valley Council of Governments 
Kennebunkport Conservation Trust 
Knife Edge Brewing 
Lake George Regional Park 
Lake Moxie ATV Riders Club 
Life Enrichment Advancing People (LEAP) 
Little Something Co. 
Loon Echo Land Trust 
Mahoosuc Guide Service 
Mahoosuc Land Trust 
Maine Adaptive Sports & Recreation 
Maine Appalachian Trail Club 
Maine Appalachian Trail Land Trust 
Maine Association for Health, Physical Education, 
Recreation, and Dance 
Maine Beer Company 
Maine Coast Heritage Trust 
Maine Conservation Voters 
Maine Environmental Education Association 
Maine GearShare 
Maine Huts & Trails 
Maine Island Trail Association 
Maine Lakes 
Maine Lakeside Cabins 
Maine Outdoor Brands 
Maine Outdoor School, L3C 
Maine Rivers 
Maine Sports Commission 
Maine Trail Builder 
Maine Trail Finder Maine Trail Riders Association, Inc (Equine) 
Maine West Collaborative 
Maine Wilderness Guides Organization 
Maine Youth Action 
Maine Youth for Climate Justice 
Map Adventures LLC 
Mark Picard Wildlife Photography 
Midcoast Conservancy 
Monroe Conservation Commission 
Moose Alley Riders ATV Club 
Moosehead Outdoor Alliance 
Moose Prints Gallery 
Mountain Division Alliance 
Mountain Valley High School 
Mousam Way Land Trust 
Mt. Abram Bike Park 
Mt. Abram High School Outing Club 
NaviTour 
New England Mountain Bike Association, Central 
Maine Chapter 
New England Mountain Bike Association, Midcoast 
Maine Chapter 
New England Mountain Bike Association, Penobscot 
Region Chapter 
New England Outdoor Center 
Nomads and Adventures, LLC 
North Pond Association 
North Star Adventures LLC 
Northeast Whitewater 
Northern Forest Canoe Trail 
Northern Forest Center 
Northern Outdoors 
Off The Beaten Path Trailworks, LLC 
Orono Brewing Company 
Orono Land Trust 
Osborne Media 
Oterra Designs 
Outdoor Sport institute 
Oxford County Mental Health Services 
Oxford County Wellness Collaborative 
Patagonia Freeport 
Patten Area Outdoors 
Peace House Studio 
PeopleForBikes 
Pine Island Camp
Portland Paddle Valley Riders Snowmobile Club 
Portland Trails W3 Adventures, LLC 
Presumpscot Regional Land Trust Warren Excavation Inc. 
Quarry Road Trails Waterville Community Land Trust 
Quimby Family Foundation Weatherby's Lodge 
Rangeley Lakes Trails Center Westbrook Trail Blazes Snowmobile Club 
Red River Camps Wildfire Cycles, LLC 
REI Co-Op Women for Healthy Rural Living 
Resilient Communities, L3C V Woods and Waters Gear Exchange 
River Valley Healthy Communities Coalition York Land Trust 
Rogue Life Maine 
Rolling Fatties 
Royal River Conservation Trust 
RSU4 
Rusted Rock LLC 
S & S, LLC 
Saco Pathfinders Snowmobile Club 
Saint Joseph's Nature Sanctuary 
Schoodic National Scenic Byway 
Scott and Sunny Townsend Team of Keller Williams 
Sebago Stonework 
Sebasticook Regional Land Trust 
She Summits Co 
Sidecountry Trails 
Sierra Club Maine Chapter 
Sisters of St. Joseph of Lyon 
Somerset Woods Trustees 
Southern Maine Conservation Collaborative 
Spencer Pond Camps 
The Birches Resort 
The Trust for Public Land 
Three Rivers Land Trust 
Three Rivers Whitewater 
Town 4 Trail Services, LLC 
Town of Farmington Parks and Recreation 
Department 
Town of Readfield Trails Committee 
Town of South Ben/vick Economic and Community 
Development Office 
Trail & Earth, LLC 
Trail Services LLC 
Twin Pine Rentals 
Twin Pine Snowmobile Club 
Unity College Sky Lodge 
Upper Saco Valley Land Trust
Broad Statewide Support for Maine Trails Bond 
‘ ;>SEiﬁ em 2~ 
_ . --' ~=' 
—--Lia 
<* 
. ~ Fuﬁzii ntf 
F;._="g‘*'(‘» 
1* 
» A 
, V ”*~=._ _,»~*"~ 1' \ran~§ur.en 
sa1rn:VPmp'hi|e~" V 
1,5‘ L L 
Caribou 
1 8 Vé V’ 
If 
_ E ‘L 
d J’ ‘ ' 
"F*Te5c'1_ua isle 
1:-Anselme i. 
:5,-Pﬂarié . 
J] 
Saintiiieméges
'
{ 
» » 
*-~~Mi§lf%|c|dz@tf" 
§- J iiir?,Ma|nieV W J j 
,»*1_§ ' 
Llncnin 
m.5‘" . 
3 Q , 5;» 
i ME 
L‘ L 
T K,i 
7v Curimh 1*x 
‘.3, 
k g Bargnr 
Eiiimjer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
