 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in SUPPORT of  L.D. 1156  –  
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Promote the Design, Development and 
Maintenance of Trails for Outdoor Recreation and Active Transportation  
 
April 27, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
Committee, I am Reid Anderson , President of the Maine Wilderness Guides Organization  and a 
Registered Maine Guide . During the school year , I teach at Nobleboro Central School , and in the 
summertime,  I guide for Northeast Whitewater in the Moosehead Lake region . Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 1156 .  
 
The Maine Wilderness Guides Organization consists of over 90 registered Maine guides, sporting  camp 
and lodge owners, and their supporters. Our mission is to provide a unified voice for the profession of 
wilderness guiding while maintaining the highest professional, educational, and stewardship standards 
for the conservation of remote woods and wat ers. We are dedicated to the protection of habitat and 
natural resources in the areas we guide in for our livelihoods, our clients, the fish and game we pursue, 
and for future generations.  
 
Trails are vitally important  to the business and tradition of guiding in Maine  by providing access to the 
places we take clients. Although Mainers enjoy a rich network of trails on public and private land , we 
cannot take that for granted.  Trails are often maintained by volunteers and without funding they  can 
easily fall into disrepair  or close down because of heavy use,  especially due to increased visitation to 
trails sparked by the pandemic. Non-motorized trails in particular lack adequate funding . Access via 
trails to forests, ponds, rivers, streams, and the ocean enable s guides  to stay in business while helping 
create high -quality, memorable experiences for our clients.  
 
Maine has made incredible progress creating trails throughout the state through the combined efforts  
of federal, state , and local government ; nonprofits ; businesses ; and private citizens. Because t hey are 
heavily used, m any have learned to search out lesser -known  trails just to be sure there will be parking 
space  available . Trails and access to natural settings is highly valued by both Maine residents  and people 
visiting Maine from around the country and even around the world.  
 
Passing  LD 1156 would be a wise investment in our state’s  economic future  and in the small businesses 
we represent.  We respectfully urge the Committee to vote ought to pass on LD 1156 . Thank you for your 
time and consideration of our views.  
 
