PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
From:  Becky Bartovics, Sierra Club Maine
Date:
January 31, 2023
Re:
Testimony in Opposition to LD 66: An Act to Prohibit
the Taxation of Drinking Water
Chairs, Senator Grohoski and Representative Perry, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on
Taxation,
My name is Becky Bartovics, and I am testifying as a volunteer with Sierra Club Maine,
representing over 22,000 supporters and members statewide. Founded in 1892, Sierra Club is one
of our nation’s oldest and largest environmental organizations. We work diligently to amplify the
power of our 3.8 million members and supporters nation-wide, and we urge you to vote “Ought to
Not to Pass” on LD 66.
The 130th Legislature passed Resolve 2021, Chapter 85, establishing the Commission To Examine
the Role of Water as a Resource in the State of Maine. Reporting back in November of 2022, the
Commission found that there is so much that has not been resolved that they recommended
another Commission with more in depth analysis of Maine’s water resources. In regards to LD 66,
at the very least it is premature, if not morally wrong, for the Legislature to create a structure that
encourages bottled water before the Commission has completed its recommendations, and with
no equivalent requirements for product testing to be considered a viable alternative to locally
sourced water.
Bottled water is a product that is not well regulated by either the State of Maine or the Federal
Government. Imagine sending bottled water, considered iconic Maine spring water, to hurricane
victims across the country that is laced with any number of chemicals that local water districts
must ﬁlter out but not the commercial purveyors
1
.
While insisting that they have ﬁltration systems
in place there is no regulation or analysis of that water. It is cringe-worthy to see pallets of plastic
bottled Maine water being delivered to people in crisis, knowing that it is beneﬁtting the bottom
line of largely international corporations while not providing tax resources for the local Maine
communities to address inadequacies of water quality. Yet, we know that Fryeburg’s water supply,
which is used by Poland Spring in their bottled water, is tainted with PFAS/PFOAs
2
. Fryeburg must
address that situation, but the Corporations who are removing water from the state would not be
paying into the state to beneﬁt clean water for our citizens without the tax on bottled water
2
https://wgme.com/news/local/poland-spring-discovers-pfas-in-fryeburg-water-source-forever-chemicals-bottled-wat 
er-tested-water-spring#:~:text=FRYEBURG%20(WGME)%20%2D%2D%20Poland%20Spring,water%20only%20i 
n%20the%20spring.&text=Out%20of%2011%20of%20the,five%20have%20tested%20their%20water
.
1
https://www.consumerreports.org/bottled-water/pfas-in-bottled-water-new-study-finds-a1111233122/

remaining. That seems outrageously unfair to local users, to Maine’s citizenry. Before any
reduction in taxation of bottled water is provided, we must ﬁx the existing situation.
The state needs to invest in better public water infrastructure, and hold the bottled water industry
to a higher standard of safety and transparency before considering proposing it as a way to
support communities facing water crises. Waiving sales taxes on bottled water will reduce income
to the State that ought to be used to address public water security and safety. And waving those
taxes to a value added product is a slippery slope. As a farmer, I have to charge sales tax on all my
value added products, such as the ﬂeece I shear from my sheep, my tanned sheep skins, the spun
wool, on the spoons we make on the farm from wood that is harvested on the farm. Is LD 66
suggesting that all producers of products for sale should not charge sales tax? I am a proud Maine
citizen and am happy we have the level of support for farmers. The bottled water industry should
likewise be happy to support the tax base that provides the iconic product marketing coming from
the impression of clean water Maine’s marketing suggests.
In addition, given our State’s efforts to reduce waste, and address rapid climate change, enabling a
reliance on the consumption of single use, plastic water bottles is in stark contrast to our goals of
sustainability and reducing plastic pollution.
The issue of access to clean drinking water deserves a more comprehensive response than a bill
that supports an already heavily subsidized industry which is actively harming the environment
and pursuing privileged access to groundwater sources. We have a long way to go to assure that
what we are providing to our residents, and to the downstream ecosystems is clean enough for
consumption. Please consider no tax holiday for the extractive bottled water industry. We strongly
urge the Joint Committee on Taxation to vote “ought not to pass” until a new Commission
addresses the urgent need to examine in greater depth issues relating to clean water supply.
Sincerely,
Becky Layton Bartovics
Sierra Club Maine, Volunteer  Leadership
273 North Shore Rd
North Haven, ME 04853
