Re:  LD 66 -  An Act to Prohibit the Taxation of Drinking Water
Dear Members of the Taxation Committee,
I would like to share my thoughts in opposition to LD 66.  Water is essential for 
life and is a very precious nutrient. However, bottled water should be taxed. I 
believe that bottled water is not a grocery staple and is currently correctly 
classified in Title 36, Part 3, Section 1752, 3-B.
1.  Bottled water is an extractive commodity. It is produced by "Large-scale 
extraction of water" as defined in Title 35-A, Chapter 61, Section 6109-B.
Not by agricultural methods.
The most recent Water Commission stated that “the Legislature should 
establish a new Commission To Study the Role of Water as a Resource in the 
State of Maine, with a more focused scope of study, to address the 
unresolved work of this commission.”  (Recommendation 1) The implications 
of large-scale extraction of water must be examined.
2. Using bottled water to sustain adequate nutritive hydration status and 
homeostasis would be very costly, and logistically very difficult. This 
contrasts with the availability of tap water. Also, as opposed to tap water, 
bottled water would be extremely difficult and impractical when used to 
meet other essential needs such as bathing or cleaning.
3. On a per volume basis, bottled water is extremely expensive and offers no 
real nutritive value over tap water.  In fact, six 500 ml plastic bottles of 
water at a convenience store can cost the same or more than the equivalent 
amount of gasoline.
4. Tap water consistently has significantly fewer contaminants that bottled 
water.  Bottled water is known to contain endocrine disrupters, plasticizers, 
metals such as antimony and concerningly microplastics.                       
Forbes reported that of 259 bottles of water from 11 brands that “Of all the 
bottles tested, only 17 were found to be free of plastic. On average, each liter 
sold contained 325 pieces of microplastic, including polypropylene, nylon, 
and polyethylene terephthalate. In one case, a bottle of Nestlé Pure Life 
contained more than 10,000 pieces of microplastic.” Studies have shown less 
than half the amount of microplastics in tap water. 
www.forbes.com/sites/niallmccarthy/2018/03/16/study-finds-microplastics-in-93-
percent-of-bottled-water-infographic/?sh=30edb55b73fa
Some non-carbonated brands of bottled water have been found to contain 
elevated PFAS.  Many brands do not even report their PFAS levels.
5. Bottled water is essentially a unique niche item and is not a grocery staple. 
Water as an essential nutrient is readily available as tap water.  The less 
contaminated tap water is readily provided by water systems, individual 
wells and is found in fountains or other dispensers in schools, municipal 
buildings, parks etc.
6. I agree that bottled water does however have practical value. In an austere 
environment, with proper logistical support, it can provide support for 
proper hydration. Also, in an emergency situation, such as a hurricane or 
flood it can provide temporary hydration.  It is frequently classified as an 
essential emergency/survival item, not a grocery staple.
7. Public policies that promulgate bottled water as a grocery staple can be very 
costly to the consumer and could be detrimental to proper fluid balance and 
health.
You can find bottled water in office supply stores and hardware ware stores, 
but you don’t find milk or eggs there.
Bottled water is not a grocery staple.  It should continue to be taxed.  
Please oppose LD 66. Thank you for your consideration.
Bruce Taylor                                                                                                    
Sweden,  04040                                                                                                                                                         
 
