1 
 TESTIMONY OF  
DANIEL D’ALESSANDRO, ASSOCIATE POLICY COUNSEL  
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date : January 31, 2023 , 1:00 P.M.  
  
LD 66 – “An Act To Prohibit the Taxation of Drinking Water ” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and members of the Taxation 
Committee  – good afternoon , my name is Daniel D’Alessandro, Associate Tax 
Policy Counsel in the Maine Revenue Services, Office of Tax Policy.  I am here 
today at the request of the Administration to testify Neither For Nor Against  LD 
66, “ An Act To Prohibit the Taxation of Drinking Water. ” 
There is a n existing sales tax exemption for “residential water ,” which is 
water purchased for use in buildings designed and used for both human habitation 
and sleeping, not  including hotels.   This includes  both residential  water  service  
from a water district and bottled water delivered to a residence .  Additionally, 
bottled water purchased with SNAP benefits (the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program) is exempt  from sales tax, even if not delivered to a residence .   
This bill would amend the sales tax exemption for “grocery staples” by 
includ ing “drinking water” within th at definition, while specifically excluding 
“flavored, mineral bottled and carbonated waters. ” There fore, “drinking water” 
would be come a  tax-exempt  grocery staple , but “flavored, mineral bottled or  
carbonated waters ” would remain taxable .   
To best facilitate this  expansion of the exemption , the term “drinking water” 
should be defined  in the sales tax law.   As currently drafted, the text of the bill 
appears to assume “drinking water” is unflavored , uncarbonated water .  For the 
2 
 Committee’s consideration is the Streamlined Sales Tax and Use Tax Agreement 
definition of “bottled water” used by 24 states.   
In addition, i t is unclear if the bill’s intent is  to create parity for all  
residential water  sold or to broadly exempt all sales of drinking water; as currently 
drafted the bill would also extend to non-residential use , allowing  hotels and other 
commercial users to benefit from the exemption.  
This broadened exemption will further narrow what is alread y a relatively 
narrow sales tax base.  A ddition ally, sales tax exemptions apply to all taxpayers, 
regardless of their ability to pay.  Increas ing the Sales Tax Fairness Credit would 
target tax relief to those truly overburdened by the sales tax on “drinkin g water .” 
The bill would require an application date to allow  retailers to timely  
reprogram their point -of-sale systems .  Maine Revenue Service s’ administrative 
costs  would be minimal and could  be absorbed by the department.   The revenue 
impact of the bill is preliminarily estimated to be between $7.5 million and $10 
million per year, however, because the intended scope of the bill is unclear this 
estimate may change substantially.  
The Administration looks forward to working with the C ommittee on the 
bill; representative s from MRS will be here for the Work S ession to provide 
additional information  and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  
DATE: January 31, 2023  
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
FROM: Office of Tax Policy  (DAFS/MRS)  
SUBJECT : LD 66, "An Act to Prohibit the Taxation of Drinking Water"  
TAX LEGISLATION REVIEW WORKSHEET  
Bill Objectives and Tax Policy  
(1) Does the Bill’s drafted text and underlying tax policy objective(s) appear to 
align with each other?  
 
 
(2) Similar legislation pending or program in place ? 
Is there other tax legislation, state spending or other government programs that 
have the same purposes as the tax legislation?  
List: Sales tax exemption for residential water, sales tax exemption for SNAP 
purchases, and the sales tax fairness credit.  
 (2) Coordina ted?  
Are those additional programs appropriately coordinated with the tax legislation and complementary or duplicative?  
  (3) Program i mprovements?  
Are there any opportunities to improve the effectiveness of the tax legislation in meeting its purposes?  
 
  
 
☐ Yes  
☒ Clarify  
 
 
☒   Yes  
☐   No  
 
   
☐ Complementary  
☒ Duplicative  
 
 
 
☒ Improvements 
suggested  
Administration and Compliance  
(1) Strong framework?  
Are there adequate mechanisms  to ensure that intended beneficiaries receive any 
tax benefits and comply with any requirements?  
 
 
(2) Cost/ intended tax benefits  balance for tax administration ? 
Are the administrative costs and taxpayer compliance burdens assoc iated with 
the tax legislation  proportionate to taxpayer benefit?  
 
 (3) Tax administration improvements ? 
Are there any opportunities to reduce the administrative and compliance burden 
of the tax legislation while still meeting its purposes?  
 
  
 
☐ Yes  
☒ No  
 
  
☐  Proportionate  
☒ Disproportionate  
 
  
☒ Improvements 
suggested  
 
