Luke Sekera-Flanders
Orono, ME
LD 66
Luke Sekera-Flanders, LD 66
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, members of the Taxation Committee,
My name is Luke Sekera-Flanders, I am a co-founder and lead organizer with 
Community Water Justice, and a core member of Maine Youth for Climate Justice. 
I’m a lifelong Maine resident currently a political science major at the University of 
Maine. I’m speaking today in hopes that you will vote “Ought Not To Pass” on the 
proposed legislation.
Communities such as the Passamaquoddy Tribe at Sipayik, Fairfield, and even my 
hometown of Fryeburg are in the midst of a crisis. The water coming from their taps, 
which we as humans rely on for our very survival, is unsafe to drink, with the latter 
two cases stemming from PFAS contamination.
At the end of last year, the Commission to Study the Role of Water as a Resource in 
the State of Maine found that the issues we face with regards to water are immense, so
much so that it will require a new commission to investigate and address them. In the 
meantime, we must give serious consideration to how we, as representatives and 
leaders in our communities, will respond. 
Eliminating the sales tax on bottled water as a standalone measure does not address the 
problem at hand. We're facing a multitude of water crises in Maine, including the threats 
posed by changes in our climate, widespread PFAS contamination and industrial pollution. 
There is no guarantee that bottled water is cleaner than tap water, as it is less regulated on 
federal and state levels than tap water, and is not held to the same standards for testing as 
tap water. Presenting bottled water as a solution only serves the profit-driven interests of the 
bottled water industry, and not the communities who are in need of relief. 
The issue of access to clean drinking water deserves an intentional, multifaceted 
response. It requires much more than a single piece of legislation which eliminates a 
tax on and, perhaps unintentionally, presents as a solution an already heavily 
subsidized industry which is actively harming the environment and pursuing 
privileged access to groundwater sources in the state.
This includes differentiating the acute need-distribution of water from the sale of 
bottled water as, essentially, a luxury product from a for-profit industry. We also need
transparency and reasonable testing requirements for water bottlers, especially if their 
products are being marketed as a “safe” alternative to tap water.
Thank you for hearing me today.
 

