MAI BEVERAGE 
ASSOCIATION 
Testimony of Newell Augur 
Director 
Maine Beverage Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
ln Support of LD 66, An Act to Prohibit the Taxation of Drinking Water 
January 31, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Grohoski Representative Per and memb fth , , ry ers o e Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, my name is Newell Augur. l am a resident of Yarmouth and a lawyer 
with P' At ' ' 
ierce wood. l represent the members of the Maine Beverage Association your local 
distributors ofa variety of refreshing products including diet soda, soda, 'uice s, 
it d '
k 3 s, po s rins 
and, increasingly, water. l am here to testify in support of LD 66, An Act to Prohibit the Taxation 
of Drinking Water. 
More Mainers and Americans are drinking more healthier beverages eve da O th ry y. ver e past 
twenty years, the members of the Maine Beverage Association have been part of a seismic shift 
in con b' 
sumer everage choice. l\/lore than 60% of the products they sell are zero calorie 
beverages. Consumption of bottled water has been — and continues to be - a significant part of 
that movement. 
Similarly, our national partners have begun a series of initiatives aimed at providing our 
customers with more choices that have less sugar. We have partnered with th All‘ e iance fora 
Healthier Generation to help fight obesity by reducing beverage calories consumed per person 
nationall b 2O‘V b ' ' ' ' ' ' 
y y 0 y 2025. The elements of this program including increasing interest in and 
access to reduced calorie beverage choices and encouraging calorie awareness and balanc t ea 
points of purchase. To that end, we have placed clear calorie labels on the front of every bottle, 
can and pack that we produce, information that is right at the fingertips of consumers, allowing 
them to make the right choice for them and their family.
Classifying plain bottled drinking water as essential aligns with recent efforts by the federal Food 
and Drug Administration, who are currently considering labeling water as “healthy. ” This policy 
change affirms that drinking water is key to a balanced lifestyle and essential to life and would 
be consistent with the State’s broader health and well-being objectives. Moreover, classifying 
plain bottled drinking water as essential will provide some relief for consumers in a time of 
challenging inflation and rising concerns about PFAS in our drinking water supply. 
Exempting drinking water from the sales tax also is consistent with action taken in a number of 
other states to exempt foods and beverages from state and local sales taxes. Roughly half 
have either no sales tax, tax groceries - including all the products we sell — at a lower sales tax, 
or exempt all groceries — including all the products we sell - from the sales tax. The Oklahoma 
Legislature is currently considering proposals to remove the general sales tax from groceries. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l'd be happy to answer any questions that you may 
have.
