Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg, ME
LD 66
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, members of the Taxation Committee,
​Good afternoon.​
My name is Nickie Sekera. I am a resident of Fryeburg, a current Trustee of the 
Fryeburg Water District, Co-founder of Community Water Justice, and an appointee 
to the most recent Water Commission to "Study The Role of Water as a Resource in 
Maine", which concluded in December of 2022 (and whose final report you will find 
on the government website).
I am testifying today in opposition to LD 66 "An Act to Prohibit the Taxation of 
Drinking Water" because I believe that bottled water is not a grocery staple and is 
currently correctly classified in Title 36, Part 3 (Section 1752, 3-B). Although the title
of this bill appears practical, it inadvertently shields privatized water bottlers and 
elevates their relevance in a time where we need to better protect the interests of the 
public and the environment.
Tax-free access to clean water for consumption is already sustainably addressed 
through Maine's building and plumbing codes for residences, public buildings and 
private businesses-- and additionally provided through public water systems. Water is 
a public resource that is available for us to responsibly use for our basic needs, and is 
inherent in our right to live a dignified life. We can always improve upon maintaining
this basic requirement by continuing to protect and invest in high standards of public 
water access, supplies and systems, and believe that the best approach to meeting this 
human necessity is through the promotion of tap water. 
Bottled water offers no real nutritional value over tap water and currently serves as a 
direct threat to maintaining a localized sustainable water usage and promotes waste. 
Through the power of marketing, bottled water companies grow their brands, and 
export water to places where clean water is already available at a high cost to the 
consumer. The coercion of consumers to believe they are purchasing a superior 
product than what is locally sourced is most often unfounded. This model of business 
is not sustainable and Maine's largest water bottler is currently being challenged again
in court for environmental harm and the use of deceptive trade practices.* The only 
bottled water that should be tax exempt is for emergency use-- and offered to people 
who do not have access to clean supply alternatives, including unhoused people. 
Additionally, bottled water is not subjected to the same regulations as tap water. 
There are no current laws requiring bottled water companies to test or report PFAS 
contamination, and has less transparency and reporting requirements than tap water. 
Recent studies concluded that most bottled water tested contained micro plastics. This
lack of protection is not safe for consumers. 
I hope that the members of this committee would be supportive of all the policy 
recommendations put forth by the most recent Water Commission, one to establish a 
new Commission to Study the Role of Water in the State of Maine, with a more 
focused study to continue the challenging work on this issue.
Single serve bottled water is not a grocery item but a convenience item with harmful 
health, economic, and environmental impacts.
It is important that we preserve water as a public resource and ensure that clean tap 
water remains free and accessible to the public, as human health and dignity rely upon
this. 
Please oppose LD 66. Thank you for your time.
Nickie Sekera
* Further notes:
The bottled water model of business is not sustainable and Maine's largest water 
bottling business is being challenged in court for the use of deceptive trade practices.
One is a class action lawsuit on the behalf of several plaintiffs that outlines the 
fraudulent claims of spring water labeling.
There have been a number of lawsuits in the United States ​recently against 
Coca-Cola, Blue Triton Brands (which manufactures Poland Spring, Deer Park and 
other water brands), and others, for making broad sustainability claims despite the 
fact the vast majority of their bottles end up in landfills and are not recycled. These 
lawsuits have been filed by various environmental advocacy groups like the Sierra 
Club.
One example of this trend is the lawsuit filed in August of 2021, by the environmental
group Earth Island Institute against Blue Triton (Earth Island Inst. v Blue Triton 
Brands) arguing that its sustainability claims were in violation of a specific District of
Columbia law, the Consumer Protection Procedures Act, which prohibits the use of 
deceptive trade practices. In response, the defendant Blue Triton, argued that its 
claims were aspirational and constituted puffery, and were thus not actionable. The 
case is still pending.
LD 66 - An Act to Prohibit the Taxation of Drinking Water
January 31, 2023
