L HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES M5" Z STATE HOUSE STATION 
_r" AUGUSTA. MAINE 043330002 ‘°FA1uzt§> 
John Andrews 
PI). Box H3 
South Paris. ME 0-lZT'l 
IOlTli.. ‘\lTd|‘C\\’S4tll@glSlLlllll ‘C.l1\;.lll1C gm 
C‘ell1(l‘(l7l73‘_)-<;()75 
March 2, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 521 
”An Act to Prevent Political Patronage with Regard to State Legislators" 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and the distinguished members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is John Andrews and l represent House District 79 in western Maine. I am 
here to present my bill LD 521, "An Act to Prevent Political Patronage with Regard to State Legislators" 
This bill prohibits a Legislator from being employed by a state agency or a nonproﬁt corporation that 
directly or indirectly receives state funds for a period of 4 years after the Legislator's term ends. For too 
long there has been a revolving door in Augusta where legislators receive well paying governmentjobs 
shortly after their term ends. This gives the appearance of reward for voting for or sponsoring legislation 
that beneﬁts a state agency or the government as a whole. 
When a legislator leaves ofﬁce they are not allowed to be a lobbyist for at least a one-year period, I think 
it is equally important they not be allowed to take a position within a state government agency or tax 
funded non-proﬁt for a four-year period. Many of these positions that are given to former legislators are 
high paying positions that are in more of an executive capacity allowing for loose interpretations of 
relevant experience to ﬁll the position with a legislator instead of a subject matter expert. With the one- 
year lobbying ban Individuals are barred from certain work in the private sector, but they are not barred 
from similar work in the public sector. This not equitable or the level of parity between the public and 
private sector that we need for effective government. The public sector is tax payer funded and needsa 
higher level of integrity and accountability. 
Since the legislature is not currently or historically policing itself with regard to pay for play employment 
of legislators within state agencies and non-proﬁts the bill also allows a citizen to ﬁle a complaint 
concerning a violation of this provision to the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election 
Practices. The Ethics Commission may then investigate the complaint. An intentional violation of this 
provision may result in a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000, and the former Legislator is required to 
terminate their employment. 
District 79 Paris, Sumner, West Paris and Woodstock 
Primed on rec\cl:.d papei
This is a necessary mechanism to ensure oversight and accountability to make sure that positions of 
power are not being abused. We wouldn't want to see a high-ranking legislator ram through a 
controversial bill pertaining to widgets and then be awarded a high paying position after their term ends 
in a government position that deals with the regulation of widgets. This is not the best way fora 
government to operate and we can do better. I urge you to please support this necessary bill. 
Thank you for your time and commitment to public service. 
Rep‘ John Andrews
