A HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE Housn STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Rachel Ann Henderson 
87 Holyoke Avenue 
Rumford, ME 04276 
Ofﬁce: (207) 287-1440 
Cell: (207) 381-4237 
Rachel Henderson@legislaturemaine. gov 
LD1199 - An Act to Provide Transparency in Public 
School Curricula 
Senator Rafferty, Rep Brennan, and members of the joint standing 
committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am Rachel 
Henderson, I represent house district 78, in Oxford County. My 
district covers the towns of Bethel, Byron, Hanover, Milton TWP, 
Roxbury, and my beautiful hometown of Rumford. I am here to 
present my bill LD1199, An Act to Provide Transparency in Public 
School Curricula, which would require each school board to publish 
curricula and library-related materials by October 1“ of each school 
year for review by parents. 
I understand that today I stand before the Education Committee, a 
number of you having years of experience in the class rooms, in 
school administration, and on school boards. As I considered 
presenting this bill to you, I was reminded of a movie I watched asa 
child, “The Pistol: The Birth of a Legend” . It was a movie about Pistol 
Pete Maravich, and his early basketball life. In the movie, the high 
school basket ball coach is talking to the team at the end of practice. 
In one hand he’s holding a basketball and the other a black marker. 
As he’s taking he held up the basketball and stated, “This ball 
represents ALL there is to know about the game of basketball. ” Coach 
them drew a saucer sized circle in the top of the ball, “This circle 
represents all of what I know about the game of basketball. ” The 
coach then tapped the center of the circle with the tip of the marker, 
District 78 Bethel, Byron, Hanover, Rumford, Roxbury and Milton Township
leaving a small dot, and declared, “This dot represents all YOU know 
about the game of basketball. ” 
Today, in this room, I believe I am the dot standing in the circle. But 
a dot with the belief that the bill laid before you can begin to bridge 
the gap between Maine’s disenfranchised parents and our school 
systems. 
As a state, as a nation, we have always considered transparency to be 
a cornerstone of our democracy. From the municipal to the state 
level, the policy and processes are subject to public access. It isa 
constitutional demand. 
Over the last 3.5 years, the pandemic has magniﬁed the need for 
transparency in our school systems. In moments our worlds came toa 
screeching halt. Every social process, every structured procedure was 
rethought and reworked. 
For our school systems these closures and the transition to remote 
learning were tragic for Maine’s children. One item that was brought 
to light during this time was the importance of parental participation 
with regards to their children ’s education, and what is being taught in 
the classroom. Teachers were forced to become IT gurus, and parents 
were forced to become teachers overnight while assisting children 
with remote learning. Parents became intimately aware of what was 
being taught as they listened and engaged alongside their student. 
The internet era has given our generation access to near unlimited 
information at their ﬁngertips. Students spend much of their time on 
the computer completing assignments, reading online textbooks, and 
as we have seen, (and some here experienced) can even remotely 
participate in the classroom. Parents can now locate stats on student 
performance. Currently, state laws about academic transparency are 
written as if none of these technological advances have taken place. 
That needs to change. 
Now we have this post-pandemic reality that parents are concerned 
over what is being taught in public schools. Some argue that this 
District 78 Bethei, Byron, Hanover, Rumford, Roxbury and Milton Township
concern came to a head with the protests of parents over the 
teachings of critical race theory (CRT). These controversies, and 
many more (some of which this committee has already discussed this 
year) stress how the lack of transparency in public education has 
eroded public trust in schools. According to Gallup, in 2020 41% of 
Americans had a “great deal” or “quite a lot” of trust in the public 
school system. In 2022, that percentage had fallen to 28%. 
Conversely, in 2020 only 20% responded with “very little” trust in 
public education. And in 2022 rose to 31%. 
Heritage Fotmdation ’s Jonathan Butcher Stated, In an interview with 
Sutherland Institute ’s education fellow, Christina Cooke Fairbanks: 
“As a culture war continues to heat up around subjects like 
American history and civics, it seems obvious that parents 
— not policymakers — ought to make the final call about 
their student’s education. 
But this requires that they be given as much information as 
possible in the first place. 
Enter curriculum transparency: policies that increase 
parental access to what schools are teaching students. It 
seems too obvious that this should already be the case; in 
fact, it seems odd the curriculum wouldn't be transparent, 
but a further look reveals that robust curriculum 
transparency has not yet been realized in most places." 
Butcher went on to SayI”Results from a Heritage Foundation 
survey conducted in 2020 found that nearly 70 percent of 
parents want their children taught that “slavery wasa 
tragedy that harmed the nation, but our freedom and 
prosperity represent who we are as a nation, offering a 
beacon to those wanting to immigrate here" 
Yet curricular content based on the New York Times 
Magazine's “1619 Project” teaches that America's “founding 
ideals were false when they were written” and aims to 
reframe American history around slavery. The material is 
now available in some 4,500 classrooms. This material is 
also riddled with factual inaccuracies. In California, the 
state board of education is developing an ethnic studies 
curriculum that, as of August (2020), taught about “empire 
building W and its relationship to white supremacy ” and 
devoted an entire section to intersectionality, a term of 
District 78 Bethel, Byron, Hanover, Rumford, Roxbury and Milton Township
victimization from Critical Race Theory that fuels identity 
politics. If parents do not know what their children are 
being taught, they cannot effectively advocate for 
factually accurate teaching materials that represent their 
values and the values of their community." 
The Goldwater Institute has published a summary for increasing 
transparency (and the hurdles put up by public education to 
overcome). Here are some highlights of the Goldwater approach: 
- Each public school would disclose a listing of the actual 
instructional materials and activities the school used during the 
academic year on a publicly accessible portion of its website. 
- Parents should be able to compare content awaiting at nearby 
schools before they have to enroll their children, and have the 
same kind of 21st century access to it as other school 
information that’s posted online. 
- Schools should not be hiding content from current or 
prospective parents: Reporting broad, officially adopted 
‘curriculum ’ frameworks, basic textbooks, etc. is no longer 
enough. 
Additionally, transparency should also include: 
- A list of all materials and agendas used during teacher 
professional development. 
- A district ’s procedures for documentation, review or approval of 
learning materials and activities. 
- Materials, activities, procedure must be posted and retained on 
a district ’s website in a timely and effective manner. 
Parents have ultimate legal authority over the education of their 
children. The law is quite clear on this. Schools and teachers have an 
obligation to uphold the existing and long-established professional and 
ethical codes that govern K-12 education and schools, and teachers have 
a moral and ethical responsibility to engage in full disclosure and truth 
in advertising in the conduct of their professional (teaching) affairs. 
Parents have a legal right and parental duty to insist on this. These codes 
call for neutrality and impartiality when dealing with matters of 
contention in the classroom. 
District 78 Bethei, Byron, Hanover, Rumford, Roxbuiy and Milton Township
Teachers and schools are responsible for “maintaining the highest 
professional standards of accuracy, honesty, and appropriate disclosure 
of information when representing the school or district within the 
community and in public communications. ” (Model Code of Ethics for 
Educators, National Association of State Directors of Teacher Education 
and Certiﬁcation.) There is a general understanding that teachers act in 
loco parentis (in place of the parents) and thus may not undermine the 
parents in interactions with their children who are legally entrusted to 
their professional care. 
Transparency in public education is critical, as is transparency in all 
levels of government, but the real key is empowering parents. 
Simply put Mister Chair, lack of transparency breeds anger and 
distrust. While transparency itself increases accountability and 
credibility. 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
https: _ L13/outu.be _/' dgGIdtxB 3 gk 
httpsgﬂj news. gallupcom / poll / 1597/con ﬁdence-institutions.aspx 
https: V1/sutherlandinstitute.org/ curriculum-transparency~why —y0ur~scho0l — 
needs~it[ 
https: ,1 j unherdcom _/ thepost / the-new~yorl<-timess-worst-pulitzer-prize-Winners _/ 
https: if www. goldwaterinstitute.org/ issues /’ academic- 
transparency/academictransparency/' 
https://wwvvihe ﬁre.org/research-learn/parental-transparencv-protocol-ptg 
District 78 Bethel, Byron, Hanover, Rumford, Roxbury and Milton Township
