 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (2 07) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 1326  
 
AN ACT TO INCREASE SCHOOL SECURITY THROUGH DESIGN AND PROTOCOL  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director  of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , in opposition to  L.D. 1326 . 
 
The safety of our students and staff is a paramount re sponsibility of school leaders but our associations oppose 
this bill for a variety of reasons.  
 
School safety requires a framework composed of technology, training, education, and community 
engagement. This framework guides school districts to implement sa fety measures that meet s the needs of 
their students and staff based on the size, design, and age of the facility. It also requires training for all staff.  
 
L.D. 1326  requires that all  schools , new and old , must be constructed based on best practices to defe nd against 
active shooters including steel dead bolts on doors. Maine has hundreds of school buildings in our state,  of 
varying ages and they are all built differently. Many of our sc hools cannot install the design features that 
implement best practices du e to the age and the structure of the school. The cost alone of meeting best 
practices in existing schools is an unfunded mandate. One can reasonably anticipate th e fiscal note will be 
substantial given the age of many of our school building s in Maine.  Furthermore, what is the definition of best 
practices  and who  will be defining them?  
 
Student and staff safety is another concern with a requirement in this bill. The National Fire Protection 
Agency  does not support classroom doors with separately operated deadbolts  as occupants could struggle with 
the lock in the event of a fire  leaving the occupants at risk should there be a fire inside the classroom.  
 
Another concern we have has to do with the ability and time needed to prove who may have left a school do or 
ajar. Many schools have dozens of doors that do not have  surveillance  cameras that can monitor the activity 
around every entrance.  Again requiring schools to install cameras at every door is another unf unded mandate. 
If a door is left ajar, how will the  school district prove  who did it and who will be involved in the 
investigation.  
 
The bill also provides that an ‘individual ” in a school who keeps a door or entryway to the school unlocked or 
open commit s a class E crime. An “individual” could be a studen t. Our associations do  not support charging 
students for leaving a door ajar or for allowing a person to enter the school.  
 
MRSA Title 20 -A, section 1001  requires  that e ach school board shall annually  approve a comprehensive health and 
safety and emergency  management plan de veloped by the school unit administration working with school teachers 
 
 and staff as well as  local, county and state public safety officials, fire -fighting personnel, emergency manag ement 
officials, mental health officials, law enforceme nt officials, schoo l nurses, physicians and public health staff to identify 
and deal with all hazards and potential hazards that could reasonably be expected to affect a facility or unit under the 
authority of the school administrative unit. The approval o f a comprehensive h ealth and safety and emergency 
management plan under this subsection is public information. The school board shall form a steering committee 
composed of school employees, school boar d members, parents and others. The steering committee s hall regularly 
review and refine the comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan. The plan must include:  
 
• A description of t he scope and purpose of the comprehensive health and safety and emergency man agement 
plan and the process used for  developing and upd ating the plan;  
• General information on auditing for safety and preparedness;  
• Roles and responsibilities of school administrators, teachers and staff and the designated chain of command 
during an emergency ; 
• Strategies for conveying infor mation to parents a nd the general public during an emergency.  
 
It is for these reasons that ou r associations oppose this bill and we strongly recommend ought not to pass.  
