I 
. 4% 
oi 3 HOUSE OE REPRESENTATIVES 2 st/are HOUSE STATION 
~,,T AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
John Andrews 
P.O. Box us 
South Paris. ME (H37! 
Iohn Andre“ Sn? legislolurc.|naim-:.go\ 
Cell: (Z07) 73¢)-0075 
April 26:11, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1326 
"An Act to Increase School Security Through Design and Protocol ” 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education Committee, my name 
is John Andrews I represent District 79 in westem Maine. I am here today to present my bill LD 
1326, “An Act to Increase School Security Through Design and Protocol ”. 
My intent for LD 1326 was to create a vehicle to address school safety in Maine for the next 
several decades. I wanted to present you an idea to secure our school that did not involve 
ﬁrearms. The idea is to secure our schools through architectural design for all Maine public 
schools being built in the future. If we design schools from a defensive mindset, we are making 
it harder for active shooters to be successful in their evil goals. 
I am not talking about barbed Wire and sand bags surrounding the perimeter of an elementary 
school. I am talking about using the same type of purposeful design mindset that We use for our 
embassies around the world. Embassies and consulates are some of the best-looking buildings 
in the world, but they are also the most secure in the world and you would never know it if you 
were to walk to the halls. 
We can do the same on a much less grand scale for our schools in Maine. If we require an RFP 
for design of new schools to include defensive design features, We will be setting ourselves up 
for success in the future. Design features could be as simple as the angle a door opens intoa 
class room to give the defender a tactical advantage and restricted ﬁeld of view for the shooter 
as they enter a classroom.A 
Currently, our courthouses are designed this way. There are vendors who design buildings with 
defense in mind. There’s absolutely no reason that our schools should not be designed this Way 
as Well. I think that if parents and tax payers are presented this as an option for the design of 
new schools, they will be willing to pay any increased costs for design and building to protect 
our children and teachers. If there is a price Worth paying for anything in government, this is it. 
District 79 Paris, Sumner, West Paris and WoodstockI 
Primed on reuclecl paper
The bill would also penalize teachers and staff who leave doors open. Especially if these 
security breaches lead to a violent incident. I am open to this being rephrased in the bill to allow 
districts to create a policy to police themselves as long as a policy regarding security breaches is 
created and on ﬁle with a school district and staff are trained on it. 
With this bill we have a chance to protect our kids for decades to come by designing our new 
school to be built from a defensive mindset. In the 21 st century Where we face 21st century 
problems. Our schools we must begin to address these issues in every aspect that we can. 
Building defensively is an easy step forward that will be impactful to protect our communities. I 
would ask you to please support the bill and help secure our future schools from day one. 
Thank you for your time and commitment to public service, 
Representative John Andrews 
Maine House District 79
