 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1326 (Opposed  to Section 2 ) 
 
TO:   Senator Joseph Rafferty  
          Representative Michael Brennan  
          Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1326, an Act to Increase School Security Through Design and Protocol  
 
DA: April 26, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to the provisions of LD 1326 that would create  a new Class E crime.    
 
 The proposed new crime includes no culpable mental state element , and would be  what is 
called a “strict liability ” crime.    17 -A M.R.S. § 34.   As drafted, the new crime  is extremely broad, 
and may encompas s conduct that is not intended to be criminalized.     It is also not written  in a way 
that is consistent with the drafting conventions of the Criminal Code .  Most crimes are drafted so 
that each of the elements is easily identified.   For example:   “A person is guilty of [name of crime] 
if the person [ culpable mental state : intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal 
negligence ] [prohibited conduct or failure to perform identified duty] and [ any result element]. ”   
See 17 -A M. R.S. §§ 32, 33 .      
 
 If any person were to assist an individual causing injury or damage in a school, the State 
could consider criminal charges under existing criminal statutes , including  those governing 
accomplice liability  and conspiracy , 17-A M.R.S. §§ 57, 151 , as well as statutes defining other 
crimes , all depending on the conduct at issue, level of involvement and intent  of the actors .    
   
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
