~ i 
PO BOX 7860 
A 
Portland, ME 04112
' 
, ‘‘ 
V 1 (207) 7745444 
wwwaclumaine org 
AMERICAN Glllll LIBERTIES UNIUNl 
Maine . 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1326 — Ought Not to Pass 
An Act to Increase School Security Through Design and Protocol 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION & CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
, April 26, 2023p 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and 
l am the Policy Director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we oppose LD 1326 because it would create a new 
crime, strengthening a failed method of problem-solving, and make teachers and staff liable for 
the actions of others. 
_ The goal of LD 1326 is noble: to keep children safe at school. But creating new criminal 
penalties is not the answer. This bill would, among other things, make it a crime punishable by 
six months in jail and a $1000 ﬁne for teachers and other school staff who leave doors unlocked 
or open, or to admit an unauthorized person into a school. It would also make teachers personally 
liable if they do leave a door open and a shooter enters the school and injures or kills a person.
I 
We recognize that gun violence is increasing, reaching levels not seen in the past twenty 
years,‘ most frequently affecting Black people and young people agez 18 to 24.i¢§Ei1l Locking doors 
may deter or delay armed outsiders from entering buildings, but creating new criminal penalties 
against teachers and staff will not keep our children safe. Every three seconds a person is 
arrested in this country. More than three fourths of Maine’s arrests every year are for 
misdemeanors. Moreover, the system dispropoitionately arrests people of color compared to 
white people. The disparity is so extreme that that while 1.6 percent of Maine’s population is 
' 
See Ed Pilkington, Gun deaths in US rise t0 highest level in 20 years, data shows, THE GUARDIAN, Dec. 13, 
2018, available at https://wwwlheguardian.com/us-news/2018/dec/l3/us-gun-deaths-levels-cdc20l7 
2 Firearm Violence, 1993-2011, Bureau of Justice Statistics, available at https://bjs.ojp.gov/press-release/ ﬁrearm- 
violence-1993-201 1.-
1.
Black, Black people make up 5 percent of all arrests and more than 10 percent of people in 
Maine’s prisons. Creating a Class E crime for not locking a door only adds to school staff’s 
stress and is not likely to change behavior.V 
Creating new crimes and extending the failed tough on crime policies of the last 50 years 
will not work. We must radically rethink our outsized and misused criminal legal system and 
commit resources to the things that are proven to make communities healthier and safer: 
education, housing, safe communal spaces, and health care. We lock up more people in this 
country than any country in the history of the world and our incarceration rate in Maine is higher 
than most NATO member states. A better World begins with making the commitment to stopW 
turning to a criminal legal system to solve our problems when that system is not equipped to 
address these issues. We urge you to vote ought not to pass. .
