DEPARTMENT OF EcONOM1c . »:§¢>.» ,» 
“<3 STATE OF MAINE 
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
JANE T MILLS HEATHER JOHNSON 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Phoenix McLaughlin 
In Support of LD 1313 An Act to Amend the Tax Credit for Maj or Business Headquarters 
Expansions Regarding Employees ’ Location and Time of Hire for Purposes of the Credit 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation, my name is 
Phoenix McLaughlin, and I am the Tax Incentive Policy Manager for the Department of Economic 
and Community Development. I am here to testify in support of LD 1313 An Act to Amend the Tax 
Credit for Major Business Headquarters Expansions Regarding Employees ’ Location and Time of 
Hire for Purposes of the Credit. 
The credit for major business headquarters expansions was enacted in 2017 to incentivize the 
expansion of large corporate headquarters in Maine. The basic idea of the program is to provide a 
tax credit to a company that either builds or expands its headquarters in Maine. A participant is 
required to add 800 jobs over ten years and maintain those jobs for another ten years. 
The bill before you today makes two tweaks to the law to accommodate changes directly and 
indirectly related to the COVID-19 pandemic. First, instead of requiring that the new employees 
added due to the expansion are located at the headquarters building, the employees simply have to 
be working in Maine. This is because of the increase in prevalence of remote work. The original 
law did not conceive of a large shift towards remote work like we have seen since 2020, 
particularly in the type of jobs based at a corporate office. In our view, as long as the jobs created 
are ﬁlled by individuals residing in Maine, they are meeting the intent of the original incentive, 
and the law should be updated to match. 
Second, instead of dating the start of the employee count to the year the participating company 
starts claiming the credit, it moves the start date to the year the participating company was initially 
approved for the program. Due in part to greater ability to hire remote workers and a delay in the 
headquarters construction timeline, the company was able to hire many workers between being 
approved for the incentive program and completing construction of the headquarters building and 
starting to claim the credit. As the statute is currently written, the company would not be able to 
count those new employees towards the required new job count, even though they were added due 
to the expansion. Again, we believe these new jobs meet the intent of the original incentive. 
The department views these changes as reasonable to clarify the incentive ’s usability going 
forward. Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION ' AUGUSTA - MAINE ' 04333-0059 
PHONE: (207) 624-9800 ~ FACSIMILE: (207) 287-2681 
WWW.MAINE.GOV/ DECD
