 
 
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Terry@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: Maine Relay 711 
 
 
 
District 108: Gorham (part) 
 
 
April 10, 2023 
  
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry presenting 
LD 1371, An Act to Amend Limits on the Direct Shipment of Wine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
  
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and esteemed members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee, I am Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in House District 108. I 
am proud to be here to present LD 1371, An Act to Amend Limits on the Direct Shipment of 
Wine. 
 
This bill is very simple. It would make one small change in the way the statute describes the 
vessel used by direct shippers to send wine to their customers in Maine.  
 
The wine industry is embracing new technology and making changes to limit the environmental 
impact of their packaging and shipping processes. Traditional glass bottles are heavy and bulky 
and while totally appropriate for containing and shipping wine, they are expensive to make, 
becoming detrimental to our environment and becoming more costly each day to ship. Cans and 
bags are being used more and more often to store and sell ready-to-open wines. However, current 
law makes it difficult for shippers to deviate from the traditional shipping vessel of choice, the 
glass bottle.  
 
The law currently states that a direct shipper may not ship a bottle of wine that is less than 750 
milliliters and may not ship more than 12 cases containing a maximum of 9 liters in volume in a 
year. This bill would remove the reference to a bottle size limitation for shipment but would 
maintain the same maximum allowable volume of wine (9,000 milliliters) in a year, permitting 
the producer to send the product in whatever vessel they choose.  
 
This small change adapts our laws to the changing nature of the industry, allowing businesses to 
adjust their processing and shipping practices to better align with new technology and goals for 
more environmentally friendly operations.  
 
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
 
