-
ﬁ u 3‘i 
,.»~;.~~. _ ADMINIS'l'RATlVE&FINANCIAL SERVICES
H 
-~ BUREAi1§r<g?i§U(1i/iAN 1~iAii1E¢sE 
oURcEs KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
; COMMISSIONER 
4 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0004 
BUREAU OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR BREENA D. BISSELL 
DIRECTOR 
Ssnvmo THE Pusuc AND DELIVERING ESSENTIAL SERVICES To STATE GOVERNMENT 
March 28, 2023 
Re: L.D. 942 -An Act to Ensure the Collection of Complete Information by Adding a 3”’ 
Option for Gender on State Forms 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Connnittee on Judiciary: I am Breena Bissell, Director of the State of Maine Bureau of Humani 
Resources, and I am here to testify on behalf of the Administration in support of this legis1ation ’s 
objective, while also identifying the practical challenges the bill poses and suggesting how they 
can belnavigated.’ 
LD 942 seeks to require that all forms, applications, and other documents, that include a 
person’s gender be identiﬁed must include by November 1, 2024, a space to designate “X” for 
gender in lieu of “male” or “female.” 
Maine is an equal employment opportunity employer, and we strive to create and 
maintain a more inclusive and diverse workforce. We appreciate that the goal of LD 942 is to 
make the State of Maine more inclusive of transgender, non-binary, and gender non-conforming 
individuals, both in its workforce and in itsvservice to the public.V 
Updating the State’s paper forms to include the X designation can be accomplished ina 
reasonable amount of time and at little expense, however, it is important to note that information 
collected via paper form is typically entered into and stored within a computer system, and many 
of the State’s paper forms have been replaced with electronic forms. Computer programming 
Phone: (207) 624-7761 TTY Relay: 711 Fax: (207)287-4414 
www.maine.gov
will be required to update the State’s computer systems and electronic forms. While some of this 
programming should be relatively straightforward, among the state’s older computer systems, 
otherwise simple reprogramming runs the risk of compromising the system’s overall integrity, 
and full system upgrades may be required to comply with this bill. When you consider all the 
programming necessary across every State department and agency, the cost and time required 
will not be insigniﬁcant. 
After speaking with the sponsor and advocates of the bill, DAFS’s recommendation on 
behalf of the administration, is to amend the bill to require each department and agency to 
inventory and report back to the Committee: 1) the instances in which they require gender to be 
designated, 2) what actions would be necessary to add the X designation, and 3) an estimate of 
the cost and time required to complete this update. Where there are minimal barriers to updating 
forms, applications and documents, updates could be made concurrent with performing the 
inventory and reﬂected in each department/agency ’s report back. 
There is also the issue of federal reporting requirements; as an example from within the 
Bureau of Human Resources, each new hire completes new hire paperwork, which asks 
questions about gender and ethnic and racial demographics. In turn, the State is biannually 
required to report this information to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 
Currently, the EEO-4 Report the State ﬁles does not include a non-binary option for reporting 
gender. The EEOC has released a statement with regard to the EEO-1 (a similar report ﬁled by 
certain private employers) stating that the EEOC is not currently authorized to require the 
reporting of non-binary employee gender data. For employers who collect this data, they are 
required to back the non—binary data out of their report and to insert that information into the
2
comments section of the report. The EEOC has not given guidance regarding reporting non- 
binary employee gender data on the EEO-4. 
As the federal government also takes action to advance inclusion and visibility of 
transgender, non-binary, and gender non-conforming individuals in federal data, the State can 
plan and prepare to comply with those updated federal surveys and data systems once they begin 
to collect non-binary gender data. 
I am happy to respond to any questions you might have at this time and can be available 
to you at the work session.
23
