HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 49 A ;w 
2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-I400 
Erin Sheena“ TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
(she/her) 
P.O. Box 1423 
Biddeford, ME 04005 
Phone: (207) 200-6616 
Erin.Sheehan@legislaturemaine. 
Testimony of Representative Erin Sheehan introducing 
LD 942 - An Act to Ensure the Collection of Complete Information by Adding a 3rd 
Option for Gender on State Forms 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Esteemed Colleagues of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Erin Sheehan and I represent part of 
Biddeford. Today, I’m pleased to introduce LD 942 "An Act to Ensure the Collection of 
Complete Information by Adding a 3rd Option for Gender on State Forms." 
In 2018, a Maine court ordered the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to begin issuing 
state ID cards and drivers’ licenses with the option of a third Gender Marker ‘X.’ This 
change advanced State recognition of Mainers whose gender identities had been 
excluded under rules that offered ‘M’ and ‘F’ as the only options. For those unfamiliar 
with Gender Marker X, it is a marker used by primarily by people who identify as 
nonbinary — whose gender identity and expression is not accurately reflected by ‘M’ or 
‘F.’ it ls also sometimes used by intersex people, who are born with genetic and physical 
sex characteristics that do not conform to binary classifications of male or female 
bodies. 
The change implemented by the BMV enhanced the safety of nonbinary and 
intersex Mainers by ensuring that the identification they rely on every day aligns with 
District 132: Biddeford (pait)
and accurately informs how they are perceived by others. LD 942 is intended to 
advance the safety of nonbinary Mainers in their dealings with the full range of State 
institutions. 
Furthermore, passage of this bill would advance the accuracy and completeness 
of the data sets that the State’s departments and agencies collect. l\/laine relies on 
those numbers to evaluate and improve a wide variety of programs that keep Mainers 
healthy, housed, employed, educated, and safe. lt’s important that the forms our 
departments rely on collect complete information to ensure robust analysis, as well as 
cost-effective and appropriate services. 
Finally, passage of LD 942 would help the State of Maine avoid costly litigation. 
In 2020, a Federal Appeals Court found in Zzyym v. Pompeo that the binary gender 
marker system was arbitrary and capricious and ordered that the plaintiff be issueda 
passport with the X Gender Marker. 
I'd like to thank l\/laine Transgender Network and the coalition of advocates who 
patiently educated me on the importance of this bill as well as representatives from the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Sen/ices, who worked with the advocates to 
craft a timely, achievable, and cost-effective path fon/vard for the changes proposed. 
These will require an amendment, which will be available in advance of the work 
session, and which will: 
- Charge DAFS with compiling an inventory of where gender is only collected ina 
binary 
- Where updates are not workable on the timeline specified in the draft, DAFS shall 
report back with an inventory and plan to Judiciary in the short session 
- Add a requirement that all new computer systems and forms that use gender must 
include X from the start. 
Thank you for your consideration of this proposal. l will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have, but may defer to the experts who will follow me. 
District 132: Biddeford (part)
