EQUALITYMAINE 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
LD 942 - An Act t0 Ensure the Collection of Complete Information 
by Adding a 3rd Option for Gender on State Forms 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, my 
name is Gia Drew. I am the Executive Director of EqualityMaine, which has been representing and 
advocating for Maine’s LGBTQ+ community since 1984, and I am testifying today on behalf of 
EqualityMaine in support of LD 942, An Act to Ensure the Collection of Complete Information by 
Adding a 3rd Option for Gender on State Forms. 
When completing a form and asked to check a box indicating their sex or gender, many people 
select one of the binary options, like female or male, without giving it a second thought. But for 
those who exist outside the binary, this is a fraught, stressful, embarrassing, and even harmful 
choice, and one that ultimately forces them to misrepresent themselves. 
There are people whose sex is not simply female or male, some people are both female and male, 
neither female nor male, or have a variety of sex traits, and/or chromosomes, including people who 
are intersex. Additionally, a pers0n’s gender may not align with their sex. Gender identity, as 
deﬁned by the Maine Human Rights Act, "means the gender-related identity, appearance, 
mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the individual's 
assigned sex at birth.” ' 
Likewise, some people use terms like nonbinary, gender queer, agender, or 
genderﬂuid, rather than the binary options of man/woman or boy/girl to describe themselves. 
According to the Williams Institute at UCLA, 1.2 million adults identify as nonbinary in the United 
States? Additionally, 1 in 4 LGBTQ+ youth identify as nonbinary.3 
‘ https://www.mainelegis|ature.org/legis/statutes/5/tltle5sec4553.html 
2 https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/nonbinary-lgbtq-adu|ts-us/ 
3 https://www.thetrevorprojectorg/sur\/ey-2021/
Yet when ﬁlling out most forms, applications, and other state agency documents, many in the 
LGBTQ+ community, particularly transgender, nonbinary, and intersex people, must ﬁt themselves 
into the current constraints of govermnent databases at the expense of being truthful and feeling 
respected. Maine, along with 16 other states and DC, already allows residents to mark M, F, or X on 
their birth certiﬁcates. Adding a gender marker option of X throughout state agency forms would 
acknowledge and honor diverse gender identities, allowing Mainers to be seen for who they are by 
their government. 
The beneﬁts of adding a third option for gender go beyond treating people with dignity. Nonbinary 
and intersex people experience increased discrimination and invasive questioning when the 
perception of their gender is in conﬂict with their gender marker. On an administrative level, adding 
a third gender marker to all state agency forms would ensure that there are no inconsistencies 
among various agencies ’ documents, which lead to bureaucratic delays, inefﬁciencies, and 
frustration. Furthermore, the addition of a third gender marker would greatly improve the collection 
of accurate demographic data throughout the state. 
I urge you to support this bill, and to vote ought to pass on LD 942. Let’s respect all Mainers byV 
extending the right to accurately self-represent to everyone. 
Gia Drew 
(she/her) 
On behalf of: 
EqualityMaine
