 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
Date May 9, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
in support of LD 1812 – An Act to Provide a Source of Funding for the Construction and Implementation of a 
Food Security Hub  
To Chairperson Ingwersen, Chairperson Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry: 
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 1812 – An Act to Provide a Source of 
Funding for the Construction and Implementation of a Food Security Hub  
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
Food security hubs are a great way to decrease food insecurity within a community, while also providing a 
space for strong community partnerships in order to address food access and the root cause work of hunger. 
The funding to be able to create such a hub within our state will allow for this multi-pronged approach of 
addressing immediate access to food and the ability to collaborate towards the longer-term work of the root 
causes of hunger.  
Utilizing unappropriated surplus from the General Fund to fund a food security hub means meeting  the 
urgent need of access to food, the ability to prepare for any emergencies can increase food insecurity, and 
creating the necessary community to bring lasting change to the work of hunger within our state.  
Please vote in support of LD 1812.  
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Rebekah Lane 
Community Organizer 
rlane@gsfb.org  
 
