 
  
 
Testimony In Opposition To  
LD 667, An Act t o Impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain Incomes  
LD 843, An Act to Improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top 
Individual Income Tax Rate  
 
March 2 3, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and Honorable Members of the Taxation  Committee,   
 
My name is Alexander Price  and I am submitting  this testimony  on behalf of the  Maine Jobs Council . The 
Maine Jobs Council is a statewide, nonpartisan, member- driven advocacy organization that advances 
public policies to support the creation and preservation of foundational jobs in Maine. We are submitting  
this testimony in opposition to  LD 667, An Act  to Impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain Incomes and LD 843, 
An Act to Improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top Individual Income Tax Rate . 
 
Maine is currently ranked last in New England in terms of economic ranking. Massachusetts is # 4, New 
Hampshire is #5, Connecticut is #25, Rhode Island is #36, Vermont is #41, and Maine is #44. One of the 
reasons for this is because we already have high taxes. Maine currently has the 3 rd highest tax burden 
in the nation. This is a combination of high property tax, high income tax, and high sales and excise tax. 
One of the states that is higher than us is New York, where notably the incomes are much higher.  
 
As a country, we are on the verge of a recession. It is important to note that the last time we had a 
recession, Maine’s economy responded slower once it was over than the rest of the country. From 2009 
to 2019, the U.S. economy grew by 25% -  an annual gro wth of 2.3%. Maine’s economy grew 10% in that 
time, an annual growth of 1%. Maine grew less than half of the national average and was already starting 
from a very low base.  
 
• Maine ranks #46 (5 th worst) for business environment –  U.S. News & World Report  
• Maine ranks #43 (8 th worst) for top states for business –  CNBC  
• Maine ranks #42 (9 th worst) for venture capital investment –  National Venture Capital 
Association  
• Maine ranks 3 rd highest for over tax burden –  WalletHub  
• Maine ranks 9 th highest for per capita h ealth care spending –  Kaiser Family Foundation  
• Maine ranks 10 th highest in income tax –  Tax Foundation  
• Maine ranks 13th highest for energy expenditures per capita –  U.S. Energy Information 
Administration  
• Maine has a stagnant population: we have an aging workforce and young people are not moving 
to or staying in Maine.  
• Maine ranks #42 (9 th worst) in personal income – U.S. D epartment of Commerce.  
 
The reason to highlight this data is to show the complex issues we have as a state. Individual pieces of 
legislation like the ones that have been introduced to this committee today are not the solution to 
solving our state’s economic problems. We need to start taking a more comprehensive look at how taxes, 
regulation, infrastructure, workforce challenges, and other issues act as a barrier to job creation in our 
state. Maine needs to develop and follow a long -term strategic plan to create a tax base that works for 
all Mainers. High earners in Maine already pay a huge percentage of state taxes. Rather than giving them 
reasons to leave Maine or discouraging more of them from coming here, we should be attracting them 
and reducing our need for higher taxes by cutting the cost of government and making it considerably 
more efficient.  
 
If this legislation passes, Maine will be less competitive with other states and it will be less likely that 
high earner will move to or stay in Maine –  especia lly with the expansion of remote work. While some 
people are moving here, Maine is not the only safe, rural state and individuals looking to relocate to 
Maine may look elsewhere before of these tax increases. Maine could be a destination state and that is 
a better way to grow the tax base.  
 
The MJC thanks the committee for it s time and consideration of this  issue , and we would welcome any 
opportunity to discuss it with you.  
 
Thank you,  
 
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood  
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council  
