19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony in Opposition to LD 667
(“An Act to Impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain Incomes”)  and LD 843
(“An Act to Improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top Individual 
Income Tax Rate”)
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 23, 2023
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, my name is Andy Cashman.  I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations, 
and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers 
involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also 
includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, 
building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National 
Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® strongly opposes LD 667 and LD 843
because they substantially increase Maine’s income tax. Each of these bills, individually, 
would make Maine one of the highest income tax states in the country. Such a distinction 
will deter people and businesses from settling in Maine over the long term and would 
negatively impact Maine’s economic sustainability. Increasing taxes increases a 
household’s cost of living, and their ability to secure housing. These proposals would further 
contribute to Maine’s housing challenges and discourage needed workforce from choosing 
to call Maine home. Increasing the income tax, at the expense of economic growth is not 
sustainable for Maine.  
These increased taxes would apply to thousands of Maine businesses that pass their 
income through the owner’s individual income tax form, including sub-chapter S 
corporations, Limited Liability Partnerships, and the other pass-through entities. Increased 
tax rates will make it more difficult for Maine to attract professionals including business 
leaders, doctors and dentists, other specialized health care providers, and entrepreneurs. 
Why would businesses and the labor force move to or remain in Maine if New Hampshire 
has no income tax and Massachusetts has a flat income tax rate that is half of Maine’s for 
the upper income bracket? 
Furthermore, the timing of these bills is troubling: Maine residents and businesses are still 
hurting financially, and this is not the time to burden our citizens with higher taxes. The 
fragility of Maine’s economy – personal and business finances – is undeniable. 
Page 2
12781773.1For these reasons, we urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 667 and LD 843. Thank 
you for your time and consideration. 
