Opposition to LD 667, LD 843  
 
With the 3rd highest tax burden in the US, it is inconceivable that this legislature is seeking to impose 
additional taxation.  
 
If any legislator would examine the history regarding "sur taxes" on high income earners, they would see 
clearly that this ul timately results in LOWER tax revenue. People move. Witness the 800,00 0 citizens 
having left California in the last  2 years. New York City is quickly becoming a ghost town, as their 
popula tions flee the increasing taxes having lost over $60 million in revenue in 2 years.  
 
Maine already has much difficulty attracting industry, due to the high taxation and utility rates. Perhaps 
one of the best studies of the failure of this proposal is in NJ. Several years ago, they decided to place a 
surcharge on higher incomes  and within a few short years their revenue declined to levels lower than 
their surcharge implementation.  
 
Are you aware that according  to The Heritage Foundation,  reported on M arch 7, 2023 ,  42.3% of all tax   
revenu es are paid by the top 1% of the population . The  bottom 50% of all tax payers, pay only 2.37%  
In summary, 50% of all tax payers, pay 97.7% of the revenue. In the states attempting to tax high 
earners , they lost over $250 billion in revenue.   
 
Last week Lewiston announced that they are anticipating a property tax increase of an estimated 
$1,400 on a $250,000 residence. A casual review of the budgets will ind icate the escalating costs of 
educati on, housing  and social ser vices for "illegal border crossers"  Currently over 15,000 people 
are wait -listed for housing vouchers.  Maine had a critical resource and housing issue, before the 
arrival of illegal border crossers. It is horrifying to me that hotels are being paid $300 per night per 
room, by taxp ayers to house "illegals" in 5+ hotels in Portland, and now Portland is seeking relief 
from Augusta.   This move for a tax surcharge is clearly a response to "a bor der crisis".  
 
People will leave, businesses will not come.  
 
For many years I worked with true "refugee" populations   relocated into Lewiston -Auburn via UN 
resettlement. M any arrive with the life -skill s of an 8 year old.  I am very familiar with "asylum" and 
in one instance actually filed asylum paperwork. Crossing the US border illegally, 'hoping for a 
better life' does not legally qualify one for a claim of asylum. In reality the vast majority of border  
crossers will not be granted asylum. That is, if they show up for a hearing at all.  
 
Tragically, media refers to these new populations as "Asylum -seeking immigrants" - No they are 
not! They are people who in the first instance have violat ed the laws of this country!  
 
Has anyone asked exactly how they have arrived at the Mexican border from Africa?  
 
The very definition of what it is to be a nation is crumbling. Without borders, food, water, and 
infrastructure , one no longer has a nation. In th e meantime, the US Government is sending billions 
to "protect the border of Ukraine" while over 5 million illegals have crossed our Southern Border in 
the last 2 years. Anyone that thinks for a minute this is sustainable is delusional!  
 
Do you really wonder why people are moving to Florida  and Texas ?  I am truly hoping some clarity 
and sanity will prevail in the Augusta Legislature. Leaders need to articulate the issues instead of 
'going along to get along'.  
Very simply, if you have a boat that sa fely holds 6 people, you cannot 'hope for the best' by adding 6 
more - everyone sinks!  
 
Thank you for your service and I hope wisdom will be victorious over sentiment.  
 
Kay Pinkham  
Auburn, ME  
 
 
 
 
