STATE 01? MAINE 
ﬁg’ OFFICE OF THE G0vERN0R 
M *" 
E ISTATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
ya; .111.‘ I 04333-0001
* 
JANET MILLS DAN BURGESS‘ 
GovERNoR . 
DIRECTOR OF G0vERNOR ’s 
ENERGY OFFICE . 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Prohibit All State Subsidies for Electric Vehicles 
' 
L.D. 1623 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
, April 27, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in opposition to L.D. 1623. 
The transportation sector represents the largest source of carbon emissions from fossil fuel combustion 
in Maine at nearly 50 percent of emissions. Maine's four-year climate action plan, Maine Won't Wait, 
made several recommendations to accelerate the state's transition to electric vehicles in support of 
meeting our emissions reduction goals by 2030 and 2050. Those recommendations include: 
0 Putting 41,000 light-duty EVs on the road in Maine by 2025 and 219,000 by 2030; 
0 Developing a statewide EV Roadmap; and 
0 Creating policies, incentives, and pilot programs to encourage adoptions of electric, hybrid, and 
alternative-fuel vehicles including in public tra nsportation.1 '' 
These recommended goals and actions complement other objectives regarding support for local biofuel 
production and reducing vehicle miles traveled.A 
Today the state has more than 8,600 electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles on the road and 389 public EV 
charging stations. ’ We still have significant progress to make in achieving our goals, but several efforts 
are underway to do this work,I
_ 
The state's ambitious strategies to reduce transportation emissions to date have been supported bya 
mix of both state and federal funding opportunities. MaineDOT and Efficiency Maine, with support from 
the GEO, Maine DEP, and the Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future, have received 
federal approval of a plan to invest in Maine's electric vehicle charging infrastructure through the 
National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Deployment (NEVI) funds, a program from the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law (BIL). In addition to the $8 million for public EV charging through the Maine Jobs and 
I https://www.maine. gov/climateplan/sites/maine.gov.climateplan/ ﬁles/inline- 
ﬁles/MaineWontWait_December2020Jarintable_12. 1 .20 .pdf 
2 https://www.maine.gov/climateplan/sites/maine.gov.climateplan/ ﬁles/inline — 
files/MWW_Climate%2OPlan%20Update%20December%202022_digital.pdf
Recovery Plan (MJRP) focused on rural communities, and the S19 million in NEVI funding from the BIL, 
the state will also compete for additional funding through the BlL’s NEVI Discretionary Grant Program." 
Efficiency Maine offers instant rebates for eligible battery electric vehicles (BEVs) and plug-in hybrid 
electric vehicles (PHEVs), including enhanced rebates and rebates for used EVs for low- and moderate- 
income drivers. For business, local and Tribal governments, and non-profit organizations, Efficiency 
Maine has increased the price cap for electric trucks and vans and launched a promotion to increase 
electric fleet vehicles. For low-income households, Efficiency Maine has incorporated more pathways to 
eligibility for enhanced low-income EV rebates, including participation in means tested programs such as 
the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP) for food assistance, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TAN F) for cash assistance, and 
MaineCare for medical insurance coverage. 
Additionally, the passage of LD 1579 codiﬁed the state's "Lead by Example" electric vehicle goals for 
state fleets, school buses, and municipal fleets into law which includes a goal of purchasing 100% light- 
duty zero-emission vehicles (ZEVs) for the state fleet by 2030. The Efficiency Maine rebates for EVs can 
make purchasing EVs for state fleets the most cost’ -effective option over the standard life of the car for 
agencies when there's a model that can satisfy the agency's needs. State agencies have reported 
significant annual fuel savings where electric vehicles have been implemented so far. 
The GEO supports continued efforts to deploy -electric vehicle charging infrastructure across the state 
and to assist Maine people of all incomes, businesses, local and tribal governments, state government, 
and non-profits in transitioning to cleaner, more efficient vehicles. We believe the state has worked to 
leverage federal funds to support these efforts where possible and will continue to do so, but strongly ‘' 
opposes any prohibition on the use of state funds for these important efforts that support the state's 
decarbonization plans. - AV 
Thank you for your consideration. 
CM»~_C.¢- Caroline Cola n, Legislative Liaison _, 
Governor ’ s Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
