My name is Aranka Matolcsy. I am from South Paris, Maine and I am here to be a voice 
for thousands of Maine families who are struggling with realities of being caregivers of 
children with significant needs. I am here to implore for your support of parents as paid 
caregivers of minors with disabilities in support of LD 346 - An Act to Clarify the 
Requirements for Family Caregivers 
 
Let it be very clear that minors with disabilities and their caregivers are the most 
marginalized, impoverished and desperate people in our nation. And, we represent all 
colors, genders, religions and cultures. 
 
My son was born with a serious genetic condition that has crippled my ability to work, 
isolated us socially pushed us into food insecurity, being cold in our home, not having 
gas to travel outside of base necessities, and so many of the emotional and traumatic 
experiences that are the reality of poverty.  
 
My son was born after I had paid into the “system” for over 20 years. I was an NPO 
executive implementing capacity-building programming for my communities. Colby has 
Down syndrome, Autism Spectrum Disorder, ADHD and more. Necessarily, because of 
his needs and the rampant systemic brokenness that leaves him and me without basic 
needs being met, our lives have spiraled into desperation. 
 
My son and I now live under the federal poverty line. My ability to work and be hired with 
any regularity has ended due to the tremendous amount of medical and special needs 
of my child. Our lives have been driven into food insecurity, fear of foreclosure, isolation 
and hopelessness. Those systems I paid into for almost three decades are letting us 
down at EVERY turn: public school, specialized services, Social Security.  
 
We are languishing; I can’t find regular work that is flexible enough to bend around 35+ 
missed days between September and June, with little to no day care options because 
Colby is required to have one-on-one support in order to be safe to attend. Furthermore, 
public education cannot provide reliable or safe transportation or instruction so his 
needs must be met out of district on a regular basis. 
 
I have repeatedly attempted to submit documentation to Social Security and other 
agencies to prove that the numbers of hours I spend directly supporting my son’s needs 
is preventing me from working enough to make ends meet but none of it matters due to 
the mandatory child support offset, Social Security says my son’s is not eligible for his 
full benefit.  
 
So I work 2 jobs in 2 counties every minute I can possibly work outside of providing 
direct one-on-one to a 12-year old child that requires “Eyes On AT ALL TIMES” due to 
choking and sharps hazards and unsafe and violent behavior with animals, himself and 
others. In fact in this moment, he is crazily chewing on legos trying to eat them to get 
my attention, because he can hear me tying which triggers him to obsessively seek 
negative attention. 
 
This stress may likely be killing me. I have multiple stress-related health conditions that 
are getting worse. I am going for another endoscopy tomorrow. A major health crisis 
would cause me to lose our home. I literally work on my smartphone in the bathroom, in 
parking lots, while Colby is sleeping, and every possible moment. My level of 
exhaustion and poor health is not sustainable. Our situation is a house of cards than 
can fall anytime. Then how much money are the taxpayers going to pay for us? 
 
Paying parents of disabled children as caregivers is critical lifeline. PLEASE HELP US. 
My friend can’t be here, she is a single mom of a child who is wheelchair bound 
nonverbal, but because he is not intellectually disabled, they do not qualify for in home 
support. Her hernia is so bad she can barely function but she can’t get surgery because 
she has no support for her son. That is why she is not here. I can’t wait to testify so I 
have to submit it. My child could elope under my in attention to wait for a chance for you 
to hear me begging in person. 
 
I could be earning income for the tremendous work I do with my son and buying my own 
food, but instead I am relegated to SNAP benefits for which I have been publically 
humiliated by people in line behind me as yet another cashier makes a big deal out of a 
problem with my card. Yes, openly shamed by strangers for having a SNAP card which 
came with becoming a single parent of a child with severe needs.  
 
At every turn, we are suffering and falling through the cracks. My child is being robbed 
of me, as our lives spiral farther down into despair. Paying parents as caregivers of 
disabled children is a chance at a better life for everyone involved in the equation 
around disabled minors! 
 
I should not face losing the home I spent my entire adult life working toward because I 
have a child whose disabilities prevent me from working with any regularity. The life I 
live with my child is devastatingly difficult and hopeless. I grapple daily with crippling 
fear about not having enough food and gas, as well as hopelessness for my child’s 
future after I am gone and am no longer able to protect him and advocate for him.  
 
As a hard-working and community contributing citizen, I should have the opportunity to 
stay in my home and provide the care my child needs to be a healthy, contributing 
member of our society, especially after paying into the system faithfully my entire adult 
life. Enabling parents of children with severe needs to be paid as caregivers would be a 
tremendous step forward in building a brighter future for my child and others in our 
same situation. 
 
I implore you to support this critical proposal. Thank you. 
 
Aranka Matolcsy 
515 Ryerson Hill road 
South Paris, ME 
207-890-6386 
aranka.matolcsy@gmail.com 
