u' 
.__ ~‘ -I 1,, ,4-. . 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (207) 28']-14()() 
Raymond, ME 04071 MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
Jessica.Fav@legislature.maine.gov 
March 28, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay Presenting 
LD 346, An Act T0 Create A Pilot Program for Family Caregivers of 
MaineCare Eligible Children With Disabilities 
(formerly, An Act to Clarify the Requirements for Family Caregivers) 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Representative Meyer, Senator Baldacci and honorable members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, thank you for the opportunity to present LD 346 with an amended title of 
“An Act To Create A Pilot Program for Family Caregivers of MaineCare Eligible Children 
With Disabilities. ” 
I have testiﬁed in past legislatures in favor of a program that would allow the parents of children 
with disabilities who are MaineCare eligible to be paid to provide personal care to those children. 
This Committee has passed this policy twice — in the 129"‘ Legislature and in the l30“‘ 
Legislature. 
Maine continues to have a serious shortage of care workers, as this Committee is well aware. 
Family members of MaineCare eligible people over 18 with disabilities can be paid through a 
ﬁnancial agent for providing approved personal care to that MaineCare member. Currently that 
option doesn’t exist for parents of children under 18. Parents struggling to ﬁnd personal care for 
their disabled children often must leave the workforce to provide it themselves. This can leavea 
family with signiﬁcant ﬁnancial challenges — if a parent could be paid to do the care that they 
can’t ﬁnd elsewhere, we could solve two problems at once. We would have care for that child 
and We would allow the parent some income. 
According to Director Probert in her testimony on LD 1204, An Act To Address the Shortage of 
Direct Care Workers for Children with Disabilities in Maine: 
“The State would not be able to reimburse parents who provide personal care services to their 
children through the MaineCare program unless the federal government granted a waiver. 
Without a waiver, the State would not be able to receive federal matching funds and would be 
funding the sen/ice with 100% state funds. The Department understands the need for personal 
care services; however, we believe the federal exclusion rests upon sound policy justiﬁcations 
and that a Waiver would be difﬁcult to obtain.” 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
The amendment to the bill before you changes the name of the bill and creates a state-funded 
pilot program that allows parents in very speciﬁc situations to be paid to assist with activities of 
daily living when other options are not available. The Department suggested that a state-funded 
program would be easier to implement because of CMS regulations. I am eager to work with the 
Committee and the Department to make this program work for the families of children with 
MaineCare eligible disabilities. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
There is testimony available to you from two previous legislatures that tells the stories of parents 
of children with disabilities: 
0 129th Legislature: LD 1936, An Act To Allow Parents of Minors Who Qualiﬁ/for 
In-home Personal Care under the MaineCare Program T 0 Be Employed as Caregivers 
for Those Minors 
0 130th Legislature: LD 1204, An Act To Address the Shortage of Direct Care Workers for 
Children with Disabilities in Maine
Sponsor amendment to replace concept draft. New title: 
LD 346 — An Act To Create A Pilot Program for Family Caregivers of 
MaineCare Eligible Children With Disabilities 
Sec. 1. Department of Health and Human Services to establish a state-funded pilot 
program for in-home personal care services to minors. Resolved: That the Department of 
Health and Human Services, referred to as “the department ” shall establish a state-funded pilot 
program, to allow the parent of a child who is deemed eligible for in-home personal care services 
under the MaineCare program to register as a personal care agency and receive reimbursement 
for those services to a child. To qualify for reimbursement under this section, the parent must 
have made reasonable efforts to obtain regular in-home personal care services and have satisﬁed 
the requirements of the applicable background check required of providers of in-home personal 
care services. For the purposes of this section, “personal care agency” has the same meaning as 
in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 1717, subsection 1, paragraph C. 
Sec. 2. Personal care agency requirements. Resolved: That in order for a parent to be 
registered as a personal care agency under section 1, another individual who is not a parent of the 
child must be designated the employer. The person designated as the employer must be 
approved by both the department and the parent to act in the child’s interest. 
Sec. 3. MaineCare eligibility. Resolved: That a minor child’s eligibility for 
MaineCare, including eligibility for in-home personal care services, is not affected by a parent 
receiving reimbursement for services under section 1. 
Sec. 4. Pilot program period; expenditures capped. Resolved: That reimbursement 
provided under the pilot program established by this Resolve is available through calendar years 
2024 and 2025. The expenditures for the pilot program are capped at $500,000 over the entire 
period of the pilot program. 
Sec. 5. Rulemaking. Resolved: That the department shall adopt any rules necessary to 
implement the pilot program established by this Resolve. The department may adopt any rules 
necessary to implement the pilot program as long as the rules are adopted no later than January 1, 
2024. Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as deﬁned in the Maine 
Revised Statutes, Title 5, Chapter 375, subchapter 2-A. 
Sec. 6. Reports. Resolved: That the department shall provide reports to the joint 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services 
matters. The department shall provide an interim report no later than January 1, 2025 and a ﬁnal 
report no later than January 1, 2026 with the status of the program including children served, 
enrollment applications, and expenditures. The department shall also notify the committee when 
any rulemaking pursuant to Section 5 is completed. The committee is authorized to report out 
legislation pursuant to the interim report and the ﬁnal report to either session of the 132“d 
Legislature. 
Sec. 7. Appropriations and allocations. Resolved: That the following appropriations 
and allocations are made. [$5 00,000 in General Funds]
SUMMARY 
This bill establishes a two-year pilot program funded by General Funds to allow the parent ofa 
child who is deemed eligible for in-home personal care services under the MaineCare program to 
be paid for providing those services to the child. The parent must be registered as a personal care 
agency and another individual is designated as the employer. The parent must have made 
reasonable efforts to obtain regular in-home personal care services and have satisﬁed the 
requirements of the applicable background check required of providers of in-home personal care 
services. The program is available through calendar years 2024 and 2025 and funding is capped 
at $500,000. The department shall provide an interim and ﬁnal report to the joint standing 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters.
