Hon. Tina Riley 
Jay, ME 
3/29/2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of LD 346, “An Act to Clarify the 
Requirements for Family Caregivers." I am before you as a parent and a caregiver, representing a 
segment of our population that has too much on their plate to focus on telling you their stories. 
My son, Bryan, has Duchenne muscular dystrophy. I have watched his body fail, bit by bit, for over 
twenty years now. He has never dressed himself, brushed his teeth, or showered independently. He 
stopped walking at the age of twelve. I was working as a mill electrician but I spent most of my energy 
jockeying his IEP, insurance, waiver program updates, medications, and therapies, and making the 
four-hour round trip to appointments with each of his specialists. His failing mobility added the job of 
repositioning him several times each night. 
For a while, a caregiver came in at 4:30am so my husband and I could go to our jobs at the mill but she 
burned out. Unable to find a replacement caregiver and exhausted from the 24/7 workload, I had little 
choice but to walk away from my career to care for my son. 
Had he needed an actual nurse at his bedside, the state would pay a parent who is qualiﬁed to deliver 
that service, if the requirements were met. But my son needed assistance with “ADLs,” not medical 
care. I was fully qualiﬁed to do that job and no one was available to provide the care he needed, soI 
did it unpaid. Some families in that situation are ﬁnancially sunk, forced to live on welfare in spite of 
the workload they cannot shirk. 
Today, I am paid to care for him through a program that has guardrails and layered checks to ensure 
that he is well cared for. The State recognizes that he gets better care at a lower cost than he would ina 
nursing home, which is his only alternative. The only thing that has really changed is that he’s an adult, 
which seems an odd metric to decide whether parents are eligible to be paid to provide this care.
A few years ago, I sponsored a similar bill that unanimously passed this committee but then died of 
covid. Then a small appropriation was set aside for a pilot program to address this need. But DHHS 
chose to ignore the Legislature ’s directive, and they have opposed this idea at every turn. I would have 
some patience for this if their arguments were cogent. I will unpack that if it pleases the Committee. 
Today, we can solve two problems - a lack of workers, and overloaded families living with ﬁnancial 
min. In certain situations, paying the parent of a minor to provide for the chi1d’s “extraordinary needs” 
is the best solution for everyone involved. Keeping parents on welfare to ensure that they are eligible 
for services is a poor approach to meeting the needs of disabled children, particularly given that a child 
in need of this program would almost certainly be on or eligible for a Katie Beckett waiver. 
Parents who are trying to meet their families ’ basic needs and provide care for their disabled children ’s 
“extraordinary needs” need a common~sense solution. I invite the Committee and the Department to 
create guidelines that will ensure the needs of the children and taxpayers are well-guarded. We can 
either hand these families welfare or we can pay them to do the job that we would routinely pay any 
other eligible person to do.
