 
 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Senator  Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 498, An Act to Prohibit the Use of the Electronic Benefits Transfer System Outside of 
Maine, Massachusetts,  or New Hampshire to Obtain Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
Program Benefits  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Joint Standing Committee  on 
Health and Human Services : 
 
Thank you for t he opportunity to provide input  on LD 498, An Act to Prohibit the Use of the 
Electronic Benefits Transfer System Outside of Maine, Massachusetts or New Hampshire to 
Obtain Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program Benefits .  
 
For background, cash payments , as well as Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) 
benefits to meet food needs, are issued onto Maine ’s Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) cards . 
Cash benefits are issued onto these cards for a number of programs administered by the  Office 
for Family Independence  (OFI) under federal and state authority . The Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families (TANF) and Parents as Scholars (PaS) programs provide temporary cash 
assistance to Maine families as they work toward their education goals  and self -support . The 
Additional Support for People in Retraining and Employment (ASPIRE) program provides 
TANF families with support  payments on items needed for education and work activities such as 
gas, car repairs, child care, and education or work to ols. The Higher Opportunity for Pathways to 
Employment (HOPE) program provides similar cash support payments to help Maine families 
reach their education goals. Lastly, State Supplement payments, also issued by OFI  are provided 
to recipients who are eligib le for Supplemental Security Income (SSI).    
 
While the intent  of the  initiative to promote program integrity is understandable , OFI is in 
opposition to the proposal because it does not align  with federal regulations.  
 
Federal law 42 U.S.C. 602 (a)(1)(A)(vii) , require s States  to ensure that recipients  have  adequate 
access to their cash assistance.  Failing to meet such a requirement would likely  result in the 
Administration of Children and Families (ACF) rejecting Maine’s required  TANF State Plan  and 
would jeopardize Maine’s eligibility for TANF block grant funds  of $76 million annually  
 
Further , TANF permits temporary absence from the state for a limited amount of time for 
eligible Maine families.  Examples include a temporary absence to seek medical treatment or to 
 
2 
 provide care to an ailing family member.  This provision is specified in our TAN F State Plan as 
permitted by Section 408(a)(10)(A) of the Social Security Act and approved by ACF.  The 
ability for eligible families to access their cash assistance during their allowable absence is 
critical to meeting their basic needs.  
 
Additionally , as most retailers have processing centers outside of New England, a geographical 
restriction would eliminate a families’ ability to utilize curbside services in Maine. Curbside 
services have been a timesaver for busy families and assist in reducing the sprea d of 
communicable diseases , as well as increasing access to basic needs for those with disabilities .   
 
Lastly, in the month of January 2023, less than 2% of all cash EBT transactions occurred outside 
of Maine, New Hampshire , and Massachusetts apart from  curbside services provided by retailers. 
The OFI Fraud Investigation and Recovery Unit (FIRU) utilizes several approaches to monitor 
for potential EBT fraud, and instances of inappropriate use are addressed accordingly by that 
team of experts.  
 
It is for t hese reasons that the Office for Family Independence opposes the passage of this bill.   
 
Since rely,  
 
Anthony Pelott e 
Director  
Office for Family Independence  
 

