 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 6 32-9438 
www. maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy  Kilrain del Rio  
Director of Advocacy and P rograms  
kathy @mejp.org  
 
 
Testimony in  Opposition to LD 498, An Act to Prohibit the Use of the Electronic Benefits 
Transfer System Outside of Maine, Massachusetts or New Hampshire to Obtain 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program Benefits  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Good  morning, Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and member s of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio , I use she/her 
pronouns, and I  am the Advocacy and Programs Director  at Maine Equal Justice , a nonprofit 
legal aid provider working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in 
Maine.  We are testifying in opposition to LD 498. 
 
This is not the first time  legislation has come before this committee seeking  to limit EBT usage 
in other states. In 2014 (LD 1820) and in 2017 (LD 866) bills were considered and rejected by 
the HHS Committee and the Legislature  for reasons that are still relevant today.  
 
This proposal invites constitutional challenge as it is de signed to deter constitutionally protected 
interstate travel and would do so by preventing or forbidding transactions occurring outside of 
Maine, which would be an improper state regulation of interstate commerce. The Constitution 
also protects the right t o travel in its most basic sense —the right to enter and leave another 
state without being subject to state -imposed burdens. State restrictions or prohibitions on out -of-
state access to or spending of cash assistance are inconsistent with that right.  
 
Maine Equal Justice has w orked directly with TANF families for many years,  and they often talk 
with us about their expe riences . They have shared  many reasons that a family may need to 
travel outside of the states included in this leg islation. Those reasons  include needing  to care for 
a fam ily member, visiting family  to maintain fami lial connections , attending a funeral, 
accompanying a child on a school trip, and to escape  domestic violence .  
 
Moriah Geer, one of our policy advocates who spent several years working directly with TANF 
families  as part of our legal services team , shared a story with  me about a family with four 
children who drives to South Carolin a every year so the children can sta y with their 
grandparent s when the ir mom d oesn ’t have childcare so she c an continue to work . Without 
access to the family ’s TANF funds , they couldn’t make this journey  – and mom would have to 
leave her job .  
 
Other parents have shared that they have a court -ordered responsibility to cover the cost of 
bringing  their children to visit a non -custodial parent at various times throughout the year even 
though  that non-custod ial parent lives in another state . They still need access to their TANF 
funds even though they are traveling outside of the states that are included in th is bill. Parents  
navigating these types of situations d o not need another barrier to meet their famil ies’ needs.  
 
In addition to the cos ts that could be associated with a legal challenge due to constitutional 
concerns, this bill would require changes to the EBT system that would have costs as well. 
Those costs wouldn’t result in any savin gs for the State – people would still be getting the TANF 
benefit for which they are eligible. And it would be complicated to create a system that would 
align with this bil l. In addition to the costs for the technology changes, it would add unnecessary 
challenges for families who need to travel to states other than Massachusetts and New 
Hampshire – and who have a right to do so .  
 
Considering all of these factors , we ask that you follow the lead of previous Maine Legislatures  
and vote Ought Not to Pass  on LD 498 . Thank you for your time. I’m happy to answer any 
questions you may have . 
