May 15. 2023 
 
Representative Jeffrey Adams and Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
 
I am writing in support of the bill LD 930 “An Act to Only Allow Students of Female Gender to Participate 
in Women’s and Girls’ Scholastic Sports.”  
Title IX was in enacted in 1972 and in my high school sophomore year girls were finally afforded the 
opportunity to play varsity level sports.  This was huge and exciting as sports were very important to me 
and my wellbeing.  I was a traditional “tomboy,” a word that you no longer hear anymore as it is pushed 
to the sidelines by the liberal trans and gay community.  It is not OK to be a tomboy, especially if you are 
straight. I fear the bullying straight tomboy girls face.    
Sports taught me not only how to compete, but also how to win and lose graciously.  It taught me that if 
I worked hard, practiced, showed up to practice and games, I could not only play and compete, but be a 
part of something bigger than me. From my many years of competing, competitive sports taught me the 
value of teamwork, hard work, and laid the groundwork for my successful entrepreneur career.   
I was never the best athlete on any of the varsity teams for which I competed, which included field 
hockey, basketball, softball (high school), lacrosse (college), competitive sailing, platform tennis (often 
referred to as paddle tennis) and swimming over my high school and college career.  There were plenty 
of girls and women who were just more gifted than I was.  However, I was usually captain. Had funding 
for my college admission been tied to my athletic endeavors, and I had to compete against a 
transwoman to even make the team, I’m not sure I would have made the cut.  As it turned out, my 
athletic achievements did have much to do with my entrance into a top-rated college.   
The Democrats and the left have for years screamed about “fairness.” They want the “rich” to “pay their 
fair share” for example.  There is nothing fair in scholastic sports for girls or women of any age to have 
to compete against boys or men who decide they want to be women.  Nothing.  Girls/women, no matter 
how good they are, are not as strong, as fast, nor can they jump as high as a boy/man can.  And no 
amount of estrogen will change this.  Just ask Riley Gaines who lost the National Collegiate Swimming 
Championship to a recent transwoman or Payton McNabb, the high school volleyball player who was 
seriously injured by a transwoman who slammed the ball into her face.  This is not right; this is not fair.   
By allowing boys or men to compete as girls/women in girls and women sports sets women sports back 
50 years.  All of the gains that women have made in sports will be wiped out by allowing non-female 
gender athletes to compete against them.  It is also an assault on biological females’ civil liberties.  If a 
male decides to switch his gender, that is his choice.  But that choice should not affect the lives of 
others.  And if he is allowed to compete during or after his transition, he is affecting the lives and liberty 
of girls and women who are equipped only with a female body and hormones, not having the added 
bonus of testosterone and a stronger physiological frame.  The female athletes didn’t make this choice, 
nor should they be forced to “live with it.” This is not right; this is not fair.  
This is why, as a gay woman, I am supporting LD 930. Girls and woman should not have their hard work 
reduced to nothing because a former male can step into their game and compete.  I don’t want to see 
our games changed, our superior athletes lose to an unfair advantage, or any woman get hurt due to 
allowing, essentially men, to play in female designated sports.  I would also encourage language to be 
included in the final bill that prohibits schools and organizations from changing the designation of 
traditional female sports to ones that anyone can play.  If there are so many boys/men who are 
transitioning now, perhaps we should just set up a sports league for them.  But I would suggest 
addressing the cultural issues that may be encouraging this unfortunate change first.  
Thank you for considering my testimony.  
Sincerely,  
Carolyn Brodsky 
12 Crescent Avenue 
Windham, ME 04062 
