 
 
May 1 3, 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 930: “An Act to Allow Only Students of Female  Gender to Participate in Women ’s and G irls’ Scholastic 
Sports ” – OUGHT NOT TO PASS   
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments in strong support of LD 930. My name is Chris McLaughlin, and 
I am a licensed clinical social worker with over 22 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children and 
families across a variety o f treatment settings here in Maine. For all of those years, I have worked directly in some capacity 
with transgender and gender diverse youth and their parents and families. For two decades, I have provided training to 
schools, community organizations, and  healthcare facilities around the unique needs of transgender and gender diverse 
clients. I am also honored to be the Executive Director of the Maine Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers 
(NASW -ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to r epresent the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor 
to meet the behavioral health needs of Maine people across all settings and ages, from Fort Kent to York and all places in 
between. On behalf of our over 1,000 members here in Maine, I’m hon ored to share thoughts on this important proposed 
legislation.  
  
We are in firm opposition to LD 930. The debate around whether transgender girls (individuals who were assigned male at 
birth but identify as female ) should be allowed to compete in female sports is complex and involves a ra nge of ethical, 
medical, and legal considerations.  We applau d the very recent efforts from the Biden -Harris Administration for propos ing 
new draft regulations for the Title I X Athletics Rule , which would have no  restrictions o n trans kids playing with their 
friends from ages K -8, and that overall bans on trans youth sports participation  are unlawful at all ages.  While schools 
could po tentially limit trans youth participation in h igh school sports, there would be numerous legal obstacles to do ing so. 
Under these proposed re gulations, states could not completely ban young peo ple from sports  based on their trans  identity.   
 
NASW -ME advocate s for the inclusion of transgender girls in female sports  for several  reason s: 
 
1. Gender Identity Recognition : Accepting transgender girls on female sports teams affirms th eir gender identity, which 
can be vital for their mental and emotional well -being. Denying them this opportunity is qui te simply discriminatory and 
harmful.  
 
2. Equality and Non discrimination : In many jurisdictions, it is considered discriminatory to  exclude people from activities 
based on their gender identity. This principle of equality and non -discrimination applies to sports as well.  
 
3. Inclusion and Participation : Sports should be inclusive and allow for the participation of all people. Advocates argue that 
the benefits of participation in sports, such as teamwork, discipline, and the enjoyment of physical activity, should be 
available to all youth, including transgender girls.  
 
4. Reducing Harm and Promoting Mental Health : Transgend er youth face significant stigma, discrimination, and exclusion, 
which can lead to behavi oral health problems. Inclusion in sports can reduce these harms and promote better mental health.  
 
5. Legal Rights : In many countries, transgender people have t he legal right to live in accordance with their gender identity, 
which includes participation in gender -separated activities, such as sports.  
 
 
 
 
 
Of course, we understand that there are challenges and concerns to consider as well, such as ensuring fair competition. Some 
will argue before you today that transgender girls may have physical advantages over cisgender women, depending on the 
timing and extent of any hormone treatments.  To this point , various sports organizations like the International Olympic 
Committee have guidelines in place to crea te a more level playing field, such as requiring transgender women to  maintain a 
certain testosterone level.  However,  let us be very clear , the scientific research demonstrates that trans girl s do not show any 
“advantage ” over cisgender girls and wom en. For young people , who are playing sports for fun , for community, and to learn 
important life lessons, it’s clear that there is no scientific reason to scrutinize  their bod ies or ex clude them. They simpl y 
deserve equal  opportunities  to play. Policies that fully include trans girls on sports t eams with other girls harm no one. Sports 
bans lim iting or denying t heir participation in sports do nothing to address the real problems that currently  exist in girls’ and 
women ’s sports , such as fewer oppor tunities to  play, second -class resources, and the long-standing h istory of sexual abuse of 
student ath letes by doctors and coach es. I would ask the spon sor and co -sponsors of LD 930 what steps they have t aken to 
offer legis lative solutions  to address these well -known and real issue s plaguing girls ’ sports across Maine and the country?   
Rathe r than continue th ese basel ess attacks on some of the most vulnerable citizens of our state , trans youth, could  we instead 
come together and work to combat the real problems at hand  instead of continuing to be distracted by bills such as LD 930 
that do nothing to address the barriers , disparities , and inequities that exist in girls ’ and women ’s sports ? 
 
NASW -ME is frankly concerned for the wellbeing of our state’s young people in light of the growing number of anti -
LGBTQ+ and misguided "parental rights" bills that have come forth this session. Trust me when I say that our state’s young 
people are watching . New data from The Trevor Project (2023) from a study of more than 28,000 LGBTQ young people (aged 
13–24) across the United States found that nearly 1 in 3 young people said that their mental health was poor most of the time 
or always due to the anti -LGBTQ+ policies and legislation that are currently sweeping the country. At t he time I am writing 
this testimony, the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) has identified  more than 520 anti -equality bills related to the lives of 
LGBTQ+ people that have been introduced across the United States. More than 50 of these hateful and harmful bills have 
already been enacted this year. We must work together to keep Maine above this fray and elevate our state to be a role model 
for our country by showing how we care for and provide for ALL of our children. The American people are also asking for 
better. In recent HRC polling, 64% of all likely voters think there is "too much legislation" aimed at "limiting the rights of 
transgender and gay people in America," including 72% of Democrats, 65% of Independents, and 55% of Republicans.  
  
I urge this committee to take action to protect the lives of transgender and non -binary youth  by vo ting “Ought Not to Pass ” on 
LD 930. I want to thank you all for your work on this issue. Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW ME for any support 
we can offer, including any social work representation and participati on in any future work sessions for LD 930. 
 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  
 
 
References:  
 
https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey -2023/  
 
https://transequality.org/blog/let -us-play-make -your-voice -heard -for-trans -intersex -youth   
 
https://www.cces.ca/transgender -women -athletes -and-elite-sport -scientific -review   

