 Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition to  
LD 930: An Act to Allow Only Students of Female Gender to Par ticipate in Women's and Girls' 
Scholastic Sports  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 May 15, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Judiciary,    My name is John Kosinski (he/him), and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, including teachers and other professionals in nearly e very public school in the state and faculty 
and other professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.   I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in opposition  to LD 930:  An Act to Allow Only Students 
of Female Gender to Par ticipate in Women's and Girls' Scholastic Sports. 
 Again , we must point out our disappointment that bills such as this one are taking the time of legislators 
when many other pressing issues are facing students and our public schools.  We have major workforc e 
shortages in our schools, especially in teacher and ed tech positions.  Salaries and wages in public education have not kept pace with other private sector jobs.  We have major concerns about the overall mental health challenges of students, evidence by the student mental health survey.  Educators report a sharp uptick in dangerous, challenging or otherwise disruptive behavior of students in schools.  The pensions of teachers and ed techs are in dire straits due to the cuts made in 2011 by the previous Governor and the impact of inflation.  Gun violence.  There are many other issues that need the attention 
of our legislators.  Specifics of our school sports programs are not one of those issues we are hearing from educators or students about.    
Of course, t his is no reflection of the valuable role athletic programs have for students.  Many educators 
can remember a student whose life and academic success were made better by becoming a student 
athlete. Organized sports teach valuable lessons that young people carry with them into their future, whether they keep playing or not. Schools offer sports for many reasons and Title IX guarantees that athletes have a fair opportunity to play on teams no matter their gender, biological makeup, or sexual orientation.  
As a society, we should not pick and choose which student counts, who can play, and who can be 
themselves -and this includes who can be on a sports team.  Opportunities and joy that are offered to 
students at school, through things like sports should be availa ble to all students, and MEA believes 
elected officials should take their focus off these topics and instead focus on things like increasing 
teacher pay, hiring enough counselors, and making school safety a top priority.  
 
 
 As a nation, we decided long ago t hat discrimination is wrong and that everyone should have the same 
opportunities to succeed in life —and that includes transgender youth. Every student deserves educators 
and coaches who can help them prepare for their future and better understand their uni que place on a 
team, in the school community and in the world. We would hope that our elected officials would support 
the very mission of our public schools to ensure our students’ dreams are not put into boxes based on 
things like gender or race.  
Lastly, the Maine Principals Association has a policy that has been widely adopted and used to address 
any issues about student participation in athletics.  This bill is a solution in search of a problem.  There is no problem.  Our current practices as art iculated by the Maine Principals Association have not been 
subject to controversy and appear by all accounts to be working just fine.   
 For these reasons, we ask the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 930.    Thank you for your attention and your ser vice to the students and people of Maine. 
  
