 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Alyssa Goodwin, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 www.maineaap.org
  
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO:  LD 930: An Act to Allow Only Students of Female Gender to 
Participate in Women's and Girls' Scholastic Sports   
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Committee on Judiciary,  my 
name is Michele Labotz, MD and I am a residen t of Yarmouth and a memb er of the Board of Directors for 
the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.   
 
Sport participation  provide s unique benefits for the development of children and adolescents , and our 
hard-earned taxpayer dollars fund sport -related programs in public school districts throughout Maine .  As 
we consider LD 9 30, it is important to understand the goals for this  investment that we are all making in 
our public -school athletic programming.  The se goals are delineated in mission statements from athletic 
departments throughout the state, and they reveal a common thread:  
 
Bangor High School:  “ The ultimate goal of the athletic program is to provide experiences that contribute to the 
development of learning skills and emotional patterns that enable the student to maximize the use of his/her 
education in our modern society”  https://bangorhigh.bangorschools.net/athletics/  
 
Rangeley Lakes High School:  “The athletic department of Rangeley Lakes Regional School supports the overall 
academic mission of the school and serves as an extension of the classroom experience.”  RSU #78 Interscholastic 
Handbook  
 
School -based sports in Maine are essentially extensions of the classroom, and promote  physical, mental 
and social development.  All students deserve equal access to these educational opportunities, but today’s proposed legislation creates the potential for an extra burden on any female athlete to “prove” 
their identity before they are allowed to participate in sport.  Transgender and cisgender females alike 
may be subject to invasive inquiries that have n o bearing on their gender identity.  There are many 
potential reasons why an individual’s anatomy might not match their lived experience, and efforts to qualify female athletes based upon invasive examinations and testing is contrary to the stated goals of  
school -based sport.   
 
There is concern that participation of transgender females on girls’ athletic teams creates an intrinsic 
disadvantage for cisgender participants.  When considering this issue, it is important to remember that 
transgender females are  NOT equivalent to biologic males.  In adults, e ven before treatment, 
transgender females have less strength and muscle than cisgender males.  Studies have not been performed looking at this issue in children and adolescents, but the equivalence that is often drawn 
between the athletic performance of transgender females and cisgender males is false.   
 
Athletic achievement is dependent upon many factors.  These include  physical qualities, such as size 
and strength , that are largely dependent upon genetic ma keup, and are highly variable within each 
gender. However, in children and adolescents, factors such as training history; effort; coaching quality; 
nutrition; and motivation are often greater determinants of athletic performance.  These factors vary 
widely  regardless of gender identity and  are often based upon social advantage.  Unfortunately, f or 
many transgender youth , there are significant difficulties and adverse experiences that create  social 
disadvantage, with direct negative impacts on their willing ness and ability to participate in sport. T hese 
are often the students who may benefit the most from athletic engagement.   
 
Equality in school -based sport is not defined by an athlete’s right to excel in athletics, but rather by the 
right to participate, and to be given the opportunity to reap the benefit of sport. Best practice for student -
athlete development is when success is based upon the growth of athletic skill of a team or individual, rather than attempts to eliminate rightful participants due to concern about possible loss of performance 
advantage.  LD 930 is  largely based upon fear and conjecture.  However, the long -standing fears  of 
some  regarding the ability of transgender females to dominate girls’ sports are unfounded, and this has 
not been s hown at any level of athletic participation.  Defeat of today’s legislation will help ensure an 
equal opportunity  for all girls  to participate in the full spectrum of educational opportunities in Maine’s 
schools, both in the clas sroom and on the playing fi eld.  
 
Thank you,   Michele LaBotz  MD FAAP CAQSM  
