70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in extremely strong support of LD 930 - An Act to Allow Only Students of Female 
Gender to Participate in Women's and Girls' Scholastic Sports sponsored by Representative Adamas. 
This bill prohibits any student from joining or participating in an interscholastic or intramural athletic 
team or sports activity sponsored by an elementary or secondary school or postsecondary institution 
that is designated for "females," "women" or "girls" except for students of the female gender.  
 
There is both Biblical and scientific support for the fact that there are two biological sexes--male and 
female. The biological differences can be significant when it comes to height, weight, and even bone and 
muscle size and strength. Sports that depend on those physical characteristics to succeed have been 
traditionally divided along gender lines, ensuring athletic achievements of women can be fully 
realized. We could look at and perhaps you have seen video when biological men are allowed to 
participate in women’s sports. Physical injuries can occur (boxing) and women’s records are not only 
broken but destroyed such as a recent weightlifting competition where a biological male broke the 
women’s record by 100 pounds.  
So where are the feminists? I mean the real feminists. Beth Stelzer, founder of Save Women’s Sports, 
testified on a similar Maine bill a few years ago. I remember Beth saying she was “a real liberal” and 
could not believe she only could get help from conservatives in defending women (I smiled and chose 
not to be insulted). Who is defending women?  Kirk Cameron, the actor, says the current goal is to kill 
God, target our children and I might add eliminate women. My side has been charged with fighting 
slavery, fighting Jim Crow laws and the KKK; fighting FOR women’s right to vote and fighting for equal 
rights. More recently for family and parental rights. Now we stand ready to defend women and 
women’s rights. None of those important fights was quick, so as bills like this that seek to undermine the 
foundation of this country…CCL Maine will stand against it and FOR women. 
 
A recent article suggested 25 US Governors were asking the administration in Washington DC to protect 
women as the White House administration’s policies are anti-women. Maine did not sign on. Canceling 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 women is a controversial issue where it really ought not be. This bill and supporters are wrong, history 
will sort this out as it always does. Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
NOTE: I intended to testify in person but need to attend a 2 pm meeting. I would have shared with you 
the testimony from the last session by Beth Stelzer which includes a great tool comparing men and 
women. See it here: https://legislature.maine.gov/LawMakerWeb/summary.asp?ID=280079378  
Mike 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
