Paula Sutton
Warren
LD 930
Please consider my testimony in favor of LD 930, An Act to Allow Only Students of 
Female Gender to Participate in Women's and Girls' Scholastic Sports
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee ,
My name is Paula Sutton and I was born and raised in Maine and am a former 
member of the Maine legislature. 
Playing sports was a key factor in my development and helped shape the person I am 
today.
As a young child, I was diagnosed with a rare condition and spent years in a full leg 
brace. And at night, I was strapped to a bed with weights pulling my hips into 
alignment. With the help of God and a revolutionary physician, I recovered.
Some doctors told my parents I would never walk normally or play sports, but I was 
determined to do the best I could. I was naturally competitive. As many adolescents 
do, I found being a teenage girl difficult with hormones, braces on my teeth, acne, and
all the accompanying insecurities. While I was an average student scholastically, I, 
surprisingly, did very well in sports. 
It felt good to excel in something.
Back then, the presidential physical fitness tests would be given in all the schools. 
Every year I eagerly awaited the tests. I was proud to be the best girl jumper, and I 
was able to do more pull ups than most of the other girls. It helped me build 
confidence and self-esteem. 
Throughout my school years, I knew I needed to get good grades to play sports so that
spurred me to study more.  We all know good habits begin young and having an 
active lifestyle in school set me up to be the active person I am today. 
While I enjoyed a variety of competitive girls’ sports, gymnastics and track and field 
were my favorites. I worked hard and made sacrifices to improve my skills. I skipped 
parties so I would be ready for competition. There is no doubt that sports helped me 
develop in many ways. 
I truly believe that allowing biological males to compete against biological females 
will discourage many girls from competing at all. Especially, girls like me who 
needed to work hard to overcome challenges. Why bother to compete if there is no 
chance to win?
Back then boys would never dream of competing in girls’ sports. Men and women, 
males and females, boys and girls, are different. We can ignore the science, but we all
know males have denser bones, more muscle mass, greater lung capacity, and greater 
upper body strength. Simply put, it is not fair for males to compete in female sports. 
Women deserve to be champions in their own sports. 
I also grew up with 2 brothers and we were close in age.  We were super active and 
we ran, swam, chopped wood, swung from trees, dug ditches, wrestled and more.  I 
know how much different we were, I rarely beat either of my brothers in anything 
physical.  Boys are built differently and my brothers were just stronger.  I saw it every
day of my life. 
Please support this bill and give girls the opportunities to develop, thrive, and achieve 
true victories while competing against their physical counterparts - other girls.
Paula G. Sutton
Warren, ME
