 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
 L.D. 930 
 
AN ACT TO ALLOW ONLY STUDENTS OF FEMALE GENDER TO PARTICIPATE  
IN WOMEN'S AND GIRLS' SCHOLASTIC SPORTS  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and members of the Judiciary  Committee. I am Victoria Wallack , 
directo r of communications and governm ent relations  for Maine School Management Association, testifying 
on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boa rds As sociation and Maine School 
Superintendents Association , in opposition to L.D. 930. 
 
Our as sociations oppose both bills because they discriminate against our students who identify as a diff erent 
gender than what they were at birth. Public schools are obligated to make all students feel safe and welcome 
when they are in our care, and we believe t hat extends to allowing those that identify as a different sex be 
allowed to participate in school  athletics based on that identity.  
 
That decision would be made based on practice adopted by the Maine Principals’ Association to advise 
schools to follow Cha pter 337, SubChapter 5 -B of the Maine Human Right s Act in allowing transgender 
participation in hi gh school athletics consistent with their gender identity.  
 
Our colleagues from MPA can better answer questions around this practice. They have been involved in this 
work with school and student athletes since 2013 and have tracked the requests by trans gender students via 
their earlier Gender Equity and Inclusion policy. From our vantage point, we can say that it had been 
respectful and it worked. Now, their mo vement to advise schools to follow the Maine Human Rights Act 
provisions is yet  another forwa rd step to support all students respectfully in their wishes to play interscholastic 
athletics.  
 
Both the MSBA and MSSA have adopted resolutions regarding equity i n education that say all students, 
regardless of their race, color, sex, sexual orientation , gender identity, religion, ancestry, national origin or 
disabilities deserve equitable opportunities in Maine schools.  
 
We believe that equity includes participati on in school athletics and compels us to oppose L .D. 930. We ask 
you to do the same.  
 
