Testimony in Support of LD 1307 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 10, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 1307
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Require
Constitutional Officers to Be Elected by Statewide Election 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government :
My name is Nathan Gould; I am a lifelong resident of Winterport. I am writing 
this testimony in support of LD 1307, “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Require Constitutional Officers to Be Elected by Statewide 
Election.” I also wish to show my support for LD 696 and LD 1117.
Over the course of our Legislature’s history, these and similar proposals have 
been brought before Committees and debated on the floors of both chambers. I find it 
striking how bipartisan the issue is, whether it was brought up a hundred years ago or 
ten.
In living memory, during the 126th Legislature, the Hon. Andre Cushing sponsored
LD 1279 and sought to make our constitutional officers accountable to the citizens. It 
was noted that Maine was an outlier in the way it appointed these officers. There was a
desire to give the People of Maine a say and to quell the notion that these are positions
merely filled by career bureaucrats with connections to the Legislature.
The 74th Legislature has passed into history, yet the words of Representative 
Davies of Yarmouth and other legislators in support of the election of constitutional 
officers by popular ballot remain. They again point out the glaring difference in our 
Testimony in Support of LD 1307 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
State not trusting the people to elect the Attorney General, the Treasurer, and the 
Secretary of State compared to other states.
That was in 1909, and Representative Hersey of Houlton said when that similar 
resolution came before the Judiciary Committee of his day and a public hearing was 
had, “not a petition was presented in favor of it, not a single letter, not a single person 
in all this state appeared in behalf of that resolve before the committee”. I hope to 
here, at the very least, provide a single letter in favor of the resolve.
This is a matter in which Maine does not live up to its motto of Dirigo, but lags 
behind other states. Both  parties must take the lead and trust citizens with this power, 
thus making the Secretary of State, the Treasurer, the Attorney General, and the State 
Auditor responsible to the people. Interim appointments to the United States Senate 
must also more accurately reflect what the plurality of voters decided in the prior 
election.
I do not believe in compromise just for the sake of bipartisanship, forsaking 
principle for expediency. Yet here the legislature is presented with a unique 
opportunity. There are precious few occasions for both parties to agree; I believe this is 
one, and it would be a great pleasure to see, if only once in my life, an example of both 
parties cooperating for the benefit of the People of Maine rather than for the parties 
and politicians.
I believe it is time to consider this bipartisan resolution, presented in years past 
by the gentleman from Yarmouth and presented today by the gentleman from Paris, 
along with the act presented by the gentleman from Poland. I ask the Committee to 
vote Ought to Pass, and I thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
