M, 
-, 
ray ;i J»; it 
i ‘=1 12'} E 
» e3» ' 
[%tin’i§<i@‘ 
Stacy Brenner ' 
THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District3() A 
131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Stacy Brenner introducing LD 1749, “An Act to Establish the Physical 
Therapy Licensure Compact” p. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
_ _ 
_ May 4, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Colleagues on the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Stacy Brenner. I represent Senate 
District 30, which includes all of Gorham and most of Scarborough. I am pleased to introduce LD 
1749, “An Act to Establish the Physical Therapy Licensure Compact. ” _ _’ 
This legislation would allow Maine to join the Physical Therapy Compact, which is an interstate 
agreement between member states to allow greater access to physical therapy services. Currently, 
physical therapists cannot practice across state lines..This compact allows for interstate mobility for 
physical therapy "providers through a state-developed collaborative structure that protects the public 
and expands consumer access to physical therapy services.I 
Passing this legislation would also improve accessibility of physical therapy to Mainers statewide, 
especially for our rural communities. As of now, physical therapists are relegated to practicing in 
Maine only. Even if they practice close to New Hampshire, they cannot treat patients a short distance 
away because of a state border. Joining the PT compact would expand access to these essential 
services for patients. .. 
Physical therapy providers in the states thatjoin the PT Compact won’thave to obtain multiple state 
licenses. Instead, they obtain a “compact privilege ” to work across state lines with another compact 
state, which includes services provided both in person and via telehealth. Joining the ‘Interstate 
compact also wouldn’t affect the scope of practice in Maine. Licensees with compact privileges must 
abide by the practice rules of the state in which they are" practicing. States do not cede their authority- 
to discipline their own. licensees. Additionally, joining this compact does not affect MaineCare orA 
commercialinsurance rates and reimbursements.' 
Twenty-nine states are already issuing PT Compact privileges, including NH. All other New England 
states have introduced PT Compact legislation. There are only 5 states that have not introduced 
legislation at all. Let’sjoin the interstate compact initiative with other states in the nation. We do not 
want to be left behind. 
I’d also like to note that this bill is a companion bill to LD 1453. The Office of Professional and 
Occupational Regulation (OPOR) will recommend a delayed effective date for LD 1749 to allow 
OPOR time to establish the requirements stipulated in LD 1453. 
Thank you for your consideration of this bill. I am happy to answer any questions.
A 
, 1
. _C1t _air, Er1vii‘Onrne2if and 1\_lcm12 ‘(z1 Resources Committee I _/eferans mid Legal /4_'[fa' irs Comrriitfeep 
Stare House: (207) 287-1515 * C211 (207) 233-1178 * Frm (207) 287-1585 * T0/1 Free: _ 1-801)-423-.6900 * TTY: 711 
-- 
.- 
. Stacy.Brerme/'@legisfalure,mufnagov * 1egis1m‘m*e.maine.g0v/senate
