295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1211 
“An Act to Require the Department of Health and Human Services to  
Fund Out-of-state Residential Treatment for Substance Use Disorder  
When In-state Treatment Is Unavailable” 
Sponsored by Representative Babin 
April 3, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community 
based mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to 
over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the 
implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 1211, "An Act 
to Require the Department of Health and Human Services to Fund Out-of-state 
Residential Treatment for Substance Use Disorder When In-state Treatment Is 
Unavailable.” This proposal would require the Department of Health and Human 
Services to provide reimbursement under the MaineCare program for out-of-state 
residential treatment for substance use disorder when residential treatment is 
unavailable in the State. The Alliance is opposed to this proposal for a myriad of 
reasons.  
 
First, this proposal does not fix the problem. We need to ensure the resources inside 
our state for Maine people. Substance use disorder should not be treated differently 
than any other disease. Imagine a bill that sent Mainers suffering from cancer to out 
of state facilities? We can all easily recognize the importance of cancer treatment 
where someone lives, works, and is cared for by their family. Treatment for 
substance use disorder should be viewed the same. Research shows that treatment is 
most effective when conducted close to one’s home community. 
 
Second, we have already learned this lesson. Let’s not repeat what we have created 
with children’s behavioral health in our state. That problem – that many of you on 
this committee have spent years trying to remedy – was created in a similar fashion. 
A proposal that recognized that there wasn’t enough treatment available in state 
directed funds out of state. Now we are trying to figure out how to bring those 
children home. And we still do not have not invested enough resources here to do so.  
 
Third, sending Mainers out of state for treatment is more expensive than treating 
them in state. It is fiscally irresponsible. We could easily invest and expand our 
services here in Maine if we cut out the red tape, and approved the investment. 
 
For all these reasons, the Alliance is opposed to this proposal. I urge you to vote 
ought not to pass on LD 1211. I am happy to answer any questions you may have for 
me.   ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

