Testimony of Barbara J Bramble  
Monday, May 15, 2023 
 
  
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry regarding LD 
1874 – An Act to Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by 
Improving Labor Standards 
 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Barbara Bramble. I am a resident of 
the State of Maine and an individual member of the Forest Stewardship Council. I am 
also a Vice President of the National Wildlife Federation, and a past chair of the Forest 
Stewardship Council. But I am testifying today as an individual and a supporter of LD 
1874 – An Act to Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by 
Improving Labor Standards. 
 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify in favor of  LD 1874 – An Act to 
Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by Improving Labor 
Standards. I support the intent of the legislation which is for the State of Maine to only 
participate in forest certification systems which help to improve labor standards and 
promote fair treatment of logging contractors and workers in the industry.  
 
I have been involved with the formation and implementation of the Forest Stewardship 
Council (FSC), both in the United States and internationally.   Over the years, I have 
variously served as an individual member, as a representative of National Wildlife 
Federation in the membership and on the board representing the Environmental 
Chamber of the membership.  
 
The FSC-US is a forest certification system with over 36 million acres of certified 
forestland in the US, 4.7 million in Maine, and approximately 534 million worldwide.  
As you may know FSC was organized in 1994, and the members are organized into three 
chambers, Economic, Social and Environmental.  Along with the other members, I have 
taken an active role, as the system provides, in proposing and approving amendments to 
improve the FSC standards, and to set rules for the third-party auditing and verification 
of performance of the standard requirements. These membership rights ensure that the 
system includes social and environmental safeguards, and that these are actually 
implemented. The Economic chamber members represent their own interests and rights 
to ensure that the standards are economically viable and that there is a value 
proposition for them, chiefly through the respected FSC logo and brand which signify 
sustainable forest management. 
 
 
FSC is promoted by many environmental organizations because it has strong 
protections for wildlife, including endangered species and biodiversity, water and soil 
quality, good practices in maintaining forest structure in logging operations, and many 
other features.  
 
But we recognize that the social safeguards are equally important to the FSC system and 
to sustainable management of forests and the many jobs which depend on them. The 
FSC standards include requirements to promote sustainable communities, such as 
consultation with those affected, and to give workers a fair deal – such as protections 
against child labor, paying fair wages, addressing gender discrimination and ensuring 
the right to freedom of association and to collectively bargain.  
The environmental organizations and individual members I have represented during my 
time on the board value FSC, because these social and labor requirements are a 
fundamental part of sustainable forest management.  
 
One of the most significant features of the FSC system is that the standards are 
performance based, not program based. Therefore, to receive and maintain certification   
FSC requires actual compliance, not just to have a policy; the performance is audited 
and checked for performance of the requirements. By contrast, the language of the 
Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) standard that relates to labor and workers’ rights 
only requires the certified operation to have ‘a written policy demonstrating 
commitment to comply with social laws.’ And while they do list a number of important 
social objectives (SFI FM Objective 11.2.1), auditing of this requirement would look at 
whether there is a written policy, not at its implementation.  As a resident of the State of 
Maine, I would prefer that my tax dollars not be spent to support any organization, such 
as SFI, that does not strongly protect labor and workers’ rights and the other very 
important social interests that affect so many people in Maine.   
  
Thank you for your interest in how the FSC protects labor rights and working conditions 
as well as environmental safeguards.  I would be happy to answer any questions, and 
thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. 
