 
 1441 Woodmont Lane NW #539, Atlanta, GA 30318   (612) 353-4511    US.FSC.ORG FOREST STEWARDSHIP COUNCIL UNITED STATES   The mark of responsible forestry © FSC 1996  FSC-SECR-0004   
    S.P. 758 In Senate An Act to Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by Improving Labor Standards  Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  Regarding LD 1874 – An Act to Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by Improving Labor Standards   Monday, May 15, 2023   Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Derik Frederiksen, and I am the President of the Forest Stewardship Council U.S. FSC-US is a three chambered forest certification system with 36 million acres of certified forestland in the US, 4.7 million in Maine, and 375 million worldwide.    Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify "neither for nor against” LD 1874 – An Act to Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by Improving Labor Standards. I am here today to provide information and background on the FSC standard and how it relates to Worker's rights and access to economic opportunity.    As background, forest certification systems were created in the early 1990s. Forest Stewardship Council certification is a globally recognized certification system for responsible forest management. FSC started 30 years ago in 1992 and has certified 375M acres worldwide and 36M acres in the US. The organization sets standards that promote environmentally appropriate, socially beneficial, and economically prosperous management of forests. FSC is a member lead and driven organization with three chambers that participate equally and fairly—social, environmental, and economic.  Anyone is allowed to join and participate and vote on actions and motions set forth by its membership.    FSC certification includes requirements for protecting workers' and labor rights and has established social and labor standards for workers involved in forestry operations, including logging and trucking.  For logging, FSC requires that workers are provided with safe and healthy working conditions, appropriate protective equipment, and adequate training to carry out their duties safely. In terms of trucking, FSC requires that truckers receive fair wages, benefits, and reasonable working hours. Truckers must also be provided with safe and healthy working conditions and appropriate protective equipment. FSC requires that trucking operations comply with local labor laws and respect the rights of workers to join unions and engage in collective bargaining.  FSC's social and labor standards aim to ensure that workers involved in forestry operations are treated fairly and have access to safe and healthy working conditions. These standards also 
 1441 Woodmont Lane NW #539, Atlanta, GA 30318   (612) 353-4511    US.FSC.ORG promote the rights of Indigenous peoples and local communities, which are often impacted by logging and trucking operations.  FSC is a strong advocate for rural resiliency and living wage jobs. Our rural areas and forests provide opportunities to support clean air and safe water, fish and wildlife habitat, agriculture resilience and production, and flood mitigation. Forests, and the workers that supply the forest industry, play key roles in helping support all of these benefits.    FSC certification also requires forest owners and managers to consult with workers and local communities about the management of the forest. This consultation process helps to ensure that workers' rights and local community interests are taken into account when making decisions about forest management.  Furthermore, FSC certification requires that forest owners and managers have policies and procedures in place to prevent discrimination and harassment in the workplace. This helps to create a work environment that is respectful and inclusive for all workers.  In summary, FSC certification protects workers and labor rights by ensuring that forest owners and managers comply with labor laws and standards, consult with workers and local communities, and have policies and procedures in place to prevent discrimination and harassment in the workplace. 
