 
 
      
  
 
 
 
Testimony b efore the Committee on  
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
Regarding LD 1874 – An Act to Support Maine Loggers' and Truckers' Right 
to Work in  Maine by Improving Labor Standards  
May 22, 2023  
  
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on 
Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry, my name is Nadine Block , and I am the 
Senior Vice President for Community and Government Relations at the Sustainable 
Forestry Initiative (SFI).  
 SFI is an independent, nonprofit organization that works collaboratively with our 
network – consisting of conservation groups, federal, state and county governments, 
Indigenous peoples, private landowners, loggers, manufacturers, universities and 
more – to a dvance sustainability through forest -focused collaboration. We leverage 
SFI-certified forests and products as powerful tools to help solve sustainability 
challenges such as climate action, conservation of biodiversity, provision of water, education of futu re generations, and sustainable economic development. We invite 
you to learn more at forests.org
. 
 
Our position is  "neither for nor against” LD 1874 – An Act to  Support Maine 
Loggers' and Truckers' Right to Work in Maine by Improving Labor 
Standards.  Please accept this letter providing information on the SFI  standard s and 
how SFI supports  worker's rights, legal compliance, community engagement,  and 
workforce development opportunit ies. Additional detail on specific requirements in 
the SFI standard is included in Appendix A and can also be found at 
https://forests.org /sfi-2022-standards/ .  
 1. SFI standards are developed through a transparent process with 
diverse participation  
 
The SFI standards revision process ensures credibility and transparency by allowing 
everyone to participate. The revision process follows international standards 
development guidelines and is based on principles of stakeholder engagement, 
balanced representation, consensus, continual improvement, and transparency.  
 The process to develop the 2022 SFI  standards included participation from a diverse 
group of individuals including the forest sector, conservation organizations, 
academia, researchers, brand owners, loggers, landowners, educators, local 
communities, Indigenous Peoples, and government agencies at every step of the 
process.  
 Task groups were utilized to review comments and develop language for the 
standards ; eight different loggers and logger representatives participated in SFI 
standard revision task groups . 
 
2. SFI standards require compliance with laws that protect  workers ’ 
rights.  
Page 2 of 6 
 
  
 
SFI standards require SFI -certified organizations to comply with all applicable social laws at the federal, 
provincial, state, and local levels. Examples of social laws include civil rights, equal employment opportunities, 
gender equality, diversity, inclusion, anti- discrimination and antiharassment measures, workers’ 
compensation, Indigenous Peoples’ rights, workers’ and communities’ right to know, prevailing wages, workers’ right to or ganize, and occupational health and safety. SFI -certified organizations must also respect 
the rights of workers and labor representatives in a manner that meets the spirit and intent of the International Labour Organization (ILO). 
See Appendix A, Objective  11, for more details.  
 
SFI is governed by a three -chamber Board of Directors with equal representation from the environmental, 
social, and economic sectors. Labor unions are  represented on the SFI Board by Jeff Bromley, Chair of the 
USW Wood Council, and on the SFI Resources Committee by Bob Walls, IAM Woodworkers Department 
Director and Vice President of Building and Wood Workers’ International (BWI) North America Region.  
 
3. SFI advances logger and contractor training and workforce development  
 
Organizations certified to the SFI standards  must ensure that they work with qualified professional loggers 
who are aware of sustainable forestry principles and best management practices, including streamside 
management and road construction, maintenance, and retirement.  
 SFI recognizes that loggers play a critical on -the-ground role in forest sustainability; as such, logger training 
and the use of qualified logging professionals are core requirements for SFI certification. More than 220,000 resource and harvesting professionals have been trained to ensure understanding of water quality, 
biodiversity, and other sustainable forest practice requirements since SFI standards were introduced in 1995.  
 
The SFI standards require appropriate training of personnel a nd contractors.  Training courses must include 
content to address U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations, wage and hour 
rules, and other provincial, state, and local employment laws. See Appendix A, Objective 13 for more 
detai ls. 
 SFI is also committed to workforce development. The pool of young people entering “green jobs” is not 
sufficient to meet demand for tomorrow’s workforce. Green jobs  include foresters, loggers, arborists, wildlife 
biologists, park rangers, green building designers and builders, energy auditors, farmers and ranchers, solar engineers, and so much more. Through our Project Learning Tree (PLT) program, SFI has helped to p lace 
more than 1,300 young adults into Green Jobs, with a total of over 7,000 work placements since 2018. SFI’s mentorship program connects young people directly to forest, conservation and parks sector professionals. By 
helping youth explore the diversity of careers in the forest, conservation, and sustainability sectors, we are 
helping to build the next generation of future forest leaders across North America.  
 4. SFI certification relies on independent third- party audits  
 A cornerstone of the SFI s tandards is third -party independent certification, which verifies that the 
requirements set out in the relevant SFI standard and supporting documents have been met. While SFI sets 
the standard, independent, third party -accredited certification bodies certi fy organizations to the SFI 
standards. Auditors from accredited certification bodies visit each organization to ensure operations in their forests, mills, plants, or other places of business conform to SFI’s principles, objectives, performance 
measures, an d indicators.  
 
After a successful audit against the SFI standards, public summaries are posted to the SFI website. These 
summaries include general descriptions of conformities, non -conformities, corrective action plans, 
opportunities for improvement, and exceptional practices.  
 
  
Page 3 of 6 
 
 5. State agencies benefit from participation in third -party forest certification programs  
 
Seventeen US states have public lands certified to the SFI Forest Management Standard, including the Maine 
Bureau of Parks and Lands. Other states include Arkansas, Florida, Indiana, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, 
Minnesota, Missouri, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin. 
 
State officials have pointed to the benefits of SFI certifica tion, including that it:  
• raises the profile of sustainable forestry in the state,  
• identifies potential improvements to on -the-ground -management,  
• provides an enhanced “social license” to operate,  
• offers new market opportunities for the state’s forest pro ducts industry,  
• increases collaboration within the agency and with key external partners,  
• provides credibility through independent audits,  
• allows the state to lead by example  
 
State l egislation should avoid restricting public agencies from choosing  forest certification and the specific  
forest certification standard that is appropriate for its management .  
 6. SFI supports community engagement through SFI Implementation Committees  
 
SFI responds to local needs through SFI Implementation Committees (SICs) at the state, and regional levels. 
These committees work with local associations, universities, government agencies, loggers, landowner 
groups, conservation groups, and many others. T hey play a vital role in promoting logger training, landowner 
outreach, youth and adult education, community engagement, the integrity of SFI’s work, and responsible 
forestry at local levels.  
 
Participation in SICs is a requirement of the SFI standards, with specific responsibilities spelled out in the 
standards. See Appendix A, Objective 14 for more details.  
 
The Maine Committee is a leader among the 35 SFI Implementation Committees. Maine was announced as 
the winner of the 2023 SFI Implementation Committee Achievement Award at the 2023 SFI Annual 
Conference on May 17. The Maine Committee was selected for its collaborative leadership in addressing key 
enhancements to the SFI Forest Management and Fiber Sourcing Standards related to climate smart forestry, 
fire resilience, and forests of exceptional conservation value.  
   
   
  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 Appendix A –  Key Sections from SFI 2022 Forest Management Standard  
 
Objective 11. Legal and Regulatory Compliance.  
To comply with all applicable laws and regulations including, international, federal, provincial, state, and local. 
 
Performance Measure 11.1. Certified Organizations shall comply with applicable federal, provincial, state, and local 
forestry and environmental laws and regulations.  
 
Indicators:  
1. Access to relevant laws and regulations.  
2. System to achieve compliance with applicable federal, provincial, state, or local laws, and regulations.  
3. Demonstration of commitment to legal compliance through available regulatory action information . 
 
Performance Measure 11.2. Certified Organizations shall comply with all applicable social laws at the federal, 
provincial, state, and local levels in the country in which the Certified Organization operates.  
 
Indicators:  
1. Written policy demonstrating commitment to comply with social laws, such as those covering civil rights, equal 
employment opportunities, gender equality, diversit y inclusion, anti -discrimination and anti -harassment measures, 
workers’ compensation, Indigenous Peoples ’ rights, workers’ and communities’ right to know, prevailing wages, 
workers’ right to organize, and occupational health and safety.  
2. Forestry enterprises will respect the rights of workers and labor representatives in a manner that encompasses the 
intent of the International Labor Organization (ILO) core conventions.  
 
Objective 13. Training and Education.  
To improve the implementation of sustainable fo restry through appropriate training and education programs.  
 Performance Measure 13.1. 
Certified Organizations shall require appropriate training of personnel and contractors so 
that they are competent to fulfill their responsibilities under the SFI 2022 F orest Management Standard . 
 
Indicators:  
1. Written statement of commitment to the SFI 2022 Forest Management Standard communicated throughout the 
organization, particularly to facility and woodland managers, and field foresters.  
2. Assignment and understan ding of roles and responsibilities for achieving SFI 2022 Forest Management Standard 
objectives . 
3. Staff education and training sufficient to their roles and responsibilities.  
4. Contractor education and training sufficient to their roles and responsibilities.  
5. Certified Organizations shall have written agreements for the use of qualified logging professionals , or wood 
producers that have completed training programs and are recognized as qualified logging professionals and/or 
certified logging companies.  
 
Performance Measure 13.2. Certified Organizations shall work individually and/or through cooperative efforts involving 
SFI Implementation  Committees, logging or forestry associations, or appropriate agencies or others in the forestry 
community to foster improvement in the professionalism of wood producers specific to qualified logging professionals.  
 
Indicators:  
1. Participation in or support of SFI Implementation Committees to establish criteria and identify delivery mechanisms 
for wood producer core training courses that allow individuals to attain qualified logging professional status . These 
criteria shall address at least the following:  
a. awareness of sustainable forestry principles and SFI’s work across four pillars: standards, conservation, 
community, and education;  
b. best management practices, including streamside management and road construction, maintenance, and 
retirement;  
Page 5 of 6 
 
 c. awareness of responsibilities under t he U.S. Endangered Species Act, the Canadian Species at Risk Act, Forests 
with Exceptional Conservation  Value (critically imperiled and imperiled species and ecological communities), and other 
measures to protect biodiversity and wildlife habitat ; 
d. loggi ng safety;  
e. U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and 
Safety (CCOHS) regulations,  wage and hour rules, and other provincial, state, and local employment laws, and  
f. other topics identified by Certified Organizations and/or SFI Implementation Committees that improve their 
responsibilities in meeting the SFI 2022 standards.  
 
2. Participation in or support of SFI Implementation Committees to establish criteria and identify delivery mechanisms 
for wood producer continuing education training courses that shall be taken by qualified logging professionals at least 
once every two years to maintain their status. The continuing education training course(s) shall address one or more 
of the following topics:  
a. awareness of sustainable forestry principles and SFI’s work across four pillars: standards, conservation, 
community, and education;  
b. best management practices , including streamside management and road construction, maintenance, and 
retirement;  
c. reforestation, invasive species management, forest resource conservation , aesthetics and special sites ; 
d. awareness of rare forested natural communities as identified by provincial or state agencies, or by credible 
organizations such as Natu reServe and The Nature Conservancy;  
e. transportation issues;  
f. business management;  
g. public policy and outreach;  
h. awareness of emerging technologies;  
i. logging safety; or  
j. other topics identified by Certified Organization and/or SFI Implementation  Committees that improve their 
responsibilities in meeting  
the SFI 2022 Standards.  
 
Objective 14. Community Involvement and Landowner Outreach.  
To broaden the practice of sustainable forestry through public outreach, education, and involvement, and to support 
the efforts of SFI Implementation Committees.  
 
Performance Measure 14.1. Certified Organizations shall support and promote efforts by consulting foresters, state, 
provincial and federal agencies,  state or local groups, professional societies, conservation organizations, Indigenous 
Peoples and governments, community groups, sporting organizations,  labor, universities, extension agencies, the 
American Tree Farm System® and/or other landowner cooperative programs to apply principles of sustainable  
forest management.  
 Indicators:  
1. Support, including financial, for efforts of 
SFI Implementation Committees.  
2. Support, individually and/or through cooperative efforts involving SFI Imple mentation Committees, education and 
outreach to forest landowners  
describing the importance and providing implementation guidance on:  
a. best management practices ; 
b. reforestation and afforestation ; 
c. visual quality management ; 
d. conservation objectives , such as critical wildlife habitat elements, biodiversity , threatened and endangered species, 
and Forests with  Exceptional Conservation Value ; 
e. management of harvest residue (e.g., slash, limbs, tops) considers economic, social, environmental factors (e .g., 
organic, and nutrient value  to future forests) and other utilization needs;  
f. control of invasive species ; 
g. characteristics of special sites ; and 
h. reduction of wildfire risk;  
i. use of qualified logging professionals , qualified resource professio nals and/or certified logging companies ; 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 j. awareness of SFI, and  
k. reporting of inconsistent practices.  
 
Performance Measure 14.2. Certified Organizations shall individually and/or through cooperative efforts involving SFI 
Implementation Committees  support and promote, at the state, provincial or other appropriate levels, mechanisms for 
public outreach, education and involvement related to  sustainable forest  management.  
 
Indicator:  
1. Periodic educational opportunities for the public promoting sustainable forestry , such as  
a. field tours, seminars, websites, webinars or workshops;  
b. educational trips;  
c. self -guided forest management trails;  
d. publication of articles, educational pamphlets, or newsletters; or  
e. support for national, state, provincial, and local forestry organizations and soil and water conservation districts.  
f. engagement and support  of teachers and/or students though programs such as Project Learning Tree.  
 
Performance Measure 14.3. Certified Organizations shall, individually and/or through cooperative efforts including SFI 
Implementation Committees , establish, at the state, provincial, or other appropriate levels, procedures to address 
concerns raised by loggers, consulting foresters, employees,  unions, stakeholders , the public or other Certified 
Organizations regarding management that appears inconsistent with the SFI standards principles and objectives . 
 
Indicators:  
1. Support for SFI Implementation Committees (e.g., toll -free numbers and other efforts) to address concerns about 
apparent nonconformance.  
2. Process to receive and respond to public inquiries. SFI Implementation Commit tees shall submit data annually to 
SFI Inc. regarding concerns  received and responses.  
 
 
 
