PROGRESS REPORT

American Forest Management
ATV Maine
Baskahegan Company
Brochu Land Company
Celine Brochu Irrevocable Trust
Certified Logging Professionals
Program
Conservation Fund
Forest Resources Association
Hancock Lumber Co.
Huber Engineered Woods
Irving Forest Products Inc.
Katahdin Forest Management
Louisiana Pacific
Maine Audubon
Maine Bureau of Parks and Lands
Maine Department of Agriculture,
Conservation and Forestry,
Recreational Trails Division
Maine Department of Environmental
Protection
Maine Forest Service535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330 - (207) 622-9288 
sfimaine.org - psirois@maineforest.orgThis report was produced by Maine's
SFI Implementation Committee (SIC) 
Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
Maine Snowmobile Association
Maine Tree Farm Committee
Maine Tree Foundation
Maine Woodland Owners
ND Paper LLC
Portage Wood Products
Prentiss & Carlisle
ReEnergy
Robbins Lumber Co.
Sappi North America
School of Forest Resources, University
of Maine
Seven Islands Land Co.
Southern Aroostook Adult Education
Tree-Star Timberland
The Conservation Fund
Twin Rivers Paper Co.
Wagner Forest Management
Weyerhaeuser Co.
Woodland Pulp
Concerned about a timber harvesting operation in your community?
 
Call 1-888-734-4625
If you have questions or concerns about any forest practices in Maine, or need
information about forest tours, please call! 
SFI GOAL is a confidential, toll-free hotline established for the purpose of responding to
public questions and concerns regarding forestry and timber harvesting practices in
Maine. It is important to understand that this is not an enforcement program.
Since 1997, SFI has responded to concerns ranging from water quality issues to visual
impacts of a harvest by sending forest resource professionals to investigate. Our goal is
to improve practices on the ground.
We work effectively with loggers, landowners and foresters by sharing techniques and
knowledge to encourage the best possible outcomes, including training programs that
can be delivered to our loggers, foresters and landowners. 
C O N T E N T S
CHANGE,
IMPROVEMENT, AND
THE NEW 2022 SFI
STANDARDS - 3
CLP ADAPTS TO
CHALLENGES AND
MOVES ON - 13-14UNDERSTANDING THE
ROLE OF MAINE’S
COMMERCIAL FOREST
TO NATIONAL BIRD
CONSERVATION- 4-5
USING FORESTS AS A
WINDOW TO THE
WORLD- 6-7
MAINE TREE'S
PROGRAMS EMPHASIZE
EDUCATION AND
COMMUNITY- 7-9
CLIMATE CHANGE
MAKES EXTREME
WEATHER BMP’S A
PRIORITY- 10
FIRE RESILIENCY
THROUGH COLLECTIVE
EFFORTS- 11-12
LEARNING THE SCIENCE
OF LOG SCALING - 15
THIS REPORT IS PRINTED ON SFI-CERTIFIED PAPER COMMUNITY PARTNERS
AND COLLABORATIONS
ARE KEY TO ANYTHING
WE ACCOMPLISH - 16-17

SFI’s stated goal for the SFI standards revision
process “was to create standards that are grounded
in science, include diverse perspectives, and benefit
consumers, communities, and ultimately forests
across the U.S. and Canada.” After a two-year
process that included 2 public comment periods, a
dozen webinars over 30 task groups meetings, and
participation by nearly 2,300 individuals and
organizations through webinars and/or submission of
comments, several major enhancements were made
and incorporated into the 2022 Standards in which
we are working collectively and independently to
implement within our individual programs. 
As was stated in the previous progress report by
past SIC chair Ben Dow, “The only constant in life is
change,” and this is certainly the case with the 2022
Standards. Some of the changes incorporated into
the new standards are “simple” language changes,
while others are more complex and include the
addition of completely new standards in which
Certified Organizations (an example of one of the
language changes) need to demonstrate compliance
with. 
A few of the language changes in the standards,
have had phrasing such as “are encouraged to” or
“should have” change to “shall have,” and the
addition of new language such as “water quantity”
paired with “water quality” has had some significant
implications in how compliance is to be achieved in
some cases. The addition of Objective 9. Climate
Smart Forestry and Objective 10. Fire Resilience and
Awareness to the standards both raised wide ranging
concerns on how to meet compliance. 
But both new objectives also offered up a powerful
opportunity in how certified organizations could
meet compliance “through cooperative efforts
involving SFI Implementation Committees” and other
partners, and that’s what the members of the Maine
SIC did.
Once the new standards were finalized, the Maine
SIC organized a subcommittee to review 
PAGE 3Eugene Mahar is chair of the Maine SFI State Implementation Committee and the
Forest Resources Manager for LandVest in Maine.Change, Improvement, and the new
2022 SFI Standards
the new standards and develop guidance documents
to be used by the members. This subcommittee was
largely successful in accomplishing this goal through
the collective knowledge and experience base of the
membership, but felt there were areas within the
standards (particularly objectives 9 & 10) that the
expertise of local and regional partners would need
to be called upon for further direction.
 
SFI Inc. developed a playbook and hosted a national
workshop on March 31 to discuss how Climate Smart
Forestry Indicators could be addressed
collaboratively. To further this initiative, a regional
workshop was held to help the SICs in the Northeast
U.S. exchange ideas and provide some regional
information for SFI certified organizations. As a
result, a regional risk assessment was developed,
and potential adaptation actions and mitigation
opportunities to address priority climate impacts
were identified, in which certified organizations can
use as a starting point. 
For Fire Resilience and Awareness, the Maine SIC
worked with Robby Gross, the Chief Forest Ranger,
for the Maine Forest Service in developing a Maine
fire resiliency report and recommendations for
continued interaction with the SIC and its members
for planning, training, and educational outreach
opportunities. 
At the end of the day, the change to the new
standards were necessary to keep pace with
enhancements in science and technology, and with
societal needs and perspectives. They reflect one of
the common themes found within the SFI Program
that SICs and Certified Organizations alike are
striving to achieve – continuous improvement. 
Lastly, I would like to encourage and challenge all
SIC members to remain engaged; it is your
involvement, support, and input that helps guide the
SIC in achieving continuous improvement through
the outreach, training, and support to the
membership it provides.
Thirty years ago, we conducted a massive study of
birds and forestry over 1-million acres of commercial
timberlands in the Moosehead Lake Region of Maine.
We’re doing the whole study all over again.
At the time in the early 1990s, there was great
concern about continental-scale declines in bird
populations, especially forest-breeding birds that
overwintered in the tropics but migrated north every
year to breed in our northern forests. Commercial
timberland owners at the time (Bowater, Scott Paper
Company) were key partners in the original study,
funded jointly by both the forest industry and
environmental foundations.
PAGE 4John Hagan has a Ph.D. from North Carolina State University in Wildlife Ecology. He is
President of Our Climate Common, Understanding the Role of
Maine’s Commercial Forest to
National Bird Conservation
 Even the 15,000-acre “Great Ragmuff Clearcut” in
T4 R14 was providing habitat for many early-
successional species of conservation concern.
Although such large clearcuts are not allowed today,
we learned that clearcuts (even big ones), and the
young brushy regeneration that followed, provided
important bird habitat. Clearcuts were not
“biodiversity deserts.”
At the same time, the study region was losing tracts
of mature, closed-canopy forest, important habitat
for a different suite of forest bird species. 
The challenge, as we stated in the 1990s, was to
maintain the full array of forest types and age classes
on the landscape at any given point in time,
recognizing that the locations of these forest types
would move around over the decades scale. We
called the concept a “shifting mosaic.”
Why would we do this study all over again?
First, since the early 1990s, forest practices have
changed for many landowners in Maine’s commercial
forest. Clearcutting accounted for nearly 50% of the
acres harvested in 1990. Today, clearcuts account for
less than 5% of harvested acres. Partial cutting of one
form or another is the rule today. What does this
widespread change in harvesting practices mean for
breeding bird habitat and bird conservation today?
Second, many bird populations have continued to
decline at a continental scale since the 1990s. A
major scientific paper published in 2019 reported a
nearly 30% decline in North American bird
populations since the 1970s—some 3 billion birds
lost. Because Maine’s commercial forest forms the
heart of a globally significant “Important Bird Area,”
as designated by the National Audubon Society, what
role might Maine’s commercial forest play today in
countering these national-scale bird declines,
especially given the changes in forest practices since
the original study.Molly Lynch (foreground) and Josh Kolasch
(backround) conducting a productivity survey for
nesting birds north of the Golden Road.  (photo
by John Hagan)
The bottom-line of the original study was that
forest practices were supporting a wide diversity
of resident and migratory bird species. 
What we do know already is that the commercial
forests of Maine remain what I call “10 million acres
of bird habitat.” Compared to anywhere else east of
the Mississippi, this is an extraordinarily undeveloped
part of the U.S. In 2021, the Appalachian Mountain
Club won the designation of “International Dark Skies
Park” for their ownership east of Greenville. Dark
skies are important for birds because many species
use the stars to navigate during migration. (Most
migrate at night.) The commercial forests of Maine
also comprise the biggest, darkest sky east of the
Mississippi.
We know we will find ways that timber harvesting
could be modified to better support bird
conservation at a national scale while maintaining
harvest. This study is a perfect demonstration of all of
us bringing our knowledge and skills to the table to
make the world a better place. Maine’s commercial
forests provide multiple values—some economic,
some environmental. It takes work, and respect for
one another, to keep those values coming in an ever-
changing changing world.
With the help of current-day landowners
(Weyerhaeuser, Landvest, Huber, and AMC), last
summer (2022) we completed all the field data
collection for replicating the 1990s study. We used
the exact same methods we used 30 years ago and
surveyed the same 1-M-acre study area. Although it’s
too early to draw definitive conclusions, the density
(birds per acre) of the majority of bird species
appears to be holding steady, or even higher than the
original 1990s study. A few species seem to have
declined in density. 
The challenge for the research team over the coming
winter is to analyze any changes and try to
understand the mechanisms that are causing them,
both increases or decreases. We will dig into the life
histories of each species individually to unravel the
patterns we observe. Some species migrate to the
Southeast U.S. and some migrate to Central or South
America. Understanding what these species
experience on their wintering grounds is just as
important as what happens in the Maine woods.
PAGE 5Contact John Hagan for more information (jhagan@ourclimatecommon.org), or visit
ourclimatecommon.org/project-30yr-bird-project. Funding for the current study has been provided by:
Cooperative Forest Research Unit, NCASI, National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, Maine Outdoor
Heritage Fund, Maine Timberlands Charitable Trust, Horizon Foundation, The Betterment Fund, Seth
Sprague Educational and Charitable Foundation, Weyerhaeuser, The Wilderness Society, and the
University of New Hampshire Ag Experiment Station.
Bird point
count
stations in
the 1990s
(yellow
dots) and
2020s (red
dots)
studies. The
distribution
of points in
the 2020s
study nicely
overlaps the
area
sampled in
the 1990s.
PAGE 6Lena Ives serves as the Director of Education and Project Learning Tree
Coordinator at the Maine TREE Foundation. Using Forests as a Window to the World
 
Maine PLT Facilitator and Sanford High School
Teacher, Lindsay Strout (standing), leads a career-
focused breakout group of middle and high school
teachers during the 2022 Forest of Maine Teachers’
Tours based in Carrabassett Valley Maine Timber Research and Environmental
 Education Foundation’s (Maine TREE’s) mission
is to educate and advocate for the sustainable
use of the forest and the ecological, economic,
and social health of Maine’s forest community.
One of Maine TREE’s education programs is
Maine Project Learning Tree (PLT). PLT is an
initiative of the Sustainable Forest Initiative
(SFI), consisting of a variety of standards-
aligned curricula used by formal classroom
educators
and non-formal educators to foster forest-
literate citizens. As the most forested state in
the nation, our forestlands and all the products
and careers they provide rely heavily on our
local communities for sustainable forest
management. Teachers’ Tours
One of Maine TREE’s most popular programs,
Forests of Maine Teachers’ Tours, celebrated its
25th year in 2022. Each year, the four-day tours
focus on the growth, harvest, and processing of
wood products in Maine. Over the past two
decades, the program has served over 1,000
teachers of all ages, Girl and Boy Scout leaders,
adult educators, and conservation organization
staff. In 2022, we hosted two tours, one in the
Carrabassett Valley region and the other in the
Bethel region, engaging 34 educators in this
experience. 
The tours prepare participants to return to the
classroom with stimulating approaches to share
knowledge about the forest with students,
colleagues, and communities. Throughout the
four-day tour, participants engage in PLT
activities, meet professionals who work in the
Maine woods, and develop ideas on how to
bring the forest to the classroom or the
classroom to the forest.2022 Bethel-region Teachers’ Tour participants learn
about conservation and forest management planning
at Chadbourne Tree Farm in Bethel from LandVest
forester David Degruttola.
PAGE 7Source: FOR/Maine
Workforce Development 
One of the goals of Maine TREE’s environmental education efforts is to reach more educators and
classrooms to provide Maine’s students with the opportunity to learn outdoors, interact with
forests, and experience the possibilities of green jobs and careers in environmental and forest
sectors. This aspect of our work is realized through direct classroom engagement, connecting
classrooms with natural resource professionals, and providing professional development for
educators and professionals to teach and incorporate career opportunities in their work with
youth. We hope to bring more prominence to natural resource and forestry careers for middle
school and high school students in Maine and connect these classrooms with professionals who
can show them what careers in the environmental sector look like. 
Maine TREE's Programs Emphasize
Education and Community
Logan Johnson is the Executive Director of the Maine TREE Foundation. 
Maine Timber Research and Environmental Education Foundation (Maine TREE) is the state's
premiere organization advancing forest-based education and outreach efforts to Maine students
and communities. Our mission is to educate and advocate for the sustainable use of the forest
and the ecological, economic, and social health of Maine's forest community. We envision a
future where the general public values and supports healthy forest ecosystems, forest
professionals, and scientific sustainable forest management. 
To advance our mission, we support forest-based education, outreach, and research programs
that engage students, teachers, non-formal educators, and natural resource professionals,
including foresters and loggers, forest landowners, and the general public. 
PAGE 8Certified Logging Professionals (CLP)
Since 1991, CLP has provided safety training and
education for individual loggers. As a result, CLP
participants receive a discounted workers'
compensation rate (47% less for mechanical loggers;
57% less for conventional loggers compared to 1993).
In addition, we recognize loggers for their
outstanding work and dedication to the profession by
awarding three loggers annually with the Certified
Logging Professional Logger of the Year Awards,
which features a winner in the conventional,
mechanical, and supervisor/contractor categories.
There are currently more than 1,000 individual
loggers participating in the CLP program. 
Forest-based Education
 
Our forest-based education programs include Maine
Project Learning Tree (PLT), Forests of Maine
Teachers’ Tours, and the Forest Ecology Research
Network (FERN). These programs focus on
professional development opportunities for teachers
and non-formal educators and direct engagement
with students. Utilizing these programs fosters
student appreciation for the forest and introduces
them to forest-based career opportunities. 
Learn more about our Forest-based Education
programs in the previous section.
Holt Research Forest
 
For 40 years, Holt Research Forest has served as a
long-term ecological monitoring site, focusing on
forest development and wildlife habitat. The 300
acres of forestland on the island town of Arrowsic
features a 100-acre, extensively studied research
grid. In the winter of 2020/21, a harvest in the
research area created opportunities to monitor how
the forest responds to disturbance. The property
features an outdoor classroom, and we have hosted
dozens of summer interns and research technicians.
The property provides a unique opportunity to
answer questions that will benefit Maine landowners
and develop connections between Maine TREE’s
research, education, and outreach programs.Holt Research Forest 2022 Summer Technicians
Jack McCann (left) and Marin Harnett (center)
describe their process for collecting regeneration
data to Downeast Magazine reporter Peter Smith
(right).Students at Edna Drinkwater School collect tree
data to study the climate change effects on trees
around their school as part of Maine TREE’s Forest
Ecology Research Network program. 
Steve Laweryson, providing conventional loggers
information for recertification session held at the
University of Maine Forest in May.
Oxford County Soil and Water Conservation District Tenmil River Demonstration
Forest Tree Farm hosted a Forestry for the Birds Workshop in May 2022. 
Maine Tree Farm
 
Maine Tree Farm is a program of the American Tree Farm System and administered by the Maine
Tree Farm Committee, which is in the process of forming its own 501(c)3 nonprofit organization.
It is an exciting time for the Committee, as becoming an independent nonprofit organization is a
momentous milestone for the group, which is currently celebrating its 70th anniversary. While
the Tree Farm Committee is poised to become an independent organization, Maine TREE will
continue to support the program. By staffing the Maine Tree Farm Coordinator, the two groups
will enhance education and outreach opportunities to Maine's family forest owners and increase
the number of Maine landowners engaged in sustainable woodland stewardship. We are also
pleased to join the Tree Farm Committee in annually recognizing Maine's Outstanding Tree
Farmers of the Year. Currently, there are more than 1,400 landowners enrolled in the program
representing 400,000 acres of Maine's forest. 
Community 
At the core of Maine TREE's programs is a community committed to providing opportunities for
people to learn about the forest and the benefits they provide for our state. As our forests grow
and their importance is recognized, our community must grow with them to expand
opportunities to participate in these essential programs. If you are interested in learning more
about Maine TREE or becoming involved in one of our programs, you can contact me via email
at logan@mainetree.org or by calling (207) 621-9872.
PAGE 9
What do I need to do to button down trails
if a big rainstorm is forecast? And what
materials will work best given specific site
conditions?Climate change is on most people’s minds
these days, particularly in the forestry
community. It’s become increasingly
challenging to steward Maine’s woodlands,
given shorter operating seasons, less or non-
existent frozen ground, torrential downpours,
severe windstorms, drought, and other
challenges.
While it’s clear that conventional BMP’s work
well to protect water quality when applied
effectively, weather and ground conditions
over the last several years have combined to
create several problems, such as culvert
blowouts, sedimentation (often when a
torrential rainstorm follows a period of
drought), and severe rutting. These conditions
are likely to persist as Maine’s climate warms
and erratic precipitation patterns become the
norm.
So, what are land managers to do? The wood
still needs to be cut, yarded, and hauled to
the mill.The key, as always, is planning.But
planning is not just about hanging ribbon and
identifying stream crossings. Adapting forest
management operations to the realities of
climate change requires more advance work
before the machines arrive. 
includes considerations like:
PAGE 10Climate Change Makes Extreme
Weather BMP’s a Priority
Patty Cormier is the Director of the Maine Forest Service.
How long can I wait to move my equipment
during an extended thaw or wet period? Or
should I keep it on site and wait for the
next dry period?
Do I have more solid lots that I can work on
when bad weather shuts down operations
on wetter sites? 
How do I manage piling down wood and
trucking it when we’re having multiple mud
seasons in one winter?
Building in flexibility and adaptability, how
can you allow for adjustments in BMP
implementation to consider a wider range
of potential uncertainties and a richer set
of response options?
Landowners and mills will also need to be
more flexible to accommodate the necessary
adjustments in harvesting operations.
Building on our past efforts, MFS looks
forward to working with the SIC and other
partners to develop a practical set of
guidelines for land managers to use during
timber harvesting operations.
As the conversation about the wildfire threat to
forests across our nation increases, the Maine Forest
Service, Division of Forest Protection, continues to
put itself in a position to lead the way in protecting
Maine from wildfire risk and potential. According to
the 2020 Maine Forest Action Plan (FAP),
controlling wildfire is listed as a priority for MFS. As
outlined in the FAP, “Protecting this natural resource
and the values at risk within forested areas is MFS’s
primary mission. Indicators point to an increasing
threat from human caused fires and weather
conditions consistent with high fire danger resulting
from climate change.” 
Through partnerships and key cooperative efforts
with stakeholders, wildfire spread and intensity have
been controlled across the landscape with few
exceptions. Inevitably, large fire growth can and will
occur in Maine with severe weather and the right
fuel conditions, but the Maine Forest Service’s goal
of keeping each wildfire less than an acre in size is
obtainable using aggressive initial attack responses
and strategic preparedness activities.
PAGE 11Robby Gross is the Chief Forest Ranger for the Maine Forest Service.Fire Resiliency Through Collective Efforts
By developing a new “Maine Basic Wildfire Training
Course,” forest rangers are delivering local
suppression tactics and fire behavior principles to
landowners, foresters, contractors, and firefighters
to enhance current response capacity. In addition,
there have been other local trainings that have
focused on the use of Maine Forest Service
equipment like grapple tanks or the basics of
fireline construction. Some landowners and
contractors are now developing their own
equipment to be used on-site for quick response
needs.
Looking at opportunities to reduce wildfire risk and
fuel loads in key areas is instrumental for keeping
wildfires small. Large or small wildland-urban
interface areas, where residential or camp
communities are intermixed throughout the forest,
are key locations to focus on and provide critical
feedback. You will find that forest rangers are
making concerted efforts to talk with stakeholders
about ways to improve wildfire safety on their
properties. Whether it be through establishing fuel
breaks in transition zones, factoring slash
management in harvest plans, or interacting with
camp associations about defensible space, there are
many ways for our cumulative actions to be
successful. 
The Maine Forest Service continues to update and
enhance its equipment capabilities to ensure quick,
efficient wildfire responses. Preseason wildfire planning and training with
landowners to share response information is
critical to the backbone of preparedness. This
past season, forest rangers have reemphasized
the importance of meeting with local land
ownership and management staff to ensure full
response capabilities. These meetings share
critical information about access, high-value
property and critical areas, equipment
availability, and staged readiness levels based on
fire danger indices. 
With fewer people in the workforce and fire service able to assist with suppression activities, ready
and capable equipment is a necessity. By developing federal excess property for water handling,
acquiring crew cab chassis for fast action engines and firefighting crew, or being able to secure
newer Bell 407 helicopters to replace our Vietnam era hueys, we are committed to being in every
part of the State when wildfires occur. We have many to thank for the support of funding to keep
our response force viable. 
It is our goal to ensure that all stakeholders are familiar with our operation, but as important,
comfortable with working side-by-side to reach our collective goals and objectives. The Maine
Forest Service has a great group of resource professionals that care deeply about our mission, I
would encourage you to reach out to any forest ranger to see what he/she can do for you or your
property to improve Maine’s fire resiliency status.   
PAGE 12
PAGE 13Mike St. Peter is CLP's Associate Program DirectorCLP Adapts to Challenges and Moves On
As we look back at the last three years, we are
pleased to report that despite the disruptions of
the pandemic, that the CLP program has endured
and, in many ways, gained insights on effective
and efficient delivery of training hundreds of
loggers and stakeholders participated in the
virtual online experience. For many, this provided
effective training options they would have never
otherwise considered. Based on participant
comments, it provided a convenient and cost-
effective method, for both the loggers and the
program administration.  
For CLP loggers, professional development
training remains important. The program remains
responsive to changes and additions resulting
from revisions to the industry’s forest certification
standards. A vast amount of wood products is
required for the paper, sawmill, pellet, and co-
generation facilities. CLP loggers and their goal of
continuous improvement contribute to safer, more
productive, and environmentally sound
workplaces. 
Over 6,800 loggers and stakeholders have
participated in the CLP program since 1991, and
this number continues to grow. For the 18th straight year, the CLP mechanical
category will pay less for workers’
compensation rates. The CLP mechanical rate
for new and renewal policies through April
2023 will be 47% less than non-certified
workers. Maine’s certified mechanical rate of
$4.74 per hundred is one of the lowest in the
country. In addition, the conventional logger
workers’ compensation rate has continued to
drop overall since 2008. It is currently 57% less
than the rate was in 1993. Again, one of the
lowest in the country.CLP loggers agree that “professional
development” through continuing education and
training is important to maintain safety and
sustainability. CLP has integrated a more
comprehensive information for forest fire
protection in the initial training and plans to
include it in the future recertification. Although
the program faces challenges, the newly
established Advisory Committee is developing
strategies to maintain the program for the long
term. We are happy to share a list of some
positive outcomes that all CLPs can be proud to
have accomplished in 2022.
CLP program participants continue to benefit from best management practice (BMP) training
to meet the Maine Department of Environmental Protection exemption working as “excavation
contractors” in shoreland zones. 
The most recent Maine Department of Labor Statistics for 2021 reports that the Injuries and
Incidence rate of 0.9 per one hundred workers for Maine logging is substantially lower than
the 3.7 national logging rate. 
CLP loggers also qualify for the Maine Forest Service “Direct Link Loan” program, which saves
thousands of dollars in interest payments for participants that qualify.
In calendar year 2022, 33 new individuals have participated in certification, and 314 loggers
in recertification. In addition, we continue to complete performance-based worksite reviews,
which provides participants with one-on-one evaluation and coaching. 
In 2022, the newly defined CLP Advisory Committee, along with Logan Johnson, the new
Executive Director of Maine TREE foundation, adopted a new organization charter to redefine
roles and responsibilities. In 2023, there are plans to review the curriculum and look at
options to make the program more efficient to grow the training network.
The CLP program is committed to logger education and to the promotion and recognition of
those who meet and exceed the CLP standard. The past 32 years has had a positive effect. We
can be assured maintaining consistency with safety, quality, and efficiency is changing our
logging legacy for the better!
There is still work to do, although we can say our CLP system is effective at producing positive
outcomes. It recognizes individual logger certification at the stump, which promotes improved
forest practices statewide. Loggers, landowners, and mills have all assumed benefits for these
efforts.
PAGE 14
PAGE 15Keith  Kanoti is the Forest Manager for the University of Maine.Learning the Science of Log Scaling
Two days of wood measurement training
were held in August by the University of
Maine School of Forest Resources and the
University Forest Office.
The scaling workshop was co-sponsored by
Maine SFI, the Maine Department of
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
(DACF), the Maine Forest Service and the
Bureau of Weights and Measures. 
This class, in its fourth year of operations,
prepares students to take the tests to be
licensed wood scalers in the state of Maine.
Taking this class also shortens the
apprenticeship time required for becoming
a licensed scaler from two years down to six
months.Experts from UMaine, DACF, Lumbra
Hardwoods and Columbia Forest Products
trained 25 attendees in wood measurement
law, log scaling, pine and hardwood log and
veneer grading at the university’s forest
sawmill in Old Town, and at Lumbra
Hardwoods in Milo. Attendees also received
a tour of Lumbra’s hardwood mill in
operation to witness how merchandising to
the highest value is achieved in real time
during the production phase. 
A priority goal of this program is to teach
how to determine the gross and net volume
(generally log truck loads) of logs. 
The Maine SFI Implementation Committee, in
partnership with the University Forest Office,
will again offer this program in the spring
and fall of 2023, and indefinitely as interest
persist. Stephen Tudor, Columbia Forest Products
leads discussion on scaling veneer logs.
Scott Pease, retired Hancock Lumber wood
buyer offer insight into pine log values. 
"The Maine SFI Implementation Committee, in partnership
with the University Forest Office, will again offer this
program in the spring and fall of 2023, and indefinitely as
interest persist."
PAGE 16Pat Sirois is the Executive Director of Maine's Sustainable Forestry Initiative
(SFI) Implementation CommitteeCommunity Partners and Collaborations
are Key to Anything we Accomplish
On page two of this publication, you get
a sense of the breadth of this program as
showcased by the list of participants and
diversity of the membership. What may
be even more impressive is the broad
spectrum of participation in the working
subcommittees focused on wildlife, water
quality, public accountability, fire
resilience, climate change, logger safety
and research related to many of these
topics. To the extent ME’s SFI
Committee experiences any successes is
due to individual’s commitment to
principles of sustainability and their
willingness to work together towards
those goals. 
Start with ME’s award-winning Certified
Logging Professional (CLP) program.
When COVID hit in 2020 and many
programs across the country ceased to
offer any educational programs for
loggers, ME’s CLP program’s Steering
Committee pivoted to offer online
training modules that proved to be
effective and popular in the logging
community. When reviewing the CLP
stats for worker compensation rates since
the program’s inception, it’s clear to see
CLPs impact. Looking to 2023, this sort
of innovation will continue as the CLP
program contemplates additional online
programming to be implemented in
2024.
As previously mentioned by our chairman, Eugene Mahar, task groups
have worked on the topics of fire
resilience, forest of exceptional
conservation value (FECVs) and climate
smart forestry. In addition to the
significant contribution the Maine Forest
Service provides through its training
efforts on a variety of forestry related
topics, the specific efforts of Robbie
Gross have helped us develop a program
to assess and adapt to the risk of fires in
Maine. This program will be reviewed
annually so that necessary adaptations
can be identified and implemented as
needed. 
For SFI certified mills whose commitment
to certification includes looking out for
globally impaired species and natural
communities, there needed to be a
process to identify these features on the
landscape within their wood supply
baskets. Spearheaded by Don Cameron,
Botanist/Ecologist with Maine’s Natural
Area’s Program (MNAP), and working
closely with ME Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife’s Ryan Robicheau, they created
a process by which landowners, foresters
and loggers can determine whether any
of these rare features might be affected
by planned forestry operations. The
process they developed has served as a
model for similar programs throughout
north America.
One of this year’s truly exciting 
discoveries comes from the bird research
conducted in Maine’s commercial forest
over 30 years by John Hagan. What
we've learned is that over 10 million
acres of undeveloped commercial
forestland continues to serve as quality
bird habitat for a variety of species.
We've also learned that despite the
forest structure changing significantly
over 30 years, many of the bird species
present in the 1990s are still present
today, and in some cases increasing in
numbers. We are anxious to learn more
about the outcomes of this project as the
data gathered this year is processed.
Research funding is a standard
requirement for SFI certified companies.
This research was funded in part by SFI
companies through the Cooperative
Forest Research Unit (CFRU) at the
University of Maine.
So much of the work described in this
report is critical to communicate to our
youth. The young people of today will be
the decision makers on environmental
issues and policies in the years to come.
We hope some will see career
opportunities within this industry. We
believe it's important for everyone,
particularly our youth, to understand the  
PAGE 17role of forests in providing ecosystem
services, recreational opportunities and a
wide variety of sustainable forest
products that are consumed and use daily.
That's where the Maine Tree Foundation
and Project Learning Tree (PLT) come in.
PLT’s teachers’ tours have reached over
1,000 teachers in the past 25 years,
introducing them to the growth,
harvesting and processing of forest
products in Maine. PLT has also worked
with Girl Scout and Boy Scout leaders,
adult educators and conservation
organization staff in introducing curricula
that fosters forest-literate citizens. It is
imperative that we reintroduce our
children to the outdoors, and in
particular, to the all-important role of our
forest.
There is so much being accomplished and
so much to do. In the spirit of continuous
improvement, we know we will
undoubtedly find ourselves adapting to
future challenges. ME’s SFI
Implementation Committee is committed
to taking these challenges on, as we have
since 1995. We hope you will agree that
our story is a good one, for our industry
and the citizens of Maine, present and
future. Please join in helping to
communicate this message whenever
possible. 

DECEMBER 2022 
This report was produced by Maine's SFI Implementation
Committee
