Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy  
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207 -622 -9288   www.maineforest.org  
TO: Chairman Ingwerson and Pluecker  
FROM: Patrick Strauch  
DATE: May, 22, 2023  
RE: LD 1874 Information Request  
 
Please find attached the  requested bylaws of the Maine SFI State Implementation Com-
mittee (SIC). The SIC was set up as a standing committee of the Maine Forest Products 
Council to reduce the costs of incorporation and to receive purchased support for the 
administration of payroll and accounting services. The account is separate from the 
MFPC system.   
The SIC has one full ti me employee who coordinates training, outreach, and administra-
tion of the SIC program. As described in the bylaws, the SIC Board directs the activities 
of the SIC Executive Director. The board is made up of dues paying members as well as 
various agencies. The MFPC Executive Director is a non -voting member of the Board 
in the capacity of administering employee human resource functions. The SIC pays 
MFPC for office services, rent and utilities.  
Because MFPC is agnostic to member certification enrollment, we h ave members who 
have FSC, SFI , or both certification systems at their mills and on their lands. The SIC 
will send you specific information about their program.  
On a separate matter , I wanted to clarify MFPC’s record on collective bargaining.  We 
believe employees of contractors already have the right to join labor unions in Maine 
law and we have never testified against this right in the legislature. We have several 
members that have a unionized workforce.  
Senator Jackson was apparently referring to LD 1459 An Act to Expand Application of 
the Maine Agriculture Marketing and Bargaining Act of 1973 to Harvesters and Haulers 
of Forest Products presented in the 129th Legislature and passed into law.1  
In the 129th legislature we stated our opposition a s follows:  
“The Council strongly opposes LD 1459 because it is trying to force a square peg into a round hole. The 
Maine Agriculture Bargaining Act of 1973 simply doesn’t fit the proposed purpose of this  bill.”  
“We also oppose the bill because this approach was tried and failed. A bill with similar goals was en-
acted in 2004 and then repealed in 2009.”  
“The purpose of agricultural marketing and bargaining cooperatives is only to allow cooperative activity 
for producers and growers of agricultural products, not services . In most large commercial harvesting 
operations, the landowner maintains ownership of t he product, and the contractor provides harvesting 
and hauling services.”  
Since enactment of the law in 2019 there has been no demonstrated use of the law by 
the logging community.  
Thank you for the opportunity to respond and I would be glad to answer an y questions you may have.  
 1 Maine Forest Products Council  
  SFI Implementation  Committee  
By-Laws  
 
(Approved version effective  March 26, 2008 ) 
 
 
 
ARTICLE I  
Name, Offices and Records  
 
Section 1.  Name.   The name of this standing Committee of the Maine Forest Products 
Council ("MFPC") is  the SFI Implementation  Committee (the " SIC"), created 
under the authority provided in Article XI of the By -laws of the Maine Forest 
Products Council, a nonprofit, nonpartisan corporation organized under and 
operating subject to the laws of the State of M aine.  
 
Section 2.  Offices.   The principal office of the SIC shall be at the MFPC Office in Augusta, 
Maine.  The SIC may also establish offices in other locations as its Executive 
Committee may from time to time determine.  
 
Section 3.  Records.   The SIC shall keep correct and complete books and records of account 
and shall keep minutes of the proceedings of its Members.  The SIC shall also 
keep at its principal office a record of the names and addresses of its members.  
Except for confidential information hel d by the Director of the SIC , all books and 
records of the SIC may be inspected by any Officer or Executive Committee 
Member and by MFPC officers and MFPC Executive Committee members for 
any proper purpose at any reasonable time.  
 
Section 4.  Non-Profit.   The SIC is a non -profit standing committee of the MFPC and may 
not conduct activities for profit.  
 
ARTICLE II  
Purposes  
 
Mission:  
 
The purpose of this SIC is to assist in the implementation of the  Sustainable Forestry Initiative® 
Standard (“SFIS”)  by Progr am Participants1 authorized to participate in the SFI program.  The  
SFIS is intended to provide measures for evaluating each Program Participant’s  compliance with 
the Sustainable Forestry Initiative Principles.  The SFI performance measures are intended t o 
promote continuous improvements in sustainable forestry.  The SFIS address es each Program 
Participant’s  implementation of these principles on their own land and in the procurement of 
wood and fiber from loggers and other landowners.   
 
1 Program Participants are defined in the 2005 – 2009 SFI Standard as:  A member of AF&PA or a  licensee of the 
SFI Program.  
 2  
ARTICLE III  
Membe rship  and Meetings  
 
Section 1.  Classification of Members.  
 
.  
A. SIC Members .  The SIC shall be comprised of three  classes of Members: (i) Full SIC 
Members; (ii) At -Large Members; and (iii) Advisory Members.   
 
1. Full SIC Members.   Full SIC Members shal l serve indefinite terms and shall 
include:  
 
a. Program Participants.   One representative of e ach Maine  SFI member company 
duly licensed to participate in the SFI program; and  
 
b..  Representative SIC Members.  One representative from each of the following:  
 
•  Any non-Program Participant  that is also a member of the MFPC and owns or 
manages at least 100,000 acres of private Maine forestland;  
 
• the Forest Resources Association;  
 
• Certified Logging Professionals,  
 
• Qualified Logging Professionals;  
 
• Any other lo gger training organization that has been approved by the 
Committee as meeting the requirements for logger training;  
 
• Small Wood -lot Owners of Maine (SWOAM) or other Maine non -industrial 
private landowner association;  
 
• North Eastern Lumber Manufacturers A ssociation (NELMA);   
 
• Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC); and  
 
• American Tree Farm System  
 
2. "At-Large  Members".   By plurality vote, the SIC  may elect for prescribed terms 
At-Large Members of the SIC  as follows:  
 
a) Three logging contracto rs with Maine based businesses;  
 
b) One Maine based wood broker;  
 
 3 c) One representative from a Maine based environmental association;  
 
d) One educational or communication professional;  
 
e) One representative of the Sportsmen's Alliance of Maine (SAM) ; 
 
f) One consulting forester.  
 
The SIC may create, by majority vote, additional At -Large positions, to be filled by 
plurality vote of the SIC.  .  
 
3. Advisory SIC Members.   One Advisory SIC Member , from  each of the following 
governmental agencies and non -gover nmental organizations shall be entitled to 
participate on the SIC: 
 
a) The Department of Environmental Protection;  
 
b) The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife;  
 
c) The Department of Conservation:  
 
 i.  The Land Use Regulation Commission  
 ii.  The M aine Forest Service  
 
d) The University of Maine:  
 
 i.  The Cooperative Extension  
 ii.  The Maine College of Natural Science, Forestry and Agriculture  
 
e) The Maine Tree Foundation.  
 
Section 2.  Rights and Responsibilities of SIC Members.  
 
A. Good Standing. Each SIC M ember shall serve for so long as the individual meets the 
eligibility or term requirements set forth in these by -laws, unless the individual resigns or 
is removed as provided herein.  Each  SIC M ember is responsible to remain in good 
standing by atte nding in person at least one of every three consecutive SIC  meetings, 
unless good cause is provided to the Executive Committee  and to pay annual SIC dues as 
invoiced.    
  
B. Voting.   All Full SIC Members and At -Large Members shall have full v oting rights, w ith 
one vote for  each Full SIC Member and At -Large Member position, provided that voting 
rights for: (i) amendments to  By-Laws; (ii) SIC financial activities including 
establishment and collection of dues and approval of budgets; and (iii) suspension or 
removal of SIC Members, shall be limited to Full SIC Members who are Program 
Participants in good standing.  Advisory SIC Members shall not have voting rights.  
 4  
Section 3.   Suspension, Removal or Resignation of Membership.    
 
SIC M embers may be suspended o r removed by a two -thirds vote of the  total number of Full SIC 
Members who are Program Participants in good standing, at any regular or special SIC meeting 
called for that purpose, as follows:  
 
1) Failure to attend meetings  may result in suspension or remo val; 
 
2) Failure of the organization represented by such SIC M ember to pay dues  as invoiced by 
the SIC or the SIC’s agent,  within 90 days of receipt of request may result in suspension, 
and, failure to pay dues within 120 days of receipt of request may re sult in removal;  
 
3) Failure to meet other membership qualifications as may be adopted by the SIC  from 
time to time  may result in suspension or removal . 
 
Telephonic participation of Program Participants at any meeting called for the purpose of voting 
on a membership issue pursuant to this section is permitted, and such participation shall be 
counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.  Any Member may resign at any time by giving 
written notice of his or her resignation to the Chair.  
 
Section 4.  Meetings . 
 
A. Regular Meetings.   The SIC shall hold no fewer than four regular meetings per calendar 
year at such times and at such places as the SIC shall determine.  
 
B. Special Meetings.   Special meetings of the SIC may be called by the Chair, Vice Chair, 
or SIC Director  and may also be called by any six members of the SIC. 
 
C. Notice of Meetings.   Written notice of regular meetings of the SIC shall be provided to 
every Member by the SIC Director no less than five days prior to the date of the regular 
meeting.  W ritten notice of special meetings shall be provided to each Member no less 
than two days prior to the date of the special meeting.  Notices shall specify the business 
to be conducted at such meeting, including any proposed amendments to the By-Laws . 
 
D. Quorum.   Eleven Members of the SIC entitled to vote shall constitute a quorum for the 
transaction of business.  Voting rights of a Member may either be delegated or exercised 
by proxy.  The act of a majority of the SIC M embers present at any meeting at which  a 
quorum was once present shall be the act of the SIC except as may be otherwise 
specifically provided by statute or these By-Laws.  If at any meeting there is less than a 
quorum present, a majority of those present may adjourn the meeting without further  
notice to any absent Member, or those present may continue to consider the issues before 
it and bring back any recommendations for action to the next regular or special SIC  
meeting for vote by the SIC. 
 
 5 E. Presiding Officer.   At all meetings of the SIC, the Chair shall be the presiding officer.  
In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall preside.  In the absence of the Chair and 
the Vice Chair, the Executive Director of the MFPC or his or her designee shall preside.  
In the absence of the Executive  Director of the MFPC, or his or her designee, the 
Members present may elect a Chair pro tempore who shall preside.  
 
F. Action by Unanimous Consent.   Any action or vote required to be taken by the 
Members may be taken without a meeting by the unanimous wri tten consent of all of the 
Members then in office.  
 
Section 5.  Powers.  
 
A. General.  The SIC shall be the governing body, and shall have general supervision, 
control, and direction of the affairs of the SIC. All powers, except such as are otherwise 
provide d for in these By-Laws, in the By -Laws of the Maine Forest Products Council, 
and in the laws of the State of Maine, shall be and are hereby vested in the SIC, who 
shaft exercise the same.  
 
B. Delegation.  Except as otherwise provided by law, the SIC may by general resolution 
delegate to the Executive Committee or subcommittees, which, in the case of 
subcommittees other than the Executive Committee, may include persons who are not 
members of the SIC, or to officers or employees of the SIC, such powers as it m ay see fit.  
 
C. Reserved Powers.   Notwithstanding any other provision of these By-Laws, the SIC  
shall exercise the following authority and responsibility itself, subject to the MFPC 
Executive Committee's authorization, and shall not delegate to any other committee, 
officer, employee, or SIC member the following powers:  
 
1. Amendment of the By-Laws of the SIC. 
 
2. The sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the property and assets of 
the SIC other than in the usual course of business.  
 
3.  Actions regarding dissolution of the SIC.  
 
4.  Election, appointment, or removal of any Officer of the SIC or any Member of the 
Executive Committee.  
 
5.  Adoption or modification of a mission statement of the SIC. 
 
6.  Approval or modification of the annu al budget of the SIC. 
 
7. Approval or modification of the dues structure of the SIC. 
 
D. Duties.  The Executive Committee and the Officers of the SIC shall exercise their powers 
and discharge their duties in good faith with a view to the interests of the SIC and with 
 6 that degree of diligence, care and skill that ordinarily prudent individuals would exercise 
under similar circumstances in like positions. In discharging their duties, they may in all 
cases rely upon the books and records of account maintained b y the SIC. 
 
E. Procedures.  The SIC may prescribe rules and regulations for the call and conduct of 
meetings of the SIC and other matters relating to its procedure.  
 
Section 6.  Compensation and Expenses.  
 
A. Members and Officers of the SIC, except for the Executive Director of the MFPC and the 
SIC Director,  shall not receive any salary for their services, but by approval by the SIC, a 
reasonable sum or reimbursement of expenses, or both, may be allowed for 
disbursements or services rendered to the SIC. 
 
B. The SIC shall have the power in its discretion to contract for and to pay to Members or 
nonmembers rendering unusual or exceptional services to the SIC special compensation 
appropriate to the value of the services rendered.  
 
C. The SIC may not authorize th e expenditure of funds or commit to financial obligations in 
excess of existing funds and the budget.  
 
ARTICLE IV  
Officers  
 
Section 1.  Officers.   Officer s of the SIC must be Program Participants  in good standing . The 
Officers of the SIC shall be the Chair,  the Vice Chair, the Executive Director of 
the MFPC or his or her designee, the Secretary, the Treasurer, and such other 
officers as may be appointed from time to time by the Committee. All Officers of 
the SIC shall exercise powers and discharge the duties  of their respective offices, 
such that they that are not inconsistent with these By-Laws or the laws of the 
State of Maine. The same individual may hold any two offices, except those of 
Chair and Vice Chair.  
 
Section 2.  Election and Terms of Office.   The Officers shall be elected biannually by the 
SIC to  serve a term of two years and until their successors are duly elected.  
 
Section 3.  Resignation, Removal, and Vacancies.   An Officer may resign at any time by 
giving written notice to the Chair. Any Officer may be removed from office, with 
or without cause, according to the same voting procedures as provided for 
removal or suspension of Members in Article III, Section 3 .  In the event any 
office becomes vacant, for any cause whatsoever, a majority of the SIC Members 
present and entitled to vote at any regular or special meeting called for that 
purpose may elect an Officer to fill such vacancy, and the Officer so elected shall 
hold office and serve until the next annual meeting of the SIC or until the electio n 
and qualification of his or her successor unless sooner removed pursuant to the 
By-Laws. 
 7  
Section 4.  Chair.   The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the SIC.  He or she shall have 
and exercise general charge and supervision of the affairs of the SIC and shall do 
and perform such other duties as may be assigned by the SIC. 
 
Section 5.  Vice Chair.   The Vice Chair shall perform the duties of the Chair during any 
absence or temporary disability of the Chair.  
 
Section 6.  Secretary.   The Secretary shall be r esponsible for the Minutes of the Meetings of 
the SIC and the Executive Committee. The Secretary shall, in general, perform all 
duties incidental to the office of Secretary, subject to the control of the SIC, and 
shall do and perform such other duties as m ay be assigned to him or her by the 
SIC. 
 
Section 7.  Treasurer.   The Treasurer has general supervision of the financial affairs of the  
 SIC. The Treasurer is responsible for the collection of dues, assessments and 
receivables of the SIC and for the mainten ance of the assets of the SIC as  directed 
by the SIC. He or she shall have all said sums placed to the credit of the SIC in 
such depository as may be designated by the SIC. The Treasurer shall ensure that 
the financial records of the SIC are maintained and  shall exhibit such records at 
all reasonable times to any member of the SIC upon reasonable request at the 
offices of the SIC. The Treasurer shall be responsible for all tax returns or reports 
primarily related to taxes or financial matters. The Treasurer  shall, in general, 
perform all duties incidental to the office of Treasurer, subject to the control of 
the SIC. The Treasurer shall provide monthly financial reports of the SIC to the 
MFPC Treasurer.  
 
Section 8.   SIC Director .  A Director employed  by the SIC shall conduct the  
administration and management of the SIC . Appointment, supervision and 
removal of the  Director shall be the responsibility of the SIC, or may be delegated 
to the Executive Committee.  The  Director shall be the chief staff executive a nd 
operating officer of the SIC with  responsibility for the management and direction 
of all operations and affairs of the SIC, subject to the supervision and control of 
the SIC. The  Director shall  function within the scope of the policy aims and 
budget lev els determined by the SIC. The  Director shall prepare an annual budget 
and such other reports as the SIC may require. The Director shall send all proper 
notices of all meetings of the SIC to the appropriate persons. Unless the SIC 
provides otherwise, the Director or the Director’s designee [s] shall be ex officio 
Treasurer and Secretary.  
 
ARTICLE V  
SIC Executive Committee  
 
Section 1.  Composition.    The Executive Committee shall consist of : 
 
 8 • The SIC Officers;  
 
• The Director of the Maine SIC;  
 
• A representa tive serving as chair of each authorized subcommittee of this SIC;  
 
• Such other members (“Other Executive Committee Members”) as may be qualified 
to serve on the Executive Committee pursuant to these By -Laws.  
 
The minimum number of Executive Committee memb ers shall be five and the maximum 
number of members shall be twenty.  The number of Executive Committee members may 
be increased or decreased, within the limits prescribed in this section, by a resolution of 
the Executive Committee.  Except for the Executi ve Director of the MFPC (or designee) 
and the Director of the Maine SIC,  who shall not be entitled to vote, all members 
identified above shall have full voting rights on the Executive Committee.   
 
 
Secti on 2.  Term.  Members of the Executive Committee in t he category of “Other Executive 
Committee Members” shall be elected by the SIC for  a prescribed term. The 
elections will be held at the last regular meeting of the SIC of  each calendar year.  
 
Section 3.  Resignation, Removal, and Vacancies.   A member of the  Executive Committee 
may resign at any time by giving written notice to the Secretary. Any member of 
the Executive Committee may be removed from office as a member of the 
Executive Committee with or withou t cause  according to the same voting 
procedures as provided for removal or suspension of Members in Article III, 
Section 3 .  Any Member proposed to be removed from office as an Executive 
Committee member shall be entitled to at least five days notice in wr iting by mail 
of the meeting at which removal is to  be voted upon, and shall be entitled to 
appear before and be heard at such meeting.  Any vacancy on the Executive 
Committee resulting from any cause whatsoever may be filled by the majority 
vote of the SIC Members entitled to vote and present at any regul ar or special SIC 
meeting called for that purpose.  
 
Section 4:  Meetings.  
 
A. Regular Meetings.  The Executive Committee shall hold no less than two regular 
meetings per calendar year at such time and at s uch place, as the Executive Committee 
shall determi ne. 
 
B. Special Meetings.   Special meetings of the Executive Committee may be called by the 
Chair, Vice Chair, or the Director , and may also be called by any two members of the 
Executive Committee.  
 
C. Notice of Meetings.   Written notices of regular meetin gs of the Executive Committee 
shall be provided to every Executive Committee member by the Director or  Chair no less 
 9 than seven days prior to the date of the regular meeting. Written notice of special 
meet ings of the Executive Committee shall be provided t o each member of the Executive 
Committee by the Director or Chair not less than two days prior to the scheduled time 
and date of the special meeting.  Notices shall specify the business to be conducted at 
such meeting.  
 
D. Quorum.   Any four members of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum for 
the transaction of business.  The act of a majority of the Executive Committee members 
present at any meeting at which a quorum was once present shall be t he act of the 
Executive Committee, except as may be  otherwise specifically provided by statute or 
these By-Laws.  If at any Executive Committee meeting there is less than a quorum 
present, a majority of those present may adjourn the meeting without further  notice to any 
absent Executive Committee member, o r those present may continue to consider the 
issues before it and bring back any recommendations for action to the next regular or 
special Executive Committee meeting for vote by the Executive Committee.  
 
E. Presiding Officer.   At all meetings of the Execu tive Committee, the Chair shall be the 
presiding officer.  
 
F. Action by Unanimous Consent.   Any action or vote required to be taken by the 
Executive Committee may be taken without a meeting by the unanimou s written consent 
of all of the Executive Committee  members then in office.  
 
Section 5.  Procedures.   
 
The Executive Committee may prescribe rules and regulations for the call and conduct of 
meetings of the Executive Committee and other matters relating to  its procedure.  
 
Section 6.  Authority and Responsib ilities.    
 
The Executive Committee shall have authority to act on behalf of the SIC and shall have 
authority to exercise all powers and privileges not otherwise reserved to the SIC pursuant  
to Article III .  The Executive Committee is responsible for imple mentation of the 
Sustainable Forestry Initiative  programs, supervision of the SIC’s employees and 
contractors.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Executive Committee shall have no 
power to enter into any transaction or engage in any activity that it knows  to be contrary 
to the wishes of the SIC. 
 
ARTICLE VI  
Dues and Fiscal Year  
 
The annual dues for each Member of the SIC shall be developed and proposed, pursuant to the 
requirements of these By-Laws, by a b udget subcommittee for consideration by the SIC.  The 
fiscal year shall be the calendar year.  The SIC may waive payment for dues for any Member.  
The SIC shall  approve dues amounts.  Dues are to be paid in advance of the due date after a 
 10 timely notice is provided.  Payment is to be made to the MFPC, SFI I mplementation  Committee, 
where it will be placed in a dedicated account.  
 
ARTICLE VII  
Rules & Amendments  
 
Where the By-Laws do not address SIC conduct, Roberts Rules of Order shall apply.  These 
By-Laws ma y be amended by a two -thirds vote of the total numb er of Full SIC Members who 
are Program Participants in good standing, at any regular or special SIC meeting called for that 
purpose .  Telephonic participation of Program Participants at any meeting called for the purpose 
of voting on a By -Law amendment pur suant to this section is permitted, and such participation 
shall be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum.  Amendments do not become effective 
until approved by the MFPC Executive Committee, at whi ch time they become effective 
immediately.  
 
ARTICLE  VIII  
Dissolution  
 
Upon dissolution of the SIC or  termination of its activities, the property, assets and earnings of 
the SIC, once any and all obligations have been paid, shall be transferred to and becom e the 
property of the MFPC.  
 
ARTICLE IX  
Effective D ate. 
 
Section 1.  Effective Date.   Once approved by resolution of the Executive Committee of the 
MFPC, these By-Laws shall take effect immediately upon their adoption by the 
SIC. 
 
Section 2.  Membership.   The membership of the SIC, Executive Committee, and o ther 
committees existing prior to the adoption of these By-Laws shall continue after 
the By-Laws' adoption.  
 
 
 
