Maine’s Sustainable Forestry Initiative sm 
                             Good for you. Good for our forests.®  
 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330     207 -622 -9288      www.sfimaine.org  
 
 
  
March 1, 2023  
 
Dear Representative , 
 
I’m writing to share our 2022 progress report on Maine ’s Sustainable Fore stry Initiative (SFI)  Implementation 
Committee. This reports highlights many of the projects and partners SFI has worked with over the past two years 
to sustain and improve our forest resource for generations to come.  
SFI is a voluntary forest land certification system used to publicly demonstrate sust ainable forestland 
management. The Maine State Implementation Committee helps Maine SFI certified landowners and 
mills meet the sustainable standards through program management and professional training programs.  
Maine’s SFI Implementation Committee (SIC ) includes landowners, loggers, mills, foresters, government 
agencies, conservation groups, management companies, recreation representatives, educators,  and researchers.  
SFI’s mission is to promote sustainable management of our state’s 17.6 million acres of  forestland by continually 
improving forestry and harvesting practices.  
During the past two years, the SFI program has undergo ne a standards revision which has resulted in some 
significant program enhancements. Since SFI is primarily a north American stan dard certifying  over 370 million 
acres in  the US and Canada, it is the role of Maine’s SFI Implementation committee to help landowners and mills 
in Maine understand how to implement the SFI Standards . You will see in this report that SFI Certified 
Participants invest in resear ch on a variety of topics such as bird habitat and climate smart forestry. Our 
educational effort focuses a wide range of practices to protect soil productivity, water quality, and biodiversity 
features. And although, Maine is fortunately not the west coast  for fire risk, we have to acknowledge the effects of 
climate change and plan for future fire risks  accordingly.  
Another  SFI, Maine specific  program that should be of interest to you is ou r public  confidential hotline for 
questions or concerns regarding forestry practices , SFI GOAL . Established in 1997 to respond to questions and 
concerns regarding forestry and timb er harvesting practices , we have responded to hundreds of calls. Some 
require d corrective actions and other s provided an opportunity for forest practitioners  to educate the caller on 
accepted  forestry practices. C alls can range from water quality issues  to visual impacts of a timber harvest . When 
we get a call about a specific site,  we send forest resource professionals out to study the site. It ’s important to 
understand that this is not an enforcement program , but a way to  identify problem areas and dev elop education 
and training programs for loggers, foresters and landowners. We wo rk effectively with loggers, landowners and 
foresters to encourage the best possible outcomes.  
Our hope is that you will encourage your constituents to call 1-888-SFI GOAL (1 -888-734-4625) if they have  
question s regarding a  timber  harvest in their area. If you would like more  information on the Sustainable Forestry 
Initiative, go to: www.sfimaine.org  or call me at 207 -622-9288. I would be happy to answer quest ions or provide 
additional  information . 
Sincerely,  
 
Pat Sirois, Program Coordinator , Maine SFI Implementation Committee  
 

Maine’s Sustainable Forestry Initiative sm 
                             Good for you. Good for our forests.®  
 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330     207 -622 -9288      www.sfimaine.org  
 
 
  
 
February 21, 2023  
Dear Sir/Madam , 
I’m writing to provide you access to  our 2022 progress report on Maine ’s Sustainable Fore stry Initiative 
(SFI) , which is celebrating its 2 8th year of promoting sustainable management of our state’s 17.6 million 
acres of forestland. The report can be found online  at: 
https://maineforest.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/02/SIC -2022 -Report -EMAIL -VERSION.pdf  
In our report , you will find articles on neotropical bird research, fire resilience, climate smart forestry , 
and efforts to protect globally significant rare and threatened species during harvest operations 
throug hout Maine.  Maine’s SFI Implementation Committee (SIC) is ma de up of  landowners, loggers, 
mills, fores ters, government agencies, conservation groups, management companies, recreation 
representatives, educators , and researchers.  Our goal is to continually improve forestry and harvesting 
practices on the ground.  The 2022 SFI report will provide you with some ways we are working to 
achieve those goals.  
In addition to the SFI report , we wanted to remind you o f our confidential forestry public comment 
program,  Maine’s SFI GOAL Program . This is our statewide confidential, toll -free hot line, which was  
established in 1997 to respond to questions and concerns regarding forestry and timb er harvesting 
practices .  Over the years , we’ve fielded calls on concerns ranging from water quality issues to visual 
impacts of a timber harvest. When we g et a call about a specific site, we send forest resource 
professionals out to study the site. It ’s important to understand that this is not an enforcement program , 
but a way to  identify problem areas and dev elop education and training programs for loggers,  foresters , 
and landowners. In responding to SFI GOAL calls, we’ve worked effectively with loggers, landowners , 
and foresters , sharing techniques and knowledge to encourage the best possible outcomes.   
Our hope is that you will encourage people to call 1-888-SFI-GOAL (1 -888-734-4625) should  they have  
question s regarding a  timber  harvest in their area.  
If you would like more  information on the Sustainable Forestry Initiative, go to: www.sfimaine.org  or 
call me at 207 -622-9288. I would be happy to answer questions or provide additional  information . 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Pat Sirois, Program Coordinator ,  
Maine SFI Implementation Committee  

