 
 
Testimony in Support 
LD 219, An Act to Promote Equity in the Permitting Appeals Process 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Honorable Members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee;  
On behalf of the Maine Real Estate and Development Association (MEREDA), I am testifying in support 
of LD 219, based on the amendment language circulated by the sponsor, Representative Bradstreet.  
MEREDA is Maine’s premiere trade association representing commercial real estate and the state’s 
housing creators. MEREDA members are housing creators, engineers, architects, designers, bankers, 
lawyers, brokers, and many other organizations involved in the real estate industry. MEREDA’s guiding 
principle is the promotion of responsible real estate development – responsible real estate development 
is community development. Through the advocacy efforts of its Public Policy Committee, MEREDA works 
to advance a more fair, practical, and predictable policy landscape for housing creation in Maine.  
MEREDA supports the proposed amended version of LD 219 because it attempts to provide greater 
predictability and fairness for housing creators. As the housing crisis continues and the response effort 
ramps up to create more units, the State has a genuine interest in ensuring the NIMBY landowners are 
not hording their local resources and “town character” for their own benefit at the detriment to Mainers 
who need a place to live.  
Further, LD 219 will help reduce costs for housing creation, by reducing the threat of lawsuits. While the 
housing creator may still have to delay their permit during the course of an appeal of their project by a 
local opposition group, the housing creator can at least have assurance that if they prevail the will not 
have to spend all kinds of new money to reapply for their permit. 
MEREDA thinks the intention of LD 219, to lower risk and barriers to housing creation for local and 
entrepreneurial housing creators, is smart. We appreciate the sponsor’s efforts in bringing this bill 
forward, and we look forward to helping in any way that we can to continue to move the needle on 
solving Maine’s housing crisis.  
Sincerely 
Elizabeth M. Frazier 
On behalf of Maine Real Estate & Development Association 
efrazier@pierceatwood.com  
 
 
 
 
 
