 
 
131st MAINE LEGISLATURE 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES 
   
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 219 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Peter DelGreco, 
President & CEO of Maine & Co.  My organization exists to find growing companies and 
show them how they can be successful in establishing an operation in Maine.  Created 
during the administration of Governor Angus King, we are a privately funded 501(c)6.  
We compete with states from the entire country and countries around the world to 
attract new jobs and investment to Maine.  We also work with existing Maine 
companies, helping them implement their growth plans.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share why I support LD 219.   
 
DEP has the role of evaluating permits related to new development projects.  
Fortunately, when they issue a permit or make a ruling, there are opportunities to 
appeal their decisions.  If they have overlooked something, there is an opportunity to 
correct it.  If they have made the right decision, the appeals process supports their 
original decision. 
 
As such, the appeals process becomes very important.  Making sure that everyone 
understands the rules of the process is vital to establishing the legitimacy of the process.  
This bill seeks to help clear up some ambiguities within the process so that both sides 
understand how to move forward in a legitimate manner.  It provides rules that are 
applicable to the permit holder, the department, and those bringing the appeal.  It helps 
to identify the specific manner in which information is introduced and attempts to 
prevent people from withholding information in a proceeding. 
 
This bill also aligns permit timelines with regulatory proceedings, especially as they 
relate to when the judicial system is involved.  It eliminates delay tactics due to court 
backlogs by use of the tolling provision, and it helps create capacity at the DEP without 
adding new financial burdens. 
 
Passing this bill will help remove repetitive processes, thus freeing up capacity and 
resources at DEP without incurring new costs.  In short, this bill provides simple, 
common-sense adjustments that ensure a fairer process.   

 
Thank you again and I urge this committee to support LD 219. 
