 
 
 
LD-219, “An Act to Promote Equity in the Permitting Appeals Process ” (4-20-2023)  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich  and respec tive members of the Joint Standing Committ ee on 
Environment and Natural Resources . My name is Tim C. Walto n, I am a resident of Livermor e and I am supplying 
testim ony tod ay on beha lf of the Maine Aggr egate Association  (MAA) in support of  LD-219.   
 
MAA is a statewide, non-profit, member -based organ ization  representing businesses and individual s involved with the 
gravel and rock industries.   Establish ed in 1994, MAA has become an effective and respected voice for the industry.  MAA 
membership includ es gravel p it owners, quarry operators, aggregate processors and truckers as well as equipment 
dealers, banks, insurance agencies and consulting firms that s erve the aggrega te industry.  
 
We would like to thank Representative Bradstreet for submitting this le gislation. In most cases , we believe  Maine ’s 
business, in dustry and  developer communities  experience  good, communicative , working relationship s with our State ’s 
various departments and agencies. We believe  this legislation will help enhance th ose rel ationships and accompanying 
processes . 
 
Predictability of process is one of the most important aspects to pr oject developmen t. The complexities and costs of 
developing projects in today ’s market s often come with immense regulatory hurdles . When a project dev eloper makes 
the decision to mov e forward with a resp ective project, they do so with the hope that the permitting process will be 
fairly navigable and more im portantly predictable. We believe  this legislation  will help improve the permitting process  
significantly,  specifically as it relates to the appeals process.  
 
By establishing clear rules during the appeals process, that all parties must follow, this bill promotes more clarity to the 
appeal s process and provides better ali gnment in the process between the department of ju risdiction and the applicant . 
Furthermore, by engaging a tolling provision  in the appeals process , which will allow for a pause in the process for 
additional review , correction of potent ial error, etc. , a potentially better outcome for all parties involved could very well 
be achieved . 
 
Thank you in ad vance for you time and consideration of our position on this matter . 
 
Maine Aggregate Associatio n ● PO Box 243 , Kent s Hill, ME 0434 9 ● (207) 557 -3049  
