1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Thursday, May 18, 2023, 1:00 PM 
  
L.D. 1852 – “An Act to Eliminate the Lodging Tax on Campground Sites and 
Revert to Using the Current Sales Tax” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against L.D. 1852, “An 
Act to Eliminate the Lodging Tax on Campground Sites and Revert to Using the 
Current Sales Tax.” 
Currently, rentals of living quarters in “tourist camps” and “trailer camps” 
are subject to the 9% sales tax rate on taxable rentals.  This bill would remove 
rentals of living quarters in “tourist or trailer camps” from the imposition of the 9% 
rate, subjecting them instead to the general 5.5% sales tax rate. 
The terms “hotel,” “rooming house,” “tourist camp,” and “trailer camp” as 
currently defined, and subject to the 9% sales tax rate, can overlap.  For example, 
the definition of “tourist camp” includes “camp cottages or other structures . . . 
offered to the public.”  A camp cottage may also be considered a “rooming house,” 
which likewise includes “cottage[s]” and “vacation home[s]” within its definition.  
As such, the lines being drawn by this bill and the policy justification for those 
distinctions, are not clear. 
2 
 Under this proposal, an entity could have different types of living quarters 
available for rental on the same property but be subject to different rates.  For 
example, a resort offering rentals of both hotel rooms and cabins may be required 
to collect 9% for the hotel rooms (as “hotels”) and 5.5% for cabins (as “tourist 
camps”).  Additionally, transient rental platforms and room remarketers facilitate 
rentals of camping sites and trailer space, and it may be difficult for those entities 
to determine the appropriate tax rate for each listing. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.   
