     Eric L. Brakey 131st MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station
     Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey
Presenting L.D. 562, An Act to Ensure Maine Residents 
Have Priority Access to State Park Campsites
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
February 27, 2023
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of 
Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Thank you for your presence today as I present 
L.D. 562, An Act to Ensure Maine Residents Have Priority Access to State Park Campsites.
This is a simple bill, with a simple idea from a constituent that I believed was a good one as I 
spoke with her last year while knocking on her door.
There is no question: Maine is a beautiful state; our pristine lakes, our rocky coastlines, our high 
peaks, and our pine tree forests. Arkansas may call itself the “Natural State,” but let’s be honest, 
it and so many others have nothing on “Vacationland” — the title borne on our license plates for 
more than 85 years as tourists have flocked here to enjoy Maine’s natural beauty and slower pace 
of life. 
I believe Maine people appreciate the commerce that visitors to our state provide. At the same 
time, Maine’s well-earned reputation as a vacation destination can make it difficult for full-time 
residents to enjoy our state parks to the fullest (which they help fund year-round with their 
taxes), competing with visitors for the limited and beautiful campsites situated along Maine’s 
coast and hiking trails are in high demand 
Maine people should be able to vacation in the vacationland. That’s why this bill proposes to 
give full time Maine residents a 24-hour jumpstart on reserving state park campsites when 
reservations open up to the public.
Beyond the obvious and direct benefit to our constituents, this policy could generate additional 
benefits. For our state parks, more Maine people enjoying Maine campsites means more family 
memories that instill in future generations an appreciation for the beauty of our wilderness and 
the importance of protecting our beautiful parks. For our tourism industry, this policy would 
boost vacation spending by Maine residents, keeping their dollars close to home.
I will note that, since submitting this legislation, I have heard from the Bureau of Parks and 
Lands. They believe this policy could impact federal funding from the Land and Water 
Conservation Fund, which accounts for less than 10% of the state park budget, but prohibits of 
discrimination based on residence, including preferential reservations. 
Personally, I am no fan of this system where Washington D.C. takes our money with taxes, debt, 
and inflation, then ransoms it back with strings attached to dictate our state policies. That said, I 
understand not every hill is worth dying on. If the Maine Legislature makes a decision that 
jeopardizes federal funds, the juice better be worth the squeeze.
That being the case, I understand if this committee would like to pursue this policy for our 
constituents without jeopardizing federal funds. If there is truly no wiggle room for something so 
limited as a 24-hour advance window for state residents, this committee could do two things:
1. Amend this bill to add a trigger clause, putting the policy into effect only when it would 
not negatively impact receipt of federal funds.
2. Send a letter to our Congressional delegation, asking them to pursue a change in policy 
for the LWCF, allowing states to enact 24-hour advance reservation windows for their 
own constituents.
I appreciate your consideration of this proposal and I am happy to take any questions.
