Dv_ P O Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2074303334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
OPPOSED to LD 1189: “An Act to Amend the Burden of Proof for Defendants Who Cannot 
Pay Criminal Restitution 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ to raise issues for your consideration 
regarding LD 1189, “An Act to Amend the Burden of Proof for Defendants Who Cannot Pay 
Criminal Restitution. ” 
Restitution is one of the primary ways that our criminal legal system attempts to 
require people who cause harm to actually make amends for the harm they’ve caused. You 
have heard quite a lot already this session about the need for second chances and about 
how the focus should be on harm repair and restoration. This bill gives you an opportunity to 
really consider the commitment Maine's policymakers are going to have to those principles. 
Under current law, a defendant who is ordered to pay restitution, who then 
experiences unexpected financial hardship, can petition the court to modify both the 
amount of each installment and the overall time the defendant has to fulfill their restitution 
obligation; they can make this request as frequently as they need to. Additionally, failure to 
fully pay a restitution obligation does not extend a probation term. For example: in an 
assault case, a defendant threw the victim's phone across the room and smashed it, causing 
a $250 loss to the victim for screen repair. The defendant is convicted, given a suspended 
sentence, ordered to one year of probation and to pay the $250 in 10 installment payments 
of $25/month. The end of the defendant ’s probation comes around, and the defendant has 
only paid $25 of the restitution because they lost their job after the first month. That 
defendant could, at any point, ask the court to modify their payment plan. In response, a 
court could modify the payment plan to $1 per month for the next ten years. It's unlikely the 
victim would even be notified until after the fact. Regardless of the modification, that 
defendant ’s probation term is not extended, they merely pay the future restitution to the 
‘ MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
l\/lCEDV Page 2 of4 
District Attorney's office that handled the initial case, instead of to the Division of Adult 
Community Corrections. 
The courts currently have vast discretion when it comes to accounting for the ability 
of a defendant to make restitution to a crime victim who has suffered financial loss asa 
result of the defendant ’s crime, both at the time of sentencing and in the future when/if a 
defendant ’s financial circumstances change. Conversely, if the court were to terminate a 
defendant ’s restitution obligation, and the defendant ’s financial circumstances were to 
change for the better, the victim would have no recourse to go back to the court and askfor 
the reinstatement of the restitution obligation. Their only recourse would then be to expend 
more of their own resources, if they have any to spare, to pursue a civil action. 
Additionally, there’s no protocol in place for victim notification that a defendant has 
moved to terminate the restitution obligation, or for a crime victim to provide the court their 
perspective on the appropriateness of that, how the pecuniary loss continues to affect 
them, any contrary information they have about the defendant ’s ability to pay, etc. Who 
would take on that responsibility for notification to and support of any victim through this 
process? District Attorneys Offices across Maine already struggle with their obligations to 
timely notify victims about pre-trial cases. What ability does the State have to challenge 
information provided by a defendant to support the full termination of their restitution 
obligation? Would the State be entitled to discovery? 
Where is the data to show that defendants are suffering adverse consequences, 
having probation revoked, being incarcerated, etc. for failing to timely pay restitution or to 
pay in accordance with the set payment schedule? Crime victims who are working with our 
networkz experience that restitution is ordered incredibly infrequently as compared to the 
number of cases where there is quantifiable economic loss. When it is ordered, there is 
usually some level of sentencing consideration in exchange for the defendant being willing 
to address the economic harm the crime caused to their victim. Despite this, even when 
restitution is ordered, it is rarely paid, and even more rarely paid in accordance with the 
terms of the court’s order. 
For those most serious cases, where a defendant is convicted and sentenced toa 
term in a Department of Correction ’s facility, the Department of Correction ’s Office of Victim 
Services has frequently observed that, despite the fact residents can have jobs that earn 
them compensation, and that a certain percentage of that compensation can be garnished 
by the Department to be paid towards victim restitution obligations, the fact of the person’s 
incarceration more often than not leads a court to discount economic loss to the victim and 
1 
MCEDV would note for the Committee that, by and large, the cases in which restitution is most commonly 
relevant are not domestic violence cases. However, as a result of the State failing for decades to prioritize 
adequate attention on or funding for victim services and the types of infrastructure that crime victims have the 
benefit of in other states, victims of crime other than domestic violence and sexual assault do not have 
representation in policy making spaces. As policy makers consider this proposal, we hope you also consider the 
impact on victims of elder abuse and fraud — other crimes for which insurance coverage is often not available.
1 
Dv_ P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 207_43O_3334 
not order any restitution at all. When restitution is ordered, Maine doesn’t have an 
organized restitution collection system. What the state has is 18 different collection agencies 
(the sixteen different county district attorneys offices, the Maine Department of 
Corrections, and the Maine Judicial Branch), none of whom have any functional ability to 
coordinate or share information about what restitution obligations are outstanding, what 
has been paid, etc. Further, the way in which these many different collection agencies 
manage the restitution they receive is not consistent. in the hypothetical example above, 
where the defendant's restitution obligation was altered to $1/month for a significant period 
of years, some DA offices would send the $1 each month, and some offices would wait until 
they recovered the whole $250 years later before sending the payment on to the victim. 
In the 130"“ Legislature, policy makers created a process for younger people (ages 18 
through 27) to have a process to seal Class E crimes if they have fully completed their 
sentence and not had any new convictions. That would include ensuring full payment of 
restitution. lf this proposal were to pass, a person ordered to pay restitution for a ClassE 
crime could petition to have their restitution obligation terminated, then have their own 
criminal record sealed from the public, as if they had successfully completed their sentence, 
while the victim continues to carry the burden of that loss. 
Lastly, consider briefly, when a single parent has the benefit of the Temporary 
Assistance to Needy Families Program (TANF), and the other parent owes child support. In 
such circumstances, the State takes most of it, passing only a small portion along to the 
custodial parent, even though the state has identified that parent as in financial need. The 
State takes the child support to pay itself backfor the TANF support it is providing, doing 
little to help move that custodial parent out of poverty. Conversely, the State has zero to 
little interest in putting effort into seeking the smallest measure of restitution from a person 
who has been found to have caused pecuniary harm as part of their crime. Why is the State's 
monetary interest more valuable than a person who has suffered a crime for which the court 
has ordered recompense to be paid? 
Policymakers should not support public policy that shifts the burden of crime from 
the person who has caused harm to the person who they harmed. That is precisely what this 
bill, in proposing to create an opportunity to terminate a restitution obligation, asks you to 
support. MCEDV and our member programs urge you to reject it. Thank you for the 
opportunity to be heard on this important issue. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
l\/ICEDV Page 4 of4 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph= (107) 430-8334 
Email: _a_ndreae@.mce.;;l.y.,.Q.:g
