HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
it 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
"f AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Kristen Cloutier TTY' MAINE RELAY 711 
Assistant Majority Leader 
33 Charles St. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
Phone: (207) 807-1637 
Kristen.Cloutier@§gislature.maine.20v 
March 30, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Kristen Cloutier Supporting 
LD 895, An Act to Establish Culturally Informed Reentry or 
Reintegration Halfway Houses 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Good moming, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Kristen Cloutier, and I proudly 
represent House District 94, which includes part of Lewiston. I am submitting this written 
testimony as a supportive cosponsor of LD 895, An Act to Establish Culturally Informed 
Reentry or Reintegration Halfway Houses. 
Halfway houses provide transitional housing and treatment for individuals who are living with 
mental illness and substance use disorder. Through a Structured, peer-oriented program, the staff 
at these facilities assist clients in maintaining recovery while moving from an intensive 
rehabilitation setting to increased independence and integration into the community. 
These programs work to address the complex needs of clients, utilizing an integrated, 
individualized and client-centered approach, led by staff trained in trauma-informed care, crisis 
intervention and mental health and substance use treatment. To help individuals stabilize and 
develop goals that will move them toward the most independent, supportive, permanent living 
situation possible, staff and clients Work together to develop individual care plans. 
However, there is still Work to be done to make halfway houses in Maine culturally sensitive to 
better provide immigrant families with the security they need to trust them as a safe and reliable 
place for their children to live and receive treatment on their path to recovery. 
LD 895 would direct the Commissioner of Corrections to establish and operate 
culturally-informed halfway houses for persons under 21 years old to provide housing services, 
referrals to commtmity-based services and supports and education and employment resources. It 
allows the commissioner to subcontract with an entity for the establishment and operation of the 
halfway houses. 
District 94: Pan of Lewiston
Such a setting would provide the support that young people so desperately need to makea 
successful transition back into society and to reach their full potential as active members of our 
communities. As a representative of the second largest city in Maine with one of the largest 
immigrant populations in the State, I wholeheartedly support this legislation and I hope you will 
too. 
Sincerely, 
Rep. Kristen S. Cloutier 
Assistant House Majority Leader 
District 94: Pait of Lewiston
