~;‘53'% 
ﬂilﬁﬁ 
Peggy Rotundo THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 21 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony introducing 
LD 895, "An Act to Establish Culturally Informed Reentry or Reintegration Halfway Houses" 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Committee 
On Criminal Iustice and Public Safety, my name is Peggy Rotundo and I represent Senate District 21, 
the City of Lewiston. I am here today to introduce LD 895, "An Act to Establish Culturally Informed 
Reentry or Reintegration Halfway Houses". 
This bill will provide culturally informed halfway houses for iinmigrant youth. When a young person 
from the immigrant community runs afoul of the law -- often by missing a court date or committing 
a petty crime — it can lead to a jail time and a downward spiral of more serious criminal activity due 
to a general lack of understanding of how to navigate the corrections system. This bill would allow 
these young people to land in a healthy, supportive environment to keep them out of the corrections 
system and let them rejoin their families to lead productive lives. 
New Mainers, while critically important to the future of our state, face distinct barriers when it comes 
to navigating the criminal justice system. As a result, there is a high rate of young New Mainers in the 
system. Reentry into the community can be complicated by the stigma attached to having been 
convicted of a crime and being shunned by family members. 
This bill calls for the establishment of facilities that take into account the cultural dynamics at play in 
order to achieve positive outcomes that will benefit all of us. These facilities would focus on mental 
health and substance use disorder treatment, as well as help with employment and reintegration. It is 
my belief that the price of creating these facilities would be dwarfed by the price of neglecting to 
create them. . 
To its great credit, the Department of Corrections has acknowledged the problem and has worked 
with the Muslim community to find solutions that will work for both parties. My hope is that we will 
continue this work toward finding a positive outcome for the immigrant youth who find themselves 
in the corrections system and seek to atone for their mistakes and find a way back to the right path. 
Thank you for your openness to finding a solution that will help Muslim families continue to 
assimilate and thrive. Maine benefits culturally and economically from the imniigrants who settle 
here, and this is one way we can further ease the transition. I am happy to take any questions. 
Chair, Appropriations and Financial Aﬂairs Committee 
Stare House: (207)287-1515 * Fax: (207)287-1585 * T011Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTI’: 711 
Peggy.R0tzmd0@legis1aIure. maine. gov * legislature. maine. gov/senate
