STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. |\/nus AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY OF 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
In Opposition to 
LD 895 An Act to Establish Culturally Informed Reentry or Reintegration Halfway Houses 
Before the 
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in opposition to LD 895. 
As this committee knows, the MDOC already operates community-based residences for youth involved in the 
justice system, including one for boys in Auburn, Unity Place, one for girls in South Portland, STEPS, and 
you’ve heard our plans to operate a third on the Goodwill~Hinkley campus for boys. 
The Maine Department of Corrections does not however operate halfway houses. I suspect no one in this room 
wants the MDOC involved with youth who are not already part of the justice system, as this bill would 
establish. 
Vfhile our opposition is simple, I would like to take the time to provide the backstory on this bill, as we know 
the intent is well meaning. 
In March of 2021, former Lewiston Representative Heidi Brooks introduced LD 963 An Act To Ensure 
Culturally Informed Programs and Services for Aajudicated Juveniles in the Custody of the Department of 
Corrections. 
The original presentation of that bill had language that was almost identical to the language in today’s LD 895. 
The previous iteration had the MDOC establishing and operating gender speciﬁc halfway houses exclusively for 
innnigrant youth. 
This is the language in the original iteration of LD 963 from the 130*“: 
Sec. 1. 34-A MRSA §1402, sub-§10-A is enacted to read: 
l0-A. Treatment and recovery halfway houses for immigrants. The commissioner 
shall establish treatment and recovery halfway houses for youth in the State to 
provide halfway house services and substance use disorder treatment, mental health 
treatment, education and job training and employment and job opportunity services 
for youth transitioning out of the juvenile justice system who are immigrants or
l
Qiﬁ 11,3 
G=_ ,;#;T?“i§‘§ 
STATE OF MAINE m "Q0. K 
DEPARTMENT o|= CORRECTIONS 
111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER 
whose families have immigrated to the State. The commissioner shall work in 
partnership with a nonproﬁt organization fonned for the purpose of involving 
immigrants in the civic work of their communities, along with other local 
immigrant community members and associations and local, state and federal 
agencies to provide halfway house services and other services in a culturally 
sensitive manner. The halfway houses must be assigned to only one gender and 
must provide housing services, referrals to community-based services and supports 
and education and employment resources. The halfway houses must be funded with 
contributions from the department and with any grants, donations and private 
funding received for this purpose. 
Immediately upon seeing the bill during the 130th Legislature, the MDOC reached out to Rep. Brooks to better 
understand the intention. What we heard was concern from constituents who self-identi ﬁed as members of the 
new Mainer community, mostly from Somalia and Ethiopia that their youth were getting into trouble and 
winding up in Long Creek. Because the community believed their youth were in Long Creek, they wanted to 
create a place for their youth outside of Long Creek that could better serve their cultural needs. 
The group’s belief that many immigrant youth were winding up in Long Creek did not match our data, at the 
time there was only l resident matching that description, and it’s rare to have more than 1-2 youth from an 
immigrant background in Long Creek. Through many conversations between MDOC, legislators, and the 
community, it turned out that the “youth” the group was concemed about were actually young adults, 18-25- 
year-olds, and they were not coming to Long Creek, rather they were coming into contact with the local courts, 
local police, and county jail system. 
It took some time, but we discover there was a misunderstanding of the various systems people can become 
entangled with, complicated as they are. 
In March, April, May, and June of 2021, we met and communicated often with Rep. Brooks, former Sen. Nate 
Libby, their immigrant constituents and members of the New Mainer Alliance to bridge the gap in 
understanding about who the MDOC’s Division of Juvenile Services has purview over and who we do not. We 
spent a lot of time communicating about the difference between county jails, state prisons, Long Creek, 
probation, the operation of juvenile community-based residences, and the funding MDOC provides to 
community-organizations that speciﬁcally serve the constituent base in question, like Tree Street, Prebble 
Street, Youth Advocates. 
Once we established better communication, we began to work collaboratively with the Lewiston Aubum 
legislators, their constituents, and leaders in the immigrant community to amended language to the bill in the 
130"‘ . The amended language, that MDOC collaboratively worked on, enshrined that MDOC’s programming 
and services would be culturally informed, which was a tenant of the constituent ’s original concern. This 
amendment passed as LD 963 in the 130th with the Governor ’s signature at the MDOC’s request, enshrining 
cultural competency in our juvenile programs and services. 
After the 130* session ended the MDOC happily upheld our commitment to improved communication with 
leaders from the Somali and Ethiopian communities from the Lewiston, Aubum, Portland areas. Of our own 
volition we convened a multi-state-agency working group that included many members of the Lewiston,
2
I,
, " are 1' 
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECITIONS 
111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER 
Auburn, Portland immigrant population, the New Mainer Alliance and relevant stakeholders, included elected 
ofﬁcials in Lewiston and Auburn to discuss issues of equity and support. 
This multi-agency working group meetings had lengthy agendas created collaboratively with Rep. Brooks and 
the MDOC. We met regularly in person in downtown Lewiston at the public library throughout the late fall in 
2021. In addition to members of the New Mainer Alliance and representatives of the Somali and Ethiopian 
communities, representatives from Maine’s Department of Public Safety, Department of Education, Department 
of Health and Human Services, local law enforcement, the City of Lewiston, juvenile probation, and my ofﬁce 
were part of the working group. These meetings allowed for incredible exchanges of information, generated 
new partnerships, and fostered greater understanding to reduce barriers and misconceptions. 
I provide all this to illustrate the good faith effort all parties took starting in 2021 to address concerns of 
understanding the needs, beliefs, and values across cultures. 
We are grateful for the connections and relationship that came out of the work during the 130"‘ including 
improved hiring practices, new contracted vendors, new volunteers at Long Creek, additional religious guidance 
in the adult population, and new friends. 
We have communicated with Rep. Rotundo so she’s aware of our position. The MDOC holds ﬁrm that we 
should not be asked to create halfway houses for youth and young adults who are not involved with the justice 
system. 
Thank You, 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner 
Maine Department of Corrections
3
