 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition regarding:  
LD 895: An Act to Establish Culturally Infor med Reentry or Reintegration Halfway Houses  
Sponsored By: Senator Peggy R otundo of Lewiston  
Public Hearing:  Monday , April 10, 2023 at 1 0:00am 
 
 
Dear Members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights 
Coalition (MIRC), a  statewide network  of almost 100 member organizations  working to enhance the lives 
of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advanc e systemic change s in Maine through 
collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and gro wing immigrant 
communities are heard.   
Personally speaking, I also live in Lewiston and am t hankful for the Lewiston delegation ’s leadership on 
this topic, with Senator Rotundo being the bill sponsor and Representatives Craven and Cloutier si gning 
onto it as cosponsors.  
Young people facing physical and  mental health challenges  or lacking positive role m odels  often  find 
themselves needin g supportive s ervices in fields such as housing, education, and employment.  For 
justice -involved youth, th e pivot al tran sition into adulthood can indeed determine  the course of their 
future.  For impacted people from the immigrant comm unity, ther e are often even additional barriers they 
face, such as language  access, discrimination, and internal community stigma.  
By providing culturally  informed re -entry and reintegration halfway houses  for persons under 21 years of 
age, the Com missioner of Corrections could take a proactive step at helping more communit y members  
get the help and servic es they need  in order to overcome their early struggles . This would benefit both the 
impacted in dividua ls and the larger communities where they live. Therefore, MIRC  encourage s you to 
pass LD 895: An Act to Establish Culturally Informed Reentry or Reintegration Halfway Houses . Thank 
you for your consideration of this  legislation .  
 
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston, ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
 
### 
 
