1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 24, 2023, at 10:00am 
  
LD 1945 – An Act to Provide a Property Tax Exemption to All Veterans Who Are 
62 Years of Age or Older and Increase the Current Exemption 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 1945 – 
An Act to Provide a Property Tax Exemption to All Veterans Who Are 62 Years of 
Age or Older and Increase the Current Exemption. 
Under current law, a veteran of a federally recognized war period, upon 
reaching 62 years of age or receiving a pension or compensation for total 
disability, is entitled to an exemption on the first $6,000 of value of property 
owned by that veteran, as long as that veteran is a resident of this State. 
This bill increases the current veteran property tax exemption from $6,000 to 
$12,000 and adds a new $6,000 exemption for all veterans 62 or older, as long as 
they served on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States, were not 
dishonorably discharged, and are residents of this State. 
Similar to LD 1717, which was heard earlier this session, this bill also 
simplifies the veteran’s exemption and therefore is a positive change.  However, 
changes to the veteran’s exemption should be made within the context of a review 
of all property tax relief programs to ensure consistent policy and affordability. 
2 
 The Administration would also like to note that the expansion of the exemption in 
this bill will be subject to the constitutional reimbursements of 50% for revenue 
lost (article IV, section 23) and 90% mandated administrative costs (article IX, 
section 21).  And the removal of the requirement, under this bill, for a veteran to 
have served during a war period is not extended to veterans eligible for the 
adaptive housing exemption under 36 M.R.S. § 653(1)(D-1). 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
