      
                     
 
Sen. Carney , Rep.  Moon en, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary,  my name is 
Judith Meyer . I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the 
Morning Sentinel .  
I write o n behalf of the Maine Press Association in opposition to  LD 1649, An Act to Support 
Local Governments in Responding to Freedom of Access Act Requests . 
* * *  
During the last legislative session, at the recommendation of the Right to Know Advisory 
Committee, the Legislature raised the  rate that an agency or official may charge to cove r the 
cost of searching for, retrieving and compiling a public record from $15 to $25 per hour .  
It was done to more accurately reflect the cost of public records searches and came following a 
months -long survey conducted by the Maine Municipal Association of its members  seeking 
guidance on the issue of the hourly rate , with clerks and town managers agreeing the $25 per 
hour cost was sufficient. That higher hourly figure was supported by representati ves of the 
Maine School Management  Association and police agencies  that are represent ed on the Right 
to Know Adviso ry Committee  and has been in effect for a little more than a year.  
The proposed increase to $40 per hour runs contrary to the MMA survey and guidance 
provided to RTK by other publi c bodies, and is excessive  -- part icularly for members of the 
general public who may struggle t o pay such a high fee for record s searches.  
For these reasons, MPA oppos es the fee increase.  
MPA also opposes  the language  addressing public records requests that may be  frivolous or 
designed to intimidate or harass school districts. There is already  protection under Maine ’s 
Freedom  of Acce ss Act, under §408 -A, in that “a body, an agency or an official may seek protection 
from a request for inspection or copying that is unduly burdensome or oppressive by filing an action for 
an order of protection in the Superior Court for the county where the requ est for records was made 
within 30 days of receipt of the request. “ 
This provision was drafted into law several years ago , after much consideration by stakeholders,  to 
address frivolous  or so -called “nuisance ” requests in order to provide relief to governmental bodies. It is 
important to note that it was draft ed as it was, for governmental bodies to go to Superior Court rather 

than through the Public  Access Ombu dsman ’s office, as the most direct, efficient and effective way to 
address nuisance requests.  
  * * *  
The Maine Press Association (MPA), founded in 1864, is one of the oldest professional news 
organizations in the nation. Our goals, as spelled out in our charter and by -laws are  to promote 
and foster high ethical standards and the best interests of the newspapers, journalists, and 
media organizations of the state of Maine that constitute its membership;  to encourage 
improved business and editorial practices and better media environment in the state; and  to 
improve the conditions of journalism and journalist s by promoting and protecting the principles 
of freedom of speech and of the press and the public’s right to know.  
 
