 
  
 
 
 
LD 1649, An Act to Support Local Governments in Responding to Freedom of Access Act Requests 
 
April 26, 2023 
 
Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Stephen 
Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am 
writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in support of LD 1649.  This 
bill provides a reasonable approach to ensuring that state and local agencies of government are not unreasonably 
burdened by certain Freedom of Access Act information requests, burdens that ultimately fall to Maine 
taxpayers. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Background.  By way of background, the Maine Freedom of Access Act (“FOAA”) grants the people of Maine 
a right of access to public records, while also protecting legitimate governmental interests and the privacy rights 
of individual citizens. In addition, the FOAA is intended to ensure the accountability of the government to the 
citizens of the State by requiring public access to the meetings of public bodies, including meetings of county 
commissioners. Individuals may submit requests to the pertinent public body or agency, such as county 
commissions, to produce certain public records, and the public body or agency responds to such request. Under 
current law, public bodies and agencies may not charge a fee for the first two hours of staff time spent on each 
FOAA request. 
 
What does LD 1649 do?  Among other things, Section 1 of LD 1649 amends the State’s FOAA to increase the 
fee for staff time spent on a public records request from the current $25 per hour fee to $40 per hour. 
Additionally, this bill provides that an agency or official may charge a fee for the first two hours of staff time 
spent on each request when the person making the public records request of that agency or official has 
previously made a FOAA request during the same calendar year. 
 
Discussion.  County government, like other public bodies and agencies, receive numerous FOAA requests each 
year. Many FOAA requests received by counties are straightforward and do not require staff to expend 
significant amounts of time to produce the requested public records. However, some requests made under the 
FOAA require county staff to expend significant time and resources to produce the requested public records, and 
are complicated in nature. Further, some individuals make numerous FOAA requests upon us within the same 
calendar year. To the extent that LD 1649 works to ensure that public bodies and agencies such as counties are 
appropriately compensated for staff time spent on requests made under the FOAA, and to ensure that public 
bodies are able to efficiently respond to as many FOAA requests as possible, we write in support.  
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1649 
April 26, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
 
 
 
