4‘, ~:,1 
“ at 3,‘ . . . . 
r 
Maine Sheriffs ’ Association *
2 *5" 
0&2 “One Team, One A4/zsszon” 
hi: $1" ; 1' 
I 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, 1*‘ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"“ Vice-President ~ Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President-at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
March 16, 2023 
L.D. 560 — An Act Regarding County Sheriff Vehicle Registration Plates 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Troy Morton. I am the Sheriff of Penobscot County 
and Immediate Past—President of the Maine Sheriffs Association. 
Maine sheriffs appreciate the opportunity to share our unanimous position of support for LD 560, 
and we urge each of you to vote Ought To Pass. 
In 1995 Maine sheriffs came before the legislature to request special registration plates for Maine 
sheriffs ’ vehicles. At the time, sheriffs ’ vehicles were similar in model and design. Over the 
years, the models have changed as have their designs. Your Maine sheriffs are before you today 
asking for an amendment to the current statute. There are sixteen counties that make up this great 
state. Allowing the sheriffs, the ability to design registration plates unique to their prospective 
counties makes sense. 
When discussing this concept with the Department of the Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor 
Vehicles, during the last session, a few issues were mentioned, and I believe we have solutions to 
any concerns. We recommend the sheriff registration process remain intact. All vehicles would 
be registered as delineated in the current process. All registration plates would be designed, 
purchased, and ﬁnanced by the individual counties. The plates would be required to be labeled 
Maine on top, sheriff on the bottom, and display the registration number approved by the Bureau 
of Motor Vehicles. 
This process would allow your Maine sheriffs to design registration plates that not only are 
visibly appealing, but they would also appropriately represent each county. This change would 
also reduce some of the burden placed on the Bureau of Motor Vehicles as they would not have 
to manage designs, have plates made, or disperse them. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present on behalf of the Maine Sheriffs Association. I welcome 
any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, ~» 
L...’ W/@111" 
Sheriff Troy Morton 
Maine Sheriffs ’ Association
