Gabriel  Stoppini 
Bethel,  in and out of the garden we grow 
LD 1765
My name is Gabriele Stoppini. I'm the owner of In and Out of the Garden We Grow 
dispensary 157. I believe this bill will help Maine move into the next phase of 
legalization.  I am concerned it doesn't actually do enough.  We can make laws to 
address the potential federal legislation,  and while we do that multi state operators 
will continue to violate state and federal laws, while we draw a line at the boarder. 
Why we draw this line I question. We moved into this in the believing that there were 
some issues with the old system and set out to create medical and adult use laws that 
were beneficial to the people,  knowing full well that the federal government doesn't 
accept either program. Yet we still wait for them to open the borders. While Maine 
sits on the most developed grow infrastructure on the east coast,  we are getting beat 
to the large market that sits a few hours away,  by our our competitors 3000 miles 
away.  I have heard concerns from some establishments about the inflood of products 
from out of state, while we are sitting on some of the lowest priced products in the 
country. I ask them why would California send their products here,  to an already 
flooded marketplace? When they could send it to the consumers south of us. And that 
is the truth,  the consumers are south of us. We are a low population state,  sitting at 
the top of the most densely populated portion of the country.  We are already loosing 
shares we have in the market to the large scale operators from out west that are 
shipping to these states that have zero cultivation infrastructure to supply the massive 
populations that are consuming everyday more than Maine does in a year. People 
have long said Maine is the emerald triangle of the east coast. We should take pride in
that and allow our state to start providing the excellent products we are known for to 
the population that sits closer to us than any other established producing state. 
Thank you for your time 
