   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/o cp/  
 
   
 
  
May 1, 2023 
 
Re: LD 1765 – An Act Authorizing the Governor to Enter into Interstate Agreements Regarding 
the Cannabis Industry 
 Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs:
 
 I am John Hudak, Director of the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP) and I am submitting the following  testimony neither for nor against LD 1765.  As we indicated at the beginning of this year’s session, having frank and honest discussions about the future of Maine’s cannabis economy upon federal legalization is a priority for our office and we welcome the opportunity to begin the discussion with this bill.  Inventory tracking, mandatory testing, and taxes are the foundation upon which the federally legal cann abis economy will be built—both for adult use and medical cannabis.  It is reasonable 
to expect that individual states will have control over to what extent they participate in that economy, but every comprehensive cannabis legalization proposal in the works in Congress 
includes these three fundamental elements.   It is unlikely that the states that Maine would partner 
with under this bill would be interested in doing so without a reasonable amount of parity between the requirements of their cannabis programs and Maine’s programs.  We encourage this committee to bear this in mind while considering this bill and the others you have before you this session.  
 It is important to acknowledge that this bill, as written , will present a number of challenges for 
Maine, both legally and geographically, that must be addressed .   
 First, before we get to the substance of these agreements, a threshold issue that must be addressed are the “triggers” for engaging in these interst ate agreements that are included in this 
bill; frankly, any agreement that is authorized in the absence of affirmative congressional action to create an interstate cannabis market will face serious legal challenges from state- licensed 
businesses seeking to maintain the protectionist barriers that currently exist. In addition, such an arrangement will  create instability and unpredictability for any business engaged in or supporting 
Maine’s cannabis economy.  It is unlikely that any governor of this state would prematurely launch Maine businesses into the interstate cannabis market until Congress affirmatively authorized it.  STATE OF MAINE  
OFFICE OF CANNABIS  POLICY  
162 STATE HOUSE STATION  
19 UNION  STREET 
FIRST  FLOOR  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   04333- 0162  
JANET T. MILLS  
GOVERNOR  
ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
COMMISSIONER  
 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS  POLICY   
 
JOHN HUDAK  
DIRECTOR 
   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671 
www.maine.gov /dafs/o cp/ Second , nothing in this bill addresses the durability of these “ agreements” from one 
gubernatorial administration to the next.  It is not at all clear whether businesses from other states 
operating in Maine could rely on these agreements from one election cycle to the next, and this kind of unpredictability will like ly discourage other states from engaging in any sort of interstate 
commerce without the certainty that the mar ket will withstand gubernatorial transit ions. 
Congressional action authorizing interstate commerce would diminish that uncertainty in a way 
federal -level executive action would not.   
 
Next, LD 1765 would require that any state participating in Maine’s cannabis markets meet or exceed certain “standards” for tracking, tagging, testing, contaminated product recalls and destruction, packaging, labeling, marketing and advertising; and then ties those requirements to the “standards” outlined in both Title 28- B and Title 22, ch. 558- C.  As we’ve made clear to this 
committee, the standards for these regulatory requirements are quite different between the adul t 
use and the medical cannabis program , and this bill does not specify which standards apply to 
which activities or kinds of cannabis. Reciprocal concerns among other states about overly permissive standards in Maine’s cannabis policy will also present cha llenges not accounted for in 
this legislation.   
 For instance, Maine’s medical cannabis program does not currently have any form of mandatory testing or inventory tracking, which sets it apart from every other medical cannabis program in the country. Those policy shortcomings —by current cannabis policy standards —make  it 
unlikely that Maine’s medical cannabis would be permitted in other states’ regulated markets.   
Furthermore, existing confidentiality provisions included in the medical cannabis statute would 
make it impossible for Maine regulators to communicate with partner states in the event of a recall of Maine medical cannabis products.  This policy challenges will make it unlikely for 
responsible states to be willing to accept product without the visibility or data availability about potentially contaminated product in their supply chains. Additionally , efforts to move Maine’s 
adult use cannabis program from a  seed -to-sale inventory tracking system that facilitates 
mandatory testing and protects retail sale of contaminated cannabis to a state -built and 
administered reporting portal will make the state one of the few  outlier s among regulated 
recreational cannabis markets.   We urge this committee not to reinvent the wheel in Maine’s 
cannabis markets without consideration of the impact of those changes on our homegrown cannabis businesses’  ability to en gage in interstate commerce when federal legalization does 
occur.   
 Beyond these fundamental concerns, this bill also presents a number of logistical questions that should be considered at the work session:  
• How would these agreements be implemented  and enforced?  Does the authority for that 
implementation rest with OCP?  Would we issue state licenses to program participants from other states?  Would they be required to submit to state or federal background checks and if so, based upon what criteria?   
• Which state official or officials from other states would be authorized to exe cute an 
agreement with our governor under this law?   
• What sort of state programs to “promote inclusion” would satisfy the requirements of § 
1204(5)?  
   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671 
www.maine.gov /dafs/o cp/ • Maine only borders one other state, New Hampshire, which presently has  a nascent 
medical cannabis program and no recreational cannabis program.  §1204(6) would 
prohibit the transportation of Maine cannabis through any state that has not entered into an agreement with Maine  to allow such transportation.  Does this mean that New 
Hampshire’s cannabis policy would dictate whether Maine cannabis businesses can participate in interstate commerce?  
• Is it the intent of this bill to allow other states’ cannabis regulators to dictate the behavior and compliance of out -of-state operators engaged in Maine’s cannabis economy ?  This 
bill appears to put at least some of the regulatory authority on regulators outside of Maine.  
As always, w e thank the committee for the committee for its consideration  and we’ll do our best 
to answer any questions you may have  at the work session.    
