Derek Hutchinson
Auburn
LD 1148
Good Day,  
My name is Derek Hutchinson and I am currently enrolled at Central Maine 
Community College and have been since August of 2018. Going to college after 
being out of school for 28 years was very daunting, yet, I persevered. I had a religious
exemption which allowed me to take my classes in-person, which for me, made all the
difference about whether I succeeded or struggled. I graduated, and believe me, I 
earned my Human Service Degree. I graduated with a GPA of 3.298. 
The end game of this schooling is to one day be a licensed Substance-Use-Disorder 
Counselor. So, with that in mind, I decided to pursue a 2nd degree in Social Science 
because I believe the two degrees paired well with one another for the career path I 
have decided to pursue...then Covid hit.  
I was banned from going to the CMCC campus, which obviously meant I could not 
take any on-site classes, because the religious exemption was done away with and I 
refused to be vaccinated for Covid.  (Although I worked with high-risk clients, I have 
never contracted Covid but I know many who were vaccinated but were struck down 
by the disease, some, many times) In order to go to the campus and have on-site 
classes, I would need 2 Covid vaccinations along with 2 boosters. I declined and was 
forced into only online classes. Let me tell you how that worked out. 
In my entire CMCC career, I had never had a withdrawal because I could not do the 
work, yet, now on my transcript, I have 3, directly caused by the administrations' 
requirement of only letting those who were vaccinated against Covid on campus and 
the repeal of the religious exemption. I am a very conscientious student. If I do not 
understand a concept, I raise my hand and get my question answered. In the online 
format, that is not possible. I was pigeonholed into many classes I would not have 
taken had I been allowed on campus, but, because the classes that were offered online 
were very limited, I was forced to take them. 
In closing, I want to say that students, like myself, need the religious exemption...we 
need to learn on-site. We are no more a danger to others because we are unvaccinated 
than those who were/are vaccinated, but still contracted Covid. I am appealing to 
those in power to repeal the ban on religious exemptions because it is unfair, 
unneeded, and does not do what it is intended to do. 
Derek Hutchinson 
