Testimony of Hadassah P . Beal
Testimony in Support of LD 1148
An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students
Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Hadassah Beal of Cherryfield, Maine. Thank you for 
the opportunity to speak before you today. I am writing in support of LD 1148, An Act to Prohibit 
COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning . The current 
mandates relating to the Covid-19 vaccine are an infringement upon our medical freedoms. 
Mainers should have the right to decide for themselves what vaccines they deem beneficial to 
themselves.
It is also necessary to point out that the Covid-19 vaccine has not gone through the proper 
testing that a new vaccine is required to undergo before being released. Looking at the CDC 
website and reading through the requirements for what must happen before a new vaccine is 
released, is telling enough to state that this vaccine is not as safe and effective as it is proclaimed 
to be. Requirements include usually 10-15 years of research, then proof of concept, meaning the 
testing of the product on small animals to study what the potential side effects could be on 
humans. It then goes on to testing the vaccine in a clinical trial. The Covid-19 vaccine was put out
with amazing speed, and did not undergo all the proper testing before being released to the 
public.
This vaccine has so many side effects, including myocarditis and other heart issues, 
strokes, blood clotting, paralysis, miscarriage in expectant women, and many other serious 
effects, even causing sudden death. We have no idea yet of these side effects' extent and gravity. 
Vaccinating this generation of young people is to harm not only them, but future generations as 
well. 
Please vote in favor of LD 1148. Thank you for your time.
Hadassah P . Beal
Testimony of Hadassah P . Beal
Testimony in Support of LD 1209
An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine
Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public Charter Schools 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Hadassah Beal of Cherryfield, Maine, and I am 
writing in support of LD 1209, An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine
Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public Charter Schools . Every individual should have 
the right to reject any sort of medical procedure that they do not believe is necessary, and that 
they may have religious or philosophical reasons for not taking part in. For the Maine 
government to decide that every student must have a certain list of vaccinations, despite their 
beliefs, is overstepping their given power, and is trampling on the freedoms of Mainers. It is time 
for LD 798 of 2019 to be rolled back, and I ask you to please vote in favor of this bill.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Hadassah P . Beal
