Heather Sadler
Sidney
LD 1148
Dear members of Maine's Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,
 
Please support LDs 51, 869, 1098, 1148, 1209 and 1228 this session. These bills 
would restore religious and philosophical exemptions to vaccines and prevent 
COVID-19 vaccination requirements in Maine's public and private school systems, 
protecting education access for all children in Maine, as well as to those Healthcare 
Workers who were denied an accommodation and were fired from their jobs in the 
name of safety.
Maine and national public health officials lied and misled the public during the 
COVID-19 pandemic about the efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines.
Today, the data are clear that COVID-19 poses little risk to school-aged children, and 
this population has little to benefit from COVID-19 vaccination. In addition, the 
authorized COVID-19 vaccines do not stop people from contracting the disease or 
transmitting it to others, and actually poses a health risk to college aged students 
(myocarditis).
My previous employer (MGMC in Augusta) allowed covid positive staff to work so 
long as they were "mildly symptomatic" due to staffing shortages. In addition, a travel
nurse who recently cared for my family member at MGMC told them that she was 
unvaccinated. "There's no way I'm putting that into my body" was her reason. What 
infuriates me is that she was allowed to work for them as a traveler and many staff 
was fired from their facility for declining the shot, myself included.
Despite these facts, public health officials used fear and panic to cajole education 
institutions to mandate these products on staff, students and Healthcare Workers. This
should never be allowed to happen again.
Implementing a mandate today is akin to kicking tens of thousands of students out of 
Maine's education system and further weakening our Healthcare system. Please learn 
from the mistakes of the pandemic and support LDs 51, 869, 1098, 1148, 1209, and 
1228 this session. Thank you.
Sincerely,
Heather Sadler
