Heather York
Maine Coalition for Vaccine Choice
LD 1148
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural
Affairs Committee. I Heather York am testifying in SUPPORT of L.D. 1148 An Act 
to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions 
of Learning, Sen. Eric Brakey (prevents adding COVID vaccine to school schedule 
for public schools) and L.D. 869 An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a
Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an 
Emergency Use Authorization, Sen. Lisa Keim (prevents adding COVID vaccine to 
school schedule)
My son Ace is 6 years old, he goes to Ossipee Valley Christian School in Cornish, 
Maine. It is his second year there and he is in kindergarten. Ace loves his school, his 
teachers, and his friends! He has stated this directly to me several times. He is 
receiving a wonderful education there and has already learned how to read, write, and 
do mathematics, including counting and a love for God. He is doing wonderfully! I 
also have a daughter Olivia who is 4 and whom we are planning to send to OVCS in 
the fall as well as our daughter Millie who is now 17 months old. With the COVID 19
vaccine mandate we would say “no” and would have to remove our son and daughters
from their school. My son would be devastated to leave his attending school and 
classrooms while my daughters would have missed opportunities to attend school. 
This would have a negative impact on our family. My children also love to play sports
such as baseball, basketball, soccer, and dance which they would also not be able to 
attend with their friends with the push to vaccinate. 
As a member of the Maine Coalition for Vaccine Choice and a member of Ossipee 
Valley Christian School, I would also like to support: 
-L.D. 51 An Act To Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements, Rep. Gary Drinkwater (restores exemptions)
-L.D. 1098 An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding 
Immunization Requirements, Rep. Barbara Bagshaw (restores exemptions)
-L.D. 1209 An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions 
for Private Schools and Virtual Public Charter Schools, Rep. David Boyer (allows 
exemptions in non-public funded educational settings)
-L.D. 1228 An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring 
Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or 
Attendance, Rep. Katrina Smith (prevents vaccines under emergency use 
authorization from being required)
