 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs   
 
In Opposition to LD 1148  An Act to Prohibit COVID -19 Vaccine Mandates for  
Students Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning  
 
Sponsored by: Senator Eric Brakey  
Hearing Date: April 3, 2023  
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brennan , and members, Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Jessica Shiminski  and I am the senior health 
program manager of the Maine Immunization Program . I am here today to provide testimony on 
behalf of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  and will be speaking  against LD 
1148, An Act to Prohibit COVID -19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public 
Institutions of Learning . 
 
This bill prohib its certain postsecondary educational institutions from requiring a student to be 
immunized with a vaccine that is approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration under 
emergency use authorization. The Maine CDC opposes LD 1148 and offers the followin g 
comments for your consideration.  
The Maine CDC has taken no steps to add COVID -19 as a required vaccine for the upcoming 
2023 -24 school year , and 20 -A MRSA §6359, sub -§6 clearly states that the addition of diseases 
for which immunization is required is  a major substantive rule change, one that would require 
full legislative approval. The Maine CDC sees no reason to change the current legislative process 
of vaccine requirement approval for this population . We would like to remind  the committee  that 
certa in presentations of the  COVID -19 vaccine have already received full federal Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) approval . Prohibiting vaccines a pproved  under  emergency use 
authorization  will not prohibit  COVID -19 vaccine , as the title of LD 1148  suggests is the intent  
of this bill .  
COVID -19 vaccines should not be preemptively prohibited from vaccine requirement s as they 
are not substantively different from other vaccines . Maine CDC has the concern that language 
prohibit ing COVID -19 or any other emergency used authorized vaccine prevent s individual post -
secondary schools from requiring this vaccine. The current rule allows for colleges and 
universities to implement immunization requirements more stringent than what is curren tly 
required by Maine law  (10-144 CMR chapter 262 , Post-Secondary School Immunizations Rule) . 
Students entering into  an allied health program, such as nursing, complete much of their 
schooling participating in clinical or a hospital setting, which may requ ire COVID -19 
vaccination in addition to  other vaccination s. Schools must be allowed to require these students 
 
 to show proof of COVID -19 vaccine and any other vaccines currently required for Maine 
healthcare workers in order for  students to complete clinica l work.   
In summary, the Maine CDC opposes LD 1148 . Good public health policy is data -driven and 
evidence -based. Maine’s immunization requirements are to ensure full protection of all Maine rs 
from vaccine -preventable disease. The evidence is overwhelming, sound, and supported by the 
professional medical community and majority of Maine voters; vaccinations are proven to be 
safe and effective for preventing the spread of disease.   
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to pro vide testimony 
today. I can address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in the work 
session.  
 
 
 
