70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Maine Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, I am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The 
Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom 
flourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including 
in governance. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 1148 - An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students 
Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning - Sen. Eric Brakey of Androscoggin 
This bill prohibits certain postsecondary educational institutions from requiring a student to be 
immunized with a vaccine that is approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration under 
emergency use authorization. 
 
Very simply, this bill says The University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System and the 
Maine Maritime Academy may not require as a condition of acceptance or attendance that a student be 
immunized with a vaccine that is approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration under 
emergency use authorization. The bill corrects a mistake that Maine and the Federal Government 
mandated in the time during the Covid 19 pandemic. Our country is predicated on the ideals of Religious 
and Personal freedoms. To ever consider removing any freedoms must be a thoughtful process and 
certainly not one that occurs during an emergency. Maine spends considerable time and money on 
emergency preparedness. To then vary from this work in a real emergency causes us to wonder if the 
planning process is worthless and a waste. Senator Brakey’s bill would help to restore trust and good 
process. 
I urge you to support this legislation by voting Ought To Pass on LD 1148, Thank you for your time and 
consideration today.  Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your 
families. God bless, 
 
Mike    
 
Mike McClellan 
Policy Director 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 Christian Civic League Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
