 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 27 , 2023  
 
Senator  Henry Ingwe rsen, Chair  
Representative  William D. Pluecker , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 834 - An Act to Ensure Transparency in the Labeling of Meat as Grassfed  
 
Dear Senator  Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and Members of the Committee  on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry : 
 
This letter is to provide information about LD 834, An Act to Ensure Transparency in the 
Labeling of Meat as Grassfed , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  is neither for nor against  this 
bill and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 834 prohibits a person from selling, offering for sale or distributing within the State or 
selling, offering for sale or serving in any retail food estab lishment or eating establishment any 
meat or meat product labeled or advertised as "grassfed" or by similar designation unless the 
ruminant animal was grassfed. The bill permits the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry to waive the determ ination that meat or a meat product is misbranded if the 
commissioner finds a waiver is warranted due to inadvertent exposure of the animal to nonforage 
feedstuffs or because incidental supplementation with nonforage feedstuffs was necessary to 
ensure the wellbeing of the animal during adverse environmental or physical conditions .  
 
Currently, t he 2013 Maine Food Code , a rule administered  jointly by Maine CDC  - Health 
Inspection Program (HIP) and Maine ’s Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
(DACF ), addresses this issue  under Section 3-6, Food Identity, Presentation and On Premis es 
Labeling , and in Section 8-1 Code Applicability . It is a shared responsibility of the food industry 
and regulators to ensure that food is safe  and that consumers’ expectations that food is 
unadulterated, prepared in a clean environment, and honestly presented  are met . Under the 
authority of 22 MRS chapter 551, HIP  may take action in accordance with adopted rules to 
enforce that food be accurately and honestly presented if provided to a consumer in licensed 
eating establishments1 such as restaurants.  When in receipt of complaints of a food product that 
 
1 22 MRS section 2491( 7) defines " eating establishment" to mean any place where food or drink is prepared and 
served or served to the public for consumption on the premises or prepared and served or served ready to eat to the 
public for consumption off the premises. "Eating establishment" i ncludes places in the entertainment, hospitality, 
recreation, restaurant and tourism industries; catering establishments; correctional facilities; hospital cafeterias; 
 
 
 is not honestly presented or misleading on a menu , HIP will investigate the labeling  and provide 
education to its licensees regarding the requirements of the Maine Food Code . Critical violations 
and repeated violations may result in correcti ve action  taken by the agency . 
 
In summary, LD 834 clarifies  requirements for food products specifically marketed or labeled as 
‘grass fed,’ adding to  the existing authority for Maine CDC and DACF to regulate food industry 
standards in the State . The  Maine CDC -HIP will continue to enforce that food be accurately and  
honestly presented in eating establishments , per the 2013 Maine Food Code . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC  - HIP is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
 
mobile eating places; public and private schools; retail frozen dairy product establishm ents; and workplace eating 
establishments and places where food is prepared for vending machines dispensing food other than in original sealed 
packages. "Eating establishment" does not include:  a place preparing and serving food that is licensed pursuant t o 
state law by a state agency other than the department as long the licensing of the place includes regular food safety 
inspections; a place serving food only to residents, such as a boarding home, a retirement home or an independent 
living place; or a farm stand that offers only whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables.   

