101 Western Ave. 
" P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2O7_43O_g334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In Support of LD 428 and LD 429: 
“An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses under the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Laws and 
Increase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System” and 
“An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses under the Motor Vehicle Laws and Increase the 
Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System” 
- 
Monday, March 6, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ in support of both LD 428, “Act to 
Reclassify Certain Offenses under the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Laws and Increase the 
Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System,” as well as LD 429, “An Act to Reclassify Certain 
Offenses under the Motor Vehicle Laws and Increase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice 
System.” 
While these bills, taken at face value, have nothing to do with domestic abuse and 
violence, and MCEDV takes no position on whether they represent the definitive list of Class 
E crimes that may be more appropriate for treatment as civil violations, MCEDV supports 
these proposals in concept because the public policy they represent is one that will help 
move Maine forward towards a more appropriate allocation of our limited criminal legal 
system resources. Intervention by the criminal legal system is not a path that all survivors of 
domestic abuse and violence seek. But, for those who do, it should work better. Due almost 
entirely to resource constraints, our criminal legal system currently struggles to: 
0 Engage timely and effectively with victims — both in terms of the minimum 
statutory victim notification requirements and also more broadly ensuring 
victims’ rights to participate in the process are meaningfully accounted for;2 
‘ MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
1 Compounding this challenge is the fact that victim services generally have historically been underfunded in 
Maine. There is minimal state general fund investment in either system-based or community-based victim 
services in relation to the existing infrastructure, and the existing infrastructure is insufficient to address the 
increasingly complex needs of crime victims. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
. mcedv.org
l\/lCEDV Page 2 of3 
0 Fully embrace evidence-based and victim-informed prosecution in domestic 
violence cases; 
0 Understand the importance of (and to prioritize asking for) restitution for victims 
to compensate for economic losses; 
0 Implement a wide array of other kinds of best practice approaches to addressing 
domestic abuse and violence, such as collaboration with civil justice system 
partners to ensure the full panoply of victim needs are accounted for. 
These gaps and challenges create too many instances where survivors of domestic 
abuse and violence conclude that the criminal legal system was unable to effectively help 
support their safety and that of their children or, worse, contributed to the harms. From 
every corner of the state, we have heard for many years that Maine’s prosecutors have the 
highest per prosecutor caseload when compared nationally. Criminal and civil court dockets 
are backlogged due to judicial resource constraints. These problems were exacerbated by 
the pandemic for sure, but they’re problems that existed prior to March 2020. Turning these 
20+ Class E crimes into civil violations is likely only a drop in the bucket of reforms that need 
to happen to truly right size our criminal legal system response such that it can appropriately 
focus the needed resources on those crimes, like domestic abuse and violence, that tend to 
present the greatest public safety concerns. However, it is certainly a good step in the right 
direction. 
Reform of our criminal legal system is both important and nuanced. Making good and 
right changes, like the ones proposed in this bill, often also require addressing unintended 
effects, one of which is noted below. Maine legislators should remain cognizant thata 
notable portion of the funding for the Victim Compensation Fund (VCF) derives from 
assessments levied against criminal offenders based on the crime for which they are 
convicted} Though the limited number of crimes proposed to be converted to civil 
violations by LD 428 and LD 429 may create a negligible impact on deposits to the VCF in this 
circumstance, eventually Maine's leaders must prioritize attending to this problematic 
funding structure. Several other states have moved away from a practice of funding the VCF 
through assessments against criminal offenders, choosing instead to fund this important 
program through direct state investment of general funds. Maine should similarly explore 
alternative approaches to funding to remove any hesitancy of crime victims and the services 
providers that work with them to fully support common sense criminal legal system reforms 
out of fear that such reforms may lead to the elimination of this important pathway for 
crime victims to be financially made whole. 
Thank you for the opportunity to be heard on these important issues. 
3 Pursuant to 5 M.R.S. § 3360-I, the court is required to impose an assessment of$35 on any person convicted of 
murder, a Class A crime, a Class B crime or a Class C crime and $20 on any person convicted ofa Class D or Class 
E crime.
Dv‘ 101 Western Ave. 
" ‘ 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 207-430-8334 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: g_ndrea@mcedyv,org 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
