20160181.1 
20160181.2 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Support to L.D. 429,  
An Act To Reclassify Certain Offenses Under The Motor Vehicle 
Laws And Increase The Efficiency Of The Criminal Justice System 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 6, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is 
Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department. I am 
submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in 
Support of LD 429.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in 
law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of 
Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
Part A amends certain Maine motor vehicle laws in the Maine Revised 
Statutes, Title 29-A,  limiting  the  sentence  for  the  crime  of  
manufacturing  or  reproducing  registration plates without the consent of 
the Secretary of State to a fine and changing some crimes to traffic 
infractions.  Crimes reduced to traffic infractions include certain violations 
of laws related to:  
1.  Motor vehicle registration certificates and plates and 
driver's licenses; 
2.  Removal of a vehicle without the consent of the owner 
or person in charge of the property where the vehicle is 
located; 
3.  Unlawful  ownership  or  display  of  a  revoked,  
fictitious  or  fraudulently  altered driver's license or 
identification card; 
4.  Unlawful use of a driver's license or an identification 
card; 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20160181.1 
20160181.2 5.  Improper use of registration plates; and6.  Operating a 
motor vehicle while license or registration is suspended or 
revoked. 
Part  B  amends  the  Maine  Criminal  Code  provision  governing  civil  
violations  to explicitly provide that evidence obtained pursuant to an 
unlawful search and seizure is not admissible in any civil violation 
proceeding, not just those arising from cannabis possession by a person 
under 21 years of age or possession of butyl nitrite or isobutyl nitrite, and 
to permit a law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that 
a violation of the law has taken place or is taking place to make application 
for a search warrant. 
Part C establishes an effective date of January 1, 2024. 
We support Part A of LD 429, which reclassifies these incidents from criminal 
to civil because criminal convictions have lasting consequences that effect all 
aspects of a person’s life and  also often their family lives.  A criminal conviction 
should only be used as a deterrent when it is absolutely necessary to hold the person 
accountable and is proportional to their offense. The civil penalties proposed in LD 
429 would ensure a proportional level of accountability and would still allow the 
individual an opportunity for a hearing to contest charges. We also support Part B 
because it is a natural step associated with decriminalizing these laws. 
The Association recognizes that the criminal justice system is completely 
overwhelmed. The backlog is astonishing, and we believe that we should advocate 
for all options that would decrease this backlog. LD 429 would simplify the process 
and would make more a much more efficient resolution. 
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in favor of LD 429. And, on behalf 
of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your work on 
this Committee.  
