 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought to Pass - LD 42 9 
 
An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses Under the Motor Vehicle Laws  
and Increase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
March 6, 2023  
 
Senator Bebee -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety,  greetings .  My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel for the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine 
and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support LD 42 9, which would 
turn some low -level crimes from Title 29-A into civil violations, saving people from unnecessary 
criminal convictions for minor misbehavior.  
The ACLU of Maine has long opposed unnecessary expansion of our state’ s criminal 
code. It has been our position that creating new crimes for behavior that is already illegal does 
not deter bad behavior but does expand our jail and prison populations. Even with one of the 
lowest incarceration rates in the country, our state’s  incarceration rate is still higher than the 
incarcerat ion rates of Bahrain, Brazil, the United Arab Emirates, Singapore, Israel, Turkey, 
Portugal and the United Kingdom, among many other countries.  With thousands  of crimes on the 
books , it is no wonder that we have this relatively high incarceration rate . There are over 1,400 
Class E crimes alone, across 35 different titles of the Maine Revised Statutes. Indeed, t here are 
more crimes outside the criminal code than inside it .1  
The ACLU is glad to suppor t this bill. Indeed, last session, this committee heard a similar 
bill written by Maine’s prosecutors  in an effort to start to reduce our overreliance on the criminal 
legal system as a mechanism to control behavior. The bill addresses almost exclusively Cl ass E 
 
1 Title 12, our Conservation code, contains over 600 Class E crimes, and 29 -A, the Motor Vehicles and 
Traffic title, contains over 150 Class E crimes..  
 
 
  
 
 
 2 crimes, which punish behaviors that the legislature has determined are the least serious offenses 
under our criminal laws.  If this bill passes , a person would no longer be subject to arrest or being 
sentenced to 180 days in jail or fined up to $1,000  for such behaviors as displaying a revoked 
license , 29-A MRSA §2102(1) , or failing to return a revoked a revoked license , 29-A MRSA 
§1603 (9). 
These are commonsense reforms that do not jeopardize public safety but do move away 
from giving people criminal r ecords and the collateral consequences that criminal records can 
cause . Even though they are not felonies, Class E misdemeanor convictions can jeopardize a 
person’s housing, employment, and education. With fines of up to $1,000, Class E convictions 
can m ean spending years in a payment arrangement with our courts as folks pay what little they 
have in their monthly budget to the judicial branch. Missed payments on fines when times get 
tough can mean dire consequences , including arrests and additional court f ines. 
This bill would also enshrine in civil legal practice the rule of criminal procedure that 
makes “fruits of the poisonous tree” inadmissible in court to prove a crime. Under that rule, if a 
law enforcement officer discovers evidence of a crime as a re sult of an unconstitutional search or 
seizure, that evidence is inadmissible in court. We applaud this effort , as it would help ensure 
that no person in Maine is found legally liable as a result of illegal, unconstitutional state 
behavior.  
This bill takes  modest steps towards reducing our reliance on the criminal legal system. 
We encourage the committee to go farther, and to look at the other of Class E crimes in Title 29-
A to see if there are other ways to reduce reliance on the criminal legal system.  We also 
encourage the committee to think about whether we can go farther by removing some of the 
Class E crimes and not replacing them with civil violations at all.2 This committee has made 
great strides to make our criminal legal system smarter and lean er. We encourage you to 
continue that work by supporting this legislation.  
 We urge you to vote ought to pass .  
 
 
 
2 Civil violations still involve entanglement with our courts, and still can lead to similar problems wit h 
unpaid fines as fines on criminal charges.  
