  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presi dent 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd 
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau   
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523 -9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
February 23, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
RE: LD 429 – An Act to Reclassify Certain Offenses Under the Motor Vehicle 
 Laws and Incre ase the Efficiency of the Criminal Justice System  
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL supports  LD 429 .   This bill reduces a number of very minor motor vehicles 
offenses from c rimes to traffic infractions.  All of the crimes are very minor crimes in 
the first place, and reducing them to  traffic infractions makes sense, especially in lig ht 
of the massive court backlog that has to deal with criminal cases in a more substantive 
way, whereas traffic infractions  are dealt with in a streamlined process that takes a 
fraction of the court time.  
 
MACDL urges this Committee to take a ser ious look at this bill as , if nothing else, a 
remedy to the backlog in the courts. But even separate  from that, this bill just makes 
sense because all of these offenses noted in the bill are minor offenses from the start 
and making them a t raffic infraction instead of a crime which makes someone a 
“convicted criminal ” for a minor offense would be appropriate . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee    
 

