4 s 
CENTRAL MAINE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 414 - An Act To Clarify the Provision of Notice of Proposed Rate Increases to Public Utilities 
Commission 
March 2, 2023 
Testifying: Opposition 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony in Opposition to 
LD 414 - An Act To Clarify the Provision of Notice of Proposed Rate Increases to Public Utilities 
Commission. 
Current law requires a notice be sent to customers in rate cases where a utility seeks an increase 
greater than 1%. Currently, that notice is prepared by the utility and filed with the Commission 
and generally provided to Staff and the Public Advocate in advance for an informal review. This 
bill would require the Commission to prepare the notice which is not objectionable. 
We oppose this legislation because of the provision prohibiting the Commission from approving a 
rate increase in an amount greater than that set forth in the notice. Any number of things can 
happen during the pendency of a rate case that could lead to an increase of greater than 1%. 
Those include items that may be driven by intervenors including investments to ready the system 
for renewable interconnections or improve reliability like tree clearance to avoid outages during 
storms. Additionally, rate cases also have public witness hearings during which customers have 
an opportunity to weigh in and offer suggestions, even well into the rate case process. This 
provision would essentially tie the hands of the Commission and parties to the rate case to 
explore innovative investments or other needed changes different from what was originally 
noticed, and frustrate the Commission's discretion to approve performance-based rate plans that 
provide financial incentives for good performance. 
As drafted, the bill is also not limited to rate cases, but could apply to other proceedings in which 
rates are increased like the annual compliance filing process for CMP and the stranded cost 
reconciliation proceeding for both CMP and Versant. Requiring customer notices for such other 
proceedings will impose an additional regulatory cost, which would be recoverable from 
customers. For example, the notices sent to customers in CMP’s current rate case cost roughly 
$100K each. Those that were sent by mail were not sent First Class. Sending the mail notices 
First Class would increase this regulatory cost, which would be recoverable from customers. 
For these reasons, we encourage an Ought Not to Pass report. Thank you for your consideration.
