15 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
Maine Water Utilities Association 207-623-951 1 
W Organized 1925 
March 2, 2023 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Zeigler House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 414 An Act to Clarify the Provision of Notice of Proposed Rate 
Increases to Public Utilities Customers 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in 
opposition to LD 414. If adopted the legislation would remove discretion from the Public Utilities 
Commission (the Commission) and put the Commission in the position of drafting rate proceeding notices 
between utilities and utility customers. 
About MWUA. MWUA is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides support for water works 
professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through educational and 
technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The Association was 
formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion. The Commission rules on notice regarding rate proceedings are clear and effective. The 
purpose of the notice is to inform utility customers of the likely rate impact, make them aware of the rate 
proceeding, and inform them of the ways in which they might participate in the proceeding either through 
the Office of the Public Advocate or directly as interveners. 
These rules do not need clariﬁcation or additional statutory layers. We are aware of a particular recent 
case where the Ofﬁce of the Public Advocate vigorously litigated the adequacy of the notices before the 
Commission. The Commission found the notices adequate and in compliance with existing rules. This 
legislation is an effort to strip the Commission of the power to decide what is just and reasonable, as well 
as the ability to apply its discretion in decisions over rates and customer notices. This bill appears to be in 
reaction to a speciﬁc case but could have unintended consequences extending beyond that case. 
As water utilities we take great pride in our customer service and our infrastructure replacement 
programs. Many water utilities highlight capital improvement plans and infrastructure projects in these 
rate increase notices so that customers understand the relationship between a proposed rate increase and 
the infrastructure necessary to ensure high quality drinking water delivered to the tap. This legislation 
would seek to prohibit such communication in the notice of rate proceedings. We see this as a disservice 
to our customers because they will not be given the story behind the proposed rate increase. Utilities 
should be commended for efforts to keep customers informed rather than being subjected to regulatory 
bureaucracy limiting communication.
Letter from MWUA re LD 414 
March 2, 2023 
Page2 
Second, this legislation would cap the ﬁnal outcome of a rate case proceeding (typically fully litigated 
proceedings can span 9 months) at the percentage that was noticed. The goal of a fully litigated 
proceeding is to establish just and reasonable rates. This process can have quite a number of twists and 
turns depending on its complexity. While it is unusual for rates established through the litigated process 
to exceed those noticed this can and does happen. Rather than arbitrarily cap the rates the current rules 
(Chapter 110) contain provisions where the Commission has the discretion to direct the utility to re- 
notice. 
“Additionally, the Commission may require a public utility to give notice to its ratepayers if 
during the course of a proceeding, it appears that one or more parties has proposed a change in 
rates or rate design which could have a significant impact on ratepayers if accepted. CH 110” 
This legislation seeks to strip the Commission of reasonably exercising its discretion in requiring further 
notice and replaces the Commission ’s discretion with arbitrarily capping rate proceedings at the 
percentage noticed. This would likely result in rates that were not just and reasonable and would violate 
the statutory purpose of the Commission in title 35A sec 101 Statement of Purpose: 
“to ensure that the rates of public utilities subject to rate regulation are just and reasonable to 
customers and public utilities ” 
Finally, the Committee should be aware that the Commission has long exercised its discretion to ensure 
reasonable notice and a fair hearing by all stakeholders in the complicated process of rate proceedings. 
Conclusion. For these reasons, MWUA urges you to defeat LD 414 because the process of notiﬁcation is 
not in need of clariﬁcation. The proposed remedy goes far beyond clariﬁcation and rather strips the 
Commission of its power of discretion, limits communication between utilities and customers, and 
potentially could result in unjust or unreasonable rates. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
/.. 
/4?’ ,//‘w_j>/“Z-—-_. 
Ro use, 
Legislative Committee Chair, Maine Water Utilities Association 
General Manager, Kennebec Water District 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director (MWUA) 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counselc
