. HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
j 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
A"iS0nw Hep|er TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
417 Montsweag Rd. 
Woolwich, ME 04579 
Phone: (207) 319-4396 
Allison.Hepler@legis|ature.mainegov 
March 27, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Allison Hepler presenting 
LD 539, An Act to Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCare Members 
with an Acquired Brain Injury 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Allison Hepler, and I represent the towns of Arrowsic, 
Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath, and Woolwich. I am pleased to present LD 539, An Act to 
Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCare Members with an Acquired 
Brain Injury. 
I don’t need to tell this committee about the challenge of substance use disorder. I am not an 
expert, but I do know the pain that this causes patients, families and the community. Its causes 
are many and its effects vary from person to person. I am presenting this bill on behalf ofa 
relatively small but growing population, namely, people with acquired brain injury who are 
recipients of MaineCare. 
This bill would make available substance use disorder counseling in addition to other services 
offered in Maine’s “I02 clinics, ” which comprise the eight outpatient neuro-rehabilitation clinics 
covered by MaineCare. 
As you may know, the Acquired Brain Injury Advisory Council was established in 2007 to 
address the needs of people with brain injury, to provide independent oversight and advice and to 
make recommendations regarding unmet needs and service gaps to the DHHS commissioner. 
The Council’s recent needs assessment identiﬁed substance use disorder as one of those gaps. 
This bill is a result of that assessment. 
Others will be speaking with more expertise as to the specific ways that brain injury and 
substance abuse interact. In some cases, peoplewith brain injuries who struggle with everyday 
life can turn to drugs or alcohol to alleviate stress or physical pain. In other situations, substance 
use can cause brain injury, as in the case of non-fatal drug overdoses. 
We are lucky, and we are a leader. Maine is the only state with these outpatient neuro- 
rehabilitation clinics for individuals with acquired brain injury who are covered by Medicaid. In 
District 49: Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich
addition, people do not need a waiver to access the services at these clinics; they only need to be 
MaineCare recipients. 
Adding substance use disorder counseling to the array of services already provided in these 
clinics is a valuable way for patients to access help if they need it, and in an integrative setting 
rather than the stand-alone clinics that treat substance use disorder counseling. 
Thanks for your time, and happy to answer questions as I can. 
District 49: Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich
