March 27, 2023 
Good morning. 
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak with you today. I know you are all very 
busy so I will do my best to be brief. 
My name is Dr. Austin Errico and I am a clinical neuropsychologist from Freeport, Maine. For 
the last 24 years, I have provided neuro behavioral and neuro cognitive services to outpatient 
and residential programs supporting persons with acquired brain injury. I have written a 
training program for Maine caregivers that is designed to educate and mentor direct care staff 
on the techniques for supporting adults with disabilities. For the past 13 years, I have had the 
honor of serving on Maine's Acquired Brain Injury Council. 
Having been trained and worked in several other states, I can confidently say that Maine 
continues to be a leader in our progressive approach to brain injury rehabilitation. I am grateful 
for the support that this committee has provided in the past to the survivors of acquired brain 
injury and their families. It has made a tremendous difference in the lives of many. 
For those ofyou who may not know, Maine supports 8 neurorehabilitative clinics through 
section 102 ofthe MaineCare manual. These clinics are required to provide a state-of-the art 
integrated team approach to neurorehabilitation. Professional team members include Physical 
therapists, Speech therapists, Occupational therapists, Therapeutic Recreation specialists, 
Nurses, Physicians, Mental Health counselors and Neuropsychologists. Unfortunately, 
substance abuse counselors are not currently among the identified healthcare providers 
supported by these clinics. This omission is significant and often poses a hinderance to effective 
neurorehabilitation. 
The problems related to substance abuse and acquired brain injury are significant and at times 
overwhelming. Here are a few statistics. 
o Nearly 58% of individuals with acquired brain injuries had a history of alcohol 
abuse prior to their injury. 
o As many as 50% of individuals with acquired brain injury will return to abusing 
substances after their injury.' 
o Acquired brain injury survivors who continue to abuse alcohol can worsen their 
condition and place themselves at risk of sustaining a second brain injury due to 
falls. 
o Adults with brain injury and diagnosed substance abuse are not readily accepted 
into conventional substance treatment abuse programs because of challenges 
with attention, memory, executive functioning and social pragmatics.
o Substance abuse counseling for person's with acquired brain injury is most 
effectively delivered by licensed professionals who are both well versed in brain 
injury recovery as well as treatment models of addiction. 
LD 539 allows substance abuse counselors to be part ofthe integrated neurorehabilitation 
team supported through section 102. This seemingly simple addition of one more trained 
professional will reduce the risk for substance abuse relapse and further help survivors reach 
their full rehabilitation potential. Please consider LD 539. l am confident that the benefits will 
be signiﬁcant. 
Thank you for your time. 
Austin L. Errico, Ph.D., CBIST, QBISPT 
Licensed Psychologist 
Neuropsychologist 
draustinerrico@gmaii.c0m 
207-809-9007
