Jane Riseman 
44 Carsley Road 
Harrison, Maine 04040 
Written Testimony 
March 27, 2023 
In Support of LD 539 
An Act to Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCo/re Members with Acquired 
Brain Injury . 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Jane Riseman and I am a resident of 
Harrison, Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this important legislation. 
lam a ”biended family" mother of eight: 2 biological, 4 step and 2 adopted children. Both my 
adopted children came to our family through the Maine foster care system and adoptive 
children's program. With that said, l have over twenty years’ experience working asa 
therapeutic foster parent with various DHHS programs. 
l am here today to speak in favor of LD 539 — An Act to Provide Substance Use Disorder 
Counseling for Maine Care Members with Acquired Brain injury. This bill will add substance 
abuse disorder counseling to the comprehensive neurorehabilitation service system? 
I want to share some of the history about our son, Michael, who is now 21 years old. He came 
into our care as a foster child at the age of two months and we subsequently adopted him at 
the age of three. He came into the custody ofthe State when his fugitive parents were arrested 
in Portland in 2002 for murdering his two siblings. Upon their arrest, Michael was immediately 
taken to the Barbara Bush Center at Maine Medical where he was evaluated for suspected child 
abuse. Ultimately, he was diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury of the frontal lobe and had 
blood clots on the brain, retinal bleeds in both eyes and fractures to the skull, ribs and legs.2 
Because he had so many fractures he couldn't or wouldn't move because of his pain. At that 
time, he was known as "Baby Jason." 
Keep in mind that in 2002 a lot less was known about traumatic brain injuries in infants, their 
nature, possible treatments and an understanding of the extent of damage done to a child when 
this occurs. Probable misdiagnoses quite often led to conclusions that were inaccurate. 
1 
The current neurorehabilitation service system includes care management and coordination, crisis stabilization 
services, physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, neuropsychology, neurocognitive retraining, 
positive neurobehavioral supports and teaching, social skills retraining, counseling, vocational rehabilitation and 
independent living skills and supports. 
2 
Sun Journal News Article, November S, 2005, https1//www.bing.com/ck/News Article
Fortunately we know a lot more now about this condition than we did then, but the education 
has been strenuous. 
Michael's care over the years has been constant, intense and all-consuming. Pediatricians, 
occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, psychological evaluations, psychiatry, 
neuro psychiatry, mental health counselors, and in home supports. Education was a challenge. 
He was assigned a one-on-one aide l<-8 but his condition was described as having mostly 
behavioral issues. The school system was ill prepared to deal with ivlichaels real conditions. By 
ninth grade he was placed out-of-district in a specialized high school where he earned his high 
school diploma. 
At age 18 he applied for and received a medical marijuana card without our knowledge as his 
legal guardians. He began to abuse cannabis. At age 19 he was introduced to methanphene, at 
age 20 he was introduced to heroin and fentanyl. He turned 21 last Wednesday. 
He has been a patient in two treatment centers, 3 detox programs, and attempted to live in3 
different sober living residences. ln all those cases he was discharged because of his anti-social 
behaviors. 
In conclusion, I want to thank you for your time to listen to my testimony. l hope you agree that 
adding substance abuse disorder counseling to the menu of services for neurorehabilitation 102 
clinics will create a more complete program to better serve those individuals with acquired 
brain injuries. Please vote to move this important bill. 
I am willing to take any questions you may have at this time. 
Jane Riseman
