\‘- 
.,> 
2 » 
, ’‘ . -’ 
. , 
, Q04: 
_~ Acquired 
Brain Injury 
Advisory Council 
of Maine 
Written Testimony of Jennifer Jello 
March 27, 2023 
In Support of LD 539 
An Act to Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCare Members with Acquired Brain Injury 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit written testimony on behalf of the Acquired Brain Injury 
Advisory Council (ABIAC). Formed in 2002 to support a grant and later established in statute, the ABIAC 
has been in existence to provide advice and oversight to the Department of Health and Human Services 
for the last 20 years. Substance misuse is a serious public health issue, and the Council is in support of 
the reinstatement of substance use disorder (SUD) counseling in Maine's neurorehabilitation clinics. 
These clinics are sometimes referred to as ”102 clinics, ” a reference to a section in MaineCare. 
MaineCare 102 clinics are a unique model and have been successful working with the brain injury 
population through a transdisciplinary approach by neuropsychologists, physical therapists, speech 
therapists, occupational therapists, cognitive specialists, recreational therapists etc. All parties are 
involved in the plan of care and use a holistic approach. 
A person receiving outpatient neurorehabilitation services for a brain injury prior to 2004 could access 
individual and group SUD therapy. The structure of MaineCare 102 services at that time was different 
than today and explicit reference to SUD counseling is not evident in archived regulations; however, in 
the 2004 regulations, following a period of budget cuts, there is reference under Limitations (102.06) 
that identifies that MaineCare 102 must not duplicate substance use treatment services. Select 
members of the ABIAC recall turn of the century SUD services in brain injury clinics, and described them 
as beneficial, effective and well-utilized. 
People that oppose LD 539 may argue that substance use disorder treatment is available through 
MaineCare Section 65, behavioral health. Note that in the Section 65 regulations, neurocognitive 
disorders cannot be considered a primary diagnosis, so a person with a brain injury may not be eligible 
to access substance use treatment through Section 65. 
One might ask: Wouldn't it be equally as effective to open Section 65 to serve individuals with 
_neurocognitive disorders? That could be a viable solution, though transportation remains an enormous 
barrier in the state, and there is value in having one-stop rehabilitation in a 102 clinic (the coordination 
of multiple therapies and one ride as opposed to the coordination of multiple trips to scattered 
appointments that may or may not be available, especially in rural areas of Maine). 
A concern raised in ABIAC meetings relates to brain injury survivors with co-occurring substance use 
challenges being ping-ponged between silos of specialized services. For instance, if a person witha 
brain injury is receiving substance intervention from a substance use provider, there are concerns that 
patients are prematurely discharged without the full benefit of substance use intervention because 
clinicians may not have training in brain injury or understand the complexities of co-occurring disorders.
The ability to address substance use through the MaineCare 102 model with therapists trained in 
working with both brain injury and substance use is ideal. 
Our partners at the Brain Injury Association of America Maine Chapter have shared that in terms of 
overall incidence, the national data has consistently shown that 45% to 60% of persons requiring 
inpatient rehabilitation for brain injury have a prior history of SUD. Additionally up to 20% of individuals 
develop SUD after a brain injury. According to research by Dr. John Corrigan, 70% of patients receiving 
rehabilitation for traumatic brain injury will be prescribed opioids and become vulnerable to addiction. 
There is a clear need for substance use intervention in the brain injury population. 
The ABIAC anticipates that the cost for the reinstatement of SUD Counseling in 102 clinics would be 
modest, but would likely have high value for the relatively small population of survivors accessing the 
service. An informal inquiry in February of 2023 of 102 clinics yielded survey data from four of the eight 
clinics in locations including Brewer, Fairfield, Standish and Rockland. The providers shared the number 
of current patients who scored a 3 or 4 (where zero represents no history of substance misuse or fully 
recovered and a score of 4 represents moderate to heavy substance use) in the categories of alcohol 
and drug use on a standardized Brain lnjury Assessment Tool (BIAT). The total number of patients with 
high BIAT scores reported for the four clinics combined was forty-five (45). In 2022, the eight 
neurorehabilitation clinics served 367 MaineCare members. To extrapolate, if the other four clinics had 
similar findings with regard to substance misuse, this would translate to approximately one quarter of 
the total MaineCare members who access 102 clinics as candidates who could benefit from SUD 
counseling services. 
The language in LD 539 recognizes the importance of substance misuse as a public health issue and puts 
SUD in the mix of treatment important and necessary for brain injury survivors. The Council's hope is to 
then work with our state partners at the Office of MaineCare Services and Office of Aging and Disability 
Services to slightly increase the service caps for assessment and treatment of SUD so that a brain injury 
survivor, family and treatment team are not put in the unfavorable position of having to choose 
between receiving a medically necessary physical therapy appointment or a crucially beneficial 
substance use treatment session. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of my testimony. Please do not hesitate to contact me with 
questions. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Jennifer Jello, Co-Chair 
Acquired Brain Injury Advisory Council 
Email: jen.iello@sevitahealth.com 
Telephone: 207-239-0124
