Alliance 
MAINE 
"' 
Officers "' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"’ Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational lnstitute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, lnc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voicefor Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 539 
"An Act to Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for 
MaineCare Members with an Acquired Brain lnjury" 
Sponsored by Representative Allison Hepler 
March 27, 2023 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members 
of the Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy 
and l am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine's community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 539, "An Act 
to Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCare Members with an 
Acquired Brain lnjury." This bill adds substance use disorder counseling to the 
comprehensive neurorehabilitation service system administered by the 
Department of Health and Human Services and directs the department to include 
counseling for substance use disorder in rehabilitative services for MaineCare 
members who have sustained an acquired brain injury. 
In 2022, 716 Mainers died from a suspected drug overdose. You, as members of 
this committee, are very familiar with that number. But the number you may not 
be quite as familiar with is the number of non-fatal overdoses ~~ that number is 
9,394. Said another way, 9,394 Mainers survived a drug poisoning event, referred 
to as an overdose. Opioid overdose induces respiratory depression that can lead 
to anoxic or hypoxic brain injury. 
This emerging population, the many individuals now surviving a drug overdose, 
with anoxic/hypoxic brain injury requires specialized services including SUD 
counseling. It is important to understand the relationship between substance 
misuse and acquired brain injury and to accurately diagnose and treat these 
cooccurring conditions, as a substantial number of individuals with Acquired Brain 
Injury return to risky levels of alcohol and/or drug consumption within the first 
few years after injury. This proposal removes the financial barrier for MaineCare 
members to receive this much-needed treatment. 
l urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 539. Thank you for your time and attention 
to this important issue. l would be happy to get you additional information for the 
work session. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 " Phone 207.621.8118 “' Fax 207.621.8362 '“ theAllianceMaine.org
