  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 27,  2023 
 
Senator Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 539 – An Act to Provide Substance Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCare Members 
with an Acquired Brain Injury  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information neither for nor against  LD 539, An Act to Provide Substance 
Use Disorder Counseling for MaineCare Members with an Acquired Brain Injury . 
 
This bill adds substance use disorder counseling to the comprehensive neurorehab ilitation 
service system administered by the Department and directs the Department to include counseling 
for substance use disorder in rehabilitative services for MaineCare members who have sustained 
an acquired brain injury.  This bill would create a speci alized substance use disorder service as an 
interdisciplinary treatment option for individuals with co -occurring substance use disorder 
(SUD) and acquired brain injury through Maine’s neurorehabilitation services.   
 
The Maine Acquired Brain Injury Advisory  Council worked with Rep resentative  Hepler to 
submit  LD 539 with the goal to add a specialized prevention and treatment model for brain injury 
and substance abuse disorders.  
 
The council’s report to the Commissioner and the Legislature outlines this goal as a top priority 
for them.  Their arguments to add SUD treatment to Section 102 clinics are mainly quality based, 
with a belief that Maine’s SUD providers lack expertise in providing treatment for individuals 
with cognitive and neurobehavioral deficits tha t would make any talk based or cognitive based 
treatment unsuccessful in supporting prevention and treatment. Maine’s TBI grant does include 
training on identification of brain injury and advocacy for brain injury.  
 
If the Department’s assumptions are correct on the intent of the bill, MaineCare providers 
delivering Rehabilitative Services would be able to deliver and bill for SUD counseling services. 
The Division of Licensing and Certification states it would be acce ptable for these providers to 
deliver SUD counseling, without requirement of an SUD agency license, if the provider has 
appropriate licensure/certification and education.  It seems reasonable to assume that traditional 
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT ) type approaches that most SUD clinicians use would be less 
effective for clients with TBI and that providers with specialized training/experience could better 
meet needs.  
 
 
 This bill would require state rulemaking, changes to the Medicaid State Plan, and bill ing system 
configuration changes.  
 
If you have any questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

