 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
L.D. 1588 , An Act to Provide Public Sector Labor Unions Reasonable  
Access to Information Regarding Employees  
Testimony of the Maine Community College System  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, good afternoon. My name is Becky Smith and I am the 
Director of Government and Community Relations for the Maine Community College Syste m. I 
am sorry that I cannot be here in person, but I have an unmovable conflict . It is the position of 
the Maine Community College System that t his legislation is unnecessary, it would violate the 
privacy interests of employees, and potentially even further violate the privacy interests of 
student employees. Also, during the 129th Legislature, we agreed to an expansion of access to 
our employees b y the unions  (bill language attached)  and reluctantly agreed to absorb the costs 
of that expansion, despite the increased workload on our staff.   
The Maine Community College System has collective bargaining agreements with six different 
bargaining units represented by three unions. Each negotiated agreement details the information, 
and timing  for employee information to be provided to the representing  bargaining  unit. M CCS 
is further responsive to requests by the bargaining units for member information and have not 
received any concerns regarding the information provided or the timeliness of the responses.  
Bargaining u nit members are notified that their contact information, including persona l phone 
and email addresses, if know n, will be provided to the ir bargaining  unit. However, there is no 
expectation that personal contact information will be provided to any other bargaining unit, or to 
any other outside entity. This legislation, as drafted, does not consider the many legitimate 
reasons an employee might have for withholding this personal information. Essentially, this 
legislation would mandate disclosure as a condition of employment.  
Further, MCCS  does not disclose personal contact information for students, unless they have 
agreed, in writing, to the disclosure. This is in accordance with federal law.1 Under this 
legislation, there is no recognition that student  employees would be impacted  if they also work 
for a College. Many student employees are recipients of financial aid, funding their work study 
employment. The disclosure of personal information of a student employee is  akin to disclosing 
the student receives financial a id.  
Given the existing law, and MCCS’ collective bargaining agreement with each represented unit , 
and the privacy concerns outlined, I respectfully request that this committee report that this bill 
Ought Not to Pass.  
Thank you.  
 
1 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). 20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 CFR Part 9  
