 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1588, An Act to Provide Public Sector Labor Unions Reasonable Access to Information 
Regarding Employees 
 
April 20, 2023 
 
Chair Tipping, Chair Roeder, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is 
Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, 
I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in opposition to LD 1588. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 1588 expands the rights of bargaining agents of public sector unions to gain access not only to 
the personal contact information of members of such bargaining unit and any newly hired employees, but also to 
the personal information of employees who are not union members. The personal information to be provided 
includes an employee’s home address, home and personal cell phone numbers, personal email address, and other 
personal contact information. Very simply, we believe this bill represents a significant overreach of authority by 
public sector unions that violates the privacy rights of government employees who have chosen not to be union 
members. Accordingly, we write to oppose this bill. 
 
Similarly, most counties throughout the State have more than one bargaining unit, and our Association would 
also be opposed to bargaining agents of public sector unions gaining access to the personal contact information 
of an employee in another bargaining unit in the county. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
Cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
