Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition  
LD 1332: An Act to Strengthen Work Equity Regarding Employment of Minors and 
Unemployment Benefits   
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Labor and Housing Committee  
April  19, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee,  
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 1332, An Act to Strengthen Work Equity 
Regarding Employment of Minors and Unemployment Benefits.  
  
This committee  has already held a public hearing on LD 559, An Act to Increase the Number of H ours 
Certain Minor Students May Work Under Certain Circumstances  and my testimony today is similar to 
the testimony we submitted for this bill. Both bills propose to allow students to work more hours, even 
during the regular school day.  Put simply, we fee l strongly students should focus on their education and 
we oppose efforts to allow students to work more hours when school is in session.  Regardless of the 
program, and even if they are engaged in home learning, we feel the focus of young people should be  on 
learning and development.   
 
LD 1332 goes one step farther and proposes a subminimum wage of $7.75 for workers who are 14 or 15 
years old, and $8.50 for workers who are 16 and 17 years old. We oppose this subminimum wage.   
First, we feel there is no r eason to make this change now.  With our current labor shortages, there are 
many jobs available to students to try.  Many businesses are looking to hire staff and students can and 
are applying for these jobs despite the state’s current minimum wage being n early double the proposal 
for 14 and 15 -year-old students contained in this bill.   
 
Second, we know some students must work in order to support their families.  We do not believe 
creating a subminimum wage for young people will help these students.  In fa ct, it will send the wrong 
message to students that their work is somehow less valued.  This is contrary to the work ethic schools 
are trying to instill in students.  This bill could foster resentment among student workers, who could be 
working next to peo ple making double what they make for the same job simply because of their age.  
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine.   
 
