Q. ST/\'1"lZ or MAINE 
DEP/\RTi\/ll €N'l" or LABOR 
bl;ll§I;i:_é ’a:l 54 ST/\Tl{ HOUSE S'l‘ATl()N 
.. /xuousr/\, MAINE 04333-0054 
Jana T) Mills Laura /\. Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Opposition to LD #1332 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 19, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. l'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
Maine Department of Labor. l’m here today to testify in opposition to LD 1332, An Act to Strengthen , 
Work Equity Regarding Employment of Minors and Unemployment Benefits. 
LD 1332 addresses the employment of minors in two specific ways, both of which the Department has 
consistently opposed: 
0 relaxing restrictions on the hours minors are permitted to work under certain circumstances, 
and 
0 establishing separate subminimum wage standards for minors in two age categories. 
As we have stated before, the Department believes that current restrictions on the employment of 
minors, including hours worked, have been effective in protecting the health, safety and education of 
Maine's young workers, and should be retained. We believe such protections are in the best interest 
of minors, their families and the future of Maine's economy. 
Similarly, we are opposed in principle to creating exceptions to Maine's minimum wage, and in 
particular to excluding certain groups from its protections. The minimum wage is intended to be just 
that—a minimum below which no Maine worker should be paid. Maine's minimum wage was set by 
referendum in 2016, was intended by voters to apply to everyone and should not be lightly changed. 
Section 4 of this bill pertains to the weekly work search requirement for receiving unemployment 
benefits and is not limited to minors. 
Current law includes the federal and state requirement that an individual must actively seek work each 
week in which a claim is filed in order to be potentially eligible to receive unemployment benefits. The 
conduct and methods of contact that satisfy the work search requirements are defined under Chapter 
10 of the Commission Rules, which were promulgated through Maine's public regulatory process. The 
proposal in LD 1332 applies to all individuals filing for unemployment benefits. Of major concern is 
l’l'lONE:(2(l7)6Z3~79UU 'lTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX:[207) 287~5292 
'lhc M3ll‘lL lltparimeni of Labor pi‘0\'!dGS equal oppoi U\’lll.\ in emplo)meni ‘Ind programs. 
/\iixiliar\ aids and \LT\-lL(\ are availablt upon lLC|\lL< to ll1(llVldUIl\ Willi disabilities
that the proposed language represents a significant limitation of the activities currently accepted as 
evidence of actively seeking work. If it were placed in law, it would override the current promulgated 
rules. 
The proposed language of LD 1332 limits acceptable work search activities solely to 2 items, a job 
application made in person at a business or through an online application portal. Under this proposal, 
application or employer contact made by telephone, mail, or email would not be valid work search 
activities, nor would participation in a job fair, meeting with a CareerCenter Consultant or attendance 
in the Department's Reemployment Services & Eligibility Assessment (RESEA) session to develop a job 
search strategic plan and receive job referrals. Participation in a CareerCenter workshop designed to 
improve the individual ’s ability to successfully find and obtain employment would also not count asa 
job search activity. 
The U. S. Department of Labor recommends that states consider all of these activities as successful 
additions to their acceptable and allowable work search methods for receiving unemployment 
benefits, yet under this proposal, all would result in potential benefit denial if submitted as work 
search activities in a weekly claim. The language as proposed is far too restrictive and does not take 
into consideration a wide range of current, successful methods used to obtain employment in today's 
job market. 
For all these reasons, we urge you to vote against LD 1332. 
Thank you for your time and attention. We would be happy to answer any questions you may have at 
a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to support job growth.
