 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive D irector                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta , ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
L.D. 1332  
 
AN ACT TO STRENGTHEN WORK EQUITY REGARDING EMPLOYMENT OF  
MINORS AND UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and members of the Labor and Housing  Committee.  I am Victoria 
Wallack , director of communications and gov ernment r elations for  Maine School Management Association, 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association , neither for nor against L.D. 1332. 
 
This bill proposes to do two things:  
 
1. Creates a separate minimum wage for yo uth 14 -17 years of age;  
a. Wage tiers are set for these youth:   $7.75 for 14-15 year olds; $8.50 for 16 -17 year olds  
b. There is a cost of living increase factored into this proposal, beginning January 1, 2024 and 
January 1 annually thereafter;  
2. Allows for yout h who are homeschooled to work during school hours – also allowing students 
attending school to work based on an agreement with the student’s parent or guardian . 
 
MSSA and MSBA legislative committees in considering L .D. 1332 understand the desire and need for youth 
to work to provide for their own expenses or to help with family financial commitments.  
 
Their support came up short with the creation of tiered minimum wages for 14 -17 year olds, feeling this was 
discriminatory and unfair to these youth , many of whom would be doing work similar and comparable with 
those 18 and older, all who may be starting at minimum wage.  
 
Additionally, to allow students who are within an approved homeschooled program to work during the hours 
when school is in sessio n also appears discriminatory – setting up one set of circumstances for students who 
are home schooled versus those in attendance at their local public school , unless there is permission granted 
by the school principal under an agreement with the minor’s p arent or guardian . There is a concern this may 
encourage and promote dropouts, or at the least , create a transition to a homeschooled program.  Regarding the 
work opportunities, there would appear to be a greater advantage for those students engaged in a h ome-
schooled program. Opportunities should be equitable for each of these groups of students , and the major 
emphasis should not be on the work, but the completion of their secondary education and successful diploma 
attainment.  
