1 of 3 Aleks Kajstura  
Legal  Director  
akajstura@prisonpolicy.org  
(413) 203-9790 
 
 
Written Testimony of Aleks Kajstura ,  
Legal  Director, Prison Policy Initiative  
 
Committee on State and Local Government  
May 2 , 2023  
 
Support  LD 1704  
 
Thank you , Chair s Nangle and Stover  and members of the Committee for 
the opportunity to provide written testimony . My name is Aleks Kajstura  
and I am the Legal  Director of the Massachusetts -based non -profit, non -
partisan Prison Policy Initiative . I have over a decade of experience 
working with states and local governments crafting solutions to the 
"prison gerrymandering " problem created by the Census Bureau coun ting 
incarcerated people in the wrong spot.  
 
This bill will bring Maine  one step closer to enacting the constitutional 
ideals of equal representation  by counting incarcerated people in their 
home district rather than at the location of the prison . This bill aligns the 
state's redistricting data with its residence laws, ensuring everyone is 
counted in the right district.  
 
 
The Problem  
 
Each decade, Maine  redraws its state and local legislative districts on the 
basis of population to ensure that each district contains the same 
population as other districts. In this way, the state attempts to give all 
residents the same access to representation and governme nt.  
 
But the Census Bureau's rule for counting prison populations is in 
conflict with the law of Maine , which explicitly says that prison is not a 
residence : 
 

2 of 3 "[A] person does not gain or lose a residence solely because of 
the person 's presence or absence  … while kept in any 
institution at public expense. "  
(Maine Annotated Revised Statutes title 21 -A, §112(14).)  
 
People incarcerated in the state's prisons come from all over Maine , but 
they are counted by the Census Bureau as if they were residents of just 5 
Census blocks in the state . 
 
Two of these blocks ( 23 013 970401 3018  and 23 013 970401 2033 ) 
contain neighboring state correctional facilities, the Bolduc Correctional 
Facility  and the Maine State Prison , located in Warren. The 961 p eople 
incarcerated there on Census day were counted as if they were 
constituents of State House District 44, accounting for over 10% of the 
district's total population.    
 
As a result, every 9 residents of District 44 have as much political 
representation in state government as 10 residents in any other district . 
Meanwhile, people incarcerated at Bolduc and MSP are represented by 
legislators from their home communities  but are not counted toward those 
legislators' constituent totals . In Maine , this represen tative nexus is 
particularly strong as people retain the right to vote while incarcerated 
and remain registered to vote at their home address.  
 
 
No impact on federal or state aid formulas  
 
Lastly, I want to address a common misconception I 've seen come up 
with similar bills – correcting this redistricting data issue has no impact 
state or federal funding formulas.  
 
Legislators are often concerned about the impact this type of bill might 
have on the distribution of government funds. Please note that LD 1704  
adjusts address data that is only used for redistricting purposes ; the data is 
not reported back to the Census Bureau , and any agency that uses any 
population data will draw their figures directly from the Census Bureau's 
publications or their own special sources . Therefore this bill would not 
affect any federal or state aid or grants because there are no funding 
formulas that rely on redistricting data.   
3 of 3 
 
Now is the best time to pass legislation to prepare for 2030  
 
The 2030 Census and the next round of redistricting may seem far off 
right now, but in fact, now is  the perfect time to pass this legislation. If 
this bill passes, Maine will be joining over a dozen other states1 in 
adjusting their redistricting data to cou nt incarcerated people at their 
home addresses. The last two decades of experience among these states 
have  clearly shown that the states who start the process early in the 
decade get the best result for the least effort.  
 
 
Conclusion  
 
The basic principle o f our democracy is that representation is distributed 
on the basis of population. Crediting incarcerated people to the wrong 
location has the unfortunate and undemocratic result of creating a system 
of representation without population.  
 
Roughly half of U. S. residents now live in a city, county, or state that has 
taken action to end prison gerrymandering ; Maine  residents deserve the 
same access to equal representation.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  I'm happy to answer any 
questions and share t he experience of other states implementing similar 
legislation. I can be reached at akajstura@prisonpolicy.org.  
 
 
 
Aleks Kajstura  
Legal  Director  
                                                 
1 California, Connecticut, Colorado, Delaware, Maryland, Montana, Nevada, 
New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvani a, Rhode Island, Virginia, and Washington 
State . Additionally, Illinois ha s legislation  in place already , first effective  for the 
2030  redistricting  cycle.  
