PO BOX 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 7746444 
wwwaclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL UBERTIES UNIDN 
Mame 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1704 — Ought to Pass 
. P 
An Act Regarding Incarcerated Individuals and Legislative 
Apportionment 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
May 2, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government, greetings. My name is 
Meagan Sway, and I am Policy Director of the American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil 
liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, we support LD 1704, which would help undo unfair legislative 
apportionment processes, known as prison gerrymandering, that still exist in our 
state. 
Maine has a proud tradition of being one of the most democratic states in the 
country: we have a large House of Representatives for the size of our state; nearly 
every bill introduced at the legislature is afforded a committee hearing, and we are 
one of only two states Where people who are incarcerated in prison are not stripped 
of their voting rights. We are rightly very proud of this democratic tradition. 
However, there are ways in which our state falls short of its democratic ideals. This 
includes the way we count incarcerated people for the purpose of apportionment. 
Prison gerrymandering is the process by which individuals who are incarcerated are 
counted as “residents ” not of the places where they grew up, but of districts housing 
incarceration facilities. According to the Department of J ustice’s findings in 2018, 
the average time served by people who are incarcerated in state facilities was 2.6 
years.1 But redistricting only takes place once every 10 years, meaning that people 
who are incarcerated are counted as residents of their prison facilities long after 
they are released. 
People who are incarcerated are usually not in any meaningful sense described as 
“residents ” of the areas where prisons are located: They are not in prison by choice. 
1 Danielle Kaeble, Time Served in State Prison, 2016, U.S. Department of Justice, 
Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, available at 
https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/tsspl6.pdf.
Because of the purposeful isolation of prisons, prisoners usually lack economic, 
social, or civic ties to the communities just beyond the prison Walls. One way to 
address this would be to allow people incarcerated in prison to register to vote in 
the district where they are incarcerated, giving them a say in what happens where 
they live. This could complicate apportionment, but would not undermine the 
purpose of this bill: to ensure political representation is accurate in our 
apportionment practices. 
Ultimately, the simplest way to end prison gerrymandering is to count people at 
their last Maine address before they were incarcerated. This bill would do just that. 
Maine should join the ll other states and 35 percent of the nation’s population that 
have formally rejected prison-based gerrymandering. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass.
2
