   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
NFNA  
 
LD 1704 An Act Regarding Incarcerated Individuals and Legislative Apportionment  
Correctional Facility  
 
Before the  
Committee  on State and Local Government  
May 2, 2023  
 
 
Senator Nangle  and Representative Stover  and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections providing 
testimony NFNA LD 1704.  
 
The Department takes no position on the matter of apportionme nt, though we will point out that the passage of 
the bill as written would mean that persons incarcerated in a county jail would not be counted, and those 
persons in an MDOC facility for whom the department has no prior address would also not be counted.  
 
 If it is the desire of the legislature to pass the bill, we ask for minor changes to subsection 3 as noted below.  
 
Strike subsection 3 and replace with:  
 
 
3.  Department of Corrections to provide data.  Notwithstanding any provision of law respecting 
confidentiality to the contrary, the Department of Corrections shall provide to the Legislative 
Apportionment Commission the preincarceration residence address and other demographic data of persons 
who are incarcerated  in a Department of Corrections facility  as of 12:01 a.m. on the date of the most recent 
Federal Decennial Census  if the department has the information  available .  The demographic data shall 
include age, gender , race, Hispanic origin, and veteran status. The department shall provide this data within 
45 days of the first meeting of the commission.  The data provided by the department is not a public record 
and the commission shall institute measures to safeguard its confidentiality and to ensure its safekee ping 
upon conclusion of the commission's work.  
 
 
Thank You,  
 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner  
Maine Department of Corrections  
 
