1https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2021-02/56975-Minimum-Wage.pdf 
2https://irle.berkeley.edu/files/2010/Minimum-Wage-Effects-Across-State-Borders.pdf 
 MAINE AFL-CIO  
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Tel. (207) 622-9          
(207) 622-9675 
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
 Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Opposition to LD 885 
“An Act to Provide That the Minimum Wage Increases by the Rolling Average of the Cost of Living of 
the Previous 3 Years” and LD 998 “An Act to Remove the Cost-of-living Adjustment from the Minimum 
Wage Laws” 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of Joint Standing Committee on Labor & Housing, my 
name is Adam Goode. I am the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 
working people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of our members 
and all working people.  
 
We testify in opposition to LDs 885 and 998, two bills that would arbitrarily delay cost-of-living adjustments to 
Maine’s minimum wage. We are opposed to any efforts to lower, weaken, slow or in any way undermine the 
Minimum Wage. In 2016 voters passed by referendum an increase in the minimum wage that has steadily raised 
wages, lifted working Mainers out of poverty and raised expectations of the working class. We are opposed to 
these bills and will be opposed to any efforts to lower, weaken, slow or in any way undermine the Minimum 
Wage. 
 
Since working families earned wage increases at the ballot box in November of 2016, wage increases have 
helped with basic “food on the table” survival issues. Prior to the COVID pandemic, it was clear the increases 
in wages gave the economy a boost through increased consumer spending. This has been good for all working 
people, whether black, brown or white, has helped small businesses and everyone in Maine. 
 
Low wage workers get the most direct gains from a higher minimum wage. Workers in the lowest paid 
industries experience the biggest proportional wage gains. The same principal applies to lower wages due to 
delays in or elimination of cost-of-living adjustments to the minimum wage. People who work in the lowest 
paid industries will be harmed the most through these changes. 
 
We would remind the committee that while unionized workers who are employed under collective bargaining 
agreements largely make more than minimum wage, there are many very modestly paid union members whose 
wages are treated in relation to the minimum wage. The loss of a cost-of-living increase could mean lower 
wages for a firefighter or a cook in a rural nursing home.  
 
Maine’s method of cost-of-living indexing to raise wages is the same system used to update Social Security 
benefits and federal personal income tax brackets. These tend to be modest increases in wages, designed to keep 
pace with rising housing and living costs. A triennial average means less money for working people without any 
protections from increasing costs of their day-to-day expenses. I will reiterate, the cost of groceries does not rise 
on a 3 year average, and neither should the minimum wage. States like Florida, Arizona, Missouri, Montana and 
Printed In House with Union Labor

4https://www.seattlebusinessmag.com/blog/real-wages-have-plunged-even-corporate-profits-have-climbed-where-they-now-
represent-highest-pe  
5https://www.payscale.com/payscale-index 
6https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2021-02/56975-Minimum-Wage.pdf 
7https://irle.berkeley.edu/files/2010/Minimum-Wage-Effects-Across-State-Borders.pdf Ohio have annual cost-of-living adjustments, which has never produced evidence of job losses or abrupt 
increases to wages.1,2 
 
Rolling back Maine’s minimum wage with delays, cuts to or elimination of the cost-of-living increases will 
make life harder for people who go to work every day to provide for their families. For those reasons we ask 
that you vote against these two bills. 
