 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN SUPPORT  -  LD 998 ‘An Act to Remove the Cost -of-living Adjustment from the Minimum Wage Laws ’ and LD 
855 ‘An Act to Provide That the Minimum Wage Increases by the Rolling Average of the Cost of Living of the 
Previous 3 Years ’ 
 
Dear Senator Tipping , Chair, Representative Roeder , Chair, and Members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing , 
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers 
Association  (MGFPA). MGFPA is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within 
Maine’s food community; Main Street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores 
and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and 
supportive service companies.  
 
We support LD 9 98 to provide predictability  for our business members. Independent grocers work within very 
tight profit margins to stay in business, approximately 1 -2% annually. Any increase in costs can have a very real 
and significant impact on a grocery store’s viability.  Increasing the minimum wage  cause s independent 
supermarkets to accelerate the pace of au tomation at checkout and backroom inventory management, leaving 
Mainers without jobs.  In a recent conversation with one of our members, they noted that they recently priced 
out adding self -checkout registers at their stores. They determined that it will c ost them approximately $40,000 
per self -checkout kiosk. Installing one of these registers will pay for itself in labor wages alone in less than two 
years. We question why the state is continuing  to put  businesses in a place where they must consider repla cing 
their staff with automated checkouts in an effort to manage the rising cost of doing business.  
 
In Maine’s 10 -year Economic Development Strategy, it is noted that the best way to increase wages is to 
increase the value of the products and services tha t we produce by developing new products. “This can be done 
through research and development conducted by public, private, and nonprofit agencies; by increasing capital 
investment and entrepreneurship; and by increasing the skills and education of the workf orce.”  MGFPA stands 
supportive of efforts that offer consistency. Maine’s 10 -year EDS specifically states that a key strategy for 
ensuring a diverse and sustainable economy is to “maintain a stable business environment.” The future is in 
talent, innovation  and developing infrastructure not raising the minimum wage .  
 
Over the last two years, managing inventory, inflation and demand has compressed stores’ margins. According 
to the 2022 edition of the Independent Grocers Financial Survey,” Expenses rose to 28 .7% of sales, back to 
2019 levels, with labor and benefits. averaging 15% of sales. Many retailers also experienced increases in 
utilities.” The changes that our grocers, markets and producers have had to make to remain viable are real. In 
an effort to adj ust to the most recent incremental increases businesses have reported that they have reduced March 30, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 staff hours, stopped paying weekend premium pay, reduced the number of paid days off, raised prices, stopped 
and or reduced offering paid dental, short -term and lo ng-term disability insurance, life insurance, and have had 
to stop capital improvements. “ Services such as floor care, weekly sales flyers, advertising, donations, repairs, 
and any other costs are now regularly evaluated.”  
 
We are supportive of giving ou r businesses the opportunity to adjust to the incremental changes at their 
discretion or triennially opposed to annually.  We must be cautious of the economic cycles and put tactics in 
place to add security for our state’s staple businesses.   
 
Thank yo u for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

