Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Opposition  
LD 855: An Act to Pro vide That the Minimum Wage Increases by the Rolling Average of the 
Cost of Living of the Previous 3 Years . 
  
LD 998: An Act to Re move the Cost -of-living Adjustment from the Minimum  Wage L aws. 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Labor and Hous ing C ommittee  
March 30 , 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee,  
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly ev ery public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 855, An Act to Provide That the Minimum 
Wage Increases by the Rolling Average of the Cost of Living of the Previous 3 Years  and LD  998, An  
Act to Remove the Cost -of-living Adjustment from the Mi nimum Wage Laws . 
 
As I have testified previously before this Committee, plenty of students whose parents work in minimum 
wage jobs attend public schools.  The low wages of the parents impact the quality of childhood some 
students are able to experience.  Of  course, a parent’s  love is always among the most important factor s in 
a child’s life.  But being able to provide for a child’s basic needs is critical to the overall well -being and 
development of every child.  When parents struggle to meet the basic needs  of their children, due to low 
wage work and other challenges in life, their children will undoubtedly struggle .1 
 
While these bills are both focused on cutting or slowing minimum wage increases, we feel compelled to 
point out that Maine’s minimum wage law  still falls well short of what is deemed a “living wage.”  I 
know some may take umbrage with this term, but don’t take my word for it – the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT) produces a Living Wage Calculator and on their site, they  define a living wage as 
“the hourly rate that an  individual  in a household must earn to support his or herself and their family. The 
assumption is the sole provider is working full -time (2080 hours per year). ”  This tool concludes that a 
living wage for a  single person in Maine with no children is $16.53 per hour.  For a single parent with 
one child, the living wage is $34.84 per hour and for a single parent with two child ren, the living wage is  
 
 
1 Please see Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, found here:  Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs in Education - Education 
Library  
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
$44.99. 2  All of these living wage calculations fall far bel ow our state’s current minimum wage of 
$13.80 per hour.  While the minimum wage was not created to be a livable wage, the closer it gets to a 
living wage the more we can address poverty among working people.   
 
LD 998 proposes to halt cost of living increas es on the state’s minimum wage at exactly the moment 
workers need this cost of living the most.  Over recent years, we have witnessed historical increases in 
inflation, coupled with specific price fluctuations in key sectors of the economy – gas and heatin g oil is 
one example, staple groceries such as the price of eggs is another.  These fluctuations impact working 
people more, as they struggle to stretch wages and income as prices go up and down, although mostly 
up, all around them.  With such high inflati on in our economy, now would be the worst time to eliminate 
the cost -of-living increases in the state’s minimum wage, as approved by voters in 2016 in a statewide 
ballot initiative.   
 
I would like to remind the Committee of the low wages among some public -school  staff.  S ome s chool s 
throughout the state still have wage scales that mirror minimum wage for some job classes.  When I last 
reviewed the wage scales of school employees in November of 20 21, 30 school districts had a minimum 
wage less than the state  minimum wage for Ed Tech Is.  This means these employees in these positions 
may have received an increase in January of 2023 when the minimum wage increased to $13.80.  At 
least four school districts have a wage scale below $13.80 for bus drivers.  Recent  cost-of-living 
increases  have  helped schools lift the minimum wage in schools and we believe it is an important 
component of our state’s minimum wage law and should be maintained.   
 
Given the fluctuations in prices for key good s (i.e., energy, groceries), we are deeply concerned about 
the moving to a rolling average cost -of-living, as called for in LD 855.  If passed, our minimum wage 
law would be slower to respond to economic volatility, at exactly the time we are seeing significant 
volatility in our economy.  Again, price fluctuations impact low wage workers the most.  Someone 
trying to get by on $13.80 per hour will struggl e more when gas prices skyrocket, or the price of a dozen 
eggs doubles.   
 
For these reasons we oppose LD 855 and  LD 998.  We believe the voter -approved minimum wage law is 
working as intended and should be preserved.   
 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine, and I will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Please see, Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Living Wage Calculator, found here:  Living Wage Calculator - 
Living Wage Calculation for Maine (mit.edu)  
