STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or LABOR 
j 54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
iwu; AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-00s4 
Janet-1~_MinS t 
LauraA.Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
in Opposition to LD 998 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, March 30, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. i'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
l\/laine Department of Labor. l’m here today to testify in opposition to LD 998, An Act to Remove the 
Cost-of-living Adjustment from the Minimum Wage Laws. 
LD 998 seeks to entirely remove the procedure by which iViaine’s' minimum wage is adjusted annually 
to any increases in the cost of living as measured by the Consumer Price Index. instead, it would set 
the wage at its current rate of $13.80 per hour without prospect of regular adjustment. We believe 
that wouldl be a mistake and an affront to the voters who approved the current system by referendum. 
Cost of living adjusﬁnents help workers maintain the purchasing‘ 
power of their paychecks as the prices 
of necessities increase. Removing the annual adjustment, as LD 998 proposes, would revert Maine to 
relying on the highly variable preferences of legislative majorities and governors, rather thanthe more 
regular and predictable mechanism provided by the current system. 
We believe the current system has worked well and as intended by the voters when it was adopted in 
2016. We urge you to vote against LD 998. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. ~"
V 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 'i"i‘Y users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (Z07) 287-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
