g HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
A AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Cheryl A_ Golek TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
9 Vicarage Lane 
Harpswell, ME 04079 
Phone: (207) 535-9857 
Chervl.go]ek@legislature.maine.gov 
Testimony of Rep. Cheryl Golek introducing 
LD 1520, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education and Department of 
Health and Human Services to Study Placing Child Care Facilities in 
Secondary Schools 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Cheryl Golek and I represent House District 99 which 
consists of the Town of Harpswell and part of Brunswick. l come before you to introduce LD 
1520, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education and Department of Health and 
Human Services to Study Placing Child Care Facilities in Secondary Schools for your 
consideration. 
This Resolve will direct the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human 
Services to jointly study placing childcare facilities in secondary schools. Maine families are 
struggling to ﬁnd available quality care, and providers are struggling to attract and retain their 
workforce. The need for childcare in our state cannot be understated. Our childcare providers are 
the workforce behind our workforce and the backbone of our economy. 
Many issues face our childcare providers today, from pay to workforce shortages. Maine parents 
are seeking childcare to return to the workforce or continue school are struggling with access and 
cost. Before -the COVID-19 pandemic, Maine needed more childcare options and during the 
pandemic, Maine lost hundreds of childcare facilities. While many have reopened, they are 
struggling to keep adequate staff. 
We must begin to think outside the box when it comes to providing childcare in our state and 
parents in our state deserve affordable solutions. The educational systems and businesses in our 
state need childcare for their employees to function. Our state’s economy needs childcare to 
grow. 
There are several goals of this bill: 
First, it would provide an on~site training center for secondary school students in child 
development and childcare courses involving the developmental stages of infants, toddlers, a11d 
preschool children; a program like this would provide an early childcare education experience 
for students that could lead to a certificate at graduation in early childcare education or a basic 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
early childcare education credit to continue their education in this ﬁeld. I would hope that this 
could be interconnected with our community colleges for continuing education beyond high 
school. 
Second, is to provide nurturing, quality childcare, and age-appropriate learning experiences ina 
safe and secure environment for infants, toddlers, and preschool children. According to the 
Maine KIDS COUNT report for 2023, it highlights the long-term beneﬁts of quality, early 
learning experiences. Programs that begin at birth lead to better outcomes for children and yield 
up to a 13 percent annual return on public lI1V6S’CI11€11’(.1 
Third, this would provide quality childcare for secondary school staff and employees. This 
would help ﬁll the workforce shortage gaps within our public education system. Our school 
districts have employee shortages from teachers to Ed Techs and food service and maintenance 
to bus drivers. If there was an option for quality childcare as an employee incentive, this would 
help ﬁll the workforce shortage gaps. A program like this would also open childcare spots 
currently ﬁlled to allow others waiting for childcare the ability to return to the workforce or 
studies. 
Finally, this would create a source of early childhood educators and caregivers to help reduce the 
shortage of childcare workers in the state. It is estimated that 50,000 children under the age of six 
in our State need full-time childcare? 
Maine is facing several crises at once, and several are connected at the hip. Our childcare 
shortage is related to our workforce shortage. We cannot build one without the other. We asa 
state must work to ﬁx these together to create the long-tenn solution our state so desperately 
needs, and the Maine people deserve. 
LD 1520 opens an opportunity for us to create long-term changes needed in our state to step 
towards addressing our state’s childcare needs. It will prepare participating students with 
adequate skills and knowledge of correct childcare techniques for the home and workplace. 
Thank you for your time and consideration on this bill and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you have. 
1 
Maine Children ’s Alliance (2023). 2023 MHNE KIDS Data Book. Pg. 39. Retrieved ﬁom 
https://mainechildrensalliance.org/site/assets/ ﬁles/2024/databook2023highlights.pdf 
2 Id. at pg. 39. 
District 99: Brunswick (Part), Harpswell
