1TESTIMONY OF
PETER W. LACY, DIRECTOR OF PROPERTY TAX
MAINE REVENUE SERVICES
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Hearing Date: 1/31/2023
LD 6 – “Resolve, Authorizing the State Tax Assessor to Convey the Interest of the 
State in Certain Real Estate in the Unorganized Territory”
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Peter Lacy, Director of the Property Tax 
Division at Maine Revenue Services.  I am here today at the request of the 
Administration to testify in Support of LD 6, “Resolve, Authorizing the State Tax 
Assessor to Convey the Interest of the State in Certain Real Estate in the 
Unorganized Territory.”
This is an annual agency bill being proposed which allows the State Tax 
Assessor to sell properties acquired by the State through the tax lien process.  36 
M.R.S. § 1283 requires the State Tax Assessor to report to the Legislature all 
property in the unorganized territory that has been tax-acquired by the State and, 
after authorization by the Legislature, to sell that property.  This Resolve is a 
statutory step in that process.  The properties listed in the Resolve were acquired 
by the State through the foreclosure of tax liens for nonpayment of property taxes.  
None of the properties included in this Resolve are occupied homesteads.  
This process is a routine element of unorganized territory tax administration 
and the administrative costs can be absorbed within the current UT budget.  The 
General Fund is reimbursed from the Unorganized Territory Education Services 
Fund for the costs of property tax administration in the unorganized territory.
2The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  I would 
be happy to respond to any questions you may have now.
