 
19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590 
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS   
12781773.1 
 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 1080 (“An Act to Require the Termination 
of Private Mortgage Insurance”) 
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS® 
 
April 4, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the 
Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of 
REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 
members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. 
Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real 
estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, 
closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine 
Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest 
trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® is neither for nor against LD 1080 in its current 
form. The bill would automatically terminate private mortgage insurance (PMI) coverage at 
an 80/20 loan to value or after two years of coverage, whichever occurs earlier. 
 
We support the intent behind this bill: if a mortgage holder with a PMI policy has met the 
terms of the policy, then they should not have to continue making payments on that policy. 
These payments can be up to several hundred dollars a month and can often be a barrier to 
entry for homeownership.  Allowing the policy to automatically terminate would be a 
significant monthly savings for many homeowners, making their mortgages, and 
homeownership more affordable.  
 
However, we do share concerns for the lending markets. Specifically, we need to ensure 
that the bill will not encumber a financial institution’s ability to sell these PMI-backed 
mortgages on the secondary market. A lender’s ability to sell an existing loan enables them 
to free up funds to continue to offer financing for homeownership. The ability to do so also 
reduces the overall cost of lending and reduces risk for all participants in the lending 
markets. Nationally, the loan to value ratio can vary slightly for termination of PMI. By setting 
an automatic rate of 80/20, Maine lenders may not be able to participate in the secondary 
market where a different loan to value ratio may be required. This is not only bad for Maine 
lenders, but limits buyers in their options for financing. In turn, we respectfully urge any 
 
 
Page 2 
 
12781773.1 
changes needed to the bill’s language to ensure that mortgages will continue to be able to 
be sold on the secondary market. 
 
For these reasons, we are neither for nor against LD 1080 in its current form and 
respectfully urge changes that both embrace the spirit of the bill while addressing concerns 
from the lending industry and ultimately homeowners. Thank you for your time and 
consideration. 
