Mciine Credit Union Leogue 
2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
ln Opposition to LD 1080 
An Act to Require the Termination of Private Mortgage Insurance 
Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services 
April 4, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Krista Simonis and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit 
Union League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine's 50 credit 
unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony 
in opposition to LD 1080. 
Credit Unions are community-based organizations with a long history and vested interest in 
encouraging home ownership. The establishment of PMI (Private Mortgage insurance) in 
1957 made home ownership accessible for many first-time homebuyers who lacked the 
traditional 20% down payment that had been standard. With housing costs rising faster than 
inflation, PMI has become even more important to ensure potential homeowners have access 
to mortgages while protecting the interests of the financial industry. 
For many, PMI is a significant cost each month, which is why the Homeowners Protection Act 
of 1998 gave homeowners the ability to remove PMI when they reach 20% equity, provided 
they make a written request and are in good standing on their payments. By making this 
automatic, LD 1080 removes protections for community-based lenders like credit unions. 
For homeowners whose homes g increased in value, current law allows them to request 
an appraisal. If at that point they have reached 20% in equity they can request PMI be 
removed. If they have reached 22% in equity, PMI is automatically removed according to the 
Homeowners Protection Act of 1998. It's our perspective that this is a reasonable approach 
that balances the financial concerns of both homeowners and credit unions. Credit unions are 
risk-averse and always take care to manage their financial responsibilities to their members 
so that lending is done in a safe and responsible manner and funding remains available for 
those in need. PMI allows this to occur while making home-ownership more accessible to 
those who may not have savings or generational wealth to rely on. 
The bill relies on the assumption that housing prices will always rise- which as we know from 
the housing crisis of 2008 is not always true. Rather than basing the 20% of equity on the 
payments a mortgagee has made, LD 1080 relies on "Automated Valuation Models,” to 
determine the home's current value. While a useful tool in appraisal, automated valuation 
models are only accurate in tract, development housing where each house on the block is 
identical. Most communities in Maine do not have this sort of standardization and require a
‘§’ Molne Credit Union League 
human appraiser for an accurate appraisal. Imagine a community like Newry- where a 3- 
bedroom home could be anything from a million-dollar ski chalet to a modest family farm. 
Automated Valuation Models simply do not have the fluency to cope with the diversity of 
homes in our communities. 
Additionally, it is our belief that LD 1080, as proposed, would conflict with the Homeowners 
Protection Act of 1998. §4908 of the Act, Section 1, specifically states that ”the provisions of 
this chapter shall supersede any provisions of the law of any State relating to requirements for 
obtaining or maintaining private mortgage insurance in connection with residential mortgage 
transactions, cancellation or automatic termination of such private mortgage insurance... ” 
Based on this, it is our understanding that any Maine law that attempts to require an 
automated termination of PMl earlier than the 22% equity level stated within the Act would 
be federally preempted. 
It is for these reasons that the Maine Credit Union League stands in opposition to LD 1080. 
We thank you for the opportunity to testify.
