MA|NE N\UN|C|pA|_ 1-800‘l+S2'8786(instote) 
ASSOCIATION SINCE 1936 “”°"°”“*‘*2‘* 
(F) 207~6Zl+-0129 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 0433091486 
Testimony ofthe Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 491 - Resolve, to Require the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to Develop a Plan for 
Communication Regarding Certain Municipal Regulation 
April 19, 2023 
Sen. LaFountain, Rep. Landry and distinguished members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in support for LD 491, Resolve, 
to Require the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to Develop a Plan for Communication 
Regarding Certain Municipal Regulation on behalf of Maine Municipal Association and at the direction 
of our 70 member Legislative Policy Committee. 
Our Legislative Policy Committee is made up of municipal officials elected to serve by their 
municipal peers from their regions mirroring Maine’s 35 senate districts. As such, they have a wide 
variety of experience, available local resources, and communities needs. In more scenic and rural areas of 
Maine, the management of public access and use of Great Ponds and waters of the state is often 
challenging, split between multiple communities, and heavily reliant on part-time municipal offices. The 
rapid in migration to these areas has created whole new challenges for these resources and municipal 
officials as well as the Association are truly grateful for the guidance and knowledge provided by the 
Department oflnland Fisheries and Wildlife in assisting municipal efforts. 
To the department ’s credit, their outreach and willingness to work with the Association to 
disseminate information and explore deeper issues around houseboats on inland waterways, moorings, 
and boat operation collaboratively is a model for intergovernmental cooperation. This has not been 
undertaken with resources to inside the department to match many of those needs, yet staff and leadership 
still honor this relationship and work to the greatest extent that they can already. 
When municipal ofﬁcials are constantly hammered by upland owners along water bodies with 
complaints, the department is a vital resource to point to an encourage acceptance that such resources are 
not owned by one, but for the benefit of all. This is invaluable to relieve local pressures that can be 
exclusionary particularly under new ownership, or when residents interact with challenging members of 
the public. 
When communities have older ordinances on the books or have made decisions that might not be 
the intended spirit of the law, the department starts with dialogue to inform communities of their 
limitations and responsibilities and assists with correcting the problem, frequently ﬁnding a solution and 
developing a deeper local relationship. As a result, the department is a trusted partner of municipal 
government who starts with belief in the good will of municipal officials and encouraging understanding 
before bringing out the sticks ofcompliance.
For all of these reasons, municipal ofﬁcials and the Association support and encourage you to 
pass LD 491. At the same time, officials as that you consider how invaluable greater resources might be in 
the department for this type of vital relationship building approach with their local government partners. 
While the department is unlikely to advocate for greater resources, the Association would like the 
committee to understand how important this work is and how much it is valued at the local level and 
encourage you to support additional resources if needed to maintain this effort.
