Testimony in Support of LD 460, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Improve 
Student Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine System by Aidan 
McGlone, of Limington, University of Maine Mechanical Engineering Student - April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations & Financial Affairs : My name is Aidan McGlone , and I am from Limington. I 
graduated from Bonny Eagle High School in 2019 and will be graduating from the University of 
Maine in May  with my bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering , but I will be staying at U Maine 
to complete my master’s degree  in mechanical engineering . I am writing this testimony in support of 
LD 460,  An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Improve Student Success and Workforce 
Readiness Within the University of Maine System . 
 
It was clear to me from a young age that I wanted to become an engineer. I was always playing with 
LEGO and robotics , and I even enjoyed math class. I toured many engineering colleges anywhere 
from Maine to New York , but I decided on UMaine due to the strong curriculum, the distance to my 
family, and the affordability . The first time I took an in-depth  tour and stayed at UMaine  was when  I 
was a junior  in high school , I had an amazing time and surprisingly decent food, but some buildings 
seemed outdated  to me , even though  my own high school had been built in the 1960s .  
 
Throughout my undergraduate caree r in Orono , I feel I have gained enough knowledge to prepare me 
to excel in whatever career I choose, under the umbrella of mechanical engineering of course. I have 
enjoyed all of my classes and labs even when they challenged me. My only complaint  about my  
UMaine education and experience  is that my lab spaces , classrooms , and dorm rooms  clearly need  
improvement and are simply outdated.  
 
My class was fortunate to be the first to perform capstone in the new Ferland Engineering Education 
and Design Center. , which opened last fall and was made possible thanks to State, private and 
corporate funding.  For clarification, capstone is a cumulative  project from our first three years of 
undergrad in which we are given a problem and have to go through the entire engineering process, 
including a building phase. The new building made this process much more enjoyable  and valuable 
to my learning, fosterin g greater collaboration with my peers and the modern technology and space 
to innovate . Betwee n the team meeting rooms, which have TVs and whiteboards, and the new design 
suite, working with my team and manufacturing our project was so much easier. Imaginin g building 
our design in the previous capstone design area, I would have felt claustrophobic with the large 
number of people packed into the tiny, old building. Never once did I feel that way in Ferland. Also, I 
feel having access to 3D -printers, dedicated  metal and wood shops, and even other specialized labs in 
the new building, helps maintain an orderly, but more importantly, safe working environment for the 
students.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to share my views on UMaine and the  impact of the  new F erland  
EEDC  on me and other engineering students , which showed me how State funding can directly 
benefit the quality of education, research,  and opportunity at Maine’s public universities for current 
and future generations. Just this one building has improv ed the quality of three engineering degree 
programs , and I am looking forward to seeing how UMaine and other universities in the system 
improve over the coming years  with your support  for the additional investment proposed  by LD 460.  
