Testimony In Support of LD 460, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to 
Improve Student Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine System  
From Aidan Mulrooney, University of Maine at Farmington Student Representative to the 
Board of Trustees  - April 26, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Appropriations & Financial Affairs: My name is Aidan Mulrooney and I serve as the University 
of Maine at F armington Student Representative to the Board of Trustees.   I am testifying today 
in support of LD 460, the $100 million infrastructure bond for the University of Maine 
System .  
 
As a third -generation UMF student majoring in history, I understand the valu e of our oldest 
campus.   That being said, two -thirds of UMF buildings have not been renovated in at least 50 
years and may have gone much longer without improvement.   While this adds to the historic 
charm of our downtown campus, renovation is critically ne cessary now to bring the quality of 
our classrooms, accommodations and other student and community spaces closer to the quality 
of our education and experience.   
 
As you have heard, UMF would use its portion of the investment proposed by LD 460 to 
modern ize residence halls, which are essential to attracting students to Farmington, where 
enrollment has been fast falling to the point that last year, there were faculty retrenchments. This 
includes improvements to Scott Hall North and South, built in the 1960 s and relatively 
unchanged since.  
 
The current condition of Scott Hall and other campus facilities have  motivated students to 
transfer to other colleges or to move off campus. More than 50 years of  wear and tear have 
resulted in flickering lights, damaged  siding, dead outlets, windows that don’t lock, and 
inconsistent heating and cooling. The former is obviously a harm to the institution and its ability 
to serve the state including preparing the teacher workforce; the latter fractures the campus 
culture, w hich challenges the ability of the institution to provide the experiences and supports 
that keep students at our institution and ensure they are most successful while drawing future 
young people to Farmington.    
 
I am grateful for my UMF education an d the opportunities I have been provided through the 
university, including to represent the student body to Trustees and to work in the local 
community. However, I am concerned that the campus facilities haven’t been modernized since 
my parents and even gr andparents attended and what that means for the future of Farmington. 
For this reason, I urge your support of LD 460 and other needed investments in Maine’s public 
universities.  
 
Thank you kindly for your previous support of the University of Maine System, and public 
education writ large. I look forward to answering your questions.  
 
 
 
