Testimony in Support of LD 460, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to 
Improve Student Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine 
System 
From Kara Hay, Penquis President & CEO 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Appropriations & Financial Affairs: My name is Kara Hay and I write in support of the important 
investment in University of Maine System infrastructure proposed by LD 460.  
I am a proud University of Maine graduate and the president and CEO of Penquis, a large 
community action agency in central/northern Maine that serves between 3,500 and 5,000 
struggling Mainers every single day. We provide roughly fifty services aimed at ensuring 
Mainers have access to safe and affordable housing, early childhood education, transportation, 
family supports and programs that build financial stability. 
The University of Maine System and especially UMaine is a critical partner in our efforts, 
providing affordable education and social mobility, the workforce our agency needs to deliver 
crucial services to thousands of individuals each day, and research-informed solutions to the 
challenges that confront the population we serve. 
Recently, Penquis has been closely collaborating with UMaine’s Advanced Structures & 
Composites Center (ASCC) to support their innovative work to transform housing construction 
methods in Maine and across the nation while addressing the state’s housing crisis. 
Thanks to Congressionally Directed Spending secured for Penquis by Sen. Angus King and 
funding from KeyBank Foundation and NeighborWorks America, our organization and 
MaineHousing are working with UMaine ASCC to create a first-in-the-nation bio-based 3D-
printed neighborhood. This project scales up UMaine’s pioneering BioHome3D technology that 
was publicly unveiled in late 2022 and has attracted state, national and international interest. 
The neighborhood will be located in the Greater Bangor area and consist of nine homes made 
entirely from Maine wood waste, providing housing for individuals experiencing or at risk of 
homelessness.   
You are well aware of our state’s housing availability and affordability crisis. One of the greatest 
challenges is the cost and slow pace of housing construction. This project is investigating ways 
to create units more quickly and inexpensively, as well as more sustainably, so that the 
technology can eventually be implemented at scale by private sector partners.  
To deliver this project, UMaine needs to build the Green Engineering & Materials Factory of the 
Future (GEM), a first-of-its-kind research and learning environment in next-generation large-
scale digital manufacturing technology. The new facility would have an entire bay devoted to 
affordable housing innovation and would allow for the nine homes to be 3D printed in phases, 
allowing time to evaluate and modify the home’s design based on housing performance, cost 
and feedback from the homes’ occupants. The goal is to solve key technical hurdles, optimize 
the home’s design and minimize cost in order to make this new type of construction 
commercially viable.  
We understand UMaine would receive $58 million from LD 460, An Act to Authorize a General 
Fund Bond Issue to Improve Student Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University 
of Maine System. A large portion of that would be dedicated by the university to GEM, closing 
the funding gap that remains and allowing for groundbreaking in 2024. For this reason, we urge 
your support of this investment. We are excited about the potential of this landmark project to 
create new opportunities for the state’s economy and Maine-made solutions to our affordable 
housing crisis. Thank you.  
