188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 
Testimony of Matthew Marks in Support of  LD  460 
“An Act to Autho rize a General Fund Bond Issue to Improve Student  
Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine  
System ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
April 26, 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs  my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal  at Cornerstone  
Government  Affairs,  and here  today  to speak  on behalf  of my client  The Associated  General  Contractors  
of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a statewide  commercial construction  trade  association  and a Chapter  of AGC  
America.  
 
 A few years ago,  I had the opportunity to participate in a task force that brought together Maine ’s post -
secondary  public ins titutions to examine the process  of integrating an evaluation tool used by the 
UMaine System to evaluate their facility  needs . It was clear during the process the University has  
completed the necessary ongoing due d iligence to assess its facilities  but also planning to tackle the 
backlog through a  strategic  and calculated  process .  
 Curren tly, the sy stem has a $1.3 billion backlog in infrastructure improvements. As you know, they ha ve 
utilized their ability to fundraise, leverage public -private  partner ships , and b udget accordingly to 
continue addressing these needs. I  attended a national conference pre -pandemic in Dallas , Texas on our 
country ’s infras tructure  and one of the breakout sessions included the ongoing chal lenges in public 
higher education in stitutions across our nation. In that session, I learned that 2/3rds o f students an d 
parents are influenced by the facility conditions in their decision -making process. As a p arent, my 
daughter is currently making her college visits, and as you might suspect it ’s usually the first impression 
she shares.  
 From a construction perspective, the University has been a stell ar partner in  the industry. Like Maine 
DOT,  they prepare the often -said “shovel -ready  projects ” that utilize a competitive bid process . In this 
bond , the same considerations of asset -based  decisions making are  applied. Repairing structures to keep 
them in good standing, ensuring life safety standards, ADA compliance , and investing in the fu ture b y 
dedicating the necessary  funds towards the Green Engineering and Materials Factory of the Future that 
is developing durable, innov ative construction technology and materials . 
 
AGC Maine en courages the Committee to move ahead with funding the future workforce and continued 
effort to invest  strategically in our higher education system. The fiscal prudence of the investment will 
assist in our sta tewide efforts to re tain students here in Maine. T hank you for considering my 
comments, and I am happy to answer any questions.  
  
