Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 460 
 
“An Act to  Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Improve Student 
Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine 
System”  
 
April 2 6, 2023  
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Good aftern oon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Aﬀairs Committee . I’m Patrick Strauch of Exeter  and I am  
submitting t estimony on behalf of the Maine Forest Products Council  today  in support of LD 
460, “ An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Improve Student Success and 
Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine System .” 
 
The Maine Forest Products Council is an organization representing more than 300 members 
from all facets of the forest products industry. Members include paper mills, sawmills, loggers, 
truckers, foresters, panel manufacturers, biomass and pellet facilities and secondary 
manufacturers. We also have more than 8 million acres of dues paying member  companies . Our 
industry contributes more than $8.1 billion each year to the state’s economy, and it supports 
more than 33,500 direct and indirect jobs.  
 
As an industry, we have worked closely with the University of Maine and other  partners 
through the FOR/Maine collaboration. This collaboration, with strong support from our federal 
delegation and administration , has focus ed on research and development and emerging 
technologies  to build resilience in the forest products industry, attract investments and re cruit 
the workforce necess ary to fill the projected 5,000 employee gap our industry will face by 
2030. The University of Maine ’s Advanced Structures and Composites Center has been a 
critical partner in this endeavor , training the next -generation manufacturing workforce while 
also developing the cutting -edge  research ne cessary to support our evolving industry and 
move Maine ’s globally competitive forest economy forward.  
 
An important part of the University ’s research has been geared towards utilizing our abunda nt 
forest resource s to reduce our carbon footprint and meet the climate goals of the day. If 
successful,  the bond provided by LD 460 would close the $58 million funding gap for the Green 
Engineering and Materials  (GEM)  Labor atory , allowing the University to br eak ground on this 
important project next year. The GEM laboratory  presents a  tremendous opportunity for Maine 
to capitalize on new opportunities to add value to our forest resources while solving critical 
challenges in our state and support ing good- paying jobs in communities that rely on a  strong 
forest economy.  
 
Maine voters have a history of supporting bonds  to support innovation in our forest economy. In 
2018, the y supported a bond for a new dorm and student center at USM that was constructed 
with cutting edge cros s laminated timber (CLT) materials.  
 
For these reason s, the Council strongly supports LD 4 60 and ur ges you to vote ‘ Ought to Pass ’. Let’s again give Mainers 
the opportunity to support critical investments in our forest economy future. Thank you for your consideration. I would be 
happy to provide answers to any questions you ma y have at  the work session.  
