Patrick Flood 
9 Quarry Lane 
Saco, Maine 04072 
April 25, 2023 
Testimony Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee in Support of LD 460, An Act to 
Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Improve Student Success and Workforce Readiness with the 
University of Maine System 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee, my 
name is Patrick Flood. l live in Saco. l am a member of the Board of Trustees of the University of Maine System. 
The Board supports LD460. We thank Senator Pierce for submitting this Bill. 
The University of Maine System has a signiﬁcant number of buildings, labs, and residence halls. Several of our 
campuses have existed for over 150 years and many of our older structures require renovations or replacements. 
We address these needs in our long—term facilities plan. Our plan aligns with guidance from a national consultant 
we use — the Gordian Company. We currently invest about $20 million per year to renovate and/or replace 
structures to meet health, safety and ADA requirements. But we know that $20 million is not enough. Our 
facilities renovation age and net asset value will not improve unless more investments are made each year. 
Gordian suggests (and we agree) that a more complete plan would require about $50 million per year of upkeep. 
General Fund Bond issues will not solely solve our infrastructure problems. We have to be creative. Already, we 
direct a large share of campus operating budgets to capital needs. The Board also raises funds from outside 
sources (like the Alfond Foundation who has pledged $240 million for speciﬁc projects over ten years provided 
we ﬁnd appropriate matching funds), and from public—private partnerships (like the Olympia Hotel Management 
renovation of Coburn and Holmes Halls at Orono which had been unoccupied for a decade, converting these 
halls into 95 hotel rooms this year). This year we are particularly proud of an $11.7 million energy upgrade we 
just authorized at the University of Maine at Farmington. This project will be ﬁnanced completely by the 10-year 
savings and energy credits realized through the installation of water and lighting systems, additional insulation in 
30 buildings, and the installation of a second biomass boiler to replace expensive propane and fuel oil. We also 
utilize revenue bonding, which allows the University System to borrow at competitive rates without General 
Fund Bond issuance. in some cases, funds for debt service from the State have helped support our payments on 
revenue bonds. This is a unique partnership with the State that does not bind the state into long term 
obligations. Of course, we will also continue to seek funding from our Congressional delegation on appropriate 
projects. l hope it is clear that lg we are not coming to the State for all our capital facilities needs. lt is our 
duty to be creative. 
l recognize that in the ﬁrst year of a biennium, it is sometimes difficult to determine the appropriate level (if any) 
for state borrowing, and therefore the right amount of General Fund Bond requests to put before the voters. As 
this Legislature evolves this year and next, please know that we will continue to do our share and work with you 
to provide for the public mission of the University System. The University System is a cherished public asset 
deserving of State support. Its Board of Trustees will continue to manage the University System and the funds 
provided by the State to the best of our ability. We appreciate your service and appreciate the opportunity to 
work with you throughout the session. Thank you. l will try to answer any questions you have. 
Patricksaflood@gmail.com 207:458-8827
