 
 
Testimony In Support of LD 460, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to 
Improve Student Success and Workforce Readiness Within the University of Maine System  
From University of M aine Presque Isle Director of A dmissions Su san White  of Caribou  
 April 26, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs: My name is Susan White and I am a proud 
graduate of the University of Southern Maine and the Director of Admissions at the University 
of Maine at Presque Isle. On behalf of UMPI and the University of Maine System (UMS), I am 
here to spea k in support of the much -needed investment in System infrastructure proposed by LD 
460. 
 
From its founding in 1903 as a Normal School providing teacher preparation, UMPI has been 
essential to ensuring a bright future for Aroostook County.    
 
You are well  aware that our public universities have deepening enrollment  challenges that 
require us to think creatively  when it comes to the recruitment and retention of our students. For 
example, o ver the past five years, credit hours from in -state students are do wn 29.3% at UMPI, 
and out -of-state student credit hours have decreased 27.1%. While some enrollment losses can be 
attributed to the pandemic and Maine's demographics, they are exacerbated by the increased 
competitiveness of facilities at peer institutions including private colleges in Maine and public 
and private schools out -of-state.   
 
Furthermore, as students come to us after having anything but a normal high school experience 
due to the disruptions of the pandemic, it is our responsibility as a low -barrier public university 
to have the proper resources readily available to support them to be successful in and out of the 
classroom. We know, and research supports, that the optimum way for students to leverage those 
resources including mental health, academ ic and peer supports is  to live on -campus where those 
services are available to them 24/7. Living on -campus can also be more affordable, and thus 
reduce time to graduation and student debt. In our rural region, off -campus housing is not readily 
available and a recent cost comparison found that on -campus housing is less expensive and more 
flexible.  
 
To be successful in the recruitment and retention of students as a small, rural public university in 
an increasingly competitive higher education marketplace, we have to look at all aspects of the 
student experience, especially on -campus housing.   UMPI’s current residence halls and related 
facilities do not reflect the dynamic needs of our students or what they and their families have 
expressed as the characteri stics that they feel are important when making a college decision.    
 
As the Director of Admissions, I have the privilege of interacting with prospective students and 
their families on a regular basis.   I hear what students say they need and what their fa milies want 
for them as they make this major transition to adulthood and independence. Students have 
 
expressed the desire to be part of a community while at the same time, having their own space to 
live and study, but our current residence halls lack singl e rooms and common areas for students 
to gather. Meanwhile, parents want to leave their students at a place that is clean, dry and safe. 
While we may refer to it as deferred maintenance, what students and families rightfully expect is 
relatively basic conv enience, comforts and accessibility.  
 
While this can be daunting to think about, I am motivated by the incredible potential of our 
university and our duty to serve the County and the state.   
 
As a former PK -12 teacher and district administrator in Aroost ook County, I saw first-hand  the 
impact that UMPI has on our schools and communities. I remember one staff meeting when I 
was a building principal when I learned that every teacher and ed tech except for one from out -
of-state was an UMPI graduate.   UMPI g raduates those that are called to be public servants as 
teachers, coaches, police officers, nurses and social workers. Our students become engaged with 
the community as part of their classwork and then decide to stay and continue to give back to the 
County  in their careers and civic lives, even if they are not originally from here.    
 
Aroostook County’s future depends on the sustainability and success of UMPI, and also our 
sister public university in Fort Kent. If we cannot meet the needs of the County’s s tudents, they 
will go elsewhere for college and are less likely to ever come back. However, if properly 
resourced, including with improved residence halls that are attractive to students as well as 
upgrades to academic and other spaces, UMPI and UMFK can b etter do our part to keep 
Aroostook County’s best and brightest in this region, while attracting new talent from away to 
help strengthen and grow the workforce and our communities.   
 
Despite how we work to leverage the gifts we receive from our donors and  alumni, our ability to 
make substantive changes to our campus facilities falls far short of what really needs to be done. 
For this reason, State support is so important to us.   
 
I strongly urge you to support infrastructure and other investment for Mai ne’s public universities 
and I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for your ongoing support of our 
incredible students.   
 
