State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Beth Lambert, Director of Teaching and Learning, Department of Education 
Neither For Nor Against: L.D. 1510 
An Act to Provide Grants to Promote Innovative Learning Strategies 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Brennan 
Co-Sponsored by: Senators Ingwersen, Pierce, Rafferty, and Representatives Dodge, Gattine, 
Malon, Peny, Sargent and Shagoury 
Date: May 2, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Beth Lambert and I am here today representing the Department speaking neither for 
nor against of L.D. 1510, An Act to Provide Grants to Promote Innovative Learning Strategies. 
This bill proposes to create a fund that would award grants to school administrative units (SAUs) 
to promote innovative learning programs that are designed to address student achievement gaps. 
It is essential that educators stay up-to date with the latest research, best practices, and training to 
implement innovative instruction effectively. These innovations in education often involve using 
new and cutting-edge technologies, tools, and materials that may not be readily available within 
the existing budget of the school district. This grant funding can support professional development 
opportunities such as workshops, conferences, and training, which allow educators to enhance 
their knowledge and skills in planning innovative instruction, as well as provide educators with 
the necessary financial resources to acquire these materials, which are crucial for implementing 
innovative instructional strategies. 
Additionally, innovative instruction requires collaboration and networking with experts, peers, and 
other stakeholders. This grant funding can support educators in building networks, establishing 
partnerships, and collaborating with other educators. This grant funding will allow districts to hire 
substitutes so that educators can have the necessary time to exchange ideas, share resources and 
learn from each other‘s experience, which can greatly enhance the quality of innovative 
instructional planning. 
A dedicated fund to provide grants to SAUs will help our schools address achievement gaps for 
economically disadvantaged students, racial, and ethnic populations, and students who 
experienced educational disruption as a result of COVID-19. 
The Department of Education is neither for nor against L.D. l5 10, An Act to Provide Grants to 
Promote Innovative Leaming Strategies. I am happy to answer any questions the Committee 
may have, and I will be available for work sessions on this bill.
