Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
av 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD 1510: An Act to Provide Grants to Promote Innovative Learning Strategies 
Mallory Cook, Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement, 
Maine Education Association 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
May 2,2023 
Senator Raffeny, Representative B1‘6I11’1ﬂ1’1, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association, and a certiﬁed English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am here to provide testimony in support of LD 1510: An Act to Provide Grants to 
Promote Innovative Learning Strategies. 
There might be days on this committee, after hours of public hearings, that you ﬁnd your mind drifting, 
not because the issues are not important to you, but because an environment where you must simply sit 
and listen, with limited time for questions, can be challenging. This rings true for our students as well. 
During my time as an educator, I spent a great deal of energy on developing curriculum that would 
engage my students. I learned early on that failure to do so would result in 20 high schoolers looking at 
me, eyes glazed over, willing the bell to ring and free them. This was especially true for one of my 
favorite courses - Technical English; a course for seniors with ambitions to enter the workforce 
immediately following graduation. At one time in their high school career, some of these students were 
identiﬁed as at-risk; engaging them in their learning was integral to keeping them in the classroom. 
Some of these units involved partnerships with businesses in the community, creating space for guest 
speakers, conducting job-site observations, or engaging in jobshadows; some involved projects where 
students needed to present problems and solutions to the school committee; some involved mock 
interviews in front of the administrative team, and other units created relevant experiences for the 
students based on their career of interest. Regardless of the unit, creating these opportunities took time 
and resources. This grant would provide schools with the opportunity to collaborate with businesses and 
higher ed institutions and to access resources that would enable more teachers to take the time to 
develop these oppoitunities and funds if their project requires materials, transportation costs, or other 
expenses. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 06330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
The MEA stood before this committee earlier in the session in support of LD 156: An Act to Require 
Recess Time for Students in Grades 6 — 8. At that public hearing, members of the committee heard a lot 
about student engagement, the growing sedentary lifestyles of our youth, and the importance of 
movement and socializing in school; a few committee members asked questions about project-based 
learning and how implementing those practices more universally would help to encourage a more active 
and social school day. We certainly agree they would. This grant would enable districts to receive the 
professional development needed to review their curricula to make decisions about where they could 
implement more imiovative strategies. 
Engagement in school has been linked to improved academic achievement, attendance, and participation 
in school activities; thus, students feel more connected to their school community and more conﬁdent in 
their abilities. Given the disruptions to connectedness caused by the pandemic, this is the perfect 
opportunity to assist districts who were most impacted. 
LD 1510 calls for routine technical rulemaking to govern procedures, criteria, and priorities for awarding 
grants. The MEA would be happy to share our views and to work alongside the department in the 
development of those rules. 
Thank you for your time, and I will do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I310 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I Www.maineea.org
