126 Sewall Street 
Augusta, ME  04330-6822
TTY/Voice: (207) 626-7058
Fax: (207) 621-8148 
www.maineequaljustice.org
Kelli Musick
Policy Advocate
(757) 634-7896
kelli@mejp.org
1Testimony of Kelli Musick, Maine Equal Justice
In support of LD 13, An Act to Define “Mail” in the Employment Security Law 
to Include Electronic Notification
February 7, 2023
Good morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kelli Musick and I am a policy advocate at Maine 
Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid and economic justice organization working to increase economic 
security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am testifying today in support of LD 13. 
What the Bill Does
As currently written, this bill “adds a definition of ‘mail’ applicable in the Maine Revised Statutes, 
Title 26, chapter 13 that includes delivery by postal service, private carrier or electronic mail.” 
Simply put, this definition would now include what is commonly known as email. This bill is 
necessary for a myriad of reasons including promoting timeliness of notice and access to records. 
The COVID-19 pandemic placed unprecedented stress on governmental agencies across the country 
and here at home. The United States Postal Service and the Maine Bureau of Unemployment 
Compensation have worked tirelessly to assist the tens of thousands of Mainers who submitted 
unemployment claims; however, these efforts have not been without issue.1 Delays in receiving 
critical documents related to their claims and their benefits have resulted in people having their 
benefits delayed or being unable to meet their appeal deadlines.  
Modernizing the definition of mail to include email allows for more speedy and certain delivery of 
documents to claimants. Furthermore, these documents are stored in a safe and accessible place in 
the claimants online portal. This ensures that claimants are receiving their information faster and 
having it stored more securely, inspiring not only efficiency in the claims process but also trust in 
the government agency administering it.
1 https://www.maine.gov/labor/cwri/ui.html#interactive 
2What We Propose Including
As previously mentioned, we appreciate the effort by the Maine Department of Labor to address 
this definitional gap and continue the efforts to modernize our laws. We propose including the 
following additions to this bill:
1. We propose that all notices related to eligibility, benefit amount, or scheduling for any 
adjudication proceeding would be stored in the correspondence folder of the portal.
2. We propose to extend the appeal time from 15 days to 30 days, in congruence with most 
other public benefits.2
3. We propose that the time for filing an after deadline appeal for good cause be changed from 
30 days to unlimited.  
4. We propose extending the minimum scheduling notice time for the fact-finding interview 
from “not less than 5 days … after the notice is mailed” to “not less than 7 working days.”
To give an example of why we feel these additions are necessary, I would like to share a story from 
a community member who has worked with the Peer Workforce Navigator Project. John3 submitted 
an unemployment claim over the summer, but he did not receive timely notice of his fact-finding 
interview because of the perfect storm. John had not verified his email address (a common 
misunderstanding among claimants); he does not have the means to have consistent, reliable access 
to a telephone, so he missed the call from the Department; and finally, the paper mail arrived after 
the date of his fact-finding interview. In sum, John is young and poor and unfamiliar with these 
processes, and the system failed him.
However, John’s story does not end there. He eventually received the deputy’s decision denying his 
claim, and he connected with the PWN Project, appealed, and won. In the meantime, he did not 
receive the benefits to which he was entitled. John’s story is not an uncommon one, and we know 
there are simple ways to make government work better for all members of our community. We 
believe that these proposals help to do that.
We recognize the delicate balance between wanting to provide ample time for notice to folks and 
providing their benefits as quickly as possible given the precarity of their situations. We have 
shared these proposals with the Department and are exploring how this bill may be strengthened to 
better achieve our mutual goals. We look forward to working with the Department ahead of the 
work session to discuss our suggestions and improve access to governmental services. 
Thank you for the opportunity to express our support for this bill and for your consideration of our 
concerns. I would be happy to answer any questions you might have. 
2 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/about-us/administrative-hearings/faq 
3 Name has been changed for confidentiality.
