STATE OF MAINE 
15Mf~T<§,f. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR \--x 
(1 54 STATE HOUSE STATION ._‘§*,-_@'4-' _ 
mu. AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR Laura A. Fortman 
COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Laura Boyett, Bureau of Unemployment Compensation 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Support of LD #13 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, February 7, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I am Laura Boyett, Director of the Bureau of Unemployment 
Compensation at the Maine Department of Labor. The Bureau of Unemployment Services provides 
temporary financial assistance to people who lose their jobs through no fault of their own while they 
actively seek new employment. The Unemployment insurance Program serves as an economic 
stabilizer for Maine business and communities during periods of high unemployment.i 
The bureau mails out thousands of legal notices through the U.S. Postal service each year that include 
time sensitive deadlines affecting benefit eligibility or tax liability determinations, and due process 
appeal rights. Additionally, we send out thousands of notices of fact-finding interviews and appeal 
hearing notices. These interviews and hearings are time-sensitive and failure to participate can 
adversely impact benefit eligibility, appeal results and increase improper payment rates. 
ln recent years, we have experienced increasing delays in mail delivery through the U.S. Postal Service. 
As a result, we frequently hear from individuals and employers that they do not receive our scheduling 
notices for fact ﬁnding interviews and appeal hearings'U' ﬁtil the day of, or sometimes after, the 
scheduled event. The non-appearance rate for these critical processes is growing, which means that 
decisions must be made on the information we have on hand, and this in turn, results in increased 
appeals. If an effort to accommodate the longer mail delivery times, we are scheduling these 
interviews and appeals further out, but this has not resolved the issue as mail delivery becomes more 
inconsistent. Additionally, moving these interviews and hearings out causes further delays in possible 
benefit receipt or increases potential overpayments. It also adversely affects our ability to meet or 
exceed our federal performance standards for timely processing of eligibility determinations and 
appeal hearing decisions. To be considered timely, adjudication fact-finding interviews must be 
scheduled, conducted, and decisions written and issued within 21 days ofthe date an eligibility issue is 
detected. The Appeals Division has 30 days from the appeal date for completing the hearing process 
and issuing a decision. 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 TTY usets call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287 5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
When we send out a decision or scheduling notice containing time-sensitive deadlines, a copy of the 
correspondence appears in the individual ’s and or employer's online unemployment account portal the 
same day. This works well for those that regularly check their account portals but unfortunately, a 
large number do not. These individuals experience frustration with additional delays or hearings to 
prove good cause for missing hearings. We do not anticipate that there will be improvements in the 
U.S. Postal Service mail delivery in the foreseeable future. This bill seeks to add an additional \ safeguard to protect individual's due process rights and to ensure accurate and timely decisions are 
made with the full participation of the individuals and employers potentially impacted by the outcome. 
We are requesting that the legal definition of ‘mail’ used to send out these critical, time-sensitive 
notifications be expanded to-include electronic means such as ‘email’ as a legal option. Currently, 
Maine Employment Security Law contains 32 references in 15 sections to notices which must be sent 
only by U.S. Postal Service. This would allow us to use electronic notification means such as email in 
addition to or in lieu of U.S. Postal Service for legal notices. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session.' 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sen/ing Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. -
