 Good Afternoon,  Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, & honorable members of the Committee on State and  Local Government.  My name is Ryan, I am currently a college student studying architecture and am proud to call  Maine my home. Today I present this testimony in favor of  LD 1616, An Act to Make the  Description of the State Seal Gender-neutral and to Depict One of the Human Images on  the State Flag as Female.  From my upbringing, I have found it important to have goals to create an equitable lifestyle.  With this, I would like to propose just that goal. The flag should represent Maine as what it is, a  diverse and equal state for all.  The current flag and seal represent the people of our state which needs to be expanded to modern  standards. A seaman symbolizes our state's hard-working marine industry. The farmer represents  the economic state of the land and the workers who farm our beautiful state. These figures  however must go further to fully adhere to our states values.  With this proposal, it would change "husbandman" to "farmer,” and a "seaman" to a "sailor."  This is a must to represent all the hard-working people of this state. Today, a large number of  women, along with men, make up the workforce. It’s also proposed that this be a woman of color  to further represent Maine for what it is, a land that not only sees the first light in the Union but  the first woman of color on a state flag, satisfying the value of a land free and welcome to all. 
 You may be asking yourself why exactly the state flag needs to change. I actually see it as  something completely relevant for a few different reasons. The first being an issue of  Economics.  Note:  According to a 2021 report from the Department of Administrative and Financial  Services, our State's future population outlook data is grim.  Currently they predict a decrease in youth.  In 2018 we had 284,015 citizens aged 0-19, with only 249,789 predicted in 2028, a  roughly 12% decrease.  The fact is our state needs youth for future growth in economic development. A new flag would  support modern ideas and hopefully keep and or bring more young families into the state. To add  to that, Baby Boomers are continuously exiting the workforce, which in our state's demographics  is only increasing, so if we don't support changes such as in the flag that support youth identities  for the future… it may result in worse economic decline and worker shortages. Utah and  Mississippi recently made news changing their flags, so why shouldn’t Maine join other states in  creating an easily recognizable identity through its flag.  A second point is of course,  Diversity.  In a 2004 brief from the Maine Department of Labor, 48% percent of women compared to 52%  of men, are in the state's workforce with these numbers only increasing into modernity.  With this in mind, I see three options…  -  One, As the bill proposes, replacing one of the men with a woman on the flag, as I have  discussed the reasoning for.  -  Which would also add this to the seal.  -  And two, which wouldn’t use people, rather avoiding the controversies that human  figures provide, and would use an adaptation of the state's current flag and seal with more  anonymous symbolism.  -  For example, a moose, a tree, with an anchor and scythe. 
 -  And third, adopt the original state flag which generally has already been accepted  amongst our contemporaries as our unofficial identity already, and change the seal to fit  either of the first two suggestions.  This of course is NOT about wokeness and erasing history but something that would more  logically represent Maine’s people as a whole.  The  current flag approved in February 24, 1909,  certainly needs an update  I hope you will consider this improvement. 
