D _ Department of the Secretary of State 
la , ~' 
vs 
}§'1' Shenna Bellows 
’“'l_§-. :2‘ ,_=I,," ~'. 
. 
$3“ Secretary of State 
lggidl 
$ Kate McBrien 
' 
Maine State Archivist 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
TESTIMONY OF SHENNA BELLOWS, MAINE SECRETARY OF STATE 
and KATE MCBRIEN, MAINE STATE ARCHIVIST 
Neither For, Nor Against 
L.D. 1616, “An Act to Make the Description of the State Seal Gender-neutral and to Depict One of 
the Human Images on the State Flag as Female” 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Govermnent; we are Shenna Bellows, Maine’s Secretary of State, and Kate 
McBrien, Maine’s State Archivist. Neither the Department of Secretary of State nor Maine State 
Archives, which falls under the Department ’s jurisdiction, have a formal position on L.D. 1616. But 
we believe we have useful information that may assist the committee in its deliberations on this 
important legislation. 
The seal for the State of Maine was passed by the ﬁrst Maine legislature in June of 1820.A 
subcommittee of the legislature was designated to design a seal, for which Representative Isaac 
Reed of Waldoboro, along with his stepdaughter Bertha Smouse, is credited with writing the 
description, listing the required elements of the state seal. Dr. Benjamin Vaughn od Hallowell is 
credited with the ﬁrst drawing of the seal. While there has been some variety in artistic expression 
of the elements of the seal, the legal description of the state seal has not changed since throughout 
our state’s 203-year history. 
Title 1, Chapter 9, §201 states: 
“The seal of the State shall be a shield, argent, charged with a pine tree (Americana, quinis ex uno folliculo 
setis) with a moose deer (cervus alces), at the foot of it, recumbent; supporters: on dexter side,a 
husbandman, resting on a scythe; on sinister side, a seaman, resting on an anchor. 
In the foreground, representing sea and land, and under the shield, shall be the name of the State in large 
Roman capitals, to Wit: 
MAINE. 
The whole shall be surrounded by a crest, the North Star. The motto, in small Roman capitals, shall be in 
a label interposed between the shield and crest, viz.:--DIRIGO. ” 
As you well know, the current Maine state flag, which includes the state seal, was created through 
legislation in 1909. Title 1, Chapter 9 §206 explicitly states that our current ﬂag will be blue and “in 
the center of the ﬂag there shall be embroidered in silk on both sides of the ﬂag the coat of arms of the State, 
in proportionate size;”
We brought the original 1820 legislation specifying the design of the Maine State Seal here today for you to 
see. 
As you consider LD 1616, we believe this historical information will prove helpful in your 
consideration. We are happy to answer any questions you may have.
