William Smith
Gorham
LD 1616
Testimony in opposition of LD 1616: “An Act to Make the Description of the State 
Seal Gender-neutral and to Depict One of the Human Images on the State Flag as 
Female”
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local 
Government Committee, my name is Bill Smith and I live in Gorham. Thank you for 
the opportunity to testify in opposition to LD 1616.
I am not opposed to the idea that we might change to our state flag to include 
representation of our female workforce and citizens of Maine. I believe this state 
fundamentally rests on the shoulders of its women as much as it does its men. A 
friend of mine, who's family founded Gorham Maine, discussed with me how one day
when the men left to go hunting the fort was attack by the aboriginal people of the 
area and his ancestral grandmother successfully led the women to defend the fort for 
hours before the men returned. This is the spirit of women in Maine. 
My opposition of this bill comes rather from the intentional use of language and 
sociological framing by Representative Terry and the resulting language used by 
journalists discussing this bill.
By using the phrase "gender-neutral" in the title of this bill, Representative Terry 
initiates one of many discussions plaquing our community and many communities 
across our country. Then by suggesting the representation of a woman be used for one
of the two figures on the flag in the content of the bill, she disregards the common 
meaning of "gender-neutrality" as proposed by people like Judith Butler, the public 
speaker and author who formalized much of today's notions around queer theory.
The arguments made by many people engaging in gender and queer theory related 
topics are flush with these types of cognitive dissonances. 
In her article "Judith Butler: their philosophy of gender explained" Anna Szorenyi 
writes:
'Butler argues that gender works in this way: when we name a child as “girl” or 
“boy”, we participate in creating them as that very thing. By speaking of people (or 
ourselves) as “man” or “woman”, we are in the process creating and defining those 
categories.'
I argue discernment and categorization is one of the primary intents of language. Dan 
Jurafsky, the Jackson Eli Reynolds Professor in Humanities and chair of the 
Department of Linguistics in the School of Humanities and Sciences at Stanford, said 
“Discovering what’s universal about languages can help us understand the core of our
humanity.” But he went on to also develop the notion of the importance of our 
uniqueness when he said “Understanding why and how languages differ tells about 
the range of what is human”. 
The modern marriage of Marxism and modern queer theory intentionally creates the 
equivalent of a mental disorder in the believer and paves the road for linguistic 
destruction. People like Butler wish for nothing but the destruction of our unique 
social groupings in favor of a liquidity that does nothing to enhance being human.
Socialists and Marxists like Bill Ayers and George Bernard Shaw have unwaveringly 
traveled a long road with the singular intention of the destruction of our State, our 
country and our Federal and State Constitutions. And that road leads no where else 
but to the control of our citizens by elites the like of those who meet in Davos each 
year. This is clearly stated by Klause Schwab in his book "The 4th Industrial 
Revolution". It is Schwab's intention to use constructs like queer theory and 
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) to slowly erode our core values by 
actively increasing the social liquidity of our children's minds and bodies in order to 
usurp their lives and our self governing bodies. They have admitted this openly. 
By using the language in this bill Representative Terry does nothing other than 
empower these movements.
I celebrate our Maine families, religions and cultures which mix and interact in ways 
that grow our awareness of our differences and results in the development of our 
individuality and group pluralities and secures our freedoms and sovereignty.
Discussions around the primary symbol of our State of Maine should do the same. 
I oppose this bill and propose you do the same. 
Thank you. 
