Helen A. Shaw 
77 Pascal Avenue 
Rockport, ME 04856 
18 April 2023 
Testimony in favor of LD 1233 
An Act Regarding the Maine State Cemetery Preservation Commission 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, members of the State and Local Government Committee. My 
name is Helen Shaw. I live in Rockport. I am chair of the Maine State Cemetery Preservation 
Commission. 
The Maine State Cemetery Preservation Commission was created last session by LD 379 which this 
Committee voted unanimously as ought to pass. The Commission has been meeting monthly since last 
fall. As required by statute the Commission has written by-laws and has also written a mission statement. 
The Commission was created with no funding. Those of us who worked for years to recommend changes 
in cemetery statutes and ultimately to propose a state cemetery commission, were a tad nieve in thinking 
a commission could function without funding as all of us were used to working on cemetery preservation 
as volunteers or as part of our occupation. 
We have discovered is we do need money! We need money to set up and maintain a web page. We need 
money to pay for printing educational material to be sent to municipalities and others involved with 
cemeteries and burying grounds. We need money to attend conferences and meetings of groups involved 
with cemeteries and burying grounds to spread the word of our existence and to provide direct 
educational information on how to preserve and protect cemeteries and burying grounds. 
As stated in Section 4 of LD 1233, we want to set up a grant program which would assist with mandated 
maintenance of veterans ’ graves in particular. It is hoped that once funds start coming in the grant 
program would expend to help with all types of maintenance and repairs that are too often far beyond the 
ability of municipalities and others involved with cemeteries and burying grounds to pay for. The specific 
form of the program would be part of the report required in Section 4 of LD 1233 to be developed and 
delivered to, presumably, this Committee by November 6, 2024. 
As we take the baby steps outlined in LD 1233; as the Commission and its duties become known to the 
cemetery community; once ﬁmds start to come in; the Commission will most likely ﬁnd there is a need 
for an ofﬁce and an employee. 
There are a few minor changes and clariﬁcations to LD 1233 which will be discussed by others 
presenting testimony here and will be elaborated on at the work session. LD 1233 changes the “may” in 
our duties to “shall” to emphasize the Commission ’s authority to act in these areas. It was suggested that 
paragraph D under duties be separated out and listed as “may” rather than “shall.” This is a step towards 
the future when those involved with cemeteries and burying grounds have been better educated in their 
preservation and protection
