P P.O.B 2490 
consumers for Augusta, M€E4338 
AffQ|‘dab|Q Telephone? 1-soc-965-7476 
f Fax. 1-ass-214-5233 
consumerhea|th@ma|necahc.org 
www.mainecahc.org 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for at! Mainers. 
Statement of Ceilidh Shea 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
To the Joint Standing Committee On Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Speaking in Support of: 
LD 267, An Act to Require Private Insurance Coverage for Donor Breast Milk 
March 23, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments in 
support of LD 267, “An Act to Require Private Insurance Coverage for Donor Breast Milk.” 
My name is Ceilidh Shea, and I am a policy advocate at Consumers for Affordable Health Care,a 
nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care for every 
person in Maine. CAHC is a nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization founded in 1988 and based in Augusta 
whose mission is to advocate the right to quality, affordable health care for every person in Maine. As 
designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s Health Insurance Consumer 
Assistance Program (CAP). which operates a toll-free HelpLine. Our HelpLine, ﬁelds approximately 
6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who need help obtaining, keeping, using, or 
ﬁxing problems with private health insurance or with accessing or affording health care services. CAHC 
also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people 
apply for and navigate the enrollment process for MaineCare. It is with that background that we provide 
these comments. 
If a parents milk is not available, breastfeeding is contraindicated, or an infant’s parent is unable to 
provide sufﬁcient quantities of their own breast milk after being provided with lactation support, 
pasteurized donor milk is often indicated as a first alternative for any infant? It provides the nutritional 
and immunologic beneﬁts of breast milk, reduces infectious complications compared to formula milk, and 
is recommended by the American Association of Pediatrics for high risk infants. “ These beneﬁts are 
especially potent for very premature and very low birth weight infants. A clear protective measure against 
necrotizing enterocolitis, a devastating disease that affects the intestines of premature and other high-risk 
infants, is the use of donor human milk when milk from a parent is not available. “ 
As of January 1, 2023, Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, covers donor breast milk for infants up to 
a year old that meet the same criteria listed in Section l of this bill. This bill would ensure that infants 
covered by private insurance recieve donor breast milk when medically necessary. Currently, 14 states 
and the District of Columbia have enacted donor milk legislation or regulations addressing Medicaid or 
commercial insurance coverage. New York, New Jersey, and Illinois require coverage by both Medicaid 
and commercial plans. Consumers for Affordable Health Care suppoits this bill because it will help 
ensure premature and high-risk infants have access to donor breast milk when they need it. Policies are 
needed to provide high-risk infants access to donor milk based on medical necessity, not socioeconomic
status.“' It is for these reasons I urge you to support LD 267. Thank you and I ’d be happy to answer any 
questions. 
‘ 
£;\ttps:[/www.ncbi.nImtnIh.gov/0mc/articles/PMQ76731981 
" 
httns:[_/www.ncbi.nIm.nih.g0v[_pmc/articles/PMC7673198[ 
‘" 
httoszj/www.ncbi.n|m.nih.20v[pmc/articles/PMC8979482[
