AMY B. ARATA _ STATE or MAINE 
‘$3,; HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE 
~/fa’ .- AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
Office: (207l287-1-140 
Ccll' ("F :2:-1x17 . _( / ) . __ 
1\§%l%TAi\ ‘THOUSE REPUBLlC.>\i\' LEADER Fax: (Z07) 337-l-34° 
E - M 21 i l: Am)..-'\r':1ia:'{: legislaiurem line gm 
April 6, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 549 
“An Act Regarding a Discovery Rule for the Statute of Limitations for Cases of Medical 
Negligence" 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee, l 
am Representative Amy Arata and l Represent Gray and New Gloucester. I am here today in 
support of LD 549, ”An Act Regarding a Discovery Rule for the Statute of Limitations for Cases of 
Medical Negligence" . 
Because we have such a litigious society, l don't normally support legislation that could increase the 
number of lawsuits. However, after listening to my friend's story, I am making an exception 
because of the inherent unfairness of current Maine law. 
My friend is too embarrassed to testify here today, so I am telling his story to maintain his 
anonymity. A routine blood test revealed that his prostate specific antigen level was three times the 
normal level. However, this was never revealed to my friend, neither that year nor in subsequent 
years. No advice for further testing or evaluation by an urologist was given. This act of negligent 
omission had severe consequences. Four years later, after moving to a new primary care provider, 
my friend's prostate cancer was discovered. By that time the cancer had spread outside of his 
prostate and was much more serious. He has had to endure more invasive surgery, radiation, and 
other treatment than he would have if the cancer had been discovered four years earlier. The delay 
in discovery was obviously due to health care provider negligence and is severely impacting his life. 
Liability laws should have reasonable limits. However, when an egregious mistake has been made, 
patients should be made whole as much as possible. This is impossible for some patients under 
current Maine law. There is also a perverse incentive not to reveal errors or negligence until after 
the Maine statute of limitations has passed. This would result in more serious disease, more 
suffering, and possibly death. 
l am not an expert in liability law, and perhaps the bill as written should be amended to include 
more guardrails to prevent excessive liability claims. However, current statute is unacceptable and 
a change must be made. Thank you. 
Respectfully, 
Representative Amy Arata
