 
 
Testimony of Dr. Joel Botler, Chief Medical Officer, Maine Medical Center 
On Behalf of MaineHealth 
In Strong Opposition to LD 549 
“An Act Regarding a Discovery Rule for the Statute of Limitations for Cases of Medical 
Negligence” 
April 19, 2023 
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee,  I am 
Dr. Joel Botler, and I write to express MaineHealth’s serious concerns regarding LD 549. 
 
MaineHealth is committed to a vision of “Working Together so our Communities are the Healthiest in 
America.”  In pursuing that vision, we provide access to high quality care across seven counties in 
Maine and one in New Hampshire; we invest in research to improve the lives of our population; and, 
very importantly, we provide opportunities to grow our workforce of the future. Part of that effort 
includes investing in medical education through our MaineTrack medical school collaboration with 
Tufts University, and our 277 residents and 51 fellows that train annually at Maine Medical Center.  
 
MaineHealth current employs 1,110 physicians who support our vision and mission of providing access 
to high quality care across our footprint.  And though we would like to “grow” all of our own, we 
currently have 144 open physician positions for which we are actively recruiting.  That is a high vacancy 
rate, and one in which a supportive environment – both external and internal – makes a significant 
difference to prospective candidates. 
 
We know that we have a good story to tell with the quality of life we provide, the school systems we 
support, the activities we offer and the communities we live in. And one of the most frequent questions 
asked by recruits is about our medical malpractice environment.  At present, we can say with conviction 
that Maine’s medical malpractice environment is fair and balanced, leaning neither unfairly towards 
plaintiffs nor defendants.  
 
However, this bill would tip that balance. While we recognize that there are rare instances when the 
current law may not capture a specific circumstance, on balance, the vast majority of bad outcomes are 
identified within the current three-year period.  Should this bill pass, we will have a more difficult time 
recruiting physicians thus resulting in reduced access to care across a large population.   
 
As you contemplate this bill, we ask that you consider the potentially significant unintended 
consequences of attempting to address extremely rare cases with a blanket approach that will change the 
landscape for all of Maine’s current and future physicians. With all of our assets, Maine has a lot of 
competition from other states for our all-important physicians. Please help us maintain an environment 
in which they feel welcome and supported by voting Ought Not to Pass on this legislation. 
 
 
