‘ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Matt Moonen TTY: State Relay 711 
53 Thomas Street #3 
Portland, ME 04102 
Matt.Moonen@Iegislature.maine.gov 
April 6, 2023 
LD 549: An Act Regarding a Discovery Rule for the Statute of Limitations for Cases of Medical 
Negligence 
Testimony of Rep. Matt Moonen, Portland 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney and fellow members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. I 
am here today to urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 549, “An Act Regarding a Discovery Rule for 
the Statute of Limitations for Cases of Medical Negligence. ” 
Under current law, there is a three year statute of limitations for ﬁling a claim based on medical 
negligence, and that three year clock starts ticking on the date the negligence occurred. 
In many cases, this timeline makes perfect sense. For example, a botched surgery may lead a patient to 
realize fairly immediately after waking up that something has gone wrong and that they have an injury 
due to the surgeon’s error. 
But in other cases where a medical provider got something wrong, an injury may not be immediately 
apparent. 
Current law does recognize one such situation - when a foreign object is left inside the body. When 
you think about it, it makes sense: a person wakes up from surgery; they have no idea that the provider 
left an object in them and sewed them back up. At some point later, potentially years down the line, the 
object shifts and starts to cause pain or internal bleeding, and all of a sudden the patient is aware of the 
hann. In this situation, current law says the clock starts ticking at the discovery of the harm, and not 
when the negligence occurred way back when the obj ect was left there in the ﬁrst place. 
This bill would extend that protection to other cases of medical negligence so that the clock starts 
ticking when the patient discovers the injury or diagnosis, rather than when the negligence originally 
happened, because there are of course other situations where a person could not reasonably have 
known something was wrong. 
You will hear testimony from a Mainer who lost her father to metastatic bladder cancer because a 
provider screwed up the pathology testing when he ﬁrst had symptoms. Had they gotten it right, he 
District ll7: Portland (part)
could have received treatment before the cancer spread and might still be with us today. But by the 
time he got a proper pathology reading more than three years later, it was too late. Due to current law, 
his family had no recourse for holding the ﬁrst provider accountable. 
You will hear testimony from another woman who was experiencing bizarre symptoms in her face and 
eyes. She got a brain scan and was told she was all clear. Ten years later, her symptoms had worsened 
signiﬁcantly and she got another scan. She learned that she had a massive tumor - a tumor that, 
although smaller, was visible on the original scan ten years earlier. The ﬁrst provider had screwed up 
by telling her she had a clean bill of health, and in the time that passed the tumor had gotten 
signiﬁcantly larger and much more dangerous. Again, due to current law, she had no recourse for 
holding that provider accountable. 
While this bill is not retroactive and will not help the folks you will hear from, I Want to express my 
gratitude for their willingness to share their stories in the hopes that future Mainers will not suffer the 
same circumstances that they have. 
I want to be clear that I am not trying to demonize our health care providers. We hold them in very 
high esteem for good reason — 
they are educated, knowledgeable, and have devoted their careers to 
providing the care that we all rely on. At the same time, we should hold them to a high standard. We 
place a lot of trust in them, and it’s important to hold them accountable when they get something 
egregiously wrong that has life-altering or even life-ending consequences. 
I also want to address some of the criticism that you might hear about this bill. Some will say this 
could drive up medical malpractice insurance costs, and I suppose it could. That is something this 
committee will need to carefully weigh against the need for injured Mainers suffering real harm to be 
able to hold negligent providers accountable for the consequences of their actions. 
In addition, you may hear that this will gut the statute of limitations. I would say that the point ofa 
statute of limitations is to ensure that someone who knows they have been harmed and has a claim 
doesn’t sit around for years on end doing nothing, while the threat of legal action hangs over the heads 
of the providers - in short, you need to exercise your right within a reasonable time frame. I would 
argue that’s not what we’re talking about here. These folks aren’t sitting around delaying action on 
their claims - they just didn’t immediately -know that their provider had screwed up. I am fully 
supportive of the idea that the moment they know of the problem, the clock should start ticking for 
them to take action. 
Finally, I’d like to add that there will be testimony after me that includes information on how other 
states deal with this. While there is of course some variation in the state laws, the short answer is that 
more than 40 other states allow a discovery rule for medical malpractice cases. 
Thank you for your time and attention, and I hope you will join me in supporting this bill.
