Good morning Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee- I 
My name is Megan Tyler and I live in Blue Hill. I am here to share my medical experiences and 
testify in support of LD549. 
In the summer of 2010, I was 31 years old. At that time, I experienced a sudden onset of 
unilateral eye and facial numbness. My Doctor arranged for me to have extensive MRI scans to 
evaluate the cause of the numbness. I had these scans in October of 2010. The results came 
back as normal. To quote the MRI report, “Unremarkable pre-and postcontrast MRI examination 
of the head.” With the assurance of clean MRI scans, we adopted a wait and watch plan. 
Eventually, the numbness faded, and I went on with my life. 
Fast-forward ten years to the summer of 2020. I started experiencing what I thought was 
tooth pain on my lower-left side. After a visit to a dentist, an endodontist, and then a root canal,I 
was still in agony. The endodontist suggested that my pain might be a nerve issue. At this point, 
I chalked the whole thing up to stress, as I had just opened a new business. My jaw pain 
eventually subsided, and I soldiered on until the next summer. At that point, my pain returned 
with a vengeance. Eating was excruciating. Some days I was unable to move my jaw to speak. 
Eventually, I went to my doctor who ordered another brain MRI. 
This scan revealed a large Petroclival Meningioma, a benign, but extremely serious,' 
brain tumor. You can imagine my shock and dismay when my neurosurgeon informed me that 
the brain tumor which was now compressing my brainstem and occluding my trigeminal nerve 
was small, but visible, on the MRI that I had in 2010. 
On December 6th 2021, I had a 14- hour craniotomy surgery at Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital in Boston. A few days later, I had another surgery due to complications. Due to the size 
and location of the tumor, several of my facial nerves were destroyed or damaged. This has left 
me with severe double vision, complete left-sided facial numbness, partial facial paralysis, and 
left-sided hearing loss. I have lost the ability to close my jaw or chew on the left side. I have lost 
my independence as I am no longer able to drive due to my vision. Mundane things like 
navigating a grocery store are now oven/vhelming to me. I am currently facing at least one eye 
surgery to try to correct my vision. I still have a long road ahead of me. 
It is impossible to accurately convey the effect this has had, and continues to have, on 
my life in the time that I am allotted today. What I can tell youls that none of this should have 
happened to me. If I had received medical intervention in 2010, my outcome would have been 
very different . 
Under the current law, you have three years from the time of the negligence to ﬁle a lawsuit. My 
clock started ticking in 2010. Unfortunately I dIdn’t even know I was the victim of medical 
negligence until 2021. By then, it was way too late for me: too late to save my vision, and too 
late to hold the radiologist who missed my tumor accountable. I testify before you today with the 
hope that you will pass LD549, because it’s not too late for us all to help someone else.
