I’- 
. »:.~ . 2: 1;-. J» .\ 1,- 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE MEDICAL ASSOCIATION 
AND 
THE MAINE OSTEOPATHIC ASSOCIATION 
IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 549, AN ACT REGARDING A DISCOVERY RULE FOR THE STATUTE OF 
LIMITATIONS FOR CASES OF MEDICAL NEGLIGENCE 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Room 438, State House, Augusta, Maine 
Thursday, April 6, 2023, 1:00 p.m. 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Paul Cain, M.D. and l am the President-elect of the Maine 
Medical Association. l am a recently retired orthopedic surgeon who spent my career serving 
the greater Lewiston/Auburn community at Central Maine Orthopedics. My wife Kathy and l live 
in Oxford. 
The Maine Medical Association (MMA) is a professional organization representing more than 
4000 physicians, residents, and medical students in Maine. MMA's mission is to support Maine 
physicians, advance the quality of medicine in Maine, and promote the health of all Maine* 
people. 
The Maine Osteopathic Association (MOA) is a professional organization representing more 
than 1200 osteopathic physicians, residents, and medical students in Maine whose mission is to 
serve the Osteopathic profession of the State of Maine through a coordinated effort of 
professional education, advocacy, and member services in order to ensure the availability of 
quality osteopathic health care to the people of this State. 
l am here today to present testimony in opposition to L.D. 549, An Act Regarding a Discovery 
Rule for the Statute of Limitations for Cases of Medical Negligence. 
individuals harmed by medical negligence in the U.S. health care system deserve a fair process 
for determining appropriate compensation. But we must balance the individual ’s interest in 
compensation for harm with our community's interest in containing costs to the health care 
system of insuring for and defending claims of medical negligence. We believe that Maine has 
maintained an appropriate balancing of these interests since the Maine |egislature ’s enactment 
the Maine Health Security Act in the late 1970s. L.D. 549 would disrupt that fine balance and
1
would be a grave mistake. lt would make physician recruitment and retention in Maine, already 
a challenge, much more difficult. 
The condition of the medical liability environment in a state is a very important factor for every 
physician in choosing a practice location. Maine’s medical liability environment was so bad in 
the 1970s that patient access to care was seriously jeopardized, particularly obstetrical care. 
Physicians had difficulty obtaining professional liability insurance coverage at reasonable 
premium rates, if at all. 
The Maine legislature responded to this medical liability crisis by enacting a series of reforms 
called the Maine Health Security Act, P.L. 1977, Chapter 492, as amended. The medical 
malpractice pre-litigation screening panels and clearly defined statute of limitations are the two 
most important elements of these reforms. The MMA also collaborated with physician leaders in 
Maine to create a mutual professional liability insurance company that is now known as Medical 
Mutual Insurance Company of Maine. These responses helped to stabilize the medical liability 
environment in Maine and our state has been fortunate to maintain this stable medical liability 
environment during the five decades since. 
L.D. 549 would dramatically expand the period of exposure for physicians, other clinicians, and 
health care facilities to claims of potential professional negligence. ln fact, professional liability 
insurers likely would underwrite insurance applications as if there is no statute of limitations 
whatsoever. In addition to the real financial impact on professional liability insurance premium 
rates, the virtually unlimited period of exposure would also contribute substantially to the stress 
and burnout of our clinical workforce which is yet another problem plaguing our current health 
care system. lt also would exacerbate patient access to care problems that Maine is now 
experiencing in obstetrics and oncology. 
Thank you for considering the concerns of Maine’s physician community about L.D. 549. We 
urge an “ought not to pass” vote on this bill. l would be happy to respond to any questions you 
may have. 
The following physician professional societies affiliated with MMA and MOA join in this 
testimony: 
Maine Academy of Family Physicians 
Maine Society of Anesthesiologists 
Maine Association of Psychiatric Physicians 
Maine Society of Eye Physicians & Surgeons 
Maine Neurological Society 
Maine Radiological Society 
Maine Chapter, American College of Emergency Physicians 
Maine Chapter, American College of Physicians 
Maine Urological Association 
Maine Society of Orthopedic Surgeons 
Maine Chapter, American Academy of Pediatrics 
Maine Gastroenterology Society 
Maine Society of Otolaryngology 
Maine Chapter, American College of Surgeons
2
