3/30/2023 
1 
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee, 
My name is Robyn Barnes and I live in North Yarmouth.  I am here today to share my family’s 
story. 
In March of 2015, my father presented to his physician with blood in his urine.  Cells from his 
bladder were sent to a pathologist, who determined that that there were no signs of cancer.  My 
father was given antibiotics for the blood in the urine and sent on his way.   
Over three years later, in May 2018, my father was diagnosed with metastatic bladder cancer. He 
died after a month of excruciating pain. 
I went to see a lawyer, who sent the pathology from 2015 to a pathologist at Johns Hopkins.  The 
expert told us that the pathology demonstrated early-stage bladder cancer. The pathologist who 
interpreted my father’s tissue in 2015 got it wrong. Tragically, in 2015, this cancer had not 
spread. If the pathology had been read correctly, my father would likely still be alive today.   
But I also learned from my lawyer that any claim against the pathologist was barred, because the 
negligence had occurred more than three years earlier. 
Because of the length of time between the pathologist’s error and our discovery that my father 
had cancer, we ran out of time to bring my father’s claim before we had any reason to suspect 
that there was any suit to bring. While the current law may be fair in many cases, it is profoundly 
unfair to families like mine.  We are left with knowing that my father’s death was preventable, 
but that, because the medical error took too long to come to light, there was nothing we could do 
to see justice done.   
As a result of my father’s death, my mother lost the love of her life. She was also left in financial 
despair. It is too late for my family to get the justice it deserves, but I am here today to ask you to 
protect future families in our situation. It is one thing to say that people with medical malpractice 
claims should go see a lawyer as soon as possible. It is another to say that doctors whose 
malpractice isn’t visible until three years later should get a free pass.  
Losing a loved one because of medical malpractice is extremely hard. Having no ability to hold 
accountable the people responsible makes it far worse. It felt like the system was set up to protect 
the powerful against normal people. That isn’t the way our law should be. 
Thank you for your time. I am hopeful that changes can and will be made to ensure that, in the 
future, victims of medical malpractice have a chance to seek justice for the injuries done to them 
and their families. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
