TESTIMONY OF ROMEO LUCAS, DO, DC, FACOG 
OWNER/PHYSICIAN: NEW ENGLAND CENTER FOR PELVIC HEALTH 
IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 549, AN ACT REGARDING A DISCOVERY RULE FOR THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR CASES OF MEDICAL 
NEGLIGENCE 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Room 438, State House, Augusta, I\/laine 
Thursday, April 6, 2023, 1:00 p.m. 
Good afternoon, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Romeo Lucas, DO, DC and 
I am a practicing OB/GYN in Freeport. I recently opened an independent gynecology practice: New England 
Center for Pelvic Health. This was in response to noticing an unmet need for dedicated care for patients with 
persistent pelvic pain and endometriosis, not only in |\/Iaine, but also throughout the region and country. I am 
proud to say that I serve patients from all corners of our state as well as those coming to Maine for this 
specialized carel This includes patients from not only New England but also states outside our region as well as 
neighboring Canadian provinces. I currently hold positions with the Maine Osteopathic Association Board and 
serve as the Vice Chair and Legislative Committee Chair for the Maine Section of the American Congress of 
OB/GYN. 
I am submitting testimony in opposition to L.D. 549, An Act Regarding a Discovery Rule for the Statute of 
Limitations for Cases of Medical Negligence. 
While I understand and appreciate that medical negligence in the U.S. health care system deserves appropriate 
compensation, I believe that this process must be fair to physicians as well as patients. The process must take 
into consideration compensation for harm with the health care community's interest in containing costs to the 
health care system of insuring for and defending claims of medical negligence. Furthermore, there is the 
incalculable cost to patients and the health delivery system when an extended time frame for filing suit 
ultimately results in barriers to physician credentialing with health insurance or hospital systems. This leads to 
an already scarce availability of independent generalists and specialists becoming even more scarce. As 
operating costs rise, physician must make tough decisions regarding patient charges and payment pathways in 
order to maintain their practices. This will result in further restricting access to care for patients who very often 
need it the most. We became physicians to help patients. We cannot do so if we cannot maintain our 
insurance cost, staff and office locations. 
I believe that Maine has maintained an appropriate balancing of these interests since the Maine legislature's 
enactment of the Maine Health Security Act in the late 1970s. L.D. 549 would disrupt that balance. 
Unfortunately, I can tell you that I have experienced such an imbalance, having previously practiced in a state 
with extended statute of limitations rule. The immediate and long—term costs were devastating to independent 
practices which are now virtually non-existent in that state. The physician community is almost entirely hospital 
system employed. Patient and doctor satisfaction scores are consistently low. As the increased liability 
insurance premium costs are passed onto the consumer, healthcare costs continue to rise. It would bea 
mistake and a shame if the same happened here in Maine.
1
The physician shortage here in l\/laine most notably exists in our remote and rural areas. These locations are not 
always deemed as ﬁscally feasible for large hospital systems to provide satellite facilities. It is exactly in these 
locations that independent physician practices are needed to provide individualized healthcare by physicians 
who belong to the community they serve. ln recent years, we have witnessed the closing of several ofthese 
rural/remote care facilities. This already difficult set of circumstances will be made even worse by passage of 
this bill. 
The condition of the medical liability environment in a state is a very important factor for every physician in 
choosing a location to start a practice or abandon their practice. With passage of this bill, physician recruitment 
and retention in l\/laine will become even more challenging. l\/laine ’s medical liability environment was so bad in 
the 19705 that patient access to care was seriouslyjeopardized, particularly obstetrical care. Physicians had 
difficulty obtaining professional liability insurance coverage at reasonable premium rates, ifat all. Having 
practiced previously in a state with extended reporting period and now in l\/laine, I can attest to the significant 
differences. I can also attest to how even after having left that state, l suffer the financial burden of having 
practiced there only a short time. l worry about passage of this bill not only discouraging physicians from 
practicing in main, but also discouraging them from even training here. lam concerned that this bill will 
effectively intimidate physicians from practicing here at all, worried that they will carry the liability of their time 
here wherever they go. Again, I can attest personally that this is a concern. 
The implementation of medical malpractice pre-litigation screening panels and a clearly defined statute of 
limitations helped to stabilize the medical liability environment in l\/laine. Our state has been wise and 
fortunate to maintain this stable medical liability environment as result. 
L.D. 549 would dramatically expand the period of exposure for physicians, other clinicians, and health care 
facilities to claims of potential professional negligence. in response, professional liability insurers likely would 
underwrite insurance applications as if there is no statute of limitations, because effectively there would not 
one. In addition to the financial impact on professional liability insurance premium rates, the unlimited period of 
exposure would contribute substantially to stress on our clinical workforce. The result is further consolidation 
of services to smaller set of facilities, further burdening an already overburdened system. 
Thank you for considering my concerns about L.D. 549. I urge an "ought not to pass" vote on this bill. I would be 
happy to respond to any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
%a~%x%¢ Romeo Lucas, DO, DC, FACOG 
romeolucas@necph.com
2
SUBMITTED BY MAINE ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE COMPANIES, MAINE 
OSTEOPATHIC ASSOCIATION, MAINE SOCIETY OF ANESTHESIOLOGISTS 
§2902. Statute of limitations for health care providers and health care practitioners excluding 
claims based on sexual acts 
Except as provided in section 2902-B, actions for professional negligence must be commenced 
within 3 years after the cause of action accrues. (THIS IS A KNOWN PERIOD OF TIME) For the 
purposes of this section, a cause of action accrues on the date of the act or omission giving rise to 
the injury. (THIS IS A DATE CERTAIN) Notwithstanding the provisions of Title 14, section 853, 
relating to minority, actions for professional negligence by a minor must be commenced within 6 years 
after the cause of action accrues or within 3 years after the minor reaches the age of majority, whichever 
first occurs. (THIS IS ALSO A KNOWN PERIOD OF TIME) This section does not apply when the 
cause of action is based upon the leaving of a foreign object in the body, in which case the cause of 
action accrues when the plaintiff discovers or reasonably should have discovered the harm. (THIS 
EXCEPTION IS NOT DEPENDAN T ON SUBJECTIVE MEMORY, WITNESSES ETC: THE 
OBJECT WAS LEFT IN, OR IT WASN’T) For the purposes of this section, the term "foreign object" 
does not include a chemical compound, prosthetic aid or object intentionally implanted or permitted to 
remain in the patient's body as a part of the health care or professional services. (IN OTHER WORD, 
THE NEW KNEE IS NOT A FOREIGN OBJECT) 
If the provision in this section reducing the time allowed for a minor to bring a claim is found to be 
void or otherwise invalidated by a court of proper jurisdiction, the statute of limitations for professional 
negligence is 2 years after the cause of action accrues, except that no claim brought under the 3-year 
statute may be extinguished by the operation of this paragraph. 
LD 549 
Sec. 1. 24 MRSA §2902, as amended by PL 2013, c. 329, §2, is further amended by 
amending the section headnote to read: 
§2902. Statute of limitations for health care providers and health care practitioners 
I r I . 
| I l 
Sec. 2. 24 MRSA §2902, first 1], as amended by PL 2013, c. 329, §2, is further 
amended to read: 
Actions for professional negligence must 
be commenced within 3 years after the cause of action accrues. For the purposes of this 
section, a cause of action accrues 
when the plaintiff discovers or reasonably should have discovered the harm. (THIS CREATES 
AN UNKNOWN AND UNLIMITED PERIOD OF TIME FOR IDENTIFYING WHEN A STATUTE 
OF LIMITATIONS PERIOD WOULD BEGIN TO RUN. IT WILL CREATE EXTENSIVE 
DISCOVERY LITIGATION AROUND SETTING THAT TIME.) Notwithstanding the provisions 
of Title 14, section 853, relating to minority, actions for professional negligence by a minor 
must be commenced within 6 years after the cause of action accrues or within 3 years after 
the minor reaches the age of majority, whichever first occurs. Ililqis-seetien-elees-net-appty
LD 549 IS SILENT ON WHAT CLAIMS ARE IMPACTED, |.E., CLAIMS THAT HAVE YET 
TO BE “DISCOVERED ” REGARDLESS OF WHEN THE HEALTH EVENT OCCURRED, 
YEARS PRIOR TO TODAY OR FAR OFF INTO THE FUTURE. 
Every health care practitioner, meaning every physician and all others certified, 
registered or licensed in the healing arts, including, but not limited to, nurses, 
podiatrists, optometrists, chiropractors, physical therapists, dentists, psychologists, 
physicians ‘ assistants and veterinarians will need to maintain professional liability 
coverage far into retirement and as they move to other jobs because of the “long-tail ” of 
exposure to risk they would be subjected to under LD 549. 
Every health care entity, which includes every hospital, nursing home and any other 
health care facility, will see, along with the practitioners, huge increases in professional 
liability insurance costs. Nursing homes are already on the brink. 
Under the bill, it appears that health care practitioners that have retired, and 
practiced in Maine at any time, will be potentially liable for an action that occurred long 
ago and for which they no longer carry professional liability insurance because the 
current periods of risk have run. 
Maine‘s health care system cannot sustain the costs, the further strain on its 
workforce, the barrier to finding healthcare professionals to provide quality care to 
Maine citizens, nor the further hampering of the challenge of providing care in sucha 
large geographic, yet sparsely populated state. 
PLEASE REJECT LD 549
2I
