 
 
 
TO:  Members of the Judiciary Committee      
  
FROM:  Rory Whelan, Regional Vice President 
 
DATE:   April 6, 2023 --- Public Hearing  
 
RE:   Opposition to LD 549 --- Medical Malpractice Expansion 
 
 
 
The National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies (NAMIC)1 and its members, thank you for 
the opportunity to express strong opposition to legislation referenced above and urge you vote ought 
not to pass.  
Under current law, a cause of action claim in a medical malpractice case begins on the date when 
the alleged injury occurred, except for cases involving the leaving of a foreign object in a body, which 
commences on the date on which the claimant discovers the alleged harm. Claims must commence 
within three years of the injury (“statute of limitations”) and extended for cases involving minors.2 
This bill represents a radical and reckless departure from current law that will increase medical care 
costs, threaten economic progress, endanger the state’s healthcare system and hyper-inflate civil 
justice costs for every Mainer.  
Maine’s current medical malpractice laws already heavily favor plaintiffs and their lawyers. Unlike 
other civil claims (like wrongful death) there are no caps on damages related to medical 
malpractice.3 Juries may award any amount of pecuniary and non-pecuniary damages they choose, 
without limit. Also, more than 35 states’ statute of limitations are shorter than Maine’s.4 
 
1 The National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies consists of more than 1,500 member companies, 
including seven of the top 10 property/casualty insurers in the United States. NAMIC member companies 
write $357 billion in annual premiums and represent 69 percent of homeowners, 56 percent of automobile, 
and 31 percent of the business insurance markets. 
  
2 Title 24, §2902: Statute of limitations for health care providers and health care practitioners excluding 
claims based on sexual acts (maine.gov)  
 
3 2019_50-State-Analysis-of-Liability-Damages-Caps-Compendium.pdf (uslaw.org)  
 
4 Medical Malpractice Statute Of Limitations By State – Forbes Advisor  
 
  
Enactment of this legislation will further tilt the scales of civil justice toward the plaintiff’s bar 
and would result in: 
• Increasing the cost and access to quality healthcare. 
It has long documented that issues related to malpractice lawsuits are a key cost-driver of healthcare 
costs. In the study “What Is Driving Up Health Care Spending?” the Bipartisan Policy Center 
concluded “Aside from the direct costs of medical lawsuits and high malpractice insurance 
premiums, our inefficient medical malpractice system also contributes to high health care 
costs through the practice of “defensive medicine” – tests and treatments that physicians 
prescribe largely in response to the threat of lawsuits.”5   
While Maine ranks just #45 of all states for mean household income6,  it is #7 among all the states 
for having the most expensive healthcare.7 This legislation will only add to those excessive costs, 
which have a disproportionate impact on lower-income, rural Mainers. 
Maine also continues to suffer from a shortage of medical professionals.8  In a TIME article published 
last week, “The Unspoken Reason Why Many Doctors and Nurses Are Quitting,” the costs and stress 
related to medical malpractice litigation is the “unspoken” reason for medical professionals leaving 
the field or retiring early.9  Maine cannot afford to exacerbate the drain of healthcare professionals. 
 
 
5 bpc_health_care_cost_drivers_brief_sept_2012.pdf (kff.org)  
 
6 Average Income by State 2023 (worldpopulationreview.com)  
 
7 Most and Least Expensive States for Health Care, Ranked – Forbes Advisor  
 
8 How will Maine address its shortage of medical professionals? – Maine Policy Institute  
 
9 The Unspoken Reason Why Many Doctors and Nurses Are Quitting | Time  
“For many, the initiation of a lawsuit or disciplinary investigation is nearly as significant as the outcome. The 
formal accusation of malpractice, whether or not any occurred, marks the beginning of a long cycle of shame and 
psychological distress for the clinician who has dedicated their life to their profession and genuinely cares about the 
outcomes of their patients. The opportunity to talk to the patient or their family—to heal, to explain, to listen, to soften—
is lost; lawyers now attack or defend in our stead. Adding to the distress of a serious adverse outcome for their patient is 
now the fear of personal assets at risk, the potential loss of licensure or livelihood, and the stigma of the lasting public 
record of the lawsuit; worry runs rampant, as does the shame of being judged incompetent by patients and peers alike. 
This fear is generally left unspoken by clinicians who are admonished by their lawyers and insurers not to talk about it 
but is highly leveraged during the legal process by opposing counsel, who are well versed in the psychological distress 
that litigation creates in the defendant. They know that a highly stressed physician is more likely to make a mistake in 
deposition, to push for a settlement just to end their ordeal or appear poorly on the stand as a witness at trial.” 
 
  
 
• More unnecessary lawsuits. 
NAMIC believes that society, in general, and all litigants (plaintiffs and defendants) should be 
encouraged to pursue reasonably prompt and fair resolution of their claims so that all involved parties 
may be able to move forward with their lives in a timely manner, and to eliminate societal costs 
resulting from tactical delaying of lawsuits to increase civil damages ultimately borne by insurance 
consumers and small businesses.  By needlessly increasing the statute of limitations, Maine will 
encourage even more lawsuits in a court system that continues to feel the strain from COVID. 
Recently, the Chief Justice of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court, Valerie Stanfill, called the state of 
the court system “frail” and estimated that state courts will not begin to address their backlog of cases 
until 2028.10 
 
 
• Unequal and uneven justice. 
Extending the statute of limitations also increases the likelihood of unequal justice and uneven 
awards and settlements. Evidence can be lost and memories fade over time. The statute of 
limitations ensures litigants can access the information needed to back up their allegations or raise 
defenses. It is also not considered fair for people to constantly have the threat of being sued. The 
statute of limitations allows people to move on with their lives without the threat of litigation hanging 
over their heads.11  
 
 
• Windfall profits for specialty plaintiff’s law firms.  
 
Specialty plaintiff’s law firms are most often entitled to one-third of the settlement or judgement PLUS 
additional reimbursable expenses that can run into hundreds of thousands of dollars or more. This 
legislation would most benefit the trial bar at the expense of Maine’s hospitals, healthcare, residents, 
taxpayers, and small businesses. 
 
For these reasons, NAMIC respectfully requests you vote ought not to pass on LD 549.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
10 Maine courts may take until 2028 to touch backlog of cases (msn.com)  
 
11 The Puzzling Purposes of Statutes of Limitation (scu.edu)  
