Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
 
April 13,  2023  
 
Senator Joseph Rafferty , Chair  
Representative Michael Brennan , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 684 – An Act to Implement Pilot Programs with Publicly Funded Day Care and Early 
Childhood Education  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 684.An Act to Implement Pilot Programs with 
Publicly Funded Day Care and Early Childhood Education . While this bill is a concept draft , the 
summary indicates that it would establish three publicly funded education programs within child 
care programs using the Educare model . The bill mandates that Regional School Unit No. 13 ( in 
the Rockland  area) be included as one of the three pilot sites.  
 
In 2021, the Legislature passed, and the Governor signed Public Law 2021, Ch. 457 , An Act To 
Support Children’s Health Development and School Success  sponsored by President Jackson , 
which established the First4Me Early Care and Education Program. First4ME’ s goal is to 
improve the social, emotional, educational, and health outcomes for children under the age of six 
through access to high quality early child care and education that utilizes a two -generation, 
community -based approach to caring for young childr en. The model for this program, based on 
the Elevate Maine /Somerset program implemented by Educare of Central Maine, integrates 
comprehensive resources and services for children and families into the child care settings to 
build strength among the particip ating families, provide supportive services to address identified 
needs, and ensure a wholistic approach to child development that integrates across both home 
and the child care setting.  
 
To implement PL 2021, Ch. 457, OCFS has partnered with Educare, Hea d Start, and the First 10 
Initiative to plan, develop, and implement the program. OCFS recently released the RFA for up 
to five pilot sites. Any community interested in applying, including Rockland , is encouraged to 
review the RFA  and apply.  The pilot will  also include an evaluation component to determine the 
impact of the program and feasibility of further expansion of the model.  
 
OCFS would recommend additional time to standup the pilot sites and complete evaluation 
activities before further expanding th e number of pilots or creating a new ( or similar) initiative. 
This proposal would also have a significant general fund cost.  
 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, pl ease feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services  

