LD 1518 " An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their 
Children from Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain 
Controversial Viewpoints" 
 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my 
testimony in support of LD 1518 “An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their Children 
from Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain Controversial Viewpoints.” 
Parents and guardians know what is best for their child or children when it comes to their education 
and wellbeing. They should be allowed to opt out on any curriculum they deemed unfit, goes against 
their beliefs or religious views.  
The United States of America is a Constitutional Republic, and every American is afforded the right 
to choose their own path. One of them being education, and it’s the parents’ right to be able to pick and 
choose what is best for their children. 
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1518 “An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents 
to Withdraw Their Children from Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain Controversial 
Viewpoints.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1518
LD 1518 " An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their Children from 
Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain Controversial Viewpoints"
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of LD 1518 “An Act 
Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their Children from Public School 
Classes or Activities That Include Certain Controversial Viewpoints.”
Parents and guardians know what is best for their child or children when it comes to 
their education and wellbeing. They should be allowed to opt out on any curriculum 
they deemed unfit, goes against their beliefs or religious views. 
The United States of America is a Constitutional Republic, and every American is 
afforded the right to choose their own path. One of them being education, and it’s the 
parents’ right to be able to pick and choose what is best for their children.
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1518 “An Act Regarding 
the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their Children from Public School Classes or 
Activities That Include Certain Controversial Viewpoints.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
