  
 
1 
 
 
 
 
Francis Pullaro  
Executive Director  
www. renewne.org  
 
 
Maine State Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 February 28, 2023   
 
Testimony of RENEW Northeast  on 
LD 399 - An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources  
 
Chairs  Lawrence and Zeigler , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology , I am Francis Pullaro the Executive Director of RENEW Northeast, Inc. (RENEW).1 
RENEW submits thi s testimony concerning the proposed changes to the Class II portfolio requirement  
for renewable resources  (RPS) . 
 
RENEW generally supports the amendment  to this bill , LR 1322(02) , that would  create an 
Alternative Compliance Payment (ACP) option in  the RPS Class II program modeled after  Maine’s RPS 
Class I and Thermal RPS programs.  RENEW favors setting the Class II ACP at $25 /megawatt -hour. 
That is one-half of the current Class I/IA ACP rate  and less than the current trading price of Class I/IA 
Renewable Energy Credits (RECs).  
 
A strong Class II is important for supporting Maine’s  small hydropower  resources that face the 
same economic pressures from wholesale electricity prices  that, while volatile, have been relatively low 
over the long -term. Small hydropower facilities are the region’s olde st carbon -free energy resources. 
They have many of the same operations and maintenance costs as larger renewable energy facilities but 
with lower output to spread across the cost. Maintaining the fleet of small hydro resources is important if 
Maine is to r each its goal of 80 percent renewable energy by 2030 and 100 percent clean energy by 
2050, and do so cost -effectively.  
 
When considering the purpose of the ACP, we should always recall that it is not a penalty on 
consumers that should be set low  but a sour ce of protection from market volatility. The ACP level 
effectively sets a ceiling on REC prices.  Revenues generated from ACP  payments  are not a windfall for 
renewable energy resource owners; they are transferred  to consumers through state‐sponsored funds a nd 
used to support renewable energy , efficiency,  and other projects.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of RENEW’s position on  this bill.  
 
1 The comments expressed herein represent the views of RENEW and not necessarily those of any particular member of 
RENEW.  RENEW is a non -profit association uniting environmental advocates and the renewable energy industry whose 
mission involves coordinating the ideas and resources of its members with the goal of increasing environmentally sustainable 
energy generation in the Northeast from the region’s abundant, indigenous renewable resources. RENEW members own 
and/or are developing large -scale renewable energy projects, energy storage resources , and high -voltage transmission 
facilities across the Northeast. They are supported by members providing engineering, procurement and construction services 
in the development  of these projects and members that supply them with multi -megawatt class wind turbines. RENEW seeks 
to promote policies that will increase energy diversity, promote economic development, and achieve policy goals including 
those found in the Renewable Port folio Standard (RPS) . 
