1 
 
LD 399 An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources  
and 
LD 437  An Act to Eliminate the Repeal Provision on Waste -to-energy  
Renewable Energy Credits  
 
Testimony IN OPPOSI TION 
Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
Public Hearing  
February 28, 2023  
 
Chair Senator Lawrence; Chair Representative Ziegler; and Honorable Committee 
Members:  
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments IN OPPOSITION  to LD 399 and 
LD 437 . LD 399  seeks to remove the repeal clause from a p rovision that was enacted in 
Public Law  2019, chapter 477, section 1, which added a 300% multiplier to the output of 
licensed power  generators fueled by municipal solid waste in conjunction with recycling 
for the purposes  of meeting portfolio requirements for Class II resources.  LD 437  seeks to 
eliminate the January 1, 2025 repeal date on the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35 -A, 
section 3210, subsection 3, paragraph A, a provision of law that applies a 300% multiplier 
to the output of a generator fueled by municipal solid waste.  Both bil ls seek to provide 
waste incinerators that generate energy with renewable energy credits.  
 My name is Jacquelyn Elliott. I live in Waterboro where I retired more than a 
decade ago from my native New Hampshire. For nearly three decades I have been actively 
engaged as an environmental health and justice advocate. That work has had the primary 
focus of developing waste policy that protects public health and the environment; 
promotes environmental justice for communities impacted by waste proce ssing and 
disposa l facilities; reduces the toxicity of waste generated; furthers reuse, diversion, and 
recycling of valuable resources; and decreases  the quantity of discards requiring disposal. 
Waste is a verb. It is something we choose to do. We can make better choices.  
2 
 
 
Framing the issue:   
BURNING TRASH IS NOT GOOD ENERGY POLICY OR GOOD WASTE POLIC Y FOR MAINE  
 
Maine ’s motto  is DIRIGO – I LEAD.  The state is  setting goals for clean, renewable energy 
to address climate disruption. Governor Mills recently announced a goal for 100% clean, 
renewable energy by 2040. Including WTE (Waste -to-Energy) in renewable 
energy credits is counter to those efforts.  
 
“Incinerators that claim to turn waste into energy are also highly inefficient. They are 
one of the most expensive ways to generate energy. In addition to being costly to build 
and run, they are also barely able to generate even a small amount of electrici ty, and 
emit 68% more greenhouse gases per unit of energy than coal plants.”  https://www.no -
burn.org/zero -incineration/   
“If the same materials burned in trash incinerators were recycled or composted, they 
would save 3 –5 times more energy than incinerators can make from burning them . . .”  
www.energyjustice.net/incineration/   
 
“The incinerator industry relies on competitive tipping fee revenues and energy sales for 
a large proportion of its revenues. In order to secure funds from the sale of energy, the 
industry lobbies policymakers to secure access to tax credits, subsidi es, power 
purchasing agreements, net metering, renewable energy credits and loan assistance 
through classification as a ‘renewable energy’ source.”  (pp.19)  Dick Lindsay, “Covanta Will 
Continue Operating for at Least 4 More Years,” The Berkshire Eagle , October 12,  2016   https://www.no -
burn.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21 -1.pdf   
  
The state of Minnesot a has a new law promoting clean energy and has determined the 
Hennepin County Energy Center (HERC) waste -to-energy incinerator in Minneapolis, is 
no longer a renewable power source . Legislators had concerns about including WTE with 
wind and solar power.  https://m.startribune.com/hennepin -county -incinerator -air-pollution -
environmental -justice -landfill -trash /600254429/?clmob=y&c=n&clmob=y&c=n   
 
o WTE is not renewable energy.  Producing energy from incineration is  wasteful.  
Valuable resources are turned into toxic smoke and ash  requiring the use of more 
energy  to extract  additional virgin resources to produce the same materials  that 
have been incinerated  perpetuating the cycle of waste and extraction.  
3 
 
o WTE  does not displace the use of fossil fuels.  Depending on the composition of 
the waste being burned, an  auxiliary source of fuel can be required to operate the 
facility  to produce energy. That fuel is usually natural gas . 
 
o Incinerators compete directly with clean renewable energy development when 
they are provided renewable energy credits.  Materials that sh ould be recycled, 
like paper, plastics, wood and tires are incinerated because they provide the 
needed fuel to produce energy.  
 
o Incineration is  a dangerously polluting and wasteful  approach to energy 
production. WTE  incineration  should not be rewarded with credits as a clean, 
renewable source of energy .  
 
Pollution Problems with Waste -to-Energy:  
“Incinerators are really ‘trash -to-toxic -ash-and-toxic -air-pollution facilities’.” 
www.energyjustice.net/incineration/  
“In 2017, the Environmental Integrity Project compiled a report, The Truth is in the 
Trash, comparing MSW incinerator emissions to coal -fired power plants and found 
that incinerators: produced, NOx, lead, and mercury at a higher rate than coal and  
Greenhouse Gases at an average rate that is 68 percent  higher, per unit of energy 
delivered to the grid, than coal plants.”  
Institute for Local Self -Reliance, Transitioning from Waste Incineration Towards Zero Waste in Montgomery  
County, Maryland, (Washington, D.C.: Institute of Local Self -Reliance, 2018).  (pp.37) https://www.no -
burn.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21 -1.pdf  
 
“To make the same amount of energy, burning  trash pollutes the air far more than 
burning coal, even though incinerators are generally newer and have more air pollution 
controls than coal power plants. Trash incinerators release 28 times as much dioxin air 
pollution than coal, about six times more l ead and mercury, 3.2 times more nitrogen 
oxides (NOx), 2.5 times as much carbon dioxide (CO 2), twice as much carbon monoxide 
(CO) and 20% more sulfur dioxide (SO 2).” www.energyjustice.net/incineratio n/ 
 
Incinerator emissions are highly unpredictable because what they burn varies 
depending on what waste happens to be collected at a given time.  (pp.38-39) 
https://www.no -burn.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21 -
1.pdf   
https://www.nrdc.org/experts/daniel -rosenberg/burned -why-waste -incineration -
harmful   
 
4 
 
o Toxic  materials  contained in the incinerated waste  are immediately available as 
polluting releases . Waste  that is not toxic creates toxics  from the incineration 
process  and are also released . Incineration produces  acid gases, NO x, SO 2, CO, and 
GHG including CO 2. Many  toxics from waste incineration bioaccumulate ; 
contaminate food suppl ies; build up in the environment ; and are found in  
human bodies , fish and wildlife .  
o Waste incineration creates dioxins and furans  – some of the most toxic 
chemicals yet identified and injurious to human health in miniscule amounts . 
Impacts include cancer, as well as  immune , endocrine and reproductive system 
disruption. They injure unborn children and interfere with childhood 
development. Incinerator pollution contains toxic metals such as mercury and 
lead, cadmium, chromium, and ni ckel.  There is no safe level for lead exposure . 
These toxics are “forever chemicals” and exposures are lifetime exposures 
because the body cannot break them down and dispel them easily . 
 
*** In 2014 EcoMaine was cited among the Dirty Dozen trash incinerators for lead 
emissions . EcoMaine is located in an Environmental Justice community.  
https://www.no -burn.org/wp -ontent/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21 -
1.pdf (pp.40) 
 
o Toxics from waste incineration  are readily available to body systems because 
they are attached to air pollution particles  that cross the cell barrier to organs 
and the blood stream . They affect the fetus  in the womb at nearly the same levels 
as found in the mother .  
https://www.healthandenvironment.org/webinars/96654   
o The ash product  created with incineration must then be landfilled . It contains 
concentrated levels of t he toxics  produced  in the incineration p rocess . The ash 
particles make the toxics more available to the environment . Incineration does 
not avoid landfilling . Incinerators actually contribute to the problems  associated 
with landfilling adding to the toxicit y of landfill outcome s.  
https://www.no -burn.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/03/CR_GaiaReportFinal_05.21 -
1.pdf  
Waste -to-Energy Incineration Is Not Carbon Neutral : 
o Carbon emissions will vary greatly depending on the specific composition of the 
waste being incinerated. The methods used to calculate CO 2 emissions provide 
loopholes and therefore  do not reflect the actual CO 2 and GHG (Greenhouse Gas) 
5 
 
emissions released to the environment.  Even with calculations as formulated, 
incineration is second to c oal for carbon emissions.    
 
https://www.eunomia.co.uk/reports -tools/gr eenhouse -gas-and-air-quality -
impacts -of-incineration -and-landfill/   
 
“Each tonne of MSW incinerated typically releases between 0.7 and 1.7 tonnes of CO 2 [3]. 
This includes emissions of both fossil CO 2 (e.g. , from burning plastics) and biogenic CO 2 
(e.g. from burning wood, paper and food). Although biogenic CO 2 is directly released into 
the atmosphere making a significant contribution to climate change, on ly the CO 2 
emissions from fossil sources will be considered for the purposes of a global analysis  - an 
important  loophole  in GHG emissions accountability. ” 
https://zerowasteeurope.eu/2020/03/understanding -the-carbon -impacts -of-waste -to-
energy/   
 
 
A Better Choice to Conserve E nergy and Manage Resources : 
 
 
 
"Zero waste is a philosophy and a design principle for the 21st Century; it is not simply 
about putting an end to landfilling. Aiming for zero waste is not an end -of-pipe solution. 
That is why it heralds fundamental change. Aiming for zero waste means designing 
products and packaging with reuse and recycling in mind. It means ending subsidies for 
wasting. It means closing the gap between landfill prices and their true costs. It means 
making manufacturers t ake responsibility for the entire lifecycle of their products and 
packaging. Zero waste efforts, just like recycling efforts before, will change the face of 
solid waste management in the future. Instead of managing wastes, we will manage 
resources and stri ve to eliminate waste ."  Institute for Local Self Reliance (Washington, 
DC) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Thank you for considering my comments. I ask that the Committee vote OUGHT 
NOT TO PASS  on LD 399 and LD 437 .  
 
Jacquelyn C. Elliott  
148 West Road  
Waterboro, ME 04087 -3210  
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   

