t HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ’ 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
James Boyle TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
25 Dundee Road 
Gotham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: (207)756-2928 
James.Bovle@le,gislature.maine.gov 
March 28, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Jim Boyle presenting 
LD 399, An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and T eehnology 
Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Ziegler and fellow members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Rep. Jim Boyle and I represent House District 109, which 
includes the eastern part of Gorham. 
Thank you for the opportunity to introduce LD 399, An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements 
for Class II Resources. As we closely examine ways Maine can meet its energy challenges 
ahead, we need to consider both the beneﬁts of those solutions and their costs. LD 399 tries to 
strike that balance. 
In Section 1 of the bill, the 300% multiplier for Class II RECS generated by Maine’s three waste 
to energy plants would remain for another four years. This would allow these facilities to 
continue reinvesting in their plants, people and mission while providing the Legislature the 
opportunity to reassess the sunset in the future. 
The beneﬁt that Maine’s three waste to energy plants provide the state is undisputed. After the 
trash these facilities collect from homes and businesses has been sorted and the recycling 
material removed for recycling, this waste is burned to generate baseload electricity for the grid. 
Compared to landﬁlling, waste to energy plants reduce the volume of trash that ultimately needs 
to be landﬁlled by 90% and produces 10 times the electricity generation of landﬁlls. Extracting 
all the energy from waste that would otherwise be landﬁlled is both good for the environment 
and good for the grid. 
In Section 2 of the bill, I propose adding an Alternative Compliance Payment (ACP) mechanism 
for Class ll resources, like waste to energy‘ facilities. Currently, only Class I, Class IA, and 
thermal resources have this mechanism in statute. Since it acts as a price cap on REC prices, and 
since Class II resources are the only resources without an ACP, I believe this mechanism can 
hold down Class II compliance costs. In my amended version, I have proposed creating a 
statutorily deﬁned ACP price range for Class II resources. By setting the floor at $10/REC and 
the ceiling at $25/REC but allowing the PUC to set a price anywhere in between, my hope is this 
allows the market to settle but still provides a needed release valve if prices for Class II RECS 
unexpectedly rise. I think this guidance to the PUC, combined with the Commission ’s ability to 
District 109: Gotham (part)
set the ﬁnal price, protects the ratepayer while recognizing the value Waste-to-energy facilities, 
and other Class II resources, provide the State. 
When I submitted my amendment adding a Class II ACP, I modeled that ACP language off 
current statute but, since then, we have voted out LD 187 which would change the way ACP 
funds are used. I voted for that bill, and I support making the necessary changes to this 
legislation to make sure it matches the language found in LD 187. 
As I mentioned above, I think this bill strikes the right balance between the beneﬁts waste to 
energy plants provide and the costs of those beneﬁts and I look forward to working with you on 
this proposal.
