Testimony of James Bass, on behalf of ecomaine 
before the Energy, Utilities, & Technology Committee in support of 
LD 399, An Act to Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is James Bass and l’m here 
on behalf of ecomaine in support of L.D. 399, An Act to Amend the Portfolio 
Requirements for Class /I Resources. 
While others, including l\/latt Grondin of ecomaine, Rod Carr of PERC, and John King 
from Maine Waste-to-Energy (via written testimony), will speak to the benefits of waste- 
to-energy (\/WE) and its vital importance to Maine’s management of its solid waste, I am 
here to speak to the energy and cost components associated with this bill. 
Currently, Maine’s three V\fl'E plants are classified as Class ll resources, meaning the 
RECs they produce help satisfy Maine’s Class ll RPS requirement. For purposes of the 
RPS, current law multiplies the value of a single REC from these facilities by 300%, 
meaning the produce three times the number of RECs they otherwise would. This “3x" 
multiplier is scheduled to terminate on Jan. 1, 2025. 
As amended, this bill extends this sunset for four years. You’ve already heard from 
ecomaine how this multiplier directly benefits its 70+ member communities but l want to 
show you how small an impact V\fi'E plants have on the cost of Class ll RECs. 
in the PUC’s latest report on the RPS from March 2022 (which reports 2020 activity), the 
Commission displayed the mix of resources used to satisfy the Class ll RPS mandate. 
Class ti to Satisfy 2020 
3x MSW and Trash-to-Energy‘ 
1 8.54%
g 
5 Biomass 
3.52% 
Other and Windi 
1.32% 5 
T Hydroeiectricl ﬂydsopoxveri 
35.97%
As you can see from the report’s chart above, RECs from \/WE plants—including those 
generated from the three “3x” Maine facilities —only accounted for 8.54% of all the Class 
ll RECs used to fulfill the RPS requirement. And per the PUC’s report, the average cost 
of a Class ll REC was $1.30 per MWh which is equivalent to about 17 cents per month 
for residential customers. 
While the price of a Class ll REC is determined by the market, what this report illustrates 
is that the total number of RECs supplied by V\/TE is a fraction of those used to satisfy 
the Class ll requirement. This means their impact on Class ll REC pricing is negligible 
since their supply is so limited. 
Even though the price impact on Class ll RECs is minimal, ecomaine recognizes that this 
committee is laser-focused on exploring all options to stabilize and help lower overall 
energy prices, including keeping RPS compliance costs low. That is why ecomaine 
supports Rep. Boyle’s amendment to add an alternative compliance rate for Class ll 
resources. 
Unlike Class l and Class IA resources, Class ll resources do not have a corresponding 
alternative compliance payment (ACP) rate. Interest in creating one has been brought 
into sharper focus as Class ll REC prices have recently risen to around $10/REC. 
Though prices are already falling back, ecomaine understands the desire to imposea 
cost cap and supports a statutorily created ACP price floor and ceiling of $10 and $25, 
respectfully, for Class ll resources. While Rep. Boyle’s amended language sets these 
guideposts, ecomaine understands the PUC will have the ability to set the actual Class ll 
ACP price anywhere within this range. ecomaine is comfortable with this approach as 
the ceiling would effectively set a price cap for Class ll RECs while the proposal itself 
recognizes the value \/WE plants, and frankly, all Class ll resources, provide the state. 
Despite \/\ffE’s role as a smaller piece of the puzzle, and in light of the focus in Governor 
Mills’ State of the Budget address on moving Maine fully to renewable energy sources by 
2040, Maine needs every tool at its disposal to achieve this goal. Class l, Class IA, and 
Class ll renewable energy must all be viable options if Maine is to succeed in moving 
toward the future of its energy portfolio. Other testimony today will describe the 
immense environmental benefits provided by \/WE generators but in regards to costs, 
this bill and this amendment are good policy. 
Lastly, LD 187 was recently voted out of this committee last week with a strong Ought to 
Pass as Amended vote directing that future ACP funds be directed to the Low Income 
Home Energy Assistance Program. ecomaine recognizes the committee ’s preference to 
change the way ACP funds are used and supports amending this bill to conform to the 
amended language in LD 187. 
Thank you.
