Marco J. Castaldi, Ph.D. Tel:  212-650-6679 
Professor Fax: 212-650-6660 
Department of Chemical Engineering E-mail: mcastaldi@ccny.cuny.edu  
Director, Earth Engineering Center|CCNY 
Director, Earth System Science & Environmental Engineering  
140th Street and Convent Avenue  Steinman Hall 307  New York, NY 10031  
 
Testimony of Prof. Marco J. Castaldi, Ph.D in support of L.D. 399 
Director, Earth Engineering Center, City College of New York 
Director, Earth System Science & Environmental Eng., City College of New York 
Before the Maryland House Economic Matters Committee 
February 28, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and distinguished members of the joint committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology, please accept my testimony in support of LD 399, An Act to Amend 
the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources. 
I am a Professor of Chemical Engineering and the Director of the Earth System Science & 
Environmental Programs at The City College of City University of New York.  I have been appointed as a 
Fulbright Global Fellow for 2017-2019 for the research involved in transforming waste materials, such as 
municipal solid waste to energy.  I have also been appointed by The National Academy of Engineering 
Frontiers of Engineering Education for the 2012-2013 academic year based on the work related to waste 
to energy.  I am also a Fellow of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME).  I have authored two books related to waste conversion 
technologies and over 100 peer reviewed journal articles related to waste prevention and reduction, waste 
to energy and utilization of waste materials for energy or materials production. 
In a 2021 paper entitled, Scientific Truth About Waste-To-Energy (WTE) , that was an-depth 
review of dozens of scientific articles related to WTE and the impact to the environment and human 
health ( https://ccnyeec.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/WTE-REPORT7603.pdf ).  The main finding was there are several 
benefits of this technology, which is, in my opinion, an underutilized strategy in our country’s waste 
management system.  Any detrimental impacts are either perceived or arrived at using outdated or 
unverifiable data.  I had the opportunity to visit the Ecomaine facility in June 2022 and it further 
confirmed the findings of the study.  Across the country, there are 76 WTE facilities that produce enough 
energy to power 2.3 million homes, and of those 76, Maine is home to three.  Maine is fortunate to have 
such an outsized WTE presence to serve its roughly 1.3 million people; there are several states that have 
none at all and that is a lost opportunity. 
The benefits of waste-to-energy are significant: 90% less volume landfilled, greater energy 
creation than landfilling, significant metals recovery, and robust pollution controls.  WTE’s is a $10 
billion industry nationwide that employs around 6,000 American workers, often in very skilled, good 
paying jobs. Although the USEPA and the European Union have established the sustainable waste 
hierarchy placing WTE between recycling and landfilling, yet most waste is still landfilled in the U.S.  
Therefore, comparing waste-to-energy to landfills is not a valid exercise because there will be residues 
from all waste management sectors that must be finally disposed in landfills.  The hierarchy demonstrates 
that only after all practical reuse, recycling and energy recovery are done should material go to landfills. 
I urge the Committee to ensure the health of Maine’s WTE plants, and to solidify Maine’s role as 
a leader in this sustainable waste management strategy, which doubles as a renewable energy resource.  
Please support LD 399. 
Respectfully, 
//mjc 

