 
 
March 14, 2023  
 
Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology    
Cross Building , Room 211 
Augusta, ME 04333  
EUT@legislature.maine.gov   
Public Testimony of Brookfield Renewable on LD 399 As Amended  
 
An Act To Amend the Portfolio Requirements for Class II Resources  
 
 
Chair  Lawrence , Chair  Zeigler  and Members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology:  
 
Brookfield Renewable1 submits these comments neither for nor against  LD 399 as amended .  
 
Brookfield Renewable believes the adoption of an Alternative Compliance Payment (ACP) 
mechanism for  the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) Class II  program is an appropriate 
program enhancement, consistent with Maine’s RPS Class I and Thermal RPS programs. 
However, the level at which the  ACP is established must  adequately  balance several factors, 
including policy  goals, system reliability considerations  and cost impacts .  
 
The Role of Class II in Achieving Reliability and Policy Requirements  
 
With an established requirement of  80% renewable energy by 2030 and 100% clean energy by 
2050 , Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standard represents one of the most laudable and aggressive 
programs in the country.  The path to achieving  past, current  and future renewable energy goals 
has relied o n a sensible structure that incentivizes new renewable energy deployment alongside  
the retention of existing renewable energy  – much of which is sourced locally  throughout Maine . 
Importantly, t he effect  of this sensible design is a program that values and supports energy 
independence, local jobs and taxes , system reliability and ratepayer costs.  
 
For the Maine RPS Class II program, specifically , the majority of  the participating resources are 
Maine -located renewable resources that provide unique  and critical contributions to system 
operations and reliability . For example, during the December 2022 system shortage event, which 
occurred  during the late afternoon and early evening hours  on Christmas Ev e due to colder than 
anticipated weather and a mix of generator outages and reduced import capacity , local 
 
1 Throughout Maine , Brookfield Renewable owns and operates 38 hydropower stations totaling 6 20 MW of installed 
capacity as well as  219MW of windpower  and a 20MW battery storage facility , enough renewable energy to power 
nearly 500,000 homes annually. Brookfield Renewable has over 100 employees in Maine and supports 275 indirect 
jobs across the State . Brookfield Renewable’s operations contribute  nearly  $20 million in property taxes in Maine 
annually, which provides critical funds for local schools, fire departments and public services.    
 
hydropower resources met 12% of system demand . Notably, d uring the event hours, the 
contributions from local hydropower more than doubled  the generation on  the system from all 
other renewable resources combined .2 Similar performance was realized during the historic cold 
weather event the region  experienced on February 3 -4, 2023 , including throughout dangerously 
cold overnight hours . In each case, the contributions of local hydro power  resulted in 
uninterrupted  electricity supply  in Maine and throughout  New England, a s well as  the avoidance 
of otherwise higher wholesale electricity  market prices.  
 
The capabilities and availability of local hydro power  during critical hours in recent months, and 
annually , highlights the critical value of Maine’s existing hydropower fleet and the direct 
benefits that polic ies supporting retention and local consumption  of the se resources, like the 
Class II program, provide. The availability of the Class II market and the ability of the market to 
function in a manner that reflects the value of the participating resources has been critical to 
long-term capex decision -making  and operating  commitments  that retains  these  contributions to 
system reliability . Specifically, r esource owners’ confidence in the Class II market supports 
millions of dollars of investments annually to ensure continued operations  and timely upkeep . 
This visib ility is especially important as more and more local Class II hydro power  resources face 
costly and uncertain relicensing considerations, including the potential  reduction in facility 
output to ensure operations reflect the latest environmental standards  and the evolving needs of 
local stakeholders .  
 
Decision  makers must keep in mind the critical contributions of Class II resources  toward 
meeting Maine’s carbon  reduction policies , including widespread transportation and building 
electrification . Reliable supply of projected increases in system demand , alongside aggressive 
renewable energy requirements,  requires an “all-of-the-above approach ” that optimizes  existing 
renewable energy , including Maine’s core hydropower baseline,  in tandem with the addition of  
new solar, wind and energy storage . Governor Mills’ recent budget address outlining her 
commitment to move Maine to 100% renewable energy by 2040  – and the accompanying request 
of the Legislature to enact this requirement – reinf orces the criticality of Class II resources.  
 
Simply put, achieving renewable supply of 80% by 2030 or 100% by 2040 without a robust 
Class II market  (30% of annual electricity demand ) will require the installation of new renewable 
energy  generation in volumes far exceeding current projections . This  presents  unique and 
substantial challenges from a cost and resource availability  perspective.  Indeed, even  setting 
aside the critical role of Class II renewable energy , and Maine hydropower in p articular,  in 
supporting a reliable, cleaner energy mix, policymakers must nonetheless wrestle with the 
practical considerations of the costs and development required to achieve these commendable 
goals.  Loss of existing resources will lead directly to more  cost for construction of new facilities, 
delays in meeting renewable  supply  targets, and dealing with the public controversies that arise 
from siting new generation facilities . 
 
 
2 ISO-NE December 24, 2022  OP-4 Event and Capacity Scarcity Condition presentation, January 5, 2023 NEPOOL 
Participants Committee    
 
 
Notably,  the current market price for  Maine Class I /IA Renewable Energy Credi ts (RECs) is 
~$35/REC . With Maine’s current RPS Class IA market set to expand annually through 2030, 
alongside similar increases in requirements  of neighboring New England states, the market price 
for Class I/IA RECs will remain elevated  even with  significant  financial support for new -build 
resources included in  the federal Inflation Reduction Act and the anticipated  availability in 
coming years of added supply from  regional procurements for  new offshore wind , onshore wind  
and solar. Comp aratively, Class II RECs have settled into a range that remains  almost  $25/MWh 
($0.025/kWh) below Class I /IA prices .  This is a relative bargain.  
 
In addition to cost implications is the practical consideration of the challenges to new resource 
development . As has been widely publicized, the combination of costly interconnection 
requirements, siting challenges for new projects and the transmission  needed  to deliver the 
associated energy, rising interest rates and supply chain constraints have resulted  in significant  
delays to many new projects  and others  being shelved or abandoned entirely. Recently, 
developers  of projects procured through prior Maine renewable energy solicitations and through 
solicitations in neighboring states have sought  to renegotiate power purchase agreement prices to 
better reflect updated financial conditions and project demands . These setbacks reflect the 
difficulties that will continue to face Maine and the region in the coming years an d even decades  
on the path to decarbonization of the energy system . While these challenges should not detract 
from the urgency and necessity of expanding reliance on renewable energy, these factors  must be 
considered in the context of decisions impacting the role and availability of the region’s valuable 
existing renewable energ y.   
 
Class II  Market  and Proposed A CP  
 
The increase in Class II RECs prices witnessed in recent years is the result of several market 
conditions that have impacted supply and demand. The most notable change has been increased 
demand for Class II -equivalent resources due to statutory directives in other states , as well as  
growing demand from  voluntary corporat e buyers  with new or expanding sustainability and 
carbon tracking and reduction  policies. Historically, t hese external factors were not  significant 
contributors to market dynamics ; however, this evolution of  policies and buyer preferences 
within and outsid e of Maine has resulted in a Class II market that more accurately reflects the 
value of  and need for  Class II resources .  
 
Importantly, however, o ver the last year , even in the absence of an ACP, Class II RECs prices 
have leveled -off to around $10/REC , sugge sting a healthy and well -functioning market  with 
supply and demand achieving  equilibrium.  
 
Looking forward,  Brookfield Renewable does not foresee additive market factors or adjustments 
that would result in volatile, upward pressure on pricing . However, as  stated at the outset, 
Brookfield Renewable is not opposed to the adoption of an ACP for the Class II market , 
provided the mechanism appropriately balances the many considerations and factors impacted by 
the program. Indeed, an ACP set artificially low,  without consideration of t he broader energy and 
policy shifts that have occurred,  would fail to provide a structure that ensures  preservation of the 
renewable attributes of  local Class II resources for Maine electricity consumers . Loss of  such 
resources could occur either through decommissioning of projects that require such revenues to 
 
make their operations economic, or through export of their products to other states and regions 
that offer more competitive compensation for those attribut es.  The result of such a design would 
lead to increased ratepayer costs without the certainty of policy goal achievement.  
 
To tha t end, Brookfield Renewable believes  the adoption in statute of a $25/MWh  ACP  is 
appropriate . This level provides visibility and predictability to ratepayers and resource owners 
alike, adequately establishing guardrails for ratepayers while safeguarding the critical reliability 
and policy role Class II resources play today and  will be relied on in the future. Furthermore, 
$25/MWh is half of the ACP of the Class I/IA program, thereby ensur ing drastic price separation 
between the Class I /IA market and the Class II market  now and into the future . Finally, as 
evidenced by the current Class I/IA ACP of $50/MWh  and C lass I /IA RECs priced  around  
$35/MWh, a well -designed ACP acts as a price ceiling for ratepayer protections and not  a price 
target where by RECs sell at or around  the ACP  independent of supply and demand factors . A 
well-designed Class II ACP can ensure the same  protections are in place  for the Class II market .   
 
Brookfield Renewable appreciates the opportunity to testify on LD 399 as amended,  and we 
thank the Committee  for its  consideration of our comments. Please don’t hesitate to contact me 
directly to discuss these issue s further .   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Steve Zuretti  
Senior Director, Origination  and Policy  
Brookfield Renewable  
steven.zuretti @brookfieldrenewable.com  
323-400-9715  

