Ben Schulz
Pownal
LD 214
One of the biggest reasons that we chose to move to Maine was that there was room 
for our children to grow up. 
LD 213 is an important legislative bill that I encourage you to support, as it amends 
LD 2003 to give smaller towns control over their own growth. There are so many 
positive aspects to living in a rural town.
One of the main positives of living in a rural town,  like Pownal, is the opportunity to 
enjoy a slower pace of life. Smaller towns have less traffic and noise, which is 
beneficial for both physical and mental health. Additionally, rural areas have more 
green spaces and natural landscapes, providing families with the opportunity to enjoy 
outdoor activities and a more natural way of life. 
Another positive aspect of living in a rural town is the sense of community. Smaller 
towns have closer-knit communities, where neighbors look out for one another and 
work together to achieve common goals. This can be especially beneficial for 
families, as children are able to grow up with a strong support system and a sense of 
belonging.  
In addition to these benefits, living in a rural town also allows families to have more 
space and room to grow. This is especially important for families with children, as 
they need room to play and explore. Rural areas have larger lots and more affordable 
housing options, which can make it easier for families to find the space they need to 
thrive. 
I have lived in large cities. I've lived in Boston, New York, Phoenix, and Las Vegas.  
We specifically moved to Maine because it was not like these other places.
By amending LD 2003 to give smaller towns more control over their growth, LD 213 
would allow these communities to preserve their rural character and maintain the 
positive aspects of living in a rural area. This would not only benefit families who 
choose to live in these areas, but also help to promote economic development and 
sustainable growth in these communities. For these reasons, LD 213 should be 
strongly supported.
