Dan Davis
Porter
LD 214
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the IDEAB,
In regard to LD214, LD665, and LD1154, I support all of these and wanted to express
a few points:
In my town, we typically build 8-9 dwelling units a year.
LD2003 imposes a financial burden of roughly $15,000.00 on my town to basically 
promote building anywhere from one more unit to 13 more units (as no one can agree 
on whether Maine needs 8,000 units or 18,000 units), based on our town's tiny size.
We opened up our regulations years ago to support additional housing opportunities, 
but how LD2003 is currently written (or not yet written), it puts us at great risk and 
we now have to actually retract and rework our entire design. This is largely as 
Elizabeth Caruso noted, our fragile service capacity and capability requires a 
measured approach understood locally, not a top-down state mandate one-size-fits-all 
boilerplate.
Senator Pouliot notes that he voted for LD2003 based on wanting to expand property 
rights, which is good, but by doing so he stripped local democracy from many 
townspeople throughout Maine by forcing the LD2003 mandate upon them. Quoting 
property rights as the basis of one's decision on LD2003 is misguided based on the 
incompleteness, substantive fiscal burdens, and top-down state mandates imposed on 
political subdivisions by this law.
The purest democracy and the best decision-making occurs locally, closest to the 
problems we face.
Anyone in any town, anywhere, can already initiate an idea (such as a duplex) in their
community on their property, but they need to organize, gather buy-in, present their 
idea, and go through the petition process, get two petitions if they have to, even 
circumvent the municipal officers via a notary holding public meetings if they have 
to. I would argue that freedom has actually been taken away from property owners, as
they always had this ability in statute, and now that has been undermined.
This has always been the case and should always continue to be the case based on the 
wide diversity of capabilities, capacities, size, and speeds of communities throughout 
the State.
Thank you.
Dan

