To the honorable members of The Joint Standing Committee on Housing, 
My name is Donald Libby from New Gloucester and I am Currently a member of the New Gloucester 
Planning Board and the Land Management Planning Committee. I was also a member of our 
Comprehensive Planning Committee. I am submitting testimony in support of passage of LD214. Like 
many small towns in Maine we are struggling with the implementation of LD2003. In our Comprehensive 
plan that is only a few years old we mapped growth areas with incentives to promote growth in those 
areas by allowing increased densities. We in New Gloucester did not need the mandate in the growth 
management Law to do this. We in town understood the value of having a growth area for ease of 
services provided as well as increased housing opportunities. The numbers for the increased densities 
were derived from a detailed ground water protection report that had been done in the past. The new 
densities that are in LD2003, which are greater than we implemented, will put a strain on the protection 
level that we felt were adequate for well water when we made our Comp plan. The Town of New 
Gloucester does have a water district that supplies water to a small part of town due to contamination 
issues that occurred many years ago. The water district does not have the capacity to supply water 
adequately for drinking water or fire protection for our entire mapped growth district without major 
expansion.   
The other area that we are struggling with is the protection of the water quality of Sabbathday Lake.  
Where the law states that a working septic is required for the addition of all new dwellings it is known 
that nitrates have an accumulative effect. It will take time for us as a community to come up with 
necessary regulations to protect the Lake from the accumulative nitrate growth. 
The on street parking allowance part of LD2003 has me concerned as well. The Town will need time to 
somehow come up with a way to allow for this and still have safe passage and snow removal on our 
small rural roads.    
As most small towns, New Gloucester’s Tax base is mostly residential. If LD214 were to pass it would 
give us time to better prepare for the Environmental impacts and increased budget increases for 
highway, fire protection, and water.  
Respectfully Submitted, 
Donald Libby 
