 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 214-An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and 
Land Use Restrictions to Limit Certain Requirements to Municipalities with a 
Population of More than 10,000 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
April 11, 2023 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Committee on Housing, 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional 
Chamber of Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 
Mainers. We are submitting this testimony today to express our organization's strongest 
opposition to LD 214.  
 
Our organization closely followed and supported LD 2003 and we were delighted to see its 
passage as the first step in a long overdue state-level discussion on zoning and land use 
guidelines that protect property rights, afford housing opportunities, and grow smartly for our 
environmental future. When we supported that legislation, we did so because we recognized 
four key issues with the zoning status quo: 
 
1. The zoning status quo deprives Mainers of their property rights and basic 
freedoms. 
2. The zoning status quo limits the ability of people to be self-sufficiently successful 
by restricting the ability of individuals to move to places with higher-paying jobs. 
3. The zoning status quo is regressive, with the biggest burden being felt by those 
at the bottom of the income scale. 
4. The zoning status quo inhibits the state’s ability to address our climate goals. 
 
 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
Those concerns have only become more apparent over the last year as many municipalities 
have made it harder to build new housing in Maine1234. The harder we make it to build housing 
in our densest areas like Cumberland County, the more demand, and thus deficit, of housing 
will spread to the rural areas of our state. Without action now, no municipality will be immune 
from devastating stories of longtime residents being forced to look further afield from their 
hometowns for housing. The need for a statewide solution with participation from all 
municipalities has never been more important, but unfortunately this legislation before you 
would send a message that some municipalities are exempt from the negative externalities 
the housing shortage exacerbates. 
 
In our region, the municipality that has led the way on the implementation of LD 2003 is Cape 
Elizabeth, which is under the 10,000 person population floor in this bill. This time last year 
they were better known for their opposition to even one affordable housing development in 
their town center, and yet their Town Council and staff is pulling together to implement LD 
2003 in full without delay. Over the course of the last 11 months, they have had three Town 
Council meetings, six Ordinance Committee meetings, and one public forum that have 
resulted in a complete redline amendment to the Town’s land use code that fully satisfies the 
requirements incumbent upon municipalities in LD 2003. If they can do this, with limited 
resources and a weak appetite for new development, it is imminently possible for any other 
similarly situated municipality to do the same.   
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we urge this committee to 
vote Ought Not to Pass on this legislation.  
 
1 New housing caps proposed in Scarborough to regulate growth  
2 Brunswick extends housing development moratorium  
3 Voters approve building cap for North Yarmouth village  
4 Vote overturns town center zoning amendments in Cape Elizabeth  
