City of Auburn, Maine 
Mayor Jason J. Levesque 
60 Court Street  |  Auburn, Maine 04210  
www.auburnmaine.gov  |   207.333.6601 
  
 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony: LD 214, 1154, 665 
 
 
Dear Chairwomen Senator Pierce and Representative Gere and members of the Maine Legislative 
Commission on Housing, 
 
As one of Maine’s largest Cities, a service center, and a leader in the construction of housing I would like 
to share my thoughts on LD 214, 1154 and 665.  All three of which are designed to limit the impact of LD 
2003.   
 
For the last 5 years Auburn has recognized how exclusionary and prescriptive municipal zoning has led to 
our current housing crisis by minimizing the ability of land owners to create different types of housing 
options on their land. From ADU’s to missing middle housing units (2 to 4 units), all of which are in critical 
need throughout the state.  Regardless of the size of the community, the common need for housing 
tailored to seniors, to our younger generation just entering the workforce is great and equally recognized.   
 
The legislation introduced to either delay or remove key elements prior to the implementation of LD 2003 
on July 1 2023 is understandable, but shortsighted.  I can state that any delay will only exacerbate the 
current housing crisis by preventing individual land owners from being part of the solution by creating 
new housing stock and allow smaller municipalities from contributing to the solutions we desperately 
need. 
 
The idea that more time is needed at the municipal level to implement the prescribed changes only 
applies to those communities that have deprioritized the work in hope that future legislation action would 
allow them not to do the work that is critically important to ensure that the private sector produces the 
varied housing that is needed throughout our state, regardless of the size of the community. As a 
community that has already done what is required (or well on its way) It is disingenuous to assume that 
more time is needed.   
 
To assume that LD 2003 infringes on home rule only applies to local ordinances which takes away the 
individual’s right to develop their land in a way in which doesn’t contradict their neighbors use.  In other 
words if someone wants to build housing in an area that is predominantly housing, then that is a 
complimentary use, not a conflicting use. To assume that renters are less of a residential use than owner 
occupied units is repulsive.  People are people and their needs and desires for housing trumps their 
neighbors vision of aesthetics on land they do not own.  
 
Furthermore, to create two classes of municipalities based on an arbitrary population number further 
illustrates the ‘two Maine’ concepts, rural and urban.  Where the urban areas shoulder the responsibility 
and cost needed to be  service center, but also a housing center.  It’s in the States best interest to enact 
legislation that will be fairly applied to all, not just a select few. 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 I respectfully ask that LD 214, 1154, and 665 not receive a favorable recommendation from this 
committee. 
 
Best regards, 
 
Jason Levesque 
Mayor, City of Auburn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jason  Levesque
City of Auburn
LD 214
Please include this testimony for LD 214, LD 1154, and LD 665
