Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Distinguished Members of the Select Joint Committee 
on Housing: 
Good afternoon, I am Jessica D. Linzer, aka Jessica Simpson, a resident of Cape Elizabeth, and 
am testifying in opposition to LD214, the bill that wants to amend laws, zoning and land use 
restrictions to apply only to towns with a population of more than 10,000 residents. Let's stop, 
right there — if this were to pass, it would allow over 95% of the S19 towns in Maine to evade 
responsibility from the thrust, intent and solutions enshrined in LD2003, the original bill passed 
by the legislature a year ago. That’s because there are only 22 towns or cities in Maine with 
10,000 or more residents. LD214 is an underhanded way of exempting almost all of Maine's 
towns from creating accessory dwelling units, as an example, to address our housing shortage. 
l come to this issue from 2 perspectives, one as a volunteer/advocate with AARP Maine who 
has beenattending, when possible, the hearings in this committee. I have heard firsthand, as 
have you, as to the convergence of many factors that's creating more housing insecurity, less 
affordable housing, and growing wait lists. Plus, worker shortages due to housing shortages, as 
well as people and businesses choosing to live or invest e-lsewherewbecause of our lack of 
housing, affordable or not. 
My other perspective is as a resident of Cape Elizabeth, a town with unidenti ﬁed people who 
formed a group, Cape Neighbors Alliance, taking out half-page ads in the local paper touting 
passage of this bill, and fighting attempts to enact the provisions for ADU's. It's important for 
you to hear from a Cape resident who is wholly in favor of the legislation passed last year to try 
to address our housing crisis.- lt is a crisis, and the establishment of this committee 
demonstrates that the legislature agrees. 
To illustrate this crisis, l have a dear friend who lived 50+ years in Cape Elizabeth. She and her 
family lived in a home until her divorce. She then moved with her children into a duplex, asa 
renter, in Cape Elizabeth for the past 29 years. She only had a lease her ﬁrst year. Thereafter, 
she was month to month. lt's hard to imagine anyone living under this tenuous rental 
agreement for 28 plus years!
\ 
Unfortunately, her anxiety over her housing situation came to a head the first week in May, 
2022. She received a letter from the current landlord, the surviving children of the original 
homeowners. She was notified that she had until June 2022 to vacate, since they were selling 
the house. She was devastated and terrified of her prospects. Fortunately, friends and family 
had taken some actions in the prior year with her daughter helping her apply to a number of 
housing options - for seniors, etc. and she was on 4 lists. ln desperation, my friend called them, 
explained her imminent need, and thank goodness,'there was one apartment coming up, ina 
different town, and a different county, but available for lune. After a half century in Cape
Elizabeth, my friend had to leave her beloved town and of course, said "yes" , sight unseen, to 
the apartment, because, at least now she would not be homeless. 
l asked my friend, if one of her children built an ADU, would she consider living in it? 
"Absolutely" , she replied. Her current apartment is about the size of an ADU, 600+ sf, but is not 
subsidized. My friend, in her late 70's, is still employed, and truly would cherish the security, 
stability and sense of community an ADU would bring, both financially and in terms of future 
caregiving. She could finally stop working yet still have a retirement lifestyle with some 
breathing room. 
Are my fellow Capers afraid of who will live in an ADU? I say - it would be by and large family- 
either young, middle aged or older. A college graduate son or daughter in need of 
independence but also in need of housing as they look for a job. A divorced son or daughter 
who needs a place while their life is in transition, or a parent, most likely alone, who wants to 
be near children or grandchildren as they themselves age. 
An ADU is a gift of sorts, a gift of caring for each other, a gift of providing a precious resource- a 
home, a place to call home, for so many who are in need. We must remember: ”T here but for 
the grace of God go l." 
We cannot and must not let a bill like LD214 pass. Doing so will enact a tremendous wrong, just 
when we are trying to make things right. 
Thank you for all you do, 
Jessica D Linzer 
3 Manter St 
Cape Elizabeth, ME 04107
