'1.’ 
_,_;, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
"- AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
_ (Z07) 287-1440 
RiCh£ll:(i C2im‘pb€l1 MAINE RELAY 711 
Oi*:Tii‘ 1;l _'tc[§nT 7-l 
Dick.Campbell1z_i lcgislaturc.maine.go\ 
Residence: (307) 7-157743 
Testimony on 
L.D. 214, “An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land Use 
Restrictions to Limit Certain Requirements to Municipalities with a Population of 
More than 10,000” 
Presented by 
Representative Richard H. Campbell 
District 19 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and fellow members of the Joint Select Committee 
on Housing: 
l am State Representative Richard H. Campbell, and l proudly represent District 19, Eddington, 
Holden, and Orrington. lt is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of introducing L.D. 214, 
“An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land Use Restrictions to Limit Certain 
Requirements to Municipalities with a Population of More than 10,000.” 
This bill is before you today because there are a great number of municipalities in our state that 
simply do not have the ability to implement PL 2021, Chap. 672, "An Act To Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying 
Zoning and Land Use Restrictions. ” Service center communities may have the ability to allow for up to 
four units per single-family house lot, as they have public water, public sewer, and public transportation. 
Many smaller communities, however, do not have these services. Reduced parking requirements, the 
proposed densities, and demand on septic systems may have dire consequences for our state. 
Using shoreland zoning as an example -- if communities allow for year-round living in the shoreland 
zone, this could result in four units per lot in the shoreland zone. Does that create affordable housing or 
an Airbnb gold mine? What works in South Portland may not work in Fort Kent. This is why the State of 
Maine has home rule authority for municipalities to govern themselves with respect to land use. 
Each community has thousands of hours at public meetings, hearings, work groups, and alike to draft 
their comprehensive plans and ordinances for their community. Residents pay property taxes in the town 
in which they reside, and they should have a say in how the future of their town is shaped. 
Thank you for your consideration. More information is to come from those testifying after me. 
District 19 Eddington, Holden and Orrington 
Printed on ll.t.\<.l£d paper
