MacMaster, Marianne 
From: Sharon Connors <saconnors23@gmail.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, April 11,2023 10:41 AM 
To: MacMaster, Marianne 
Subject: I support LD 214 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature.I 
- IfI 
_I
“ I II 
Dear Clerk MacMaster , 
I am encouraging you to support LD 214 because it is necessary for preserving the feel 
of our state as well as guarding the principle of private property rights. We have a good 
mix of larger and smaller populations throughout the state. A thoughtful process should 
be given to how to expand housing availability. Our problems have stemmed from our 
nation's growth due to illegals and from the numbers of people who left major cities 
during the pandemic to buy property in rural areas. There is a definite need for housing. 
However, there needs to be proper planning. 
It is important to exempt small towns in Maine with a population of less than 10,000 in 
order to prevent their collapse under the huge expenses required to afford the necessary 
infrastructure needed to support increased housing and increased populations. Please 
note significant increases in WATER, SEWAGE DISPOSAL, GARBAGE COLLECTION, 
POLICE AND SECURITY, EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, SOCIAL SERVICES costs a lot of 
$$$$$$$$- 
Also, as a state, we have always been concerned about the effects of our decisions on 
the environment. There will be climate, environmental and esthetic disasters caused by 
increased housing and populations without appropriate support. We will witness the 
destruction of oxygen-producing plants and trees, and loss of farmland as a result. 
Getting rid of farmland will be very grave for our future ability to grow food for our own 
population. 
I believe the loss of local control will lead to many voters becoming disenfranchised with 
the state takeover of decision-making. Our communities and the many people who 
participate in their towns still play a vital part in our country and that should never be 
forgotten. 
While we do need affordable housing, let us find a way to plan it properly. The language 
of last year's legislation, LD2003,is very threatening to those of us who remain and own 
property in this state. 
Sincerely, 
Sharon Connors 
7 Blueberry Pines Dr 
Kennebunk, ME 04043
1
