Stephanie Anderson
Cape Elizabeth
LD 214
Testimony in Support of LD 214  - An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and
Land Use Restrictions to Limit Certain Requirements to Municipalities with a 
Population of More than 10,000
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Honorable members of the Housing 
Committee,
My name is Stephanie Anderson, I reside in Cape Elizabeth and am a member of the 
Cape Elizabeth Housing Diversity Committee.  
Cape Elizabeth is a rural town of 9,500 residents.  It is a diverse community 
consisting of several farms, high density neighborhoods, condominium developments,
beaches, parks and 850 acres of land under conservation easements. 
 
Like most communities in Maine, we are in the process of grappling with the cost of 
housing.  We learned in 2022 that a startling number of households in Cape Elizabeth 
are cost burdened:  21% of all households, 65% of households with incomes earning 
below $50,000, and 29% of all senior households.  The entire community is aware of 
the crisis that is presented and want to change that.  We are working to change that.  
We will change that. 
 
LD 2003 was the work product of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities 
in Maine.  It met 7 times between August 12, 2021 and December 2, 2021.  It was 
composed of likeminded folks and the presenters were for the most part urban 
developers and officials. 
LD 2003 imposed urban and one-size fits all solutions on rural communities and 
divested the smaller towns of the right and the responsibility to provide housing with 
ordinances and strategies that are conducive to housing diversity and affordability in 
their communities. 
One of the most problematic provisions of LD 2003 was the enactment of 30-A sec 
4364, which provided, inter alia, that municipalities may not require more than two 
parking spaces for every three units in developments in which there is affordable 
housing.  For rural towns without public transportation, this provision, instead of 
encouraging affordable housing developments actually makes it more difficult to 
approve them because it forces the town to add public transportation to its 
infrastructure.   It places an unfair and unnecessary burden on rural communities.  I 
would urge an amendment to LD 214 to eliminate this requirement also. 
Thank you for your service and for your consideration. 
