DV. _ “QM 101 Western Ave. 
The Maine Coalition P'O' BOX 5188 
to End Domestic Violence Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
207-430-8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso 
Neither for Nor Against LD 363: “An Act to Expand the Jurisdiction 
of the Sentencing Review Panel of the Supreme Judicial Court." 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Thursday, March 2, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ to raise 
issues for your consideration regarding LD 363, “An Act to Expand the Jurisdiction of the Sentencing 
Review Panel of the Supreme Judicial Court.” 
In Maine, the vast majority of those convicted of a domestic violence crime,~are convicted of 
a Class D crime. It is unusual that a person convicted of such a crime is a first-time offender. By and 
large, these are people who either have a pattern of victimizing the current crime victim or who have 
come to the attention of the criminal legal system through victimizing a series of intimate partners 
over a period of years. It is not uncommon for these criminal cases to take months, if not multiple 
years, to resolve — particularly those cases where a defendant is ultimately going to be sentenced 
outside of a plea agreement and particularly given the current court backlogs. The proposal before 
you will make these misdemeanor level cases drag on for even longer. For many crime victims} a 
sense of closure is a key component of moving forward on their path to healing. The resolution ofa 
criminal case, and with it the end of a period of uncertainty, often brings a kind of closure. 
MCEDV appreciates that other interested parties are bringing forward to this Committee 
information around the increased cost this proposal would bring to the Judicial Branch, to the Maine 
Prosecutors Association, and to the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services. We would ask the 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
abuse and violence and their children in Maine last year. 
1 
We observe that, while domestic violence and sexual assault victims have specific advocacy representation 
around public policy tables in our state, for which we are grateful as there are often highly unique needs to be 
addressed for these populations of victims of crime, there is a much broader universe of crime victims to 
consider. Their voices are often held up by a variety of community partners (including the Departments of Public 
Safety, Corrections, and Health and Human Services; the Maine Prosecutors ‘ Association; and the MaineJudicial 
Branch). However, in our experience, these representatives have other priorities as well. It is important for 
decision makers to be mindful of the criminal legal system's accountability to all victims of crime. 
' 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
Committee to also recognize that additional or expanded processes bring with them a victim services 
cost. The more process you add, the more support a survivor needs — to understand the process, to 
be appropriately informed about the status of the case, and to tend to any additional needs the 
victim may have as a result. Victim sen/ices in Maine, both system-based and community-based 
victim services, have been and continue to be grossly underfunded. There is minimal state general 
fund investment in victim services relative to the existing infrastructure, and the existing 
infrastructure is insufficient to fully meet the current and complex needs of crime victims. Without 
corresponding investment in community-based victim services, additional or expanded process in 
the criminal legal system’ ignores the very real needs that crime victims have. States that have 
implemented reforms through a Justice Reinvestment initiative demonstrate this reality clearly, as 
nearly all of those efforts have involved significant additional investment in victim services. 
Given the above, as you consider this proposal, we hope you will ask thoughtful questions 
about what the rationale for this change is. What evidence do we have that Maine's judicial officers 
are currently imposing unreasonable sentences for Class D and E crimes? What does the data tell us 
about the petitions currently filed with the Sentence Review Panel? How many of those petitions are 
making it past the initial review? How many petitions to the Panel each year result in a modified 
sentence? And we hope that, should you choose to move this proposal forward, that you remember 
the full systems cost, beyond court resources and the need to fund prosecutors and defense 
attorneys. For crimes involving a victim, there’s an additional person requiring support, and 
appropriate funding should be allocated accordingly. 
Thank you for the opportunity to raise these issues. MCEDV and our member programs are 
happy to serve as a resource to the Committee as this bill moves through process. 
Contact lnformation: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director o 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356, Email: ancirea@mcedv.org
