 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 363 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 363, An Act to Expand the Jurisdiction of the Sentence Review Panel of the Supreme 
Judicial Court  
 
DA: March 2 , 2023  
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LD 363, as members are divided on the proposal .  Some CLAC 
members take the position that all sentences , unless agreed to, should be subject to discretionary 
appeal , with the goal of prom oting  fairness in the sentencing process .    CLAC offers the fo llowing 
additional observations.  
 
 Currently, a ny sentence may be appealed or corrected if it is illegal , imposed in an illegal 
manner, or outside the jurisdiction of the court.   S uch appeals are governed by the Rules 
promulgated by the Supreme Judicial Court and by caselaw .   See., e.g., State v. Bennett , 2015 ME 
46; M.R.U.Crim. P. 35, 36(e) , 38.  The bill proposes a significant expansion of the types and 
number of sentences that would be eligible for discretionary  review by the Supreme Judicial Court.  
15 M.R.S. §§ 2151 -2157 and M.R.App. P. 2A(f), 19, 20.  This expansion would require additional 
resources for counsel, transcripts, and court personnel.  
 
 Victim advocates and courts would  need to address  notice to victims and victim safety in the 
context of requests  for stays of execution and post -conviction bail, which are not currently 
authorized for discretionary appeals.   15 M.R.S. § 2157.  
 
 Sentencing courts currently have significant discretion to modify the method and timing of 
payment of fines and restitutio n.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1708, 1710, 2006, 2014.  
 
 The inclusion  of restitution in § 2151 (1)(A) is not necessary, because  there is no mandated 
amount of restitution.    
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, pros ecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Cou rt, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature o n matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code  
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
