 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 363 – Ought  To Pass  
 
An Act to Expand the Jurisdiction of the Sentence Review Panel of the 
Supreme Judicial Court  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
March 2 , 202 3 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on  Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede , and I am 
Policy Counsel  of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advanc ing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support 
LD 363, legislation that would expand the Law Court’s ability to review sentences 
imposed for criminal offenses  and correct t he sentences when they are unjust.  
 
Currently, a person convicted of a criminal offense can only appeal their sentence to 
the Law Court if they have been sentenced to imprisonment for at least a year. This 
limitation does not acknowledge that sentences ot her than lengthy imprisonment 
can still represent a miscarriage of justice and have long -lasting negative effects on 
the convicted person . This bill fixes that error. For example, a person convicted of a 
Class E misdemeanor (the least severe offense under Maine’s criminal code) can 
face a fine of up to $1000  or up to six months of incarceration . 17-A M.R.S. § 
1704(5) ; 17-A M.R.S. § 1604(1)(E) . This is a significant amount of money, especially 
for the lower -income Maine residents who are disproportionately likely to be 
charged with misdemeanors . That financial penalty, when imposed on those who 
can least afford it, traps people in a debt they cannot pay. Similarly, six months of 
incarceration can easily wreak havoc on a person’s l ife—that is six months in which 
a person cannot work or easily maintain a relationship with their children. These 
severe consequences merit review by our highest court.  
 
Importantly, LD 363 also allows people convicted of crimes to seek stays of their 
sentences or to seek post -conviction bail, while they pursue  Law Court review of 
their sentences. (Currently, people who seek Law Court review of their sentences 
must serve out their sentences awaiting the Law Court’s decision.)  Crucially, a stay 
of a sentenc e pending Law Court review ensures that a person does not serve a 
sentence later determined to be unjust or illegal. We urge you to vote ought to pass . 
