        
 
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                             
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION  
SHIRA BURNS , EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
                                                                                                               
 “An Act to Expand the Jurisdiction of the Sentence Review Panel of t he Supreme Judicial Court ”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
Public Hearing Date: March 2 , 2023  
Testimony in Opposition  of LD 363  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary . My name is Shira Burns and I represent th e Maine Prosecutors Association. I am here to 
testify in opposition  of LD 363.  
 
It is hard to consider the merits of the bill without first discussing the reality that there are no 
resources to even implement this procedure. Throughout this week you have heard from  all three 
parties in the criminal justice system, indigent legal services, prosecutors , and judiciary that we are 
in crisis and cannot keep up with the current criminal caseload. The Maine Prosecutors 
Association’ s priority this session has been threefold to address the criminal caseload; 1) reclassify 
criminal offenses to civil violations and oppose the establishment of new criminal offenses that do 
not affect public safety or victim safety, 2) procuring more resour ces for all parties in the criminal 
justice system and 3) advocating and suggesting ways within our existing system to be more 
efficient, victim centered, while adhering to all of a defendant’s constitutional rights. That is the 
only way we are going to be  able to move forward. Speaking just for prosecutors, we absolutely do 
not have the resources to take on  more appeals. We do not have an appellate unit or outside agency 
that does appeals for our prosecutors. Every assistant district attorney has to do the ir own appeals, 
which includes researching and writing the brief, working on the appendix, and arguing in front of 
the Maine Supreme Judicial Court. This all happens when they are still expected to be in court 
every day dealing with their unmanageable case loads.  
 
Now, looking at the merits of the bill with the lens of advocating for more efficient court processes 
that are victim centered while adhering to a defendant’s constitutional rights, this bill stops right in 
its tracks. This is not a constitutional  issue, this is not victim centered, and this  is not more efficient. 
Finality is a very big deal when you are a victim of a crime and the criminal justice process moves 
at a snail’s pace.  
 
Judges are not allowed to just sentence a defendant to anything th ey want. They are restricted to the 
laws that are already in place. This includes the statutory maximum  of fines, imprisonment, and 
probation  for the level of offense they were convicted of and to follow the sentencing guidelines 
promulgated in Title 17 -A of the Maine Revised Statutes. If it is an illegal sentence, the defendant 
does have a right to appeal.  
 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association is in opposition of  LD 363.  
      STATE OF MAINE
  
 
 
 144 SwedStreet    
Caribou, ME 04736 -2353  
207-498-2557  
FAX 207 -493-3493   _____  
   
 
27 Riverside Drive    
Presque Isle, ME  04769 -2730  
207-764-0504  
FAX 207 -764-2046  _____  
   
 
25 School Street    
Suite 210  
Houlton, ME  04730  KATHRYN SLATTERY  
DISTRICT I 
 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS  
DISTRICT II 
 
NEIL MCLEAN 
DISTRICT III 
 
MAEGHAN MALONEY  
DISTRICT IV 
 
R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V 
 
NATASHA IRVING  
DISTRICT VI 
 
ROBERT  GRANGER  
DISTRICT VII 
 
TODD R. COLLINS  
DISTRICT VIII  
 
 
 
