  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
Presid ent-Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasurer  
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secretary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattso n 
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil P rendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
February 16, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 363 --  An Act to Expand the Jurisdiction of the Sentence Review Panel of 
 the Supreme Judicial Court  
        
Dear Sen ator Carney, Representativ e Moonen, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL supports  LD 3 63.   
 
As it s tands now, a pe rson can be s entenced to a massive misdemeanor sentence by a 
judge , that sentence could be unfair by everyone ’s account,  and yet there can be n o 
review of that sentencing decision.  Only felony convictions are reviewable by the  
Sentence Revi ew Panel of the Supreme Judicial Court as it s tands now, and yet a 
judge could impose a misdemeanor sentence of 36 4 days to the county jail for a minor 
misdemeanor crime , and there would be no right of any appeal or review at all. 
 
This is unfair.  The app eals process is an important one because it allows for a review 
of a sentence and a check on a judge’ s actions in the critical and life -changing 
sentencing process.  A judge should not be allowed to do whatever she or he wants  
without any review at all.  T his bill also allows for review when there is concern 
about something more than just the term of im prisonment  but also the term of 
probation, fine, or restitution.  Imposition of a term of probation and a restriction  on 
the person’ s liberty is important an d should be reviewed, and potentially la rge fines or 
restitution that can cause life- long economic hardships should also be reviewable.  
 
Finally, a person seeking a sentencing review  should be allowed a stay of execution 
and bail.  This is for the simple r eason that a person could very well serve the entirety 
of a sen tence while awaiting a review, that review may well overturn that sentence, 
and yet the person will have already  served the potentially improper sentence before 
that review is completed.  If th e sentence appeal process is going to have any merit 
and importance, it should be with the view that its decisions will actually be 
meaningful a nd not cause unnecessary harm to a defendant who is ultimately 
successful.  In cases where the appeal is frivolo us, of course, a court is freely allowe d 
to deny any stay of execution or post -conviction bail.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legislative Committee  
 
 
  

