                                          
  
 
rarediseases.org • rareaction .org • rareME.org 
 
April 6 , 2023   
   
The Honorable Joe Baldacci  
Chair   
Health and Human Services Committee  
P.O. Box 1423   
Bangor, ME 04402  The Honorable Michele Meyer  
Chair   
Health and Human Services Committee  
58 Odiorne Lane  
Eliot, ME 03903  
  
  
Re: Opposition to LD 1083  – An Act to Amend the Membership of the Rare Disease 
Advisory Council (RDA C)  
  
Dear Chair Baldacci , Chair Meyer , and Members of the Joint Health and Huma n Services 
Committee:  
 
On behalf of the 1 -in-10 individuals in  Maine with a rare disease , the National Organization for 
Rare Disorders (NORD) respectfully oppose s LD 1083, legi slation that would amend the 
membership of Maine’s Rare Disease Advisory Council  (RDAC) .  
  
The National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) is the leading independent advocacy 
organization representing the millions of Americans affected by rare diseases. NORD is a unique 
federation of non -profits and health organizations dedicated to improving the health and well -
being of people living with rare diseases by driving advances i n policy, research, and care . Any 
condition that affects fewer than 200,000 Americans is considered  rare.  
 
It can be difficult for state lawmakers to have an in -depth understanding of the rare disease 
community’s needs due to the small patient populations and the variety of rare diseases . This 
lack of awareness often contributes to the obstacles faced by rare disease patients and their love d 
ones. NORD is  confident that Maine’s RDAC will be an effective way to give the state’s rare 
disease community a stronger voice in state government. However, it is critical that all members 
of the rare disease community have an opportunity to apply for cou ncil membership.   
 
LD 1083 would require one of the patient representatives to have a single -gene disorder and one 
of the caregiver representatives to care for a patient that has a single -gene disorder. Overall, there 
are more than 7,000 known rare diseases , affecting 25 -30 million Americans across a broad 
spectrum of medical conditions. Although there are some single -gene disorders that are 
considered rare, NORD feels that it is essential for RDACs to be representative and inclusive of 
all rare diseases.    
 
Twenty -three other states (Alabama,  Colorado,  Connecticut , Florid a, Georgia,  Illinois , 
Kentucky, Louisiana,  Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New 
York, Nevada, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, 
                                          
  
 
rarediseases.org • rareaction .org • rareME.org 
and West Virginia ) have signed RDAC legislation into law, and each of these states have given 
individuals a chance to be considered for council membership, regardless of the type of  
rare disease that they have a connection to. This has helped ensure  that all rare disease advocates 
feel equally heard and included in their state’s RDAC.   
 
We are grateful that Maine has recognized the importance of having an RDAC in the state, and 
NORD is looking forward to seeing the positive impact that the  RDAC will have on the state’s 
rare disease community. To maximize the effectiveness and inclusiveness within this council, 
NORD urges this Committee to vote no on the proposed amendments. Thank you for your 
attention to this matter. For any questions, please contact me at areed@rarediseases.org .    
  
Sincerely,    
  
  
  
Annissa Reed   
Associate Director, State Policy   
National Organization for Rare Disorders   
  
CC: Members of the Joint Committee on Health and Human Ser vices    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

