 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 6, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: L D 1083 - An Act to Amend the Membership of the Rare Disease Advisory Council  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Committee  Health and 
Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide i nformation about  the potential impact  LD 1083,  An Act to Amend the 
Membership of the Rare Disease Advisory Council , and the potential impact  of the proposed 
emergency legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  is neither for nor against this 
bill and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 1083  changes the membership of the Rare Disease Advisory Council . This bill is a 
recommendation from the Advisory Panel to Better Understand and Make Recommendations 
Regarding the Implications of Genome -editing Technology for the Citizens of the State 
established pursuant to Resolve 2021, chapter 177.  It require s one of  the commissioner -
appointed members who is 18 years of age or older with a rare disease to be a person who has or 
has had a single -gene disorder and requires  one of the members who is a parent or guardian of a 
child with a rare disease to be a parent or gu ardian of a child with a single -gene disorder. To 
minimize disruption of membership and ensure that members of the council with direct 
experience of a single -gene disorder will be appointed at the beginning of the council's activities, 
this legislation, if  enacted, is to be effective immediately.  
 
The 130th Maine State Legislature enacted LD  972, An Act To Establish the Rare Disease 
Advisory Council . Members of the Rare Disease Advisory Council will be appointed by the 
DHHS Commissioner, pursuant to Public Law 2021 chapter 740.  Once established, t he council  
will begin the work of identifying and distributing educational resources for health care 
providers on rare diseases, increasing public awareness of rare diseases in the State, and 
establishing a c omprehensive plan for the management of rare diseases in the State. The council 
is required to provide  an annual report to the Governor, the Commissioner of Health and Human 
Services and the Legislature, which must be posted on a publicly accessible websit e. PL 2021 
chapter 740 includes funds for a part time position to coordinate all the  duties associated with the 
Rare Disease Advisory Council. To note, this 0.50 FTE  council coordinator  line is currently 
 
 being created  and, once filled, will  provide adminis trative support to the Rare Disease Advisory 
Council and members of the council .  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC  is neither for nor against this bill as the Panel has not be en 
appointed  yet. The Maine CDC has kept a running list of interested parties who have reached out 
and will be contacted once the 0.50 FTE coordinator is hired.    
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. The Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

