Senator Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Meyer, Chair 
Department of Health and Human Services Office of MaineCare Services 
RE: LD 603 "An Act to Make Electric Breast Pumps More Accessible by Providing for 
MaineCare Reimbursement."
March 15, 2023
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services,
I am a family nurse practitioner, certified lactation counselor, and Co-Chair of the Maine 
Nurse Practitioner Association (MNPA) Legislative Committee. Please consider the health of 
mothers and infants when voting for LD 603, "An Act to Make Electric Breast Pumps More 
Accessible by Providing for MaineCare Reimbursement." I am writing this testimony on behalf 
of MNPA and to urge you to support this bill. 
There are immediate and long-term health benefits to mothers and infants from 
breastfeeding/pumping breast milk. According to the Centers for Disease and Prevention (2021), 
breastfeeding (and pumping milk) reduces the risk of breast and ovarian cancer, high blood 
pressure, and Type II diabetes. Breastfed infants have a lower risk of asthma, obesity, type I 
diabetes, severe lower respiratory infections, ear infections, gastrointestinal infections, and 
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). 
Barriers to breastfeeding may be sore nipples, engorgement, low milk supply, and a 
feeling like you cannot leave your baby (WIC, 2023). An electric breast pump helps address 
these barriers, especially when immediately accessible and not waiting for prior authorization for 
a breast pump. Ideally, a mother would have an electric breast pump before she leaves the 
hospital after delivering her infant. 
As a primary care provider, I work with mothers and newborns. Often, the top two 
reasons mothers note for not pursuing breastfeeding are the worry about not having enough milk 
and engorgement – two barriers readily addressed with having an electric breast pump on hand. 
A family needs to prepare to succeed in breastfeeding; part of this success is the education and 
materials needed to overcome barriers and nurture the special bond between infants and their 
caregivers. 
Thank you in advance for your time and support of LD 603. Please feel free to contact me 
if you have any questions.
Sincerely-
Jennifer Mora FNP-C, CLC
Maine Nurse Practitioner Legislative Committee Co-Chair
Jennifer_Mora@rush.edu
(207) 272-3520
