131st Maine Legislature
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Testimony of Erik C. Jorgensen, MaineHousing, before the
 Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, in favor of
LD 144 - An Act Regarding the Monitoring of Municipal Abandoned Property
February 7, 2023
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed member of the Taxation Committee, 
my name is Erik Jorgensen and I serve as Senior Director of Government Relations and 
Communications at MaineHousing. 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 
1969. We are an independent state authority created to address the problems of unsafe, 
unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing.  We are authorized to issue bonds to 
finance single family mortgages for first-time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family 
housing.  We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, 
including rental subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-
income housing tax credit program, and homeless grant programs.  We receive state general 
fund revenue for homeless programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer 
tax for the Housing Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund.
I am testifying today in support of LD 144, which makes a technical change to the procedures 
used to monitor property that a municipality has certified as having been abandoned. This 
procedure was established as part of LD 1132, a bill from the 130th Legislature, which 
codified how municipalities might accelerate the reuse of abandoned properties. Under that 
bill, a municipality certifying abandoned property would submit to MaineHousing parcel 
information for purposes of determining redevelopment opportunities. 
This bill proposes to redirect those reports: instead of sending them to MaineHousing 
municipalities will instead send them to the newly formed Maine Redevelopment Land Bank 
Authority. We support this shift because while we were willing to accept and keep these 
reports, they are not tied specifically to any MaineHousing program. The Redevelopment 
Land Bank Authority is better positioned to actually make positive use of them, as they fit 
much more clearly with that agency’s core redevelopment mission.
We think this is the correct policy move, and urge you to support this small but useful tweak. 
