1https://www.mccs.me.edu/workforce-training/apprenticeships/ 
2https://www.maine.gov/labor/cwri/publications/pdf/MaineLaborForceAgingAndGrowingSlowly.pdf  MAINE AFL-CIO 
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
                                                                Tel. (207) 622-9675         
       Fax (207) 622-9675  
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
  
 
Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Support of L.D. 
1394, "An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive Skills Scholarship Program” 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor & 
Housing, my name is Adam Goode. I’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. 
We represent 40,000 working people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working 
conditions of our members and all working people. We testify in support of LD 1394. 
The Competitive Skills Scholarship Program (CSSP) provides funding and support services for eligible 
Maine residents to pursue two and four-year degree programs or employer-recognized credentials 
leading to high-wage, in-demand jobs in Maine. Making the CSSP more available to persons in 
apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs will help promote wage growth and attract more people 
to the workforce.  
Registered apprenticeship programs train workers to become highly-skilled construction workers 
through a technologically-advanced education that will enable them to earn a solid wage to support their 
family. In the construction industry, registered apprenticeship programs help recruit, train and retain 
workers with progressive wage increases, apprentice-to-journey worker ratios that promote safety, 
uniform standards, safety training and eligibility requirements for instructors. 
Increasing CSSP funding to support more participants in apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship 
programs is an investment in the people who will be the future of Maine’s trades. Apprentices are 
prepared to enter into high wage and high demand jobs, are 85% more likely to stay with an employer1, 
and earn an average wage of over $25 per hour.2 Our experience working on pre-apprenticeship to date 
is that these programs result in the student being placed in either an actual apprenticeship or directly into 
a good job.  
Fundamentally this funding is about ensuring that people who enter these programs have the support 
they need to successfully complete them. For registered apprenticeship programs, the classroom and the 
field are one and the same and equally important to learning the trade. Classroom hours that the federal 
Department of Labor mandates are a fraction of the on-the-job education hours. The fact that a future 
high skilled worker is doing their training in the field as opposed to in a classroom should not limit their 
access to resources.  
The on-the-job education that comes with registered apprenticeship and registered pre-apprenticeship 
should be treated the same as classroom education as completing these programs means the participant 
Printed In House with Union Labor

has done all of the learning necessary to become proficient in their trade. Having access to financial 
resources for books, supplies, tools, childcare, remedial education, and for the costs of licensing or 
certification will help ensure that more people successfully complete the programs, thus helping fill the 
huge need for workforce development in the building trades in Maine.  
CSSP funding is an essential part of our overall workforce system. It strengthens our existing education 
and training infrastructure by providing services like child care and transportation not otherwise 
available to these students, yet essential for them to succeed at a community college, in an 
apprenticeship or pre-apprenticeship program, or any other program resulting in a credential of value.  
We want folks from higher need and underrepresented backgrounds to have access to high quality 
careers. The CSSP opens the door to those jobs for people in these circumstances. LD 1394  helps us to 
reach that goal by removing barriers to completing apprenticeships programs, and by providing the 
additional funding needed to make these vital supports available to more Maine people who need them. 
It will increase economic security and promote representation in non-traditional occupations for women, 
people of color and marginalized communities that will lead to higher wages in the highly demanded 
skilled trades.   
The bottom line is passing LD 1394 will mean more Mainers sign up for education and training 
programs that lead to their financial success.  
 
