/'“ ~-n 
//I 
/S *
\ _‘ MAll'\lE P5 
.7 
L1-‘~BCFi '1'l 
cummz / 
\COUNClL /‘i 
, ,/ ‘ 
\\_,/~ 
Testimony of Maine Labor Climate Council Executive Director, Francis Eanes, in Support 
of L. I). I394, "An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive Skills Scholarship 
Program” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
& Housing, my name is Francis Eanes and I ’m here today to speak in favor of L.D. 1394. l’m the 
Executive Director of the Maine Labor Climate Council. a coalition of 20 labor unions here in 
the state of Maine working together to address the climate crisis while tackling decades of 
inequality. 
I don’t think it’s lost on any of you that we’re living through what is perhaps the most signiﬁcant 
energy transition since the industrial revolution. Between market forces and a slew climate and 
energy policies —- both at the federal level and right here in Maine —— we’re looking at mind- 
boggling changes to our energy systems, our buildings, our transportation systems, and so much 
more. 
This adds up to an unbelievably enormous amount of work over the coming decades, and our 
own Govemor’s Energy Office estimates we’ll need to effectively double our clean energy 
workforce by 2030 if we want to have a fair shot at hitting our statutory climate goals. That 
means adding another 15,000 jobs in 8 years. And that’s just in clean energy, to say nothing of 
the rest of what we need to build, retroﬁt, and manufacture, and all of the care work we so 
desperately need. 
But if any of you on this committee have tried to call a plumber, an electrician, or carpenter in 
the last few years, my guess is that you’ve probably had a hard time getting ahold of someone — 
much less ﬁnding someone who can actually ﬁt you in. This is a particular problem here in 
Maine given our aging workforce. 
Fortunately we have models of workforce development, like registered apprenticeship and pre- 
apprenticeship programs, that are incredibly successful at building a highly skilled workforce 
and pathways to good-paying jobs. When we move to the Zoom portion of the hearing, you’ll 
hear from my colleague Jason Shedlock, President of the Maine State Building and Construction 
Trades, whom l’m sure will tell you more about these programs and their successes. At the same 
time, we know that despite the rumors, there are in fact a lot of Mainers who hungry for these 
programs and the pathways they provide to become the next carpenter, electrician, or iron 
worker. But despite this hunger and drive, many of them face really practical hurdles to entering 
and graduating from registered apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs.
That’s where this bill comes in. By expanding eligibility requirements to explicitly include 
registered apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs, and by doubling its overall funding, 
we can make sure that the next generation of tradespeople have the resources they need ~ e.g., 
childcare, transportation, assistance paying for necessary certiﬁcations — to succeed in these 
training programs and become productive members of the building trades. By supporting this 
bill, you can help make the Competitive Skills Scholarship Program not only a critical piece of 
Maine’s workforce development strategy, but also an essential part of how we’ll meet our 
climate and energy goals.
