LD 1394: An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive 
Skills Scholarship Program  
 
Good Morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and 
members of the Labor and Housing Committee.  My name is 
Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent for Ironworkers Local 7 
and a member of the AFL- CIO Executive Board.  I come before 
you in support of LD 1394: An Act to Expand and Strengthen 
the Competitive Skills Scholarship Program. 
      I have been a Union Ironworker for 24 years and was 
fortunate enough to go into the trades directly after high 
school.  My family and I have benefitted from my Union 
Membership and my 4-year Registered Apprenticeship Program 
immensely.  I now sit as an elected official of my Union, 
Ironworkers Local 7.  I see the hardships and obstacles Mainer’s 
face when they are entering into a Registered Apprenticeship 
Program later on in life.  Many have Families, Mortgages and 
Bills that impair their ability to make advancements in or switch 
their careers.  As Mainers we want as many opportunities for 
our fellow citizens to succeed as possible. 
        When I was an apprentice, I worked under a Journey 
person who made sure I was learning the trade on the jobsite.  I 
also went to school every other Saturday for 8 months of the 
year for 10 hours a day.  The classroom hours were extremely 
important, however the majority of my education happened in 
the field, my other classroom.   
     This bill will work to empower individuals who typically face 
barriers to completing their apprenticeships because of the cost 
of childcare, travel, cost of licensure, etc - especially single 
parents, women and lower-income individuals without the 
flexibility and resources to navigate the system.  I was fortunate 
to have few responsibilities when I entered the Ironworkers 
Apprenticeship Program, this is not the case for many Mainers.  
The more we can do support our fellow Mainers career paths 
the more poised Maine will be to compete to retain the many 
workers so greatly needed here. 
      The Labor shortage faced today in Maine is proof we need 
better support programs for those who intend to enter the 
Trades.  We shouldn’t complain about the lack of skilled labor 
in Maine, then not give the same support to our apprentices 
enjoyed by more socially accepted career paths through 4 year 
college degrees or beyond.  This is why I encourage the 
committee to vote ought to pass on this piece of legislation.  
 
 
 
Grant Provost
Brunswick
LD 1394
LD 1394: An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive Skills Scholarship 
Program
Good Morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee.  My name is Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent for 
Ironworkers Local 7 and a member of the AFL- CIO Executive Board.  I come before 
you in support of LD 1394: An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive Skills 
Scholarship Program.
      I have been a Union Ironworker for 24 years and was fortunate enough to go into 
the trades directly after high school.  My family and I have benefitted from my Union 
Membership and my 4-year Registered Apprenticeship Program immensely.  I now sit
as an elected official of my Union, Ironworkers Local 7.  I see the hardships and 
obstacles Mainer’s face when they are entering into a Registered Apprenticeship 
Program later on in life.  Many have Families, Mortgages and Bills that impair their 
ability to make advancements in or switch their careers.  As Mainers we want as 
many opportunities for our fellow citizens to succeed as possible.
        When I was an apprentice, I worked under a Journey person who made sure I 
was learning the trade on the jobsite.  I also went to school every other Saturday for 8 
months of the year for 10 hours a day.  The classroom hours were extremely 
important, however the majority of my education happened in the field, my other 
classroom.  
     This bill will work to empower individuals who typically face barriers to 
completing their apprenticeships because of the cost of childcare, travel, cost of 
licensure, etc - especially single parents, women and lower-income individuals 
without the flexibility and resources to navigate the system.  I was fortunate to have 
few responsibilities when I entered the Ironworkers Apprenticeship Program, this is 
not the case for many Mainers.  The more we can do support our fellow Mainers 
career paths the more poised Maine will be to compete to retain the many workers so 
greatly needed here.
      The Labor shortage faced today in Maine is proof we need better support 
programs for those who intend to enter the Trades.  We shouldn’t complain about the 
lack of skilled labor in Maine, then not give the same support to our apprentices 
enjoyed by more socially accepted career paths through 4 year college degrees or 
beyond.  This is why I encourage the committee to vote ought to pass on this piece of 
legislation. 
