MAINE BUSINESS 
Testimony of ]oby Thoyalil, Maine Business Immigration Coalition 
In Support of LD I394, An Act to Expand and Strengthen the 
Competitive Skills Scholarship Program 
April I9, 2023 
Good morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the joint standing 
committee on Labor and Housing. My name is joby Thoyalil and I am the director of the Maine 
Business Immigration Coalition (l"IeBlC). MeBlC is Maine’ s only resource dedicated to providing 
information, education and advocacy on immigration and related issues from the business and 
economic perspective, and I am testifying in support of LD I394. 
As you well know, Maine, like so many parts of the country, is experiencing a short- and 
long-term workforce shortage. In the past few months, since I've been in this role, I've spoken 
to Maine employers in industries ranging from health care, scientiﬁc research, and technology to 
construction, agriculture, and law enforcement, and the one consistent message I hear is that 
they all need more workers. In 202l, MeBlC helped organize nearly I00 Maine businesses, 
chambers of commerce, trade associations, and higher education institutions to sign onto the 
Maine Compact on lmmigration' urging state leaders to “adopt policies and practices to help 
Maine become a destination of choice for immigrants to the U.S. and that provide an 
environment where immigrants can reach their full potential in our state." The Competitive 
Skills Scholarship Program (CSSP) is a tested strategy that helps workers reach their full 
potential while also helping employers hire workers with the skills they're seeking. 
We fully support expanding CSSP in the ways that are envisioned in this bill. I want to highlight 
the provision that would remove barriers to CSSP enrollment by covering the cost of credential 
evaluation and educational transcripts. Many immigrants have applicable prior skills and 
experience that could help meet Maine's current labor market needs, but they face the barrier 
of needing their foreign credentials evaluated. For example, to apply for a job that requires a 
master's degree, immigrants often need to have their foreign educational credentials translated 
' 
https://www.mecompact.org/ 
jfhoyo |iI@cimerico nbicbiz, wwvmmoine-bic.org
if not in English, and then evaluated by a professional service to establish that their education is 
the equivalent of a U.S. master's degree. This can cost hundreds of dollars and these costs 
currently prevent some workers from using existing skills to increase their wages, support their 
families and contribute fully to the Maine economy. 
Although many immigrants arrive with prior skills, for some, those skills don’t transfer to the 
needs of the Maine labor market, and so I want to also highlight our support for expanding 
CSSP to participants in apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs. Apprenticeships area 
proven career pathway where employers take an active role in developing their future 
workforce and workers value the practical, hands-on experience they can get from these 
programs. Pre-apprenticeship programs are designed to prepare individuals to enter and 
succeed in an apprenticeship program. We especially see the potential for expanding CSSP to 
pre-apprenticeship programs because individuals can participate in such programs prior to 
receiving federal work authorization. As I know this committee is well aware, certain 
immigrants, including people seeking asylum, must wait many months to a year to receive work 
authorization from the federal government. Asylum seekers could spend that time taking steps 
to get ready for work, including participating in pre-apprenticeship programs. However, without 
any ability to earn income, these individuals face barriers to participation that CSSP could help 
overcome. 
I will conclude by urging you to support LD I394. Our ongoing labor shortage means that every 
new working-age resident who moves to Maine, whether from across the country or around 
the globe, is someone Maine needs to join our workforce in a way that maximizes their 
potential and contributes to our economy. CSSP is well designed to help make that happen and 
LD I394 will significantly improve upon that design. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
2 
jlhoyc1li|@c1 rnericci nbicbiz, www.nnoinebi<:.org
