126 Sewall Street 
D I ' ~ Kelli Musick 
Augusta, ME 04330 6822 E Policy Advocate 
TTY/VOiC €2 (Z07) 626-7058 q (757) 634-7896 
FBXZ (207)621-8148 . _ ke||i@mejp_Qrg 
www.maineequaljusticeorg People PO|lCy sOlLltlOI ’\S 
Testimony of Kelli Musick, Maine Equal Justice 
In support of LD 1394, An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive Skills 
Scholarship Program 
April 19, 2023 
Good morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kelli Musick, and I am a policy advocate 
at Maine Equal Justice, a nonproﬁt legal aid and economicjustice organization working to increase 
economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. l am testifying today in vigorous 
support of LD 1394. 
As the only child of working class parents, their advice to me was simple but steadfast: a good 
education will lead to a goodjob, and you’ll be able to live a good life. Across economic classes, 
cultures, ethnicities, and geographical regions, that sentiment has been shared by countless parents, 
including, l imagine, some of you. Fundamentally, this bill is the practical manifestation ofthat 
belief. An investment in education is an investment in our communities. As we have heard today, 
LD 1394 expands the services covered by the Competitive Skills Scholarship Program to include 
those essential for participant ’s success and provides a critical funding increase to support the 
necessary inﬂux of folks who can be supported by this program. 
It”s no secret that we have a workforce issue here in Maine. We are the oldest state in the nation.‘ 
The youngest Baby Boomers will turn 65 before the end of this decade, meaning tens of thousands 
of jobs will need workers with the knowledge, skills, and training to ﬁll those openings? The truth 
is, we already have the folks here who can step up to the plate and gain the skills necessary to 
perfonn thosejobs, they just need the consistent, comprehensive support this bill would ensure the 
CSSP could provide. 
This bill will also provide the needed support for workers who have a passion and skill set that have 
not yet been developed to their full potential. For example, as Maine looks toward our energy 
future, we can all agree that the development of jobs in the green energy sector is to the beneﬁt of 
workers, businesses, and our environment. This bill allows for workers to get the training needed to 
1 
https://worldpopulationreview.com/state-rankings/oldest-states 
2 
https://www.mai_ne.gov/labor/cwri/publica ﬂons/illF/EnlQ@ymentOutlo0k2030.pdf
l
make that transition or start a career in the green economy without jeopardizing their current 
financial reality. 
Furthermore, the increased support services offered by this bill make it possible for folks who have 
been out of the workforce due to illnesses, including addiction, or incarceration to rejoin more 
easily. For example, a nurse or LPN may already have the qualiﬁcations necessary to continue in 
her career, but time-based certifications may have lapsed. This bill would allow her to receive the 
ﬁnancial support to retake the nursing boards, if necessary, get recertified, and rejoin her chosen 
profession, one that badly needs more workers here in Maine. 
The evidence is clear that the CSSP makes a dramatic difference in pe0ple’s lives. On average, 
folks who complete the CSSP see their wages double, and in the most recent year for which data is 
available, wages increased by 75%. Moreover, the link between increased education and the 
reduction of an individual ’s future reliance on unemployment beneﬁts is both documented by data 
and simply common sensexl This means that the more people who have the opportunity to 
participate in the CSSP, the less burden there is on the unemployment insurance trust fund in years 
to come. 
People wantjobs, not unemployment benefits — this is a phrase I hear almost every day while 
working with folks navigating the unemployment system. I hear this from people living in both 
rural and urban areas, from younger and older workers, from immigrants and native Mainers — all 
people simply trying to make a better life for themselves and their families. There is a profound 
pride in working and providing for your family that is shared by New Mainers and folks who have 
been here for generations. Families are stronger when children know their parents are in stable jobs 
that provide reliable income. Research confirms that children are more likely to go on to college if 
their parents have a degree.4 That ﬁnancial security allows families to put down roots, regularly 
participate in the local economy, and invest in their children ’s future. This bill is more thanjust 
good for the economy. The improvements this bill makes to the Competitive Skills Scholarship 
Program creates the pathway for hundreds of Mainers every year to make their dreams a reality. We 
have the opportunity to make a real difference in the lives of folks who are eager and willing to 
work. 
Thank you for the opportunity to express our support for this bill and your consideration ofits 
importance. l hope you further consider the testimony ofthe passionatpe students who shared their 
experience with this program via their testimony. 
l respectfully urge you to vote in favor of LD 1394. 
3 
https://www.bls.gov/emp./chart-unemployment-eamings-education.htm 
4 
https://nces.ed.gov/whatsnew',/pres_LreIeases/ l_l2_2022.asp
2
