Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and esteemed Members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
my name is Mohamed Ibrahim, I live Lewiston. I am here to support LD1394. The CSSP can help address 
the Maine workers shortage and help the integration of new Mainers workforce to the skilled jobs 
opening in our state. 
Maine people's Alliance is the largest grassroots organization with over 30 thousand members across 
the state. We believe in a world where everyone gets what they need, contribute what they can and no 
one is left behind. It's proven that 85% of employees from these programs are more likely to stay with 
their employers. 
Apprenticeship fosters diversity and creates economic security and promotes representation in 
traditional occupations for women, people of color and marginalized communities helping them achieve 
higher wages in in-demand skilled trades. 
I mostly organize new Mainers communities, last month the Frontline Climate Formation, a group of 
organizations, held a Job Fair event in Portland where a number of companies in the energy and 
construction fields have joined, offering apprenticeship and pre-apprenticeship programs. Many asylum 
seekers and other new Mainers communities members registered and signed up for these programs. 
Frontline Climate Formation group is also planning to organize a similar event in Lewiston and is 
dedicated to bringing these programs to the people of color, women and marginalized communities at 
where they are. 
Few things I know for sure: this bill will increase funding of these programs and will advance the 
Integration of newcomers by offering them professional English training to reduce language barriers. 
Learning the language on the sites and interacting with real people is the best way to adapt a language. 
Far too long the economy has worked for a few. Marginalized communities including people of color, 
disabled and low income have been left behind in living economically stable livelihoods. If these 
programs get funding it will open pathways for careers advancement. 
For the last decades the state of Maine has received and welcomed waves of newcomers, including 
highly educated and professional young adults who just need programs that help them transition to 
these skilled jobs. 
Finally, these programs have profited a friend of mine who finished two years in electrician training and 
became a homeowner and got a stable life in Maine. Multiplying the opportunities to access higher 
wages jobs will help our youth to stay in the state and reduce poverty in Maine. 
Esteemed committee, I urge you to pass LD1394 to allow youth and young parents and adults access 
higher paying jobs which will meantime reduce the poverty the skilled workers shortage.
