April 14, 2023  
LD 1394 – An Act to Expand and Strengthen the Competitive Skills 
Scholarship Program  
Senator Tipping , Rep. Ro eder , Members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Sally Sutton. I am the Program Coordinator of the 
New Mainers Resource Center at Portland Adult Education, and I am 
pleased to be speaking in support of LD 139 4 – An Act to Expand and 
Strengthen the Competitive Skills Scholarship Program  
In my role as Program Coordinato r, I have an opportunity on a daily basis 
to work with foreign -trained professionals who are seeking to re- start their lives here in 
Maine, and each year I advise several hundred people about the steps they need to take 
to move forward with their  careers.   
For many new Mainers  it will be necessary for them to return  to school, receive some 
training, or take  on the costs associated with  certification  or licensing  in their  profession 
if they are going to be able to put any of their  training or experience to work at a level 
that is comparable to their  previous professional level.  The Competitive Skills 
Scholarship Program is a tremendous resource that is accessible to people who may not be eligible for other programs  that will cover the same  range or level of expenses.  
The most important measure  of this proposed  legislation is the increase in money  that 
will go  into t he CSSP Fund.  In previous years  when CSSP funds ran out, or were only 
available in certain regions of the  state, many pe ople who wo uld have otherwise been 
eligible to take  advantage of the program had no where else to turn for support . If Maine 
is serious about helping employers to fill high wage/high demand jobs  it needs to invest 
in strategies to help prepare people for those jobs . Expanding the resources available 
throug h the CSSP Fund is an effective approach that creates a pathway for people into 
those jobs .   
I would also like to speak in  support of the provision of the bill that includes 
preapprenticeship s.  Adu lt education  programs  all across the state  are in the business of 
providing  these type s of programs . Having additional resources available through CSSP 
either for the development of the  programs or to help cover the costs of CSSP eligible 
individuals to participate in these programs , would greatly enhance the range of 
programs that could be offered , and not limit their offering to occasional  dedicated 
grant revenue. CSSP funds for pre apprentic eship programs cou ld also be used to meet 
spec ific employer or regional needs.    

Finally,  I would like to speak in support of  the specific inclusion  of covering the costs of 
licensing  or certificatio n necessary  to practice  in an occupation for which  an individual is 
qualified.  These expenses can run to hundreds and  thousands of dollars for some 
professions and could be cost  prohibitive for someone who meets the income eligibility  
requirements for CSSP .  By removing this financial barrier and covering these  costs 
through CSSP,  someone who would otherwise be qualified  to work  in a high wage/high 
demand job would now be able to do so.  
Thank  you for your  consideration of my comment s.  The CSSP prog ram is a tremendous 
resource fo r the people and employers of Maine.  I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 
1394.  
 
Sally Sutton  
Program Coordinator  
New Mainers Resource Center  
Portland Adult Education 
suttos@portlandschools.org  
 
  
 
 
