Zamzam  Elmoge 
Lewiston 
LD 1394
My name is Zamzam Elmoge, and I am writing to testify in support of this bill. I am 
currently studying at Emerson College in Boston, Massachusetts, but have always 
been passionate about change-making, leadership, and contributing to bringing 
resources and opportunities for my community. My journey for peace-making began 
in the summer of 2017, when I was accepted into Camp Seeds of Peace, which 
transformed me as an individual. It ignited and fueled my passion for making a 
difference and working towards doing good for the world. Through my work, I have 
gained a deep understanding of the challenges facing the youth in my community. I 
am currently a member of the Gateway 2023 Youth Coalition. I also had the privilege 
of being a member in 2020 when the coalition first started as the COVID-19 Youth 
Coalition, where we worked on providing resources for the community during the 
pandemic.
Gateway is a non-profit organization created to support the well-being of immigrants 
and refugees in the Greater Portland and Lewiston areas in Maine. GCSM offers 
support while creating opportunities for connection between immigrant, refugee, and 
asylee community members and their neighbors. Through our work with Gateway, we
have seen how many of our community members face barriers when trying to access 
good jobs in high-need areas. These barriers can include language barriers, cultural 
differences, and other obstacles that can make it difficult to secure meaningful 
employment. As an immigrant and refugee myself, I have seen firsthand the 
challenges that our communities face.
The resources provided through programs like CSSP can help to remove some of 
these barriers and put our community members on a pathway to success. Cash 
assistance for childcare, transportation, books, supplies, equipment, and remedial and 
prerequisite training are critical for overcoming some of the challenges that folks face.
Expanding the funding for this program, as proposed in Bill LD 1394, would enable 
us to better serve our clients and help them secure good jobs in high-need areas. This 
is especially important for populations like the Frontline Climate Coalition that are 
working towards diversifying Maine's clean energy workforce while putting folks on 
pathways to careers in high-quality trades.
In conclusion, I urge you to support Bill LD 1394. Thank you for your time, and 
please do not hesitate to reach out if you have any questions or need further 
information.
Sincerely,
Zamzam Elmoge
