Testimony from:
Mikki Rice - Freeman Twp.
LD 556
In Support
Senator Ben Chipman, Representative Lynne Williiams, and the Joint Standing
Committee on Transportation,
I am testifying today in support of LD 556: An Act Concerning Bureau of Motor Vehicles Fees,
Fines, and Driver’s License Reinstatements. As you know this bill would set up a system for
someone to show that they are under extenuating circumstances financially and cannot afford to
pay the fine, fee, or reinstatement fee and therefore will not have to pay it. Charging fees, fines,
and reinstatement fees already unfairly targets those who are low income and cannot pay by
further restrictions on their driving privileges.
If someone cannot pay a fee, fine, or reinstatement fee then we should be willing to help that
person instead of causing further harm like the loss of a job or the inability to get a job because
they cannot drive.
Much of our state is rural and requires someone to drive to get to a job or find a ride in places
where there is no option of public transportation.
When I was 19 my license privileges were suspended (before I ever attained a license) for an
unpaid fine and 2 stacked reinstatement fees. It took me 2 years to be able to afford the fine and
the reinstatement fees so that I could apply to even get a license. I had a 1 year old child at
home by the time I was able to get my license and it caused me to not be able to work to come
up with the money for the fees. Luckily rent and other living expenses weren’t as expensive as
they are now and my husband (working to support the three of  us) finally was able to pay it off.
During the time that I didn’t have a license I received Food Stamps, Mainecare, and (for part of
that time) TANF. The State spent a lot more money because I couldn’t find a decent job living
where I was living without having a driver’s license than they would have if they just let me
prove I couldn’t pay and forgave the fines and fees.
I ask you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 556 and I thank you for your time.
Mikki Rice
Freeman Township
