Ragan Toppan
Orono
LD 556
Good afternoon!
My name is Ragan Toppan and I’m a junior at the University of Maine. I have seen firsthand 
how being poor in Maine can get someone trapped in a cycle of tickets and late fees. For 
about a year, I couldn’t afford to get any work done on my car, even an oil change. This 
meant that my inspection was long overdue. Between rent, my car payment, and tuition, there
was only enough money leftover for gas and for me to eat. The university also changed its 
policy this year, requiring students to pay more money off of their tuition just to register for 
classes for the next semester. 
When I received a fine for my inspection being 9 months overdue, I couldn’t pay it. I was now 
supposed to replace my brakes, back tires, and front bumper and pay a ticket, so the ticket 
went unpaid. Earlier this summer I was pulled over and the officer informed me that I had a 
suspended license. I was shocked to hear this, as I didn’t know what I could have done to 
have my license suspended. Beyond this, I was never informed that my license was 
suspended in the first place. He issued a ticket for driving with a suspended license and sent 
me home to deal with the DMV and the town office. In order to get my license back, I had to 
pay the original ticket and then pay a $50 reinstatement fee. At this point, my inspection and 
car work were never going to be done. This is how the cycle continues. Being poor prevents 
people from being able to afford regular car repairs, or pay for their tickets. This then causes 
late fees, more tickets, and a suspended license, which ends up costing you too. Thankfully, I
have family that looks out for me and helped me out in fixing up my car. For the first time 
since I got my license, I am driving completely legally and owe no money, but only because I 
got financial help. There has to be some way that we can hold people accountable and 
handle vehicular issues without taking food out of their mouths and a month's worth of pay. 
Thank you for your time. 

