  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso  on beh alf of the Maine Coal ition to End Do mestic Violence  
In SUPPORT of LD 564: "An Act To  Improve Access to Civil Legal Services "  
Tuesday , March 21, 2023 
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , I am writing o n behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)1 to offer  support for increased funding for Maine’s civil legal aid 
providers .   
 
Access to legal representation reduces the probability of future domestic abuse and 
violence.  We have long known that this access enhances the long -term safety of survivors 
and of their children . As noted in the 2016 report, “Economic Impact of Civil Legal Services in 
Maine,” more than 80% of the recipients of civil legal aid in Maine have an annual household 
income of less than $25,000; 2/3 of the se recipients are women; and more t han 30% are aged 
65 and older.2 These are Maine’s most vulnerable communities – communities in which 
survivors exist in significant numbers.  Many survivors rely on our court systems to attend to 
some aspect of their safety and stability. And the reality i s that the vast majority of survivors 
are navigat ing our court systems without representation and often without having had an 
opportunity to even consult with an attorney. This leads to less successful outcomes and 
compromises safety efforts.  
 
Maine’s Eld er Justice Coordinating Partnership released a comprehensive Elder 
Justice Roadmap3 with many suggestions about how to better support seniors in Maine who 
experience elder abuse. It is incumbent upon Maine’s legislators to provide sufficient 
funding to support implement ation of these important  recommendations and allow for  a 
cross -discip linary approach to address the generational trauma that we see across Maine . 
Legal Services for the Elderly has been a leader in this effort , and greater support for their 
work will be essential to continued progress towards the goals outlined in the Roadm ap.   
 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to approximately  14,000 victims of 
domestic violence in Maine last year . 
2 Todd Gabe, Ph .D., Economic Impact of Civil Legal Aid Services in Maine  (2016).  
3 “The Maine Elder Justice Roadmap, An Initiative of the Maine Elder Justice Coordinating Partnership,” 
(December 2021), available at: https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline -
files/EJCP_Roadmap.pdf .  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
The need for the services of the Immigrant Legal Advocacy Project (ILAP) has 
continued to grow as Maine has seen sustained increases in immigrants, refugees, and 
asylum seekers across the state. Our New Mainer population  also  includes a significant 
number of trauma survivors who continue to experience abuse at the hands of a family 
member.  Securing the immigration relief they are eligible for in a timely manner is critical to 
supporting the safety and security of these survivo rs. And, as in all legal matters, s urvivors 
navigating immigration courts have greatest success when represented by an attorney. ILAP 
is the sole  resource  for that  in Maine and is unfortunately in the position of turning away so 
many who qualify for servic es and who could benefit from their help due solely to 
insufficient state funding.  
 
MCEDV also hopes that Maine Legislators will  make significant progress this session 
towards  address ing the reality  that our family courts are not able to  provide timely and 
effective responses to families in crisis. For survivors contemplating separation from the 
person who has been abusing them, a paramount concern is always what will ultimately 
happen with the ir children. When one parent uses abuse and v iolence against the other, 
“leaving” is often little more than a change in residence, as the children will remain a life -
long tie. Survivors should be able to see our family courts as a resource to help them achieve 
safety and stability. For too many survi vors in Maine, that is not the reality of their 
experience.  Challenges faced by survivors as they navigate the family  court include:   
 
• Limited  access to affordable legal representation.  
• High caseloads  for judges and magistrates  lead to limited availability of th e courts 
to timely hear contested  issues.  
• There is insufficient  time and resources to ensure adequate training of court 
personnel on the myriad of complex issues the courts are confronted with.  
• Guardians ad litem  to support families in the family court process are out of reach 
for those  without significant financial means. GALs  are only available in two 
circumstances: when a family can afford to pay either an hourly rate or a set fee – 
often thousands of dollars; or where a GAL  is willing to provide their services pro 
bono.  
 
These challenge are particularly acute for survivors in rural Maine, where resources  
are even more scarce. We urge you  to use your discretion  as policy makers and appropriators 
to make headway on these lon gstanding challenges. Thank you for the opportunity to 
participate in this important conversation.  
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso ,  
Public Policy Director  
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334, Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
