 
 
P.O. Box 2490  
Augusta, ME 04338  
 
Telephone: 1 -800-965-7476 
Fax: 1 -888-214-5233  
Website: www.mainecahc.org  
Email: consumerhealth@mainecahc.org   
 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable health care 
for all Mainers.  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 564, An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Service  
Ann Woloson, Executive Director, Consumers for Affordable Health Care  
March 21, 2023  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary.  
I am Ann Woloson, E xecutive Director, at Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC), a nonpartisan, 
nonprofit organization that advocates for Maine people to be heard, respected, and well -served in a health 
system that pro vides coverage, access and quality, affordable care to all.  
CAHC is designated by Maine’s Attorney General as Maine’s Consumer Assistance Program (CAP). The CAP 
program provides toll- free and in -person access to certified application counselors and traine d individuals who 
help Mainers understand their health coverage options and apply and enroll in private health insurance. The 
program also provides assistance to Mainers in appealing inappropriate health insurance denials and connects people to safety net programs , including sliding scale clinics , hospital free care and prescription drug 
assistance programs , when necessary, in an effort to help meet health care needs. CAHC also serves as the 
Ombudsman Program for Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and hel ps people with applying for and 
navigating the enrollment process for MaineCare coverage. It is from our experience assisting Mainers in navigating health care systems and coverage programs that we offer the following comments in support of  LD 
564, An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services.  
Last year, Maine’s Consumer Assistance Program  (CAP) fielded over 5,800 calls with Mainers who needed 
assistance navigating Maine’s health insurance and coverage options.  People who call the CAP often are low 
wage workers, some who are self -employed , or are not provided health coverage through their employment . 
We also hear from Mainers who may be offered coverage but who  are unable to afford the coverage they 
need because it is too expensive. Often, w e hear of other issues Mainers are  facing, trying to make ends meet .  
We have heard from people who need to forgo the coverage , health care or medicine  they need in order to 
meet  other  basic needs. People have share d with us the difficulties they face  trying to  keep a roof over their 
heads  or food on the table, while at the same time  having to deal with debt collectors  or other unfair 
collections practices.   While we do our be st to assist Mainers in need, our ability navigate these and other 
complicated  issues people might be facing while in crisis,  is limited.   
Demand for the services we provided has increased  – as does the need for assistance beyond the scope of  
what we help  with.   We often refer people to and depend on legal  aid services entities to help  Mainers who 
need assistance beyond what we are able  to provide.  For example, we refer older Mainers  in need of help 
understanding or dealing with a denial of coverage under  Medicare or who are dealing with  some kind of 
financial abuse to Legal Services to the E lderly .  We will connect people with limited income who are in 
jeopardy of being evicted or who are being denied other services they are eligible for to Pine Tree Legal or 
  
Maine Equal Justice. These groups have the  legal aid  expertise that Mainers, especially Mainers  living in 
poverty or near poverty need but may otherwise go without. Maine’s civ il legal aid groups  truly help Mainers 
during times of crisis –  Mainers who might otherwise lose their home, go hungry, or unnecessarily experience 
some other form of harm.    
More resources for civil legal aid would help our state to address the very real and growing needs of Mainers 
with low income .  LD 564  would help to increase the capacity of Maine’s civil legal aid organizations and help 
ensure more Mainers who need legal help , especially during times of crisis,  have access to the justice needed 
to avoid further hardship and improve their lives.     
Thank you.  
