DlSABlLlTY 
RIGHTS 
MAINEH March 21, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary 
State House, Room 438 
Re: L.D. 564, An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Atlee Reilly and I serve as the Legal Director of Disability Rights Maine 
(DRM), Maine's Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities. DRM’s 
mission is to advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding 
opportunities for people with disabilities in Maine. In 2022, DRM provided no cost legal 
services to Mainers with disabilities in all sixteen of Maine's counties. I am here today to 
testify in support of LD 564, An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services, which 
would build upon previous efforts toward ensuring Maine makes a sustained and 
adequate investment in civil legal aid. 
DRM has received funding through the Maine Civil Legal Services Fund to support the 
provision of legal services to people with disabilities for many years, and received 3% of 
the allocation in 2022. To date, this funding has not been sufficient to fully support a 
staff attorney position. As a result, DRM uses the MCLSF allocation to supplement our 
existing funding to provide representation in cases where the client has a disability, has 
an income below or around the federal poverty level, and has experienced disability- 
based discrimination or a violation of their rights. 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 - 1.800.452.1948 - Fax: 207.621.1419 - drme.org 
MAlNE'S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
Committee on Judiciary 
March 21, 2023 
Page2 
Almost 16% of people in Maine are people with disabilities, which is above the national 
average of 12.6%. And unfortunately, disability and poverty remain closely linked. 
Between 2015-2019, 56% of working-age Mainers with a disability lived in or near 
poverty, which was more than twice the rate for Mainers without a disability. Given the 
significant need for no-cost civil legal services within the disability community, l\/ICLSF 
funding is essential to maintaining and expanding DRM's capacity to provide legal 
representation to Mainers with disabilities. 
The Maine Civil Legal Services Fund Commission recently provided a report to this 
Committee which contains detailed information about DRM's activities in 2022.1 So I will 
just take this opportunity to highlight some information from the unmet needs section 
of that report. We have continued to see a growing demand for education related legal 
advocacy. DRM prioritizes cases where students are excluded from school for all or part 
of their school day and, at this time, there is such significant demand for representation 
in those situations that they comprise the vast majority of our education docket. We 
have also seen a significant increase in the number of calls related to housing and an 
increasing number of Mainers with disabilities at risk of losing their housing. 
We have tried to meet this demand within existing resources, but need to hire 
additional attorneys to sustain and expand efforts in these areas. LD 564 would help 
DRM expand capacity to work toward meeting these unmet needs and we ask you to 
vote ought to pass on this important initiative. 
Respectfully, 
Atlee Reilly 
Legal Director 
Disability Rights Maine 
1 Maine Civil Legal Services Fund Commission, Report to the Joint Standing Committee on the 
Judiciary, 1315‘ Legislature, First Regular Session, (February 8, 2023). Avoiiable at: 
https:[/legislature.maine.gov/doc,/9722
