State of Maine judicial Branch 
1.-j ._;;L2*' Administrative Office of the Courts — Office of Court Operations 
1 Court Street, Suite 301, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Barbara A. Cardone barbara.cardone@courts.maine.gov 
Director of Legal Affairs 207-213-2803 
And Public Relations 
March 21, 2022 
Judicial Branch testimony in favor of LD 564: 
An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Barbara Cardone and I represent the Judicial Branch. I would like to 
provide additional information in support of LD 564. 
As you heard earlier today, Justice Mead, and all the judges and justices of the Judicial 
Branch, strongly support access to justice. Without access to a lawyer, there is very limited 
access to justice. Anyone who has seen a proceeding where a non-lawyer is trying to navigate the 
Rules of Evidence and the Rules of Civil Procedure in a courtroom can see that this is an almost 
impossible task. Add to that the statutes and case law that govems a particular situation, and it is 
hard to see how someone who is not ‘schooled in the law can protect his or her rights. 
The funding provided by this bill will enable several legal services assistance agencies to 
support additional initiatives and increase the number of Maine people who have access to an 
attorney. You will hear from representatives of these agencies, and they will describe actual 
cases and situations in which the help of an attorney won the client a better outcome in court that 
pro se representation would have done. 
The need in the community is even greater amid the lingering effects of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Investing in civil legal aid right now will enable the providers of legal services to 
expand their current capacity to respond to the growing needs of Maine citizens. Having an 
attorney representing a party creates efficiencies in how a court can handle a case and allows for 
the faster resolution of cases. 
Others who will testify today will speak more eloquently about speciﬁc people and cases 
that have beneﬁtted from the provision of civil legal aid. 
Thank you for your time.
