160 Capitol Street, P.O. Box 438, Augusta, Maine 04332-0438 
(207) 623-2661 • FAX (207) 621-0118 
mtla@mtla.org 
President 
Susan Faunce*  
 
President-Elect 
Jason M. Jabar 
 
Treasurer 
Lisa A. Lunn 
 
Secretary 
Walter McKee 
 
Past President 
Lauri Boxer-Macomber++ 
 
Board of Governors 
Taylor Asen 
Michael Bigos**++ 
Alexis Garmey Chardon 
Thomas L. Douglas 
Anthony K. Ferguson 
Christian Foster 
Benjamin R. Gideon 
Scott Hess 
Daniel G. Kagan*++ 
Timothy M. Kenlan 
Stephen W. Koerting 
David Kreisler 
Christopher R. Largay*++ 
Christian Lewis++  
Scott J. Lynch 
Christiana E. Mann 
Jodi L. Nofsinger++ 
James E. O’Connell III 
Sebastian Okun 
Verne E. Paradie 
Richard R. Regan 
Ellsworth T. Rundlett, III ++ 
Randall E. Smith++ 
Daniel J. Stevens++ 
Heather Seasonwein 
Michael J. Welch++ 
Laura White 
 
 
*AAJ Governor 
**AAJ State Delegate 
++Past President 
 
Executive Director 
Steven Prince 
 Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matthew Moonen  
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: Testimony from Dov Sacks on behalf of the Maine Trial Lawyers Association on   LD 
564 --   An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services  
Good morning Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the 
Judiciary Committee.  
My name is Dov Sacks, and I live in Portland. I am a partner at the law firm of Berman & 
Simmons based in Lewiston, with offices in Portland, Bangor and Biddef ord. I am here as a 
member of and on behalf of the Maine Trial Lawyers Associati on (MTLA). The MTLA has as 
our mission the promotion and preservation of the civil justice system.  
It is MTLA’s unswerving commitment to the civil justice syst em that is driving our support of 
LD 564, An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services, which would provide the 
desperately needed increase in funding for civil legal aid in Maine.  
Unlike the criminal justice system, which deals with crimes and punishments, the civil justice 
system is the venue for peaceful resolution of all non -criminal disputes that arise in civil 
society. In these polarized times, never has a robust and trust ed civil justice system for 
peaceful dispute resolution been more important than now. However, unli ke the criminal 
justice system which provides all defendants with court -appointed and state -funded 
representation, the civil justice system does no such thing. As a result, two banks facing off in 
a multibillion -dollar dispute have no problem paying their $1000/hour attorney’s fee f or 
representation. All business owners, wealthy individuals, and folks of more moderate means 
pay hourly rates to attorneys in order to utilize the civil justi ce system that protects their 
businesses and assets. For those who can engage it proactively in this manner, the American 
civil justice system is second to none.  
However, the disturbing underbelly of the civil justice system i s the fact that the nearly one -
third of Mainers living below 200% of the poverty line are usuall y left completely on the 
outside looking in when it comes to asserting, exercising or availi ng themselves of their 
supposed rights under our civil legal system. According to the Nat ional Justice Index, states 
require 10 legal aid attorneys per 10,000 people living below 200% of the poverty line in order 
to meet the most basic demand for civil legal aid. In stark contr ast, Maine has fewer than 2 
attorneys per 10,000 people living under 200% of the poverty line.   Over the next two years, 
LD 564 would thankfully bring Maine to about 3.6 attorneys per 10,000 peop le and would re -
calibrate Maine on a path leading in the right direction.  
For 8 years in Philadelphia before moving to Maine in 2014, I worked a s a legal aid lawyer at 
Community Legal Services in Philadelphia, one of the nation’s pr emier civil legal aid 
providers. As a lawyer there, I worked in the Family Advocacy U nit working to preserve 
family units amid the onslaught of challenges facing urban Ame rica. I also worked in the 
Consumer Unit representing low -income client facing foreclosure or who had been victimized 
by intense debt collection harassment.   Unfortunately, I have learned in my 9 years living in 
Maine since then, that the civil legal challenges facing the m ost economically vulnerable among us in Maine 
are much the same as elsewhere. If our elected representati ves fail to pass this vital bill, LD 564, these are the 
folks who will be left out in the cold without civil representati on and therefore without the ability to exercise 
their theoretical legal civil rights:  
• The single mother of three who is being wrongfully evicted und er Maine law in order to make way 
for a new development project.  Maine landlords are represented in more than 80% of eviction 
cases, while tenants are represented less than 20% of the time . Tenants with an attorney are much 
more likely to avoid an eviction, which is the nation’s leading cause of homelessness ;  
• The teenage victim of domestic violence. Civil legal aid is par t of a coordinated community 
response to end domestic and sexual violence. Although many people se eking protection orders are 
victims of criminal acts, civil legal remedies like a prote ction order can be enforced by law 
enforcement, are well -known to reduce rates of domestic violence and are often the only recou rse 
available to victims;  
• The 90 -year -old victim of elder abuse and exploitation in need of the protections theoretically 
provided by Maine law;  
• The military veteran facing obstacles to lawful benefits a nd healthcare access —benefits earned by 
years of putting one’s life on the line in the defense of this state and country;  
• The parent whose disabled child is not getting the educational servi ces theoretically required to be 
provided by Maine law.  
In short, passing LD 564 and increasing funding to legal aid will, f or tens of thousands of upstanding Mainers, 
transform their theoretical legal rights into actual legal rig hts that will protect them and their families in actual 
difficult situations. For these individuals, passing LD 564 may well  be life and death. More broadly, by 
passing LD 564, you will send the message loud and clear throughout Ma ine and beyond, that in Maine —no 
matter how rich or poor —our lawful protections and legal rights are REAL, not merely theoretical.  
Beyond the individual Mainers who will be able to access legal  representation if you pass LD 564, the new 
law will also have more systemic benefits.   For example, LD 564 will help to streamline our court system a nd 
cut down on court costs, by moving cases that must be in court more quickly and by resolving other matters 
outside of court or other formal proceedings. LD 564 will also help e nsure that all Mainers, regardless of 
income, have access to accurate, current and valuable information about their civil legal rights and 
remedies.   Maine’s civil legal aid providers produce easy -to -access information about people’s rights and 
responsibilities under Maine law. These materials are free and available to anyone, regardless of income. 
Examples include Legal Services for the Elderly’s Elder Rig hts Handbook and Pine Tree Legal Assistance’s 
Rights of Tenants guides. These publications are of the highest c aliber and constitute an invaluable asset to 
any Mainers in difficult situations in which they quickly need to know their legal rig hts and protections.  
In short, LD 546 will take a critical step in moving Maine in the right direction toward a robust civil justice 
system which any Mainer —regardless of means —can access and avail themselves of the legal protections our 
state affords them. I urge you to do all you can to ensure that LD 564 becomes law  as soon as possible.  
Thank you for your attention.  
