1March 21, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:
My name is Elizabeth Ward Saxl and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine 
Coalition Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine’s 
sexual violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine’s Children’s Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers in 
your communities. 
MECASA is here today in support LD 564, “An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services.” Many 
thanks to Senator Carney for introducing this bill. Our members sexual assault support centers 
strongly urge you to make this funding ongoing.
Each year, 14,000 Mainers will experience sexual violence.1 Yet of those 14,000 Mainers, fewer 
than five percent will make a report to law enforcement. And so, one of the only paths to justice 
and safety for the thousands of remaining survivors is accessing civil legal protections. 
The good news is thanks to the hard work of our friends at Pine Tree Legal Assistance (PTLA), Legal 
Services for the Elderly (LSE), Maine Equal Justice, and you and prior Legislatures, we have some 
of the most comprehensive legal protections in the country for victims/survivors of sexual 
violence. Also in the good news column is that the PTLA attorneys who primarily represent sexual 
violence victims/survivors are extraordinary – they are deeply knowledgeable about the range of 
protections available for victims and their practice is sensitive and trauma-informed.
PTLA’s attorneys support hundreds of sexual assault survivors every year. 
1 Dumont, R. & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public policy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern Maine.

2They support high school and college students in Title IX issues when they have been sexually 
assaulted by another student, allowing them to continue attending classes as well as being able 
to continue with after-school activities such as sports and participate fully in special occasions 
such as prom and graduation by advocating for specific safety plans to help student survivors 
continue to fully access their education.
They support tenants from being evicted for refusing to have sex with their landlords.
They support victims with intellectual disabilities to obtain court-ordered protection resulting in 
their increased safety.  
Without civil legal providers, these survivors would be without representation – they would 
leave school, be evicted, and be subject to continued sexual violence.
The bad news is that many victims are going unrepresented. We need more staff at PTLA to 
support the many areas where their staffing can’t currently reach. For example, our Children’s 
Advocacy Center and sexual assault support center Downeast are working with minors impacted 
by sexual violence without the same civil attorney resources as other parts of the state. As a result, 
these student survivors are struggling to continue to attend school. 
We also need more attorneys at LSE who are uniquely positioned to support elder victims. We 
need more staff at the Immigrant Legal Advocacy Project to support victims who need T and U-
Visas. These needs are not one-time. They are ongoing. 
I would also add that my enthusiasm for these service providers is not limited to my work time. 
My husband Mike and I believe heart and soul in the life changing services these entities provide 
and as a result make the Campaign for Justice, which funds these agencies, our highest charitable 
giving priority – at a rate many times more than what we donate to the Maine Coalition Against 
Sexual Assault, an organization which we also think does great work.
I would urge you to join us in our commitment to provide ongoing funding to these organizations 
and would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.
3About Maine’s Sexual Assault Service Providers 
 
Maine’s sexual violence service providers provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in-person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
school- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
regardless of when they experienced sexual violence, and regardless of what type of sexual 
violence they experienced. Types of sexual violence include, but are not limited to, sexual 
harassment and gender-based bullying, child sexual abuse, elder sexual abuse, stalking, sex 
trafficking, and sexual violence within an intimate partner relationship.    
 
24/7 Confidential 
Maine Sexual Assault Helpline:  1-800-871-7741
 
 
