            
                                                               
Testimony Before the Joint Standing Committees on Judiciary
March 21, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committees on 
Judiciary,
Good afternoon. My name is Janet Smith, and I am the Executive Director of New Ventures Maine. I live in 
the town of Industry and I’m here today to speak in support of LD564, "An Act to Improve Access to Civil 
Legal Services".
The mission of New Ventures Maine is helping Maine people succeed in the changing economy and achieve 
economic security for themselves and their families. We provide training and individual coaching, both 
online and in-person in:
Career planning, access to education and skills training, job search strategies, and job advancement.
Business plan development, start up support and advising, and linkages to ongoing assistance. 
Money management, matched savings, scholarships, and mini-grant programs that build emergency 
savings, support investment in home ownership and repair, car ownership and repair, small 
business development, and postsecondary education.
Through our leadership of CA$H Maine, provide free tax preparation and educate tax filers about 
individuals about programs in their community that can increase their income, reduce debt, and 
build savings.
Occasionally New Ventures Maine’s low-income participants are facing civil legal problems including 
foreclosure, eviction, property disputes, domestic abuse, financial exploitation, disability discrimination in 
housing, education, and employment, and more which interferes with their ability to find employment, 
plan to start a business, and work to improve their household financial security.  Having a place to refer 
these participants to for help them managing the complexities of legal issues and the courts enables them 
to focus on their goals to improve their economic security. 
Maine Civil Aid Providers provide legal help to people facing many of life’s crises and turning points. With 
an investment of $3.9M in the first budget year, and $7.8M in the second budget year, passage of LD 564 
would allow Maine’s civil legal aid providers to take significant steps to meet unmet legal needs in Maine.
New Ventures Maine supports LD 564 which will preserve existing legal aid capacity; increase intake 
capacity and provide free legal help to at least 10,640 more households each year, and address the legal 
needs of at least 20,000 households through impact litigation and administrative advocacy; and increase 
education and outreach efforts to people with legal needs, expand client-facing technology tools, and 
improve self-help to reach and assist even more people in need of legal help. 
Thank you.  I am happy to answer any questions.
