1 
  
 
 TESTIMONY OF LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE 
ELDERLY IN SUPPORT AN ACT TO INCREASE FUNDING FOR CIVIL LEGAL SERVICES (LD 564)  
 
March 21, 2023  
 Senator Carney , Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the 
Judiciary Committee, my name is Jaye Martin , and I am the  Executive 
Director of Legal Services for the Elder ly.   
 I submit this testimony today in  support of  LD 564 , an Act to Increase 
Funding for Civil Legal Services.  
 
Legal Services for the Elderly ( LSE) is a nonprofit corporation that was 
formed in 1974.  LSE’s mission is to provide free legal help to older people in Maine when their basic human needs are at stake.  This includes shelter, 
food, health care, public benefits and safety.      
With forty -eight  years of service to Maine’s older residents , LSE has deep 
insights into  the past and current needs, and unmet needs, for legal help.   I 
can tell you that the current landscape facing older people in Maine is unlike 
anything LSE has seen  in its history.  
 
LSE is currently able to help 3,200 older adults per year .  Half of these cases 
involve emerge ncy situations.  LSE is gettin g on average 125 calls per  
month for help with legal emergenc ies.  This is more than twice the number 
of emergencies that LSE handled in 2019 and the upward trajectory is continuing into 2023.    These cases are urgent and resource intensive.  
 It is important to understand what it means for an older person to face a legal 
emergency.  These are situation s where legal help must be made 
immediately available or an older person is going to suffer physical or 
financial harm.    
 
Picture  Mary, a 75 year old woman living alone in rural Maine.  Her sole 
source of income is Social Security.  She remains fiercely independent 
2 
 despite some health problems.  She is at her kitchen table  with a legal 
document in front of her. She is distraught.   She could be facing:  
 
A lawsuit filed by a credit card company or collection agency;  
 
An eviction notice;  
 
A foreclosure complaint;  or 
 
A notice of reduction in her home care services, or SNAP be nefits, or 
Social Security;  
 
She needs  free legal  help right away.   She was already living on the edge.  
 
Now picture Sue.  Sue decided to rent out a room in her house to her 
grandson to bring in money to help her pay her bills.   The grandson has 
stopped paying rent , taken her credit card , and threatened to lock her in her 
room if she tries to do anything about it.   She is living in constant fear in her 
own home.  She needs  free legal  help right away.  
 
To try to ensure people like Mary and Sue who face legal emergencies get 
help, LSE is turning  away more and more people who have problems that 
are not quite as serious.   In 2022, LSE turned away nearly 500 people who 
would have benefited from our help.   We did that because the stakes are so 
high for people like Mary and Sue .  This means hundreds of people did not 
get help that might have otherwise prevented or minimized future problems.  
It is easy to predict that this approach of withholding help from anyone not 
yet facing an emergency will only serve to fuel  the growth in people who 
face emergency situations.     
 The harm that results when older Mainers  who face legal problems that 
implicate their basic needs don’t get access to free legal help extends well beyond the loss of safety, independence and dignity experienced by 
individual s.  As the oldest state in the nation, failing to provide older people 
with legal help when it is needed adversely impacts all of our local communities and our entire state.  It takes the form of increased health care 
and social services costs and increased burdens placed on caregivers of older 
Mainers  who might have retained their independence if legal help had been 
available.  Increased funding for civil legal aid will help to ensure more 
3 
 older people in Maine ge t the free legal help they need when their basic 
human needs are at stake.   
 
Additional Background About LSE  and The Growing Unmet Need for Help 
 
LSE provides services through a statewide Helpline and Staff At torneys 
located across the state.  About 80% of the older adults  who call LSE for 
help get help exclusively from an employed LSE Helpline Attorney via 
telephone.  Helpline Attorneys may advocate for a client in writing or by 
telephone and/or review or draf t documents but there is no in- person contact.  
Case types handled entirely via telephone include most housing and 
consumer debt cases.  An experienced Helpline Attorney is able to handle 
approximately 1, 200 legal matters per year.  The Helpline also provi des a 
broad range of referrals to the private bar and other legal resources.  LSE maintains a statewide panel of over 200 referral attorneys who have agreed 
to accept pro bono and reduced fee referrals in substantive areas that are in 
great demand by callers to the Helpline, but are not handled by LSE, 
including things like probate, MaineCare planning, real estate, and estate 
planning.  A small subset of cases in areas that are handled by LSE are 
referred by the Helpline on to an LSE Staff Attorney.   Many older people  
desire and would benefit from more extensive help, but the resources are not available to allow for that.  Because Helpline services are much less 
expensive to deliver than the Staff Attorney  services, this overall approach 
stretches LSE’s limi ted resources as far as possible.  
 
Eleven  LSE Staff Attorneys located across the state handle resource 
intensive, litigation matters. This intensive level of litigation services  is 
limited to circumstances where someone  is at immediate risk of harm.  
Litig ation cases are things  like eviction, foreclosure, public benefit appeals 
and elder abuse.  These are very complex  cases,  and a typical Staff Attorney 
can handle only about 100 cases per year.      
LSE is able to improve the situation of 81%  of the clients we serve.  In the 
Helpline this includes stopping creditor deception and harassment, resolving 
housing problems that might lead to homelessness, and ensuring elder s 
obtain all public benefits they are entitled to receive.  In the Staff Attorney work , this includes saving homes from improper foreclosure, stopping illegal 
evictions, preserving housing subsidies, restoring public benefits, and 
restoring personal safety and recovering stolen assets.  LS E helps older 
Mainers who do not have anywhere else to turn for help.  
4 
  
LSE accomplishes a lot with a  small staff. The direct legal services 
staffing includes : 0.80 full time equivalent (FTE) Litigation Director; 0.50 
FTE Helpline Director; 1.0 FTE Intake Paralegal; 2. 70 FTE Helpline 
Attorneys; 1.00 FTE Elder Abuse Paralegal; and 10.60 FTE Staff Attorneys. This is a total of only 1 6.60 FTEs of direct legal services staff (including 
supervisory staff). At this time, 3.0 FTEs of attorney capacity are s upported 
by short term relief act funding.   
 LSE is proud of the quality of our work and the results we get for our clients, 
but we know we are failing to fulfill our ultimate mission.  The number of 
older Mainers  with unmet legal needs is growing at an ac celerating rate.  
There are at least three major drivers behind the significant and growing unmet need for legal services among Maine’s older population.   
 
1. Maine is the oldest state in the nation, and the number of older 
people living in Maine is growing at an incredible rate.   
 
By 2030, it is expected that nearly one out of every three Maine residents 
will be over 60.  That means there will be over 460,000 older people living 
in Maine.    
 
2. There is a very high poverty rate among older Mainers, and older 
people face many other unique challenges.   
 
In Maine, 18% of older people live below 150% of the poverty level, and 
nearly one third live below 300% of the poverty level.  Seventy percent of 
low-income elders  receive Social Security as their sole source of income 
compared to only half of older peopl e who are above poverty levels.  The 
high poverty rate among older people in Maine does not tell the whole story.  Older Mainers face additional financial challenges, including high medical 
costs, high food costs,  high electricity costs, and an aging housing stock 
heated with oil.  Many older people in Maine are also extremely vulnerable in other ways.  Under America’s Health Rankings for Seniors
1, Maine ranks 
25th in the nation (with 1 being best) for older people living in poverty, 33rd 
for food insecurity, 31st for severe housing problems, and 41st for suicide.   
  
 
1 America’s Health Rankings 2022, 2022- senior -report -state-summaries.pdf (americashealthrankings.org)   
5 
  
3. Older people who are low -income face frequent legal problems.   
 
Older people face more frequent leg al problems than the general low -income 
population and are at higher risk of harm when facing a legal problem.   A 
legal needs study conducted in Maine in 2011 by the University of 
Maine Center on Aging revealed that 56% of Maine’s older people with 
low in comes had experienced a legal problem in the past year (this went 
up to 67% for low income seniors 70 years of age or older) .2  This is 
consistent with a more recent national study showing that 56% of low -
income seniors’ households experienced a civil leg al problem in the past 
year, and a stunning 10% experienced six or more legal problems per 
year.3   LSE is meeting at most 10% of the need for services.    
 
Complicating the landscape is the fact that without ready access to free legal 
assistance, Maine elders who can’t afford a lawyer are most likely to “do 
nothing” about their legal problem .    A national survey that is consistent 
with prior Maine surveys showed that 87% of older people with low -
incomes who experience legal problems receive inadequate or  no help 
because they don’t know where to seek help, decide to deal with the problem on their own, don’t have time to deal with the problem, or aren’t sure they 
have a legal problem.
 4  Doing nothing when facing a legal problem like 
abuse, foreclosure, eviction, or overwhelming medical debt quickly 
leads to a downward spiral in what had previously been a productive 
and independent person’s life.  
Ironically, i t is a fear of loss of independence that keeps many older Mainers 
from seeking assis tance.  In addition, of growing concern is the reality that 
older Mainers  are being preyed upon in large numbers by unscrupulous 
caregivers and family members.  A recent survey found that 5.4% of all 
older people  are financially exploited by a family membe r each year.5   A 
study in Maine found that financial exploitation cost Maine seniors at least $10,500,000 annually (not including the cost of the protective, legal and 
social services required by victims).  The primary asset being stolen is the 
 
2 Legal Needs Assessment of Older Adults in Mai ne:  2011 Survey Findings from Key Populations of 
Older Adults, University of Maine Center on Aging, December, 2011.  
3 Justice Gap Measurement Survey, The Justice Gap :  Measuring the Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low 
Income Americans, 2017.  
4 Legal Services Corporation, The Justice Gap, June, 2017, page 47.  
5 Office of Justice Programs, Elder Abuse Fact Sheet, November 2011.  
6 
 older per son’s home and the median loss across victims is $27,000.6  These 
are devastating losses for someone on a low, fixed income.   Elder abuse 
adversely impacts the financial and physical health of victims and harms the 
broader society.   
 LSE does everything it can to increase capacity through innovations 
including:  using  interns and externs; increasing the number of pro bono and 
reduced fee referrals made to the private bar; using  a paralegal to support 
attorneys handling complex financial exploitation cases ; and improving the 
self-help material available from LSE.  LSE h as also pursued efficiencies 
by collaborating with other legal services providers to share technology 
resources.  
 
LSE has also worked tirelessly to expand private support for our services 
and has successfully competed for private and public grant funding.   The 
problem is that g rant funding is time -limited and restricted.  It does not 
support core operations.  That is where public support plays an essential role.  LSE currently receives a broad range of financial support from local, 
state and federal sources, and has strived to maximize all sources of funding, 
but more and more people are going without the help they need.  The only 
solution to this growing problem is to i ncrease the public funding for civil 
legal services .   
 Passage of LD 564 is of critical importance  to Maine’s future .  This bill will 
help to ensure more people in Maine have access to free legal help when 
their basic human needs are at stake.   This investment would help and 
support every community across the state of Maine.  
 
 
Submitted by Jaye L. Martin, Executive Director, Legal Services for the 
Elderly, jmartin@mainelse.org
, 207-620-3103  
 
6 Financial Exploitation of Maine’s Older Adults, University of Southern Maine Muskie School of Public 
Service.  
