61 Winthrop Street - Augusta, ME 04330 
‘"3 1-800-499-0229 - Fax 207-621-0509 
’ MLTCOP@l\/!aineOmbndsman org 
‘:\/lziino long-'3 arm (fun; 
OMBUDSMAN l’rogmm 
TESTIMONY 
In Suppoit of 
LD 564 An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
March 21, 2023 
Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciaiy' 
The Ombudsman Program staff are pleased to provide testimony in support of this legislation 
that provides for increases in the ongoing appropriation to the Judicial Department for civil legal 
services. The funding supplements existing revenue that is distributed to providers of civil legal 
services by determination of the Civil Legal S61'ViC6S Fund. 
This funding is critical to ensure that Mainers with low incomes will have access to 
representation and legal advice. It will allow civil legal aid providers to maintain and increase 
current staffing capacity and move Maine closer to meeting the unmet legal needs of Mainers 
with low income. The need for these services is significant across the state. Approximately 
26.7% of Maine people are living below 200% of the federal poverty line. (2001, State Health 
Facts, Distribution of the Total Population by Federal Poverty Level — above and below 200% 
FPL) 
The Ombudsman Program works collaboratively with Legal Services for the Elderly and 
Disability Rights Maine, two of the nonproﬁt legal services providers whose ability to provide 
legal services would be supported and expanded with this funding. We have found both agencies 
to be both dedicated and effective in providing needed legal assistance to the older and disabled 
individuals we serve. Every day, their work makes a difference for individuals who would
otherwise, be without the legal assistance they need. 
Examples of their work: 
0 Representation at administrative hearings when older and disabled individuals receive a 
denial, reduction, or termination of needed home care services. 
0 Appealing an involuntary discharge from a long-term care facility 
0 Obtaining an ADA reasonable accommodation to increase home care services for an 
older woman with dementia. The additional hours gave her family caregivers the 
essential support they needed to keep their mother at home preventing admission toa 
nursing home. 
0 Obtaining an ADA reasonable accommodation so that skilled nursing care would be 
provided for younger individuals with medical conditions that require this care to remain 
independent in the community. 
0 A protection from abuse order for an older woman who had been assaulted. 
We continue to see an increase in the need for ADA reasonable accommodation requests that 
require legal assistance as well as other legal issues experienced by older and disabled 
individuals who cannot afford an attorney. Currently, Maine has less than two legal aid attorneys 
per 10,000 people living below 200% of poverty. The National Justice Index indicates that states 
need 10 legal aid attorneys per 10,000 people living below 200% of poverty. The funding 
proposed in this legislation would support 3.6 legal aid attorneys per 10,000 people living below 
200% of poverty. This would be an important step forward in reaching low-income Mainers who 
need legal assistance. 
Thank you for your consideration.
