 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of National Legal Aid & Defender Association in support of  
LD 564 An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services  
March 21, 2023  
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name i s Radhika Singh, and I am the Vice President for Civil Legal Services and Strategic 
Policy Initiatives at the National Legal Aid & Defender Association. NLADA represents civil legal aid and 
public defenders, and the clients they serve, in every U.S. state and territory. Our civil and defender 
members serve the same low -income communities, ensuring they are safe, stable, and thriving. We 
strongly support LD 564.  
Nationally, an estimated 74% of low -income people experience at least one  civil legal problem eac h 
year.1 In rural areas, 40% experience at least five civil legal problems. More than 360,000 Mainers are 
eligible for legal services but providers are only able to meet 20 -35% of requests for assistance.  
Without access to legal help, individuals and famil ies are put at risk of severe life -altering outcomes in 
matters related to domestic violence, health care, housing, income support, and other basic human 
needs.  
Multiple analyses have demonstrated clearly the difference civil legal aid makes, and I have i ncluded 
two demonstrative examples in my written submission. 2  
Robust state funding for legal aid is an urgent necessity. Federal funding is limited: while the Legal 
Services Corporation provides a strong national infrastructure  for civil legal aid, its g rants do not come 
close to meeting the need. Additionally, these funds have conditions that limit the types of advocacy 
available to attorneys and who they may represent.  
Moreover, emergency pandemic funding is expiring, while the need for assistance conti nues to rise.  
LD 564 is an investment, not a cost. Analyses from multiple jurisdictions demonstrate that civil legal aid 
pays for itself many times over. For example, Vermont has received a return of more than $11 for 
every $1 spent on legal aid.3  
                                                        
1 Legal Services Corporation, The Justice Gap: The Unmet Civil Legal Needs of Low -income Americans , 2022, available at: 
https://lsc -live.app.box.com/s/xl2v2uraiotbbzrhuwtjlgi0emp3myz1 . 
2 See, Carolyn Copps Hartley, Lynette M. Renner, The Longer -Term Influence of Civil Legal Services on Battered Women , 
2021,  available at https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/249879.pdf  (a study in Iowa funded by the U.S. Department of 
Justice found that victims of physical domestic violence were around four times less likely to experience re -victimization  
over the short and long term ); See, also,  Elizabeth Benton, Margaret Dewar, R obert Goodspeed, Robert Gillett , Reducing 
Michigan Evictions: The Pandemic and Beyond , University of Michigan, June 2021, available at  
sites.fordschool.umich.edu/poverty2021/files/2021/05/Poverty -Solutions_Reducing -Michigan -Evictions_June2021.pdf  
(analysis of a large eviction diversion program fou nd that 97 percent of participants who received extensive legal assistance 
avoided eviction) .   
 
Strong  state funding also allows providers to leverage federal grants, as well as legal expertise from the 
private bar and law school clinics.  
Additionally, since you also are considering investments in your public defender system, I would like to 
note why it is  necessary to maximize support for both.  
Low-income people are regulated at higher levels than other sectors of society, and the problems 
resolved through civil legal aid are often criminogenic. For example, people who are homeless are 11 
times more likely  to be arrested than people who are housed.4 Likewise, a strong defense minimizes 
the collateral consequences of involvement in the criminal system.  
The need for adequate funding for legal aid is widely understood. In recent years, dozens of members 
of Con gress from both parties, bipartisan coalitions of chief justices and state attorneys general, and 
hundreds of Fortune 500 business leaders have called for a stronger investment in civil legal aid.  
LD 564 presents an opportunity to become a leader for equa l justice, and we urge you to take it.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
                                                                                                                                                                                                
3 Vermont Access to Justice Coalition,  Economic Impacts o f Civil Legal Assistance Programs In Vermont  (2019), available at 
https://vtbarfoundation.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/11/Economic -Impact -Study -Executive -Summary -and-Report -2.pdf . 
4 Madeline Bailey, Erica Crew & Madz Reeve, Vera In st. of Just. , No Access to Justice: Breaking the Cycle of Homelessness 
and Jail 1 (2020) , available at https://www.vera.org/downloads/publications/no -access -to-justice.pdf . 
