Senator Car ney, Represe ntative Moonan, Membe rs of the Judiciary  Commi ttee,
My name is Roberta  Manter, I  live in Fay ette, and I  and the f ounder of  Maine ROADWay s,
which is an a crony m for Residents &  Owner s on Abandone d & D iscontinued Way s.  I am
writing  in favor of  LD 564.
I am in contac t with people all over  the State who have  difficulties due to living  on or owning
proper ty on a discontinued roa d.  Often the se roa ds remain “ public ease ments,” allowing  the
public to continue to use the roa d without restriction and da mage the a ccess to abutting
proper ties.  Yet the public ha s no responsibility  for pr oviding a ny maintenanc e.  In other c ases,
the roa d was discontinued with no ea sement re tained, lea ving pr operties leg ally land locked.
In either c ase, disputes inevitably  arise ove r who c an use the  road, a nd how, and whe n, and who
is responsible for r epair ing a ny resulting  damag e.  In many  case s, the town isn’t even sur e wha t
the leg al status of the roa d is, and thus is of litt le help.  I f law e nforc ement is ca lled in, their usual
response  is, “That’s a  civil matter.  You’ll have  to take it to court.”
The trouble is, re sidents on these roa ds are  often strug gling f inancially .  In many  case s, they
boug ht the land bec ause, be ing on a  discontinued road, it wa s chea p, and it was a ll they  could
afford.  Ofte n the re sident is a veter an with PTSD who was looking  for pe ace and quiet and
solitude.  Som etimes the re sidents are  young  families, who we re looking  for a  place  wher e they
could let their c hildren play  in the y ard w ithout worry ing a bout traff ic.  In any  case , as soon as
the re sidents start putting money  into the road to improve their  own ac cess, they  find that public
use incre ases, a nd soon wea rs out the roa d faster  than the re sident can a fford to repa ir it.  I f the
road be comes impassable  at ce rtain times of the y ear, holding a  full time job becomes diffic ult if
not impossi ble.  Hiring  an attorne y to take on a c ivil sui t is out of the question financially .
Conflict is almost i nevitable.  One  resident or  landowner  gets tired of the  road be ing tor n up, and
blocks it.  Then another  resident or  landowner  finds himself without acce ss.  Or one la ndowner
who has be en told for y ears that the road w as extinguished without ease ment when it was
discontinued is rudely  awakened by  a bulldozer as the owne r of a  back lot cla ims he has an
easement by  nece ssity and is g oing to put in a subdivision on his land.  All too often, the lack of
options leads to one landowne r taking  matters into their own ha nds, and violence  erupts.
I know of thre e cases that ar e cur rently  befor e Superior Court whe re one  of the pa rties is pro se
due to lack of  financ es to hire a n attorney .  Two of these  case s appea r to involve attempts to
“resurre ct  rig hts long since  extinguished,” to quote Mar tin & Crabbe  v. Bur nham 631A.2d 1239. 
Might should not make r ight, but ofte n the per son who ca n afford an a ttorney  is likely  to win
simply  beca use they  have be tter re prese ntation, and not beca use the law  is actually  in their favor . 
The third ca se involves a pe rson who wa s beate n to a pulp for try ing to wa lk on a roa d which
evidenc e indicate s remains a  public ease ment.  The State ha s twice droppe d Trespa ssing c harges
against him without  explanation after be ing se nt evidence  of the roa d’s public status.  Yet a
pending  civil suit t o rec over me dical expenses fr om the assault doesn’t of fer much hope. 
Attorney s are reluc tant to take the c ase pr o bono when the pr ospects of r ecove ring their expenses
from either  party  are slim.  
I know of many  others who a re muddling  along  without the ability  to have their  issue addre ssed
by the cour ts.  I have se en people ’s tree s cut, their y ards bulldozed, and wa tercourses c hang ed to
flood their prope rty.  On the other  hand, I  have se en ac cess to homes blocke d with locked g ates
and/or a  row of boulde rs.  And ther e is a g rowing  list of weapons pe ople have  used on ea ch other
out of frustra tion - fists, a hatche t, an iron bar , a mac hete, a  medieval sty le battle axe, a pistol, a
shotgun, ... the  list keeps g rowing , fuele d by the lack of  availability  of civil reme dy.  There  have
been a nony mous death threa ts.  (I  have pe rsonal experienc e with that one, a nd I’m not the only
such ca se.)  One  person’ s pigs we re poisoned w ith antifree ze.  Another re ceive d a thre at that her
house wa s going to bur n down and the f ire de partment would not re spond.
If there  were more  funding  for c ivil lega l service s, that could help treme ndously .  The other  part
of that puzz le is that the ag encie s that provide these  service s need to g et the tra ining they  need to
be able  to addre ss road c ases, a s they  don’t fit into the usual cate gories - e victions, child custody ,
domestic violence , etc.   B ut providing more  funding  is at least a star t.  I ask y ou to support L D
564.
Thank y ou.
