Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and 
members of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Robin Russel and I live in Hermon. I am a member of the 
Board of Directors of the Maine Justice Foundation and I am employed 
as a professor at the University of Maine. But, I started my professional 
career decades ago as an attorney working in a local legal services 
office. I later worked at a national legal services backup center. I then 
went back to school and received a PhD in social welfare policy and 
have been teaching ever since.
I worked in legal services at a time when there was adequate federal 
funding to provide legal representation to low-income people in civil 
cases. Our case loads were high, but I felt like we had the resources to 
provide quality representation to poor and vulnerable people. In the 
decades that followed, federal funding for indigent legal services was 
drastically reduced and legal representation for low-income people has 
suffered, nationally and here in Maine.
I currently teach courses on social welfare policy and teach our 
students about the workings of the legal system. While we discuss the 
principle of equal justice before the law, I tell my students that most 
people can get about as much justice as they can afford to pay for.
Currently more than 26% of Maine residents are low income and 
qualify for free legal services.  Most of these people face at least one 
legal issue a year that would benefit from legal advice or 
representation. We have far too few legal services staff to meet this 
need. The National Justice Index advises states that they need 10 legal 
services attorneys per 10,000 people living below 200% of the poverty 
line.  Maine falls far short of this standard at less than 2 attorneys per 
10,000 low-income citizens.
As a legislature you enact laws that grant residents rights and services. 
But what good are these to a low-income person who cannot take 
advantage of them? We are talking about issues that directly impact 
the welfare of some of our most vulnerable residents; elders, children 
and adults with disabilities, victims of family violence and sexual 
assault.
Our legal services programs are providing educational materials on 
legal issues for residents. But, that doesn’t take the place of having 
someone to represent you in court, especially when the opposing party 
has legal representation. I remember hearing in law school that a 
person who has themselves as an attorney, has a fool for a client. In 
Maine a poor person needing a lawyer may not be a fool, they just 
don’t have other options.
I strongly urge you to vote in favor of LD564. Let’s make equal justice 
before the law more of a reality in Maine.
Robin Russel, JD, PhD
Professor
University of Maine
Orono, ME
