IMMIGRANT LEGAL ADVOCACY PROJECI 
March 21, 2023 
Testimony of Susan Roche, Executive Director of the Immigrant Legal Advocacy Project 
in Support of An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Services LD 564 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Susan Roche, and I am the Executive Director of the Immigrant Legal Advocacy 
Project (ILAP). ILAP is Maine’s only state-wide immigration legal aid organization. We have 
full-time offices in Portland and Lewiston and a regular presence across the state through our 
Rural Maine Project. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 564, an Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal Aid. ILAP is 
one of the seven organizations that would beneﬁt from this funding to help low-income Mainers 
navigate our civil legal systems when they face life changing problems. 
ILAP’s mission is to help immigrants and asylum seekers gain work authorization and legal 
status, which are the ﬁrst steps towards meeting basic needs, joining the workforce, and 
integrating safely into Maine communities. 
Statistics show that someone is five times more likely to win their case in immigration court if 
they have a lawyer. ILAP maintains a success rate of over 95% for cases reaching a ﬁnal 
decision. 
Each year, our staff and volunteers help more than 3,000 clients from all 16 counties. Our clients 
include asylum seekers, young people who qualify for Special Immigrant Juvenile Status, 
immigrant victims of domestic violence and trafficking, and more. In addition to our legal staff, 
we have more than 200 pro bono attomeys who donate over 5,000 hours of their time each year 
representing clients through our Asylum Program and our Immigrant Children ’s Project. 
Unfortunately, we still have to tum away hundreds of clients each year because we lack the 
capacity to serve them. 
For ILAP, the Maine Civil Legal Services Fund (MCLSF) is our only form of recurring 
government funding. We are ineligible for most federal funding because of the clients we serve. 
So, we rely upon private donors and funders for most of our support, and that funding is subject 
to shifting priorities and changing donor interests. 
Increased funding would allow ILAP to expand our Asylum Assistance and Legal Orientation 
Project, an innovative project we launched last fall in response to the large number of asylum 
seekers arriving in Maine and staying in hotels. Although the gold standard is to provide full 
representation to anyone applying for asylum in immigration court, the demand now far exceeds
our capacity. This new project will help more asylum seekers ﬁle their asylum applications on 
their own, with legal guidance from attorneys. The goals are (1) to help asylum seekers get their 
applications ﬁled so they can get work authorization, and (2) to ensure their cases are properly 
screened, prepared, and set up for ultimate success so they will eventually have permanent legal 
status. Once an asylum applicant can work, they may eventually hire their own lawyer or get 
placed with an ILAP attorney if we have the capacity to represent them at that time. 
Increased funding would also help us represent more children through our Immigrant Children ’s 
Project. We launched this project in the fall of 2020 to build a statewide system to identify 
children and youth who may be eligible for Special Immigrant Juvenile Status (SIJ S) and to pair 
them with legal representation by ILAP staff and pro bono attorneys. Two years later, we have 
made signiﬁcant progress toward these goals, serving more than 200 young people last year. But 
we are still turning away dozens of qualifying children on our waitlist because of our limited 
resources. 
We know that Maine needs immigrants to help grow our workforce and economy. As we 
welcome new immigrants and asylum seekers into the state, the need for ILAP services will 
continue to grow. I ask that you vote to support LD 564 to invest in ILAP and civil legal aid in 
Maine.
