BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger
Hello Senator Carney and members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Taylor Cray, 
and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Advocacy at Preble Street. In this role, I support 
Homeless Voices for Justice, a group of individuals with lived experience of homelessness 
and poverty. I am writing to you today to ask that you support LD564: An Act to Improve 
Access to Civil Legal Aid Services. 
Both Preble Street and Homeless Voices for Justice work to represent a body of 
individuals who have been greatly impacted by poverty, homelessness, food-insecurity, 
and other life-threatening challenges. In much of the work that we do, we see first-hand 
the impact of insufficient civil legal representation in the lives of our clients. Many 
individuals arrive at Preble Street in a state of desperation because they owe large 
amounts of money in child support, have been denied benefits, have been evicted, or 
have a family law matter. 
The stories are numerous and varied, but all retain the underlying distress that comes 
from the knowledge that you are unable to defend yourself and your family in a court of 
law. Our clients tell stories of children lost to custody battles, evictions that resulted in 
children being removed from their care by Child Protective Services, and the ongoing toll 
that civil legal losses have on their lives. We know of clients who have lost custody of 
their children due to falsified reports given in court by abusive partners, forcing these 
individuals to learn the inner working of the civil legal system themselves or risk losing 
access to their children forever. We hear stories of parents reconnecting with their 
children after years of disconnect due to legal battles, evictions, and homelessness. These 
stories show the cruel reality of a legal system that does not ensure adequate 
representation for all individuals.
LD564 presents an opportunity to fund civil legal aid programs that will allow individuals 
in similar situations to access the help they need to navigate a complex legal system. The 
impacts of these civil legal cases often follow individuals for life, and the ability to access 
legal aid cannot be understated. Preble Street works alongside the Volunteer Lawyers 
Project to provide legal advice to our clients through the Maine Homeless Legal Project. 
Funding limitations, however, prevent us from offering legal representation to clients 
when they go to court. Organizations like Maine Equal Justice and Pine Tree Legal help to 
fill these gaps, but oftentimes clients end up in court without the legal representation 
that they need to navigate these complex systems. The funding provided by this bill will 
help to increase access to civil legal aid for individuals regardless of their financial status. 
Everyone deserves the chance to be fairly represented in a court of law. 
With this in mind, we ask that you vote in favor of LD564: An Act to Improve Access to 
Civil Legal Aid Services. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray 
Team Leader, Homeless Voices for Justice
Preble Street 

