Preble 
BOARD OP DIRECTORS 
Terry Sutton 
Prwidezzt 
Chip Leighton 
I/ire Pmirlerlf 
Yemaya St. Clair 
Serrefn/)1 
Jennifer Wilson 
Treat//re/' 
Rebecca Asen 
joann Bautista 
Terry Davies 
Lauren Gauthier 
]ohn Roberts 
Elaine Rosen 
Kini Schoop 
Maurice A. Selinger III 
jay Tansey 
Lannie Welcli 
Lori \‘(/hynot 
Mark R. Swann 
Exec///ii/e Di/"er1‘0r 
55 Portland Street 
Portland, l\/[E 04101 
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org 
\v\v\v.preblestreet.org 
United 
way 
United Way 
of Greater Portland 
CHARITY 
rNAVIGAIGH 
.-*j—,.'-/ I ‘sit 
[V Hfnurslgrtthalily 
Meeting urgent needs O Empowering people 0 Advocating for change 0 Creating solutions to homelessness and hunger Street 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Terence Miller, and I am the Advocacy Director for Preble Street. I am 
here today to request your support in the passage of LD564: An Act to Improve 
Access to Civil Legal Services. 
Across the state of Maine, 26.7% of people are considered low-income ——living at 
or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Line. At Preble Street, we serve many of the 
most vulnerable folks in our SiteBased Housing First, shelter, Food Security Hub, 
anti-trafficking services, and Veterans Housing programs. Many people we serve 
frequently face civil legal issues that require legal advice or fonnal representation 
to seek resolution. 
Our civil legal aid service options in Maine are numerous yet severely 
underfunded. Presently, the Volunteer Legal Project identiﬁes rotating volunteer 
law ﬁrms offering legal advice through the Maine Homeless Legal Project. 
However, due to funding restrictions, it is limited to legal advice and not a~ 
representation of clients. While we rely on other civil legal providers such as 
Maine Equal Justice and Pine Tree Legal, underfunding these terriﬁc legal 
providers creates gaps in Maine’s funding of indigent legal services, and most 
people’s needs are not being comprehensively met. LD5 64 will bolster the funding 
for Civil Legal Services across the state, expanding the delivery of services to 
individuals and families in need. We need sustained funding through ongoing 
appropriations to strengthen this service~ —not piecemeal aid. 
The depth of the statewide housing crisis and the need for robust civil legal 
representation is never more apparent than in our work with clients trying to 
maintain stable housing. In the Preble Street Rapid Re-Housing and Veterans 
Housing programs, individuals frequently face challenges from landlords refusing 
to accept subsidized rental payments, including those from General Assistance, and 
property managers issuing notices to quit with little cause. With assistance and 
representation from Pine Tree Legal Aid, clients benefit from legal advocacy that 
can stave off crises. Clients have had their evictions stalled, with 30-day notices 
extended to 90 days, allowing them to prepare for shifts in their living situation 
adequately. In other instances, legal representation has offered important 
clariﬁcation on the rights of landlords vs. tenants, allowing clients to seek the best 
path forward to maintaining their housing. 
With an awareness that housing is one of the central pathways to general stability, 
our ability to keep clients housed is paramount. Yet the provision of these critical 
services has clear limitations, which can be traced back to shortcomings in the 
revenue stream. Legal representation should not be a privilege amongst the most 
vulnerable but a basic resource that is accessible to all. 
At Preble Street, we recognize that we work within a socioeconomic and justice 
system structure that often perpetuates cycles of poverty and harm. Quality civic 
legal representation can be a lifeline that offers individuals a chance to extract 
themselves from these cycles.
