BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Terence Miller, and I am the Advocacy Director for Preble Street. I am here today 
to request your support in the passage of LD564: An Act to Improve Access to Civil Legal 
Services. 
Across the state of Maine, 26.7% of people are considered low-income—living at or below 
200% of the Federal Poverty Line. At Preble Street, we serve many of the most vulnerable 
folks in our SiteBased Housing First, shelter, Food Security Hub, anti-trafficking services, and 
Veterans Housing programs. Many people we serve frequently face civil legal issues that 
require legal advice or formal representation to seek resolution. 
Our civil legal aid service options in Maine are numerous yet severely underfunded. Presently, 
the Volunteer Legal Project identifies rotating volunteer law firms offering legal advice 
through the Maine Homeless Legal Project. However, due to funding restrictions, it is limited 
to legal advice and not a representation of clients. While we rely on other civil legal providers 
such as Maine Equal Justice and Pine Tree Legal, underfunding these terrific legal providers 
creates gaps in Maine’s funding of indigent legal services, and most people’s needs are not 
being comprehensively met. LD564 will bolster the funding for Civil Legal Services across the 
state, expanding the delivery of services to individuals and families in need. We need 
sustained funding through ongoing appropriations to strengthen this service—not piecemeal 
aid. 
The depth of the statewide housing crisis and the need for robust civil legal representation is 
never more apparent than in our work with clients trying to maintain stable housing. In the 
Preble Street Rapid Re-Housing and Veterans Housing programs, individuals frequently face 
challenges from landlords refusing to accept subsidized rental payments, including those from 
General Assistance, and property managers issuing notices to quit with little cause. With 
assistance and representation from Pine Tree Legal Aid, clients benefit from legal advocacy 
that can stave off crises. Clients have had their evictions stalled, with 30-day notices extended 
to 90 days, allowing them to prepare for shifts in their living situation adequately. In other 
instances, legal representation has offered important clarification on the rights of landlords 
vs. tenants, allowing clients to seek the best path forward to maintaining their housing.   
 
With an awareness that housing is one of the central pathways to general stability, our ability 
to keep clients housed is paramount. Yet the provision of these critical services has clear 
limitations, which can be traced back to shortcomings in the revenue stream. Legal 
representation should not be a privilege amongst the most vulnerable but a basic resource 
that is accessible to all.  
At Preble Street, we recognize that we work within a socioeconomic and justice system 
structure that often perpetuates cycles of poverty and harm. Quality civic legal representation 
can be a lifeline that offers individuals a chance to extract themselves from these cycles. 
Sincerely, 
Terence Miller
Advocacy Director
Preble Street

