 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition regarding:  
LD564: “An Act to  Improve Access to Civil Legal Services ” 
Sponsored By: Senator Anne Carney  
Public Hearing: Tuesday, March 21, 2023 at 1 :30pm 
 
 
Dear Members of the Judiciary Committee:  
My name is Tobin Williamson and I live in  the city of  Lewiston, Maine  in Androscoggin County . I am 
the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network  of 
almost 100 member organizations  all working to enhance the lives of Maine’s immigrant communities.  
We are happy to  support the Justice Action Group ’s Legislative Committee in the ir efforts to bridge the 
justice gap in Ma ine by supporting LD 564. Man y of our state ’s most vulnerable residents would rely on 
civil legal aid organizations should the need for representati on ever arise.  As a small advocacy -focused 
organization, MIRC does not provide legal  services; instead, we refer people to or ganizations like the 
Immigrant Legal A dvocac y Project, Pine Tree Legal Assistance, and Maine Equal J ustice. These 
organizations are over worked, understaff ed, and underpaid, but the y provi de such incredible  services to 
people who need them  for civil cases .  
Unfortunately, civil legal organizations desperate ly need more capacity  to do the kind of work t hey do 
(e.g., c hild custody, domestic violence, asylum applications,  evictions , and more ). People seek services 
from organizations like these when they are at some of the lowest points in the ir lives , facin g sometimes a 
literal matter of life or death. The demand for a dequate le gal representation for low -income individuals  
far exceeds the s upply, and many people are unable to get the services they nee d in the current climate .  
Rather than the “justice for some ” that is availa ble now, MIRC wants to see equal access to “justice for 
all.” Maine  needs to invest more in access to civil legal aid in or der for our state ’s low -income residents 
to have legal representation available to them in civil cases. Therefore, we  highly  encourage the passage 
of LD 564: An Act to  Improve Access to Civil Legal  Services . Thank you for your consideration  of this 
important matter . 
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston, ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
 
### 
