VERSANT /,\ POWER 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 1347 
An Act to Eliminate the Current Net Energy Billing Policy in Maine 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I am here 
on behalf of Versant Power neither for nor against LD 1347. 
Versant Power agrees that absent policy changes, the cost of the current net energy billing program (N EB) will 
lead to signiﬁcant affordability concerns for customers over the next twenty years. We were supportive of the 
Committee ’s efforts during the last legislature to design a successor program to NEB for larger projects and were 
pleased to have been active participants in the stakeholder process, which produced the recommendations with 
which you were presented earlier this year. As that report noted, not all stakeholders ultimately agreed with each 
recommendation, however, we believe the overall policy of transitioning the current NEB program towarda 
wholesale PPA structure that speciﬁcally targets beneﬁts to lower and moderate-income customers is prudent and 
will realize many of the same beneﬁts of NEB while reducing the cost to ratepayers. 
As we have stated numerous times, Versant Power recognizes that we have an important role to play in helping 
the state achieve our shared climate and energy goals and are prepared to facilitate necessary implementation 
measures as efﬁciently as possible. 
We agree with the growing consensus that, as a major policy regulating a dynamic and rapidly shifting energy 
landscape, the NEB program should be reevaluated to ensure it is striking the right balance of clean energy 
progress and customer beneﬁt. As the committee debates this and future bills that would make reforms to the 
current NEB program, Versant Power offers the following for your consideration: 
Locational & Grid Dynamics 
Many NEB projects that are operational or are currently being constructed in Maine are located in areas far from 
existing load and in places on the electric grid that are relatively less robust. This dynamic leads to signiﬁcant 
engineering challenges, and often signiﬁcant cost to project sponsors, in order to safely and reliably interconnect 
these resources. When signiﬁcant interconnection costs are incurred, those costs are ultimately passed onto 
ratepayers and so will lead to higher rates on the supply side. 
Versant Power understands that hosting capacity data is an important tool for developers to site projects more 
strategically, where they may require fewer upgrades and result in lower costs. We have worked diligently 
alongside stakeholders to develop a hosting capacity tool, which was recently added to our website, and believe it 
will provide access to valuable data — a formal announcement of this tool will be made soon. At the same time, we 
would recommend that the locational value of projects on the grid — along with other siting considerations— 
should be an important factor that is evaluated as the Committee considers future NEB reforms. 
Customer Billing 
There is a considerable level of customer confusion and frustration when it comes to the billing associated with 
community solar projects eligible under the NEB program. Customers often call Versant Power with questions 
and confusion related to who is billing them, why they are being billed, rates, and other details associated with 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
VERSANT A POWER 
their arrangements with a community solar provider. Versant Power always works to help customers navigate 
their way to answers where possible, but unfortunately, Versant is often unable to directly resolve customer 
concerns. We hope that recent changes Versant has made to our bill design — including a new speciﬁc bill for 
NEB customers — will clear up some confusion, but also believe a long—term solution that affords consumers the 
clarity and transparency they deserve — should be a part of any reforms. 
Notwithstanding our concerns over the aggregate cost of the current program, and recommendations regarding 
locational standards, and customer billing, Versant Power believes there are commonsense policy adjustments that 
can be made to the NEB program that would be fair to project developers, help control costs for ratepayers, and 
improve customer experiences, short of outright program repeal. 
We support a long-term solution that would reform this program with input from all stakeholders, which should 
not be mistaken for a solution that will satisfy all parties. 
Thank you for your consideration and we would be pleased to answer questions or provide more information for 
the work session. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
