April 13, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative S. Paige Zeigier, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1347 
To Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigier, and Members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee: 
Please consider this testimony in opposition to LD 1347. The Coalition for Community 
Solar Access (CCSA) is a national Coalition of businesses and non-profits working to expand 
customer choice and access to solar for all American households and businesses through 
community solar. Our mission is to empower every American energy consumer with the option 
to choose local, clean, and affordable community solar. We work with customers, utilities, local 
stakeholders, and policymakers to develop and implement policies and best practices that 
ensure community solar programs provide a win, win, win for all, starting with the customer. 
Net energy billing is an important policy tool to address the state’s climate and energy goals and 
allow customers to directly participate in the clean energy economy. This legislature created the 
net energy billing program, and expanded the program in 2019 because it recognized the 
important role that distributed generation plays in addressing a changing climate, aging grid 
infrastructure, and investment in local economies. The program provides net benefits to all 
Maine ratepayers. 
Let’s be clear - the main culprit in rising electricity costs is our reliance on imported fossil fuels. 
We think it is critical to push back against the utilities ’ claims on the net energy billing program 
costs, which distract us from the real problems in our energy system that are driving up costs for 
ratepayers. We believe the projections of program costs include unrealistic assumptions that 
overstate the costs and do not account for system benefits from the program. We look fon/vard 
to working with the Office of the Public Advocate, the Maine Public Utilities Commission, this 
committee, and others to scrutinize the utilities claims for cost recovery and ensure that they are 
not overcharging ratepayers. 
The legislature has already made multiple reforms to the program in the past two years to 
reduce program costs. The reduced tariff rate enacted last session will apply to the majority of 
projects serving commercial customers. LD 936 has capped the program for projects over2 
MW, and set an end of 2024 deadline for projects to reach commercial operation. A large 
number of projects that are still awaiting cluster study interconnection results will not be able to 
meet that deadline. CCSA, its members and its partners are willing and eager to discuss a 
successor program that supports solar development in a cost effective manner, and that 
delivers meaningful benefits to Maine customers, particularly low to moderate income 
1380 Monroe Street NW, #721 info@communitysolaraccessprg 
Washington, DC 20010 www.communitysolaraccess.org 
720-334-8045
\ 
CCSA * 
customers. Ending net energy billing suddenly would create a severe chilling effect on the 
renewable energy sector in Maine and would signal to all industries that the business climate in 
Maine is unstable and unfriendly. There are already thousands of customers enrolled in 
operational projects. Retroactive changes to already contracted projects will create stranded 
assets, angry customers, and could invite expensive litigation. 
We urge the committee to vote ought not to pass. 
Sincerely, 
Kate Daniel 
Northeast Regional Director _ 
Coalition for Community Solar Access 
1380 Monroe Street NW, #721 info@communitysolaraccessprg 
Washington, DC 20010 www.communitysoIaraccess.org 
720-334-8045
