-’
2 
CENTRAL MAINE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 1347 An Act to Eliminate the Current Net Energy Billing Policy in l\/laine 
April 4, 2023 
Testifying: Neither For Nor Against 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (”EUT"), my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony neither 
for nor against LD 1347 An Act to Eliminate the Current Net Energy Billing Policy in Maine. 
Whether to eliminate the incentive program that supports the solar industry is a major policy 
decision — one that is timely and impactful on many of ClVlP’s customers — both our 
interconnection customers and our electricity customers. To this end, we refrain from a support 
or oppose position but lay out aspects of the program you should consider. 
The solar program designed under LD 1711 several years ago, and amended several times since, 
has achieved the targeted goal of establishing and engendering a robust solar industry in Maine. 
As you heard from our team last week, we have seen an unprecedented increase in 
interconnection applications and Net Energy Billing ("NEB") applications having processed over 
700 interconnection requests since 2019 and having interconnected over $00 MW into the 
system, with another 500-plus MW in queue working toward interconnection. 
The benefits of such burgeoning distributed generation create opportunities such as time-of-use 
rate designs that can save customers money, potential price suppression effects in the 
commodities market and creation ofjobs here in Maine. 
The challenges with the program are around the cost of continuing to incentivize this 
development at the current levels. Currently, CMP's projections indicate $105M in customer 
costs, to be paid through stranded costs beginning later this year. This equates to about 
$5/month for an average residential customer. As more projects come online, these costs will 
grow and these amounts will comprise almost a third of CM P's costs to run the grid. The result is 
that the appetite to invest in grid modernization; system improvements needed to address more 
frequent and severe storms and other innovative grid design needs, will be less doable given the 
rate impacts resulting from the NEB program. The costs of these programs on our customers are 
unsustainable and should be considered in a balanced way to better align the outcomes. 
These are very difficult policy decisions to make. CMP believes reform is needed to contain cost 
and wishes to have a constructive seat at the table should the Committee move forward to 
explore constraining the program from its current form. Thank you for your consideration.
