 
 
 
April 13, 2023  
Senator Mark Lawrence , Chair  
Representative Stanley  Paige Zeigler , Chair  
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Testimony  on LD 1347 , “An Act to Eliminate the Current Net Energy Billing Policy in Maine ” 
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology  Committee:  
 
Founded  right here in Maine  twenty years ago , ReVision Energy is a local, employee owned , 
certified B Corp oratio n with over 385 employee s across our five branches in  New Englan d, with 
220 staff in Maine at our Montville and South Portland locations . Our mission is to lead our 
community in solving the environmental problems caused by fossil fuel s while alleviating social 
injustice to ensure  New England is a thriving place  where our children, grandchildren, and future 
generations can enjoy a clean environment and just society . In 2022 alone, we installed 10,000  
kilowatts of residential solar and nearly 24 megawatts of commercial sola r across the region . 
 
We strongly believe that an effective net energy billing policy is critical in reaching our state’s  
climate commitments and renewable portfolio standard law , and  therefore we are here today in 
strong opposition  of LD 1347 . 
 
As our society contends with rapid and drastic environmental  change , governments around the 
globe are setting ambitious targets to reduce impacts of a warming climate. Regardless of 
political party, we all agree that we want to pass on a thriving planet to our children and our 
grandchildren. In the face of the challenge present today, to do this  work , we m ust be both 
ambitious and innovative . We must pass entrepreneurial policy solutions to accelerate 
innovat ions to make our energy sector cleaner and more reliable . And because this is all so 
new, those policies  must be iterative.  
 
Our state has a long way to go on our renewable energy targets.  Any suggestion that we’re 
building clean energy too fast is wildly disconnected from the reality we live in. To jump start the 
development we needed, Net Energy Billing (NEB) 1.0 was implemented. We’re the first to sa y 
it wasn’t perfect, especially in how it addressed larger offsite projects. Fortunately, you stepped 
in as leaders, and together, we have  improved the process . ReVision has been supportive of 
these changes. However, the flow of new large projects has come to a standstill. When it 
became time to iterate holistically, you stepped in again and passed LD 936, bringing together 
leaders from across the clean energy s ector , including nearly all parties that have commented 
on this bill, to provide  thoughtful and strategic stakeholder input to create a policy for the 
future —NEB 2.0.  Given the incredible amount of work that went into the process, and the 
recommendations  reached that serve as iterative  policy sol utions  ready to be implemented , the 
focus should now be on implementation , and espec ially on making large projects both smart 
and effective.  
 
Net metering , as you know, is critical in getting  us on a path to meet our climate goals.  To get a 
bit more granular , to meet our state’s renewable portfolio standard law and achieve 100% 
renewable electricity by 2050, we would need to build approximately 7500 MW of solar in state , 
or at least 275 MW per  year.i While we don’t have exact numbers, we think it’s fair to say we’re 
 
 
not building anywhere near that pace today, especially if you exclude construction of projects 
that are ultimately serving the load for other states . 
 
As you know, we’ve only had a  few utility scale projects come online here in Maine . Therefore, 
distributed generation (below 5 MW) will need to make up a significant portion of that total 7500 
MW target.  So, using back of the envelope calculations, and assuming at least a quarter to a 
half of that capacity won’t come from utility scale solar , we need to be building 75 -150 MW  of 
DG annually.  We clearly have a long way to go .  
 
Net energy billing is currently the most foundational policy for supporting distributed 
generatio n—and ultimately supplies Maine homes and businesses wit h the myriad benefits , 
including the reduction of energy costs,  offered through investment in renewable energy . We 
recognize this policy  must be a sophisticated regime that has customized applications  for 
different market segments. We have been involved in those discussions and have helped 
developed these mechanisms, for example, for commercial and institutional customers and 
large -scale  facilities.  
 
Previous efforts to replace net energy billing for t he state’s residential and small commercial 
ratepayers have failed —and net metering remains the most effective tool in advancing the 
state’s codified clean energy goals.  Even more, this committee sits on thoughtful 
recommendations  within the DG 2.0 report from all parties as to how to better this process.  The 
committee asked, and stakeholders delivered. Let ’s turn th ese recommendations into legislation 
and enact it, especially at a time when  significant federal funding from the Inflation Reduction 
Act is available to our state.   
 
Let’s not throw  out a critical policy tool  that would retroactively pull the rug out from under 
thousands of Maine rs without any real proposal for how to make clean energy affordable and 
accessible moving forward. Let’s  implement the collaborative efforts within the DG 2.0  report . 
Let’s strive to meet our goals for the future of all Mainers —and their children and grandc hildren, 
too. We ask you to oppose LD 1347.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Lindsay Bourgoine  
Director, Policy & Government Affairs  
ReVision Energy  
207.819.5663  
 
 
i Competitive Energy Services “A New Energy Policy Direction for Maine: A Pathway to a Zero Carbon 
Economy  by 2050” 2019. https://www.competitive -energy.com/zero -carbon -maine    

