 
 
 
 
Supplemental  Testimony  in Opposition to Sponsor’s Amendment of LD 1 347  
   An Act to R educe the Cost of Net Energy Billin g for Maine Rate Payers  
Steven L. Weems, Board Member , Solar Energy Association of Maine  
President, Dirigo Community Solar Group  
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
May 25, 2023  
  
Senator Lawrence,  Representative Zeigler, and other distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology: my name is 
Steve Weems, Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of Maine  (SEAM) ; 
also founder and P resident of Dirigo Community Solar Group  (Dirigo CSG) , a 
nonprofit associa tion of 14 small, member -owned  community solar farms.   We 
emphatically oppose  the Sponsor ’s Amendment to LD 1 347.  While it might 
reduce the delivery portion of utility electricity charges somewhat, in the short 
term, it is fundamentally destructive in nature and ignores the true benefits  and 
costs of distributed solar generation.  There are f ar more constructive steps the 
Committee can take to improve our energy future, both health  wise and  cost 
wise,  which are before the Committee n ow.  At this stage  in the legislative 
session , a limited number  of words must suffice.  
 This proposal  would decimate  years of legislatively -authorized distributed 
generation  (including net  energy billing ) planning, investment , customer 
commitment, and operation for about 25,000  Maine electricity customers, 
without due process.   
 There is an orderly process , established by the legislature , to restructure the 
DG and NEB programs that the Sponsor ’s Amendment would obliterate.  
 
2 
  
 
 This existing  process is ready to bear fruit , in the form of LD 1986, which  would 
base all future DG development in the 1 -5 MW range on a competitive bidding 
platfor m that would benefit all Maine people, and save all ratepayers money, 
as calculated by rigorous economic analysis.   Net energy billing (NEB) would be 
limited to projects of 1 MW or less.  
 Rather than emasculate NEB, focus on its virtues and mak e it bene ficial  to all 
ratepayers,  which can be done by taking steps to ensure NEB projects are 
characterized as load reducing projects at the utility level .  Then, through 
recurring, rigorous  economic analysis of bene fits and costs, m ake the 
remaining NEB program (projects of 1 MW or less)  neutral or beneficial for all 
ratepayers by adjusted the delivery credit comp onent of the progra m.  Since 
the utilities are deregulated (do not own generating facilities) , the en ergy 
portion of a NEB project should be accounted for as pass -through utility costs, 
like the Standard Offer or energy from any other compet itive supplier.  
 Based on actual benefi ts and costs of operational project s, consider 
adjustments in NEB bill  credits necessary to reduce and eventually elim inate 
any ratepayer burden of the first -generation (current) DG program (including 
NEB).   
All this can and should be accomplished via LD 1986 , with refine ments as  
necessary.   Embrace constructive improvement s leading to benefits for all 
ratepayers , not regressive disruption.   
 
 
 
 
 
SEAM LD 1347 EUT Committee Supplemental Testimony  5-25-23 (short)  
Steven Weems
Solar Energy Association of maine & Dirigo Community Solar Group
LD 1347
Supplemental Testimony on Sponsor's Amendment to LD 1347 filed by the Solar 
Energy Association of Maine and Dirigo Consumer Solar Group
