 
 
 
 
Supplement # 1 Testimony  on LD 1347 
An Act to Eliminate the Current Net Energy Billing Policy in Maine   
Steven Weems, Board Member , Solar Energy Association of Maine  
President, Dirigo  Community Solar Group  
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
April 14, 2023  
 Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and other members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology : my name is Steve We ems,  a Board Me mber of 
the Solar Energy Association of Maine ; also founder of Dirigo Community Solar Group , a 
nonprofit association of 14 small, member -owned  community solar farms .  This is additional  
factual material (and related conclusions) designed to cut through some of the hyperbole  heard 
at the public hearing on LD 1347.  We apologize if this seems too basic.   
Accounting for the Bene fits and Costs of Distributed Energy Resources  (DER)   
There are two basic , distinct types of analysis .  Both are important to consider for a full and 
accurate understanding of the impact of distrib uted energy resources  (DER) , which is a category  
that includes but is not limited to ne t energy billing (NEB) . 
1. Benefit -Cost Analysis .  This is a comprehensive analysis that looks at all the benefits and 
costs of a distributed energy resource (DER), including utility system and societal (general 
population) benefits and costs .  The results typically are expressed i n a Bene fit/Cost Ratio  
(BCR).   Benefits considered in the “Maine Test ” by the economic consultants to the 
Governor ’s Energy Office (GEO) for the DG Sta keholder Group work include : (1) avoided 
capacity costs ;  (2) avoided en vironmental and  RPS compliance costs ; (3) avoided 
transmission costs, (4) avoided distribution costs; and ( 5) avoided greenhouse gas (GHG) 
and NOx emissions  (Source: Distributed Generation Successor Program in Maine , An 
Economic Assessment , January 5, 2023, pages 14 -19.)  
2. Rate Impact Analysis .  The rat e, bill, and partic ipation analyses encompass  only the bene fits 
and costs  of DER that affect the utility bills of both participa nt and nonparticipant 
ratepayers .  This is a subset of the factors considered in an overall benefit -cost analysis , 
which exclude  societal benefits , because these are not reflected in utility bills, even though 
they benefit participant  and nonparticipant ratepayers equally.  (Source: same as above, 
pages 22 -23.) 
 
 
2 
 The forego ing was taken from the work of the economic consultants Synapse Energy Economics 
(Synapse) and Sustainable Energy Adva ntage (SEA) included in the Final Report of the 
Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group , dated January 6, 2023 , as submitted to the EUT 
Committee. This is the latest and  most comprehensive analysis of the net benefits and costs, 
and ratepayer impact, of distributed energy res ources.   A few important statements tha t can be 
made as a result are:  
 This work was oriented toward the charge of the GEO and the DG Sta keholder Group to 
come up with a successor DER program, so vi rtually all the analysis relates to future 
program options.   This corroborate s the practicality and importance of such analysis . 
 The limited analysis included  about the exis ting NEB program (currently  the only active DG 
program) did not take into account the limitation on the C&I Tariff  enacted last ye ar.  
 Calculations about lost or foregone projected utility revenues are misleading,  particularly  if 
they are represented  as negative ratepayer impact, because  typically they are  based on 
what might happen  (undoubtedly an overstate ment to some degree , for multiple reasons ), 
and do not take into account the benefits  of DER , including both avoide d costs of the 
utilities  (whi ch reduce ratepayer impact) and benefits to all Maine people, including  all 
ratep ayers, which are not reflected in utility bills.  
 It definitely is possible to quantify bene fits, costs, and ratepayer impacts, despite the 
difficulty assigning  a value to things like clean air and reduced climate change, especially  
when comparing the merits of future options.  
 It appears eminently possible to structure a successor  program that benefits all Maine 
people, which either reduces  the rates paid by all investor -owned utility ratepayers or 
minimize s any net  negative impact  of future DER development . (See attached chart of the 
potential beneficial impact on ratepayers of the recommendation of the DG Stakeholder 
Group , as well as all Maine p eople. )  This is included as an illustration only.     
CMP has a three -year rate p lan pending at the PUC , to become effective in 2023 , with a n 
estimated half of the potential increase allocat ed to “energy policy objectives of the State of 
Maine. ”  (This includes but is not  limited to NEB.)   According to the company, this half would 
result in an increase  in its average residentia l customer electric bill of $2.32 in 2023, $1.39 in 
2024, and $1.18 in 2025.  It seems  unlikely that CMP under -estimated its costs , nor do es this 
reflect what  the PUC will approve .  These figures belie the scary future cost figures being 
espoused by certain people .  The CMP  figures do not indicate a crisis, and support the value of 
having a smooth transition in adopting a successor program that will minimize future impacts.  
Attachment  
 
SEAM LD 1347 EUT Committee Testimony Supplement # 1 (4 -14-23) 

Steven Weems
solar Energy Association of Maine
LD 1347
Please find supplemental testimony from the Solar Energy Association of Maine and 
Dirigo Community Solar Group as submitted on Friday, 
april 14.
