some enemy AssoolATl0:\2 or MAlNE 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1347 » 
An Act to Eliminate the Current Net Energy Billing Policy in Maine 
Steven Weems, Board Member, Solar Energy Association of Maine 
President, Dirigo Community Solar Group 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 13, 2023 _ 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and other members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology: my name is Steve Weems,a 
Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of Maine; also President of Dirigo 
Community Solar Group, a nonproﬁt association of 14 small, member-owned 
community solar farms. We respectfully oppose LD 1347 as a bill without any 
constructive provisions. There are far better ways to deal with the issue it seeks to 
address. 
Net energy billing (NEB) is a bedrock clean energy program in Maine and across 
the nation. lt is the backbone of our individual and collective response to worsening 
climate disaster. Some form of net energy billing is essential to allow individuals, 
businesses, and other entities of conscience to install clean energy equipment, orA 
participate in cooperative proiects generating renewable energy for them, and be 
charged on their utility bills only for any additional energy they need. About 25,000 
Maine electricity customers already have heeded this call (page 15, DG Stakeholder 
Group report). 
We have a national commitment to net energy billing, in various forms. NEB. 
projects have real benefits for all Maine people, as well as ratepayer costs. In Maine 
and elsewhere, continuous improvements can and should be made to the NEB program, 
to enhance the benefits and reduce any net negative impact on other ratepayers. Some 
of these are available now, notably through the successor program recommendations of 
the DG Stakeholder Group. These would take up to 90% ofthe pipeline projects 
44 Thompson St. Brunswick, ME 04914 1-3026 207.751.9437 www.solarenergy'maine.org
currently eligible for net energy billing out of this program and transform this volume so 
it reduces the costs of all ratepayers. Other rate cost reductions will be available with 
improved battery technology, two-way grid construction, and time-of-use rate designs. 
Making it virtually impossible for customers to take direct action to address theirV 
contribution to climate disruption would be a regressive action that hurts everyone. 
Distributed generation (DG) projects, including the smallest projects covered by 
the net energy billing program, are the foundation on which the dynamic, two-way grid 
ofthe future will operate. Unrealized utility revenues associated with NEB projects are 
not equivalent to negative ratepayer impact, due to the many beneﬁts of small projects. 
Chair Bartlett of the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) made this point recently. Good 
policy entails identifying refinements that will increase benefits and reduce costs. 
For example, data from CMP and Versant (November 2022) shows that 74% of all 
proposed projects are in the upper 2-5 MW ra ngg; and a mere 7% in the 0-1 MW 
category. (See chart on the next page, page 18 ofthe DG Stakeholder Group final 
report.) These smallest projects (0-1 MW) would decrease utility revenues about $12 
million per year, resulting in a 1.2% increase in the customer delivery charge only. This 
equates to an increase of about $0.60 per month for a typical residential customer, I
w i any offsetting benefits are considered. (Reference: ltem # 9, pages 5-6 of 
Appendix A to this testimony.) This is a very small ratepayer impact, which simply 
illustrates the value of being surgical about potential change, contrasted with simply 
eliminating net energy billing.
A 
In sum, we believe LD 1347 prescribes a destructive policy inconsistent witha 
clean energy future including distributed generation. There are more sensible ways to 
achieve ratepayer equity. Thank you for your service and consideration of our 
perspective.- 
Attachment: Total Pipeline of NEB projects, November, 2022 
Appendix A follows 
EAM LD 1347 EUT Committee Testimony 4-13-23 (final)
2
APPENDIX A 
Considering the complexities of electrical energy policy, the following policy 
framework is a mixture of facts and perspective we hope you will consider when dealing 
with individual renewable energy bills, including LD 1347. This following framework 
relates to renewable energy projects of all sizes, with special attention to distributed 
generation (DG) and net energy billing (NEB) projects. We use the common definition of 
distributed generation as projects up to 5 MW in capacity. The following list includes 
big-picture considerations, with supporting facts and commentary. Please excuse any 
parts that are self-evident.‘ 
V1. There is a global climate crisis that is getting worse, requiring action at all levels of 
government. Despite good intentions and some progress in curtailing the emission of 
greenhouse gases (GHG), global GHG emissions increased in 2021 and again in 2022. 
The most recent UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report, dated 
October 16, 2022, states that by 2030 GHG emissions must be cut by 43% from 2019 
baseline levels to avoid the worst impacts of climate disruption. - 
2. The only practical avenue to avoid climate disaster is to electrify almost 
everything, get off of fossil fuels, and produce the required electricity from renewable 
resources (and possibly some nuclear power). 
3. In Maine, solar energy is a foundation technology for what has _to be done. The 
technology and economics of solar energy are well-established. The technological, 
economic, and operational risks are known to be limited. Solarjelectricity is _cost 
effective over the life cycle of the equipment, and this continues to improve. 
4. We need solar electricity generation projects of all sizes for multiple reasons. 
These include (i) creating sufficient total generating capacity, (ii) siting considerations, 
and (iii) generating widespread public support. Large-scale projects have economies of 
scale (see # 5 below). Siting smaller projects close to load offers many unique ‘benefits, 
including the potential for dynamic, two-way generation and use. ln Maine, land use 
and cultural considerations indicate individual solar installations must be varied in size 
and dispersed to be accepted and add up to the necessary aggregate capacity.
3
5. Large renewable projects (land-based wind and solar) selling electricity wholesale 
are economically advantageous to everyone. Large, grid-scale solar projects offer 
undeniable economies of scale, although when making cost comparisons among 
procurements it is important to delineate what bundle of values the buyer (utility) is 
acquiring. These arenot always the same. [For example, who gets the value of the 
renewable energy certificates (RECs) makes a significant difference in the values being 
purchased, and therefore cost.] in any case, large-scale solar installations are driving 
down and stabilizing the average cost of electricity, to the benefit of everyone. it is our 
view that additional large-scale competitive procurements pursuant to Maine's 
renewable portfolio standards (RPS) legislation are desirable. 
5. Estimates of the hypothetical cost shift of distributed generation (DG) projects (up 
to 5 MW) to nonparticipating ratepayers are misleading. The highest estimates are 
based on pipeline numbers including many projects that will never be-built, due to grid 
constraints, siting and economic challenges, and recent legislated changes already 
enacted into law. Raw estimates of potential lost revenues to utilities are not the same 
as ratepayer cost shift, since DG projects result in certain reductions in utility costs 
(e.g., avoided capacity payments, reduced transmission line costs). Also, such estimates 
ignore customer benefits that do not show up their monthly bills, but affect their lives 
positively (societal benefits such as reduced pollution, local jobs, local control, and 
climate change mitigation). One could say these are ratepayer benefits, in the sense 
that just about every person in Maine is a "ratepayer," if they reside in a home that 
purchases electricity. Nevertheless, ”on-bill" electric rate equity considerations among 
ratepayers is an issue that should be taken into account, as done in the work of the 
distributed generation (DG) Stakeholder Group. 
7. The vast majority of any actual, on-bill net ratepayer cost shift resulting from DG 
renewable energy occurs in projects of 2-5 MW, which account for the rapid growth in 
DG. Rectifying this would solve the bulk of the ratepayer cost shift problem. This was 
the focus of the two years of work done by the DG Stakeholder Group, pursuant to 
LD 936 (2021). This included high quality analyses of (i) the full range of benefits and 
costs associated with this upper range of DG projects, (ii) a separate distinct 
examination of ratepayer bill impacts, and (iii) a specific recommendation fora 
successor DG program. Pending legislation embodying these recommendations would 
eliminate any future ratepayer cost shift from these projects. Projects of 2-5 MW would
4
actually provide a net financial benefit to all ratepayers. Specifically, the successor 
program recommended by the DG Stakeholder Group (the ”Hybrid" program) would 
have a benefit-cost ratio of 1.68; the ”Hybrid + Storage" combination program would be 
even better, with a benefit-cost ration of 2.71, (page 29 ofthe DG Stakeholder Group 
final report). When looked at solely from an electric ratepayer perspective, both the 
Hybrid and the Hybrid + Storage successor programs would decrease electric rates for 
all ratepayers (page 30, same report). 
8. Small-scale DG projects (up to 2 MW) have many unique benefits and are_ 
extremely popular, creating strong grassroots public support for the transition toj 
clean energy. These small, highly distributed projects provide an essential platform for 
the possibilities of the dynamic two-way, time-based local generation and use electrical 
system sector of the future. We need this electrical infrastructure for this purpose. -In 
addition, the NEB_concept provides a critically important avenue for individuals, 
families, small businesses, towns, schools, and other institutions to initiate clean energy 
projects. This is empowering and sustains public support for clean energy. Currently 
there are about 25,000 of these customers (page 15, DG Stakeholder Group final 
report). The essential aspect of NEB is the customer's ability to take direct action, as the 
designated off-taker of a project, to address climate disruption, whatever the design of 
the NEB rate or tariff.' 
9. Any actual cost shift to other ratepayers associated with all the smallest NEB 
projects (up to 1 MW) in the pipeline would be extremely low, well less than one 
percent (1.0%) of a nonparticipant customer's electric bill, or about S 0.60 per month 
for a typical residential customer. This is an-absolute worst case, ignoring any 
offsetting factors that would reduce the actual electric bill impact, based on the unlikely 
assumption that all planned NEB projects ofthis small size will be built. If pipeline NEB 
projects between 1-2 MW are included, theratepayer impact still would be very low. 
The assumptions, mathematics, sources, and notes related to these statements follow. 
Assumptions~ 
* Total annual Maine electricity consumption (use): 12,000 GWh (12,000,000,000 kWh) 
* Total Maine ratepayerpayments for electricity delivery only (all T&D charges): About 
S1 billion (12,000,000,000 kWh X $0.09/kWh)
5
* Total pipeline of NEB projects up to 1 MW: 120 MW (120,000 KW) (DG Stakeholder 
Group final report, p. 18, Governor's Energy Office — included as page 2a) 
* Average generation per KW of installed small-scale solar capacity (all types of NEB, 
including residential rooftop projects): 1,100 kWh/year/KW capacity (industry standard) 
Math 
* Annual future generation of small NEB pipeline projects: 132,000,000 kWh/year 
(120,000 KW project pipeline x 1,100 kWh/KW/year) 
* Lost utility annual revenue (i.e., maximum potential ratepayer cost shift) perQ 
year: about $12 million (132,000,000 kWh/ x $0.09/kWh delivery charge) 
* Cost shift percentage: 1.2% ($12 million/$1 billion) of delivery charge only (note this 
percentage would be far less of the total bill when the energy charge is included) 
* Monthly increase in typical residential electric bill (based on 550 kWh use per 
month): $0.60 (550 kWh x $0.09/kWh delivery charge x 1.2%) 
Worst Case Note: This is an exaggerated worst case. The actual cost shift to other 
ratepayers is likely to be less. Among the reasons for this are: 
* This simple analysis ignores on-bill benefits of DG (e.g., reduced utility peak load 
capacity payments, avoided transmission costs), which reduce net ratepayer cost. 
* These calculations include a significant amount of NEB project generation that is 
utilized immediately behind the meter, which is not lost revenue of the utility._ 
* Many NEB customersare electrifying their lives. This creates new revenues for 
utilities, when these NEB customers need electricity in addition to their NEB energy. 
Related Notes and Statistics 
* Historically, the amount of the Standard Offer energy charge has been comparable to 
the delivery charge (although the energy charge is about double the delivery charge 
right now). If this historical ratio were used, the cost shift calculated above would 
increase the total typical residential electricity bill by about six tenths of one percent 
(0.60%). 
* lf the total pipeline of NEB projects up to 2 MW were used in this ratepayer impact 
analysis, which includes an additional 340 MW of pipeline projects (see p. 18 of the GEO 
DG Stakeholder Group Report, as attached), the total bill maximum bill impact would
6
increase but still be very low at about 2.3% of the total amount of the typical residential 
electric bill (energy plus delivery). This would be about §2.3O[month, based on the, 
current delivery charge of about $0.09/kWh. 
* The foregoing figures relate to all future projects in the pipeline of the sizes specified, 
and disregard the potential offsetting factors that would reduce the actual bill impact. 
10. Keeping NEB as it is for small projects will provide a platform for future 
innovations like mutually-beneficial two-way energy flows, time-of-day pricing, and 
other features designed to eliminate even any minor cost shift associated with this 
established small-scale clean energy program category. 
SUMMARY 
Many economic studies, over the years, in Maine and elsewhere, have shown 
that solar electricity, including that produced by distributed generation (DG) resources, 
provide net benefits for all people. Solar energy is good for us and the planet. It 
reduces GHG emissions dramatically. The fuel is free, which stabilizes the cost of 
electricity and keeps more money in Maine. lt creates excellent Maine jobs. However, 
as pointed out explicitly in the recent economic analyses done for the DG Stakeholder 
Group by two consulting firms, there is an important distinction between (i) overall 
benefits and costs (benefit/cost ratio) and (ii) ratepayer impact. These considerations 
do not always align. Both are important to consider. _ 
Based on all the accumulated evidence, including the simple math included in this 
testimony, we think it is reasonable to conclude that solar electricity projects of all sizes 
are beneficial to all Maine people and should be encouraged by well-structured State 
policies. This assumes the recommendations of the DG Stakeholder Group are adopted, 
perhaps with certain refinements. Specifically, and with explicit consideration of 
ratepayer impacts, we think the following conclusions are warranted._ 
1. Procurements of large-scale solar projects (greater than 5 MW) should be 
accelerated to the extent practical. We need more grid-scale projects where they can 
be appropriately sited, and the grid can accommodate them. It seems like we are 
developing a lot of solar, but the in-state solar capacity can supply onlya tiny fraction of 
our total electricity use (well under 5%). Large-scale solar projects providing electricity 
to the grid at low wholesale prices are lowering the blended cost of electricity for all
7
ratepayers. Maine should haveas much ofthis type of clean energy capacity as can be 
sited appropriately, assuming beneficial bid pricing as determined by the PUC. 
2. Medium-scale projects (1 or 2 MW to 5 MW) should be embraced by enabling 
legislation consistent with the Hybrid or Hybrid + Storage options defined in the final 
report of the DG Stakeholder Group. As shown by economic consultants Synapse and 
SEA, this would eliminate any negative ratepayer cost shift associated with DG projects 
in this size range. This would be a real breakthrough causing these projects to reduce all 
ratepayer costs. This would create a justification for doing even more projects in this 
size range (by increasing the 7% limit of total capacity currently in force).g 
3. Small-scale NEB projects (up to 1 or 2 MW) should be continued as currently 
structured, with beneficial changes in the credit rate structure being introduced over 
time, for future projects. As shown, the nonparticipant ratepayer impact of operational 
and planned projects ofthis scale is extremely low. Continuously modernizing the NEB 
rate structure over time should eventually ensure this program is beneficial.to all_ 
ratepayers, including nonparticipants. ln the aggregate, these small projects account for 
a tiny fraction of the total electricity consumed in Maine. Small NEB projects create 
great public support for clean energy because they allow people to take direct action to 
mitigate climate change, and such small projects create the infrastructure for the 
dynamic electrical system of the future, including two-way energy flows. Small-scale 
NEB is a truly foundational program, in Maine and around the nation. 
SEAM is a broad coalition of solar energy supporters, advocating for the 
development of solar electricity of all project sizes and ownership models, for the 
benefit of all Maine people. It is a not-for-profit corporation governed by a diverse 
Board of Directors. Dirigo CSG is a nonprofit membership organization providing 
management services to 14 established, small community solar farms. All ofthese 14' 
separate projects are owned and managed by their members, a distinctly different 
business model from the larger community solar farms currently being developed by 
solar developers, who are selling subscriptions. The smaller group projects are all under 
1 MW in nameplate capacity. The member owners of these projects typically cannot 
put solar on their rooftops and own shares in a group project for this reason. These 
small group projects, individually and in the aggregate, have a negligible impact on other 
ratepayers.V
8
Figure7 
Net energy billing capacity in the pipeline, by project size 
November 2022A 
’ 
2SkWorless ‘a126kW-lMW Il.O1-2MW I2MWorm0re 
' 
@~z,w\w xlo vww T7,, 
|~2_:vw/ 34e_MW W/0 
we Mvf L1~¢i<> MW W1 
P 
W50 mv lO0"{,, 400 1,200 
1,000 
800                
. {Active Not Operational Pending Active Not Operational Pending 
Central Maine Power Versant Power 
Figure 8- 
Net energy billing capacity in the pipline, by project size, status, 
and program 
November 2022 
25kWorless i~.<s26kW-lMW Il.O‘l-2l\/lW lI2MWormore 
700 
600         
3 400 
(0 
9300 
5 200 
100P 
_ 
EI                                                                                               
' 
Central Maine Power Versant Power Central Maine Power Versant Power 
kWh program C&l tariff program 
Based on the average offtaker capacity illustrated in Figure 5 and Figure 6, as well as the potential net 
energy billing capacity in the program pipeline illustrated in Figure 8, an estimated additional 82,000— 
_, 18 I P a ge 
2a 
