~<< 
. 
, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
5% 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
p AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 Maureen Fitzgerald Terry 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Terry@legislature.maine.gov 
April 25, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry introducing 
LD 1136, An Act to Clarify Term Limitations for Legislators, Constitutional 
Officers and the State Auditor 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government, I am Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in 
House District 108. I am happy to be here to introduce LD 1136, An Act to Clarify Term 
Limitations for Legislators, Constitutional Officers and the State Auditor. 
In nearly every legislative term, for various reasons, at least one seat becomes vacant. 
Sometimes life circumstances change, be it a new job or family commitments, and a member can 
no longer serve. In other cases, many of us have served when a beloved colleague has passed 
away. 
Regardless of the circumstance, folks step up to ﬁll the remainder of that term through a special 
election to provide needed representation for their community. That newly elected member 
serves out the remainder of their predecessors ’ term. They often sit on the committee their 
predecessor requested and sat on, they have missed out the opportunity to submit bills and they 
have missed the orientations and training other members have received. In the case of the 
Senate, due to constitutional requirements, that seat must be ﬁlled even if the current Legislature 
will never meet again after the conclusion of the second session. 
This legislation seeks to provide some equity to those who step up to ﬁll these partial terms. 
Under the current law, someone who serves even one day is counted to have served a full term 
for the purpose of term limits. This proposal would allow someone who serves less than half of 
a predecessor ’s term to serve four full terms of their own before being termed out. 
We should not penalize those who step forward to serve out the remainder of a term, often fora 
few months, by denying them the ability to serve four full terms of service should they wish to 
serve and the voters of their community choose to send them. 
Speciﬁcally, the bill would require service in the ﬁrst session to be counted as a term and thus 
count toward their term limit count. Someone who served only in the second session or after the 
District I08: Gorham (part)
second session ended would be eligible to run for four full terms. I chose these time limits 
because the ﬁrst session makes up roughly 60% of our in-session time during most terms. Ifa 
member does not serve during the ﬁrst session, they are very likely serving less than 50% of their 
predecessor ’s term. 
I believe this proposal provides equity to those who step up to serve partial terms while honoring 
the spirit and intent of our term limit law. It ensures that a community is represented without 
putting that representative at a disadvantage going forward. 
I will also note that the bill as drafted includes the Constitutional ofﬁcers and State Auditor. All 
of these positions are combined under our term limit statute and the same principle applies. 
Should we for some reason need to appoint someone to those positions for a short period of time, 
they should be able to serve full terms in their own right should the Legislature choose to elect 
them. 
I urge you to support this legislation that simply provides equity to all those who serve in these 
roles. 
Thank you for your time and I ’m happy to answer any questions you may have.
