Ea Soltan BaSS,|_|_c 2%¢222r2%%%<rr 
A T E Y S A T W _ _ T 0 R N L A www soltanbass com 
PO Box 188 ~ 96 State Street, 2nd Floor - Augusta, ME 04332-0188 
CHARLES C. SOLTAN JAMES BASS 
Managing Member Member 
charles.soltan@soltanbass.com james.bass@soltanbass.com 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE ASSOCIATION OF INSURANCE 
COMPANIES 
LD 350 — AN ACT TO PREVENT DOG BREED DISCRIMINATION BY INSURANCE 
COMPANIES 
February 14, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Health Coverage, 
insurance & Financial Services Committee, l am Charlie Soltan, a resident of Winthrop, 
and appear here today on behalf of the l\/laine Association of Insurance Companies 
(MAIC) in strong opposition to LD 350. 
The members of the MAlC are Maine based property and casualty companies 
writing nearly all lines of personal and commercial insurance, including auto, 
homeowners, commercial risk, workers’ compensation, and medical professional liability 
insurance. We employ hundreds of Maine residents in well~paying professional and 
challenging jobs. Our collective mission is to serve our customers ’ interests after they 
have purchased our products to protect their homes, families, employees, businesses 
and financial interests from unexpected loss. 
This is an incredibly serious issue. Eliminating insurers ’ ability to decide how 
they underwrite homeowner ’s policies, and especially how each company chooses 
whether to and how to insure homeowners that own pets, especially dogs, would bea 
horrible public policy decision and will seriously and negatively impact every 
homeowner and renter that chooses to secure insurance for their financial protection. 
Homeowners are already facing increased costs due to the increased costs of 
building materials, the rising value of homes, and the increased costs of replacement 
goods, whether they be appliances, garage doors, furniture and other household goods. 
Forcing carriers to insure dangerous breeds is another inflationary factor that is both 
unnecessary and unwise.
I 
Q STATE LAW 
[TI RESOURCES, INC. 
an miemallonal network of 
independent law firms
We are fortunate in Maine to have a very competitive property & casualty 
insurance market. We have some of the most affordable homeowner rates in the 
country. Competition saves us, as consumers, money when insurance companies work 
hard for our business. Companies distinguish themselves on sen/ice, the breadth of 
coverage, pricing and responsiveness to the insureds as well as protecting the interests 
of their insureds. Because of this competition, insurers do differ on how they treat 
dangerous animals. 
But most importantly, a homeowner in Maine can always get homeowners 
insurance, regardless of their dog. Dozens of carriers offer it regardless of the breeda 
homeowner might own or acquire. Others choose to be more selective, as a way to 
reduce costs for their insureds that choose to not own potentially dangerous pets ora 
pet at all. This is just one way the companies compete for your business, besides 
entertaining you with geckos, ostriches, ducks, or mayhem. 
First, an oven/iew of pet ownership in our country: 
Millennials are the generation most likely to own pets, accounting for 32% of all 
pet owners. 
Approximately 23 million US households added a pet between March 2020 and 
May 2021. 
About 69 million households in the US own at least one clog. There are 
131.2 million households in the US. 
Roughly 45.3 million US households own at least one cat. 
Americans owned an average of 1.46 dogs per household in 2020. 
36% of dogs were purchased from breeders between March 2020 and May 2021 
33% of cats were acquired from friends, relatives, or neighbors during the same 
peﬂod. 
The Labrador Retriever is the most popular dog breed in America, with 98,300 
registered in 2020. 
Freshwater fish are the third most popular pet in the US, owned by 11.8 million 
households. 
Saltwater fish are the least popular pets, found in 2.9 million households. 
85% of dog owners and 76% of cat owners consider their pets family. 
The state with the highest rate of pet ownership is Wyoming at 72%. 
The rate of pet ownership is highest among people living in mobile homes at 
73.8(70 
The percentage of poultry kept as pets increased by 23% between 2012-2017. 
Approximately 6.3 million cats and dogs wind up in US animal shelters each 
year 
There are between 30-40 million community cats in the US
2
90% of dogs and 87% of cats adopted during the pandemic were still with their 
owners in May 2021. 
Approximately 390,000 dogs and 530,000 cats are euthanized in US shelters 
annually. 
Now the uglier part of dog ownership: 
According to CDC dog bite statistics, more than 4.5 million people report being 
bitten by dogs each year in the United States. 
More than 800,000 people per year report requiring medical attention for their 
dog bites. 
About 30-50 people are killed by dogs each year. In 2020, 46 people were killed 
Children are the most common victims of dog bites. 
Between 2000-2018, 45.9% of dog bite deaths occurred in people under 16 
years old 
Over 13 years, the highest percentage of dog bite deaths were in children 2 
years old or younger. 
Dog bite injuries in children increased during 2020 and the coronavirus 
pandemic. 
California and Texas reported the most dog bite fatalities between 2005-2017. 
More than 25 breeds were responsible for dog attack fatalities over the 20 years 
examined by this study. 
4% of dog bite fatalities were not caused by the family pet. 
In 2019, only 10% of the reported dog bite deaths could be linked to a specific 
breed. (Information not often collected) 
Pit Bull-type dogs and Rottweilers were held responsible for 75% of the 
fatal attacks where the breed was identified. 
Dogs with short, wide heads who weigh between 66-100 pounds are most likely 
to bite. 
The three breeds with the highest percentage of reported dog bites in one study 
were Pit Bulls, mixed breeds, and German Shepherds. 
A survey conducted in Colorado in 2007-2008 found that Labrador Retrievers 
were responsible for the most dog bites in the state during that year. 
More than 700 cities have breed-speci ﬁc laws or breed bans as of 2020. 
$854 million was paid by insurance companies for dog bite injuries in 2020 
The average cost for a dog bite insurance claim in 2020 was $50,245. 
More than 900 ER visits per day are for dog bite injuries. 
9,500 people per year are hospitalized for dog bites. 
As stated above, the average dog bite claim is currently $50,245. In 2013 when 
this proposal was last considered, the average dog bite claim was $29,396. Now think 
what your own homeowner ‘s policy cost. As you can easily determine, all of us are 
paying for each of these dog bite claims. 
LD 350 is extreme in its restrictions. LD 350 would prevent insurance carriers
3
from: 1. Cancelling; 2. refusing to issue; 3. non-renewing; or 4. charge an increase a 
premium solely on the basis of an ownership of a breed of dog. Unlike LD 1192 in 
2013, there is not even an exception if the dog is designated as a dangerous dog. See 
7 MRSA §3907, sub-§12-D. ‘ 
Since pit bull and Rottweiler breeds account for a large portion of the more 
serious injuries, we believe it ought to be up to each individual carrier to decide whether 
to and under what terms they wish to insure the owners of such animals. Preventing 
carriers from competing on this issue as well as exercising theirjudgment would bea 
major disservice to Maine homeowners and renters. There is reason Maine insurers 
continue to offer some of the best coverage and the best rates in the country—sound 
public policy. LD 1192 is not sound public policy. 
Obviously, given the above statistics, dog bite litigation is not uncommon. 
Lawyers in parts of the country specialize in this type of injury. Under Maine law, a dog 
owner can be legally responsible under three theories of law: common law strict liability, 
common law negligence and statutory liability under 7 MRSA §3961, sub-§1. See 
Morgan v. Marquis, 50 A.3d 1 (Me. 2012). Legal remedies are fortunately available. 
1 
12-D. Dangerous dog. "Dangerous dog" means a dog or wolf hybrid that causes the death of 
or inflicts serious bodily injury on an individual or a domesticated animal who is not trespassing on the 
dog or wolf hybrid owner's or keeper's premises at the time of the injury or death; a dog or wolf hybrid 
that causes a reasonable and prudent person who is not on the dog or wolf hybrid owner's or 
keeper's premises and is acting in a reasonable and nonaggressive manner to fear imminent serious 
bodily injury by assaulting or threatening to assault that individual or individual's domesticated animal; 
or a dog or wolf hybrid that inflicts bodily injury on an individual or a domesticated animal who is not 
trespassing on the dog or wolf hybrid owner's or keeper's premises at the time of the injury and has 
previously been determined by a court of competentjurisdiction to be a nuisance dog. 
"Dangerous dog" does not include: 
A. A dog certified by the State and used for law enforcement use; [PL 2017, c. 404, §2 (NE\/\/).] 
B. A dog or wolf hybrid that injures or threatens to assault an individual who is on the dog or wolf 
hybrid owner's or keeper's premises if the dog or wolf hybrid has no prior history of assault and 
was provoked by the individual immediately prior to the injury or threatened assault; or [PL 2017, 
c. 404, §2 (NEVV).] 
C. A dog or wolf hybrid that inflicts serious bodily injury on or causes the death of an individual 
who is committing a crime against an individual or property owned by the dog or wolf hybrid 
owner or keeper. {PL 2017, c. 404, §2 (NE\/\/).] 
For the purposes of this definition, "dog or wolf hybrid owner's or keeper's premises" means the 
residence or residences, including buildings and land and motor vehicles, belonging to the owner or 
keeper of the dog or wolf hybrid. 
[PL 2017, c. 404, §2 (RPR).]
4
But whether carriers must be forced to provide coverage to Mainers that insist on 
owning certain breeds of dogs that repeatedly demonstrate violent and injurious 
behavior is poor public policy. 
Maine’s Insurance Code is not silent on pet ownership and the vast majority of 
carriers insure homeowners and renters with pets. But in an attempt to balance the 
interests of pet owners against the interests of all homeowners and renters to maintain 
affordable insurance, carriers may cancel a policy after a dog bite claim unless the pet 
owner removes the pet from the home. 24-A MRSA §3049, sub-§9. Most carriers use 
theirjudgment in such cases after evaluating the severity of a claim. Yet this provision 
recognizes the societal goal of minimizing the danger to innocent 3"‘ parties aftera 
demonstrated and injurious behavior. 
Finally, it is our understanding that the sponsor has based the bill on a model act 
from the National Council of Insurance Legislators, or NCOIL. Unfortunately, the 
sponsor left out the second portion of the model act, choosing to include only the most 
restrictive portion. The 2"“ portion of the model act relates to dangerous dogs. 
Nevertheless, we would still be opposed to the LD id included. 
. 
LD 350 is simply poor public policy. lt negatively impacts homeowners that 
choose not to have a pet, or that have pets that cannot do serious injury to family 
members, children, and their neighbors. We strongly urge you to vote LD 350 Ought Not 
to Pass! Thank you for your time and consideration.
5
