131st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Sa 3 State House Station 
Augusta, iME 04333-0003 
Maine Ofﬁce (207; 237-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing 
LD 350, An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination by Insurance 
Companies 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
February 14, 2023 
Representative Perry and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, as you know, my name is Donna Bailey, andI 
proudly represent Senate District 31, which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. 
Today I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 350, “An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination 
by Insurance Companies. ” 
LD 350 is a straightforward bill. It would prohibit the cancellation, refusal to issue, or non- 
renewal of a property insurance policy solely on the basis of the breed of dog that a policyholder 
owns. It also prohibits an increase in the insurance premium based on the breed of dog. It’s no 
secret that some dog breeds are maligned or viewed as inherently violent. For example, pit bulls 
have a perception of being aggressive. They bite or scare people; they chase kids while they ride 
their bikes down the street. That perception is the result of decades of advertising, culture, and 
media deﬁning and reinforcing that stereotype. Pit bulls aren’t alone. Historically, insurance 
carriers have also declined issuing homeowners insurance to owners of German Shepherds, 
Rottweilers, and Doberman Pinschers- —amongst other breeds. These dogs carry the perception 
of being aggressive and violent, but neither the biological or scientiﬁc evidence back this 
perception up. According to the ASPCA, “This practice is unjustiﬁed and unsupported by data. 
There is also no evidence to support that insurance claims for the prohibited breeds are 
ﬁnancially signiﬁcant for insurance carriers relative to other paid losses.” In fact, according to 
the Insurance Information lnstitute, for 2020, dog bite claims in total cost less than 2% of 
insurers ’ liability losses. 
Outlawing dog breed discrimination has become a trend, and it’s ﬁnally trending in the right 
direction. In the past few years, states like Nevada and New York have passed legislation similar 
to this bill. The National Council of Insurance Legislators, a leading organization in putting 
forward model legislation affecting insurance nationwide, recently adopted the “Dog Breed 
Insurance Underwriting Protection Model Act.” This model legislation can be found here: 
https://33afce.p3cdn2.securesewer.net/wp-content/ ‘uploads/2022/ ’ 1 l/NCOIL-Dog~Breed-Model- 
Adopted-Nov.-2022.pdf.
This is good policy. If We prohibit dog breed discrimination, then We can support uninformed 
consumers who aren’t aware that insurance companies will deny coverage or increase their 
premiums, people of color who experience the racist perception of owning pit bulls, and 
consumers with low or moderate means who might not be able to afford to spay and neuter and 
properly train their dogs——no matter the breed. Also, are we going to continue to restrict housing 
options for Mainers during the ongoing housing crisis? Let’s outlaw this discriminatory, unfair 
practice that punishes dogs and pet owners alike. It’s the right thing to do. 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions about the bill. 
Donna BaileyS 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
2
