Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Jon Connor and I’m from the great 
city of Lewiston and here to testify in opposition to LD350.  
 
Today, I ask you to oppose this legislation for a very personal reason. As a former member of this 
committee  and having served with many of you , you know my family’s  story related to certain 
breeds of dogs. Many of you sent me notes, messages, and a kind word in these very halls to express 
your heartfelt sympathies  to me and my family —I am forever grateful to you.  
 
For those that don’t know, my 71 -year-old mother -in-law was viciously attacked by a neighboring pit 
bull on April 15, 2021  in Lewiston . She sustained life -long injuries that have permanently altered her 
way of life…both physically and emotionally.   
 
Could the vicious mauling that my mother -in-law endured have been prevented? Possibly. Did the 
dog’s owner believe that his dog was “harmless ” and “would never hurt anyone”? Perhaps. It’s my 
belief that laws should be enacted proactively to prevent the worst from happening, not reactionary 
after something bad happens.  
 
For this reason, I firmly believe that allowing insurance companies to disc riminate against certain 
breeds of dogs is a proactive approach to preventing unnecessary harm to persons or property. 
Waiting until there is a history of aggression in a dog before an insurance company can deny , cancel 
or increase the premiums on a policy  is the definition of reactionary lawmaking and will certainly 
result in future maulings.  
 
Please oppose this legislation  and allow insurance companies to deny or cancel coverage or to 
increase premiums for those who decide to put themselves and others at risk by owning certain 
breeds of dogs with known aggression.   
 
Thank you for your time today.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Jon Connor  
Lewiston  
Jon Connor
Lewiston
LD 350
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Jon 
Connor and I’m from the great city of Lewiston and here to testify in opposition to 
LD350.
Today, I ask you to oppose this legislation for a very personal reason. As a former 
member of this committee and having served with many of you, you know my 
family’s story related to certain breeds of dogs. Many of you sent me notes, messages,
and a kind word in these very halls to express your heartfelt sympathies to me and my
family—I am forever grateful to you.
For those that don’t know, my 71-year-old mother-in-law was viciously attacked by a 
neighboring pit bull on April 15, 2021 in Lewiston. She sustained life-long injuries 
that have permanently altered her way of life…both physically and emotionally.  
Could the vicious mauling that my mother-in-law endured have been prevented? 
Possibly. Did the dog’s owner believe that his dog was “harmless” and “would never 
hurt anyone”? Perhaps. It’s my belief that laws should be enacted proactively to 
prevent the worst from happening, not reactionary after something bad happens. 
For this reason, I firmly believe that allowing insurance companies to discriminate 
against certain breeds of dogs is a proactive approach to preventing unnecessary harm
to persons or property. Waiting until there is a history of aggression in a dog before an
insurance company can deny, cancel or increase the premiums on a policy is the 
definition of reactionary lawmaking and will certainly result in future maulings.
Please oppose this legislation and allow insurance companies to deny or cancel 
coverage or to increase premiums for those who decide to put themselves and others 
at risk by owning certain breeds of dogs with known aggression.  
Thank you for your time today.
Respectfully,
Jon Connor
Lewiston

