 
 
February 14, 2023 
 
RE: Testimony in Support  of LD 350 – An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination by Insurance Companies  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services, my name is Katie Lisnik  and I am the Executive Director the Greater Androscoggin Humane 
Society in Lewiston and Secretary  of the Maine Federation of Humane Societies (MFHS).  
 
I am offering  testimony in support of  LD 350 on behalf of MFHS  whose  board also includes representatives 
from the Animal Refuge League of Greater Portland in Westbrook, Animal Welfare Society in Kennebunk, 
Bangor Hu mane Society in Bangor, Greater Androscoggin Humane Society in Lewist on, Humane Society of the 
United States,  Maine State Society for the Protection  of Animals in Windham, PAWS Animal Adoption Center in 
Camden, Pope Memorial Humane Society in Thomaston, an d Spirits Place in St. Albans .  
 
As shelters and rescues, it is our job to place homeless animals in loving and stable homes.  We also work to 
keep animals in homes where they are loved, but the family may be struggling with a barrier. While cost is a 
significant barrie r in housing challenges, it  isn’t the only obstacle. Currently, many insurance providers deny 
coverage or renewal to homeowners and renters  through  policy exclusions or limitations based solely on the 
specific breed of dog  in th e family . 
 
These policies severely reduce options for our community members  and can challenge  low-income households 
contributing to housing insecurity, as well as causing many dogs to be needlessly surrendered to animal 
shelters and rescues because their l oving family cannot find or afford home insurance while keeping the dog.  
It also poses challenges to our life -saving work as dogs of particular breeds sit in our facilities for no reason 
other than insurance challenges.   
 
The Maine legislature prohibited municipalities from regulating dogs based solely on their breed in 1991 and 
new research has confirmed that arbitrary breed restrictions do not translate to increased public safety. Based 
in sound science, LD  350 encourages insurance companies to rely on a n individual dog’s behavior history to 
evaluate risk. Growing changes in the insurance industry and in legislatures across the country highlight that 
this is the right step for Maine. We ask the committee to  vote ought to pass on LD 350.  
 
Thank you for yo ur consideration and opportunity to submit testimony . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Katie Lisnik  
 
Katie Lisnik 
Secretary  
Maine Federation of Humane Societies  
info@mefed.org  
 

