 
 Atlanta  •  Kanab  •  Los Angeles  •  New York City  •  Salt Lake City
Best Friends Animal Society5001 Angel Canyon Road, Kanab, UT 84741 bestfriends.orgFebruary 14, 2023  Maine Legislature Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Via online portal submission  Re:  LD 350; SP 0157: An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination by Insurance Companies  Dear Chairwoman Bailey and Committee Members,  Please accept this letter as the testimony of Best Friends Animal Society in support of LD 350; SP 0157: An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination by Insurance Companies. Best Friends is a leading national animal organization dedicated to ending the euthanasia of dogs and cats in America's shelters. In addition to running lifesaving programs in partnership with more than 2,800 animal welfare groups across the country, including 12 in Maine, Best Friends works to advance regulations, policies and legislation that support communities’ efforts to adopt humane best practices.   More than 69 million families own dogs and 95% of American view their pets as members of the family. More than half of dog owners acquire their pet after they purchased their home insurance coverage and do not inform their insurance company of their new pets. Consumers do not and should not need to consider their insurance’s arbitrary pet restrictions before adopting a dog. Furthermore, insurance companies should not dictate the breed or type of dog a person can own. The broad range of pets impacted by outdated insurance company standards includes Great Danes, American Staffordshire terriers, Doberman pinschers, Rottweilers, huskies, and malamutes, plus any dog believed to be mixed with any of these breeds. Having a certain type of dog should not prevent otherwise responsible consumers from finding and keeping affordable homeowners or renters insurance for their families.  A legislature should strive to ensure every consumer, regardless of their race, has access to adequate homeowner’s and renter’s coverage. The history of discriminatory insurance practices, such as redlining, require legislators to continually examine insurance company policies and institutional biases that can result in racial discrimination, even if these practices have not faced scrutiny in the past. Insurance companies’ breed restriction lists can disproportionally impact people of color just as other underwriting guidelines have done in the past. Several published scholarly studies support the notion that singling out the breed of a dog can result in discrimination based on race.    A correlation exists between dog breed and race as it relates to public perception of who is more likely to own a particular dog. Ann Linder, a research fellow at Harvard, in “The Black Man’s Dog: The Social Context of Breed Specific Legislation” analyzed the impacts of breed specific legislation on race.  Linder presented six photos of different dog breeds (American pit bull 
terrier, Maltese, dachshund, golden retriever, collie, and German Shepherd) and asked participants who they thought would own each type of dog based on gender, race and ethnicity, and age. Unlike the other five breeds, pit bull terriers were perceived as most commonly belonging to people of color - specifically young black males. The perception was consistent regardless of the participant’s race or gender, and Linder concluded that pit bulls are being targeted, in part, due to racial bias. Because arbitrary breed exclusions in property insurance may result in a discriminatory impact on racial minorities, the focus of insurance questions should shift from appearance to the actual behavior of the dog and the owner.   Recently, Nevada, Arizona, and New York passed similar legislation to prohibit insurance companies from using arbitrary breed lists to refuse to renew or cancel coverage or to otherwise treat the family disparately.  Even more importantly, in 2022, the National Council of Insurance Legislators passed a model law prohibiting this practice, and legislators in more than eight states have introduced this model law or a version of it in the 2023 legislative session. Other national organizations like the American Bar Association, the National Black Caucus of State Legislators, and the National Animal Care and Control Association have adopted policies opposing breed specific policies and laws in favor of those which address specific dog and owner behavior.   For these reasons, we respectfully ask the committee to vote yes on LD 350; SP 0157 and to take the next step to ban breed specific policies and their disparate and negative impact on Maine families.   Thank you for your kind consideration.  Respectfully,    Kelsey Gilmore-Futeral, Esq. Legislative Attorney Best Friends Animal Society kfuteral@bestfriends.org 
