Robert Fisk, Jr.
Maine Friends of Animals
LD 350
                        TESTIMONY OF ROBERT FISK, JR.
                 Founder and President of Maine Friends of Animals
        Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
                                          February 14, 2023
IN SUPPORT of L.D. 350 “An Act to Prevent Breed Discrimination by Insurance 
Companies”
Good afternoon Sen. Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the 
committee. My name is Robert Fisk, Jr. and I am the founder and President of Maine 
Friends of Animals. We have been a voice for animal welfare in Maine for over 25 
years. I wish to first thank Sen. Bailey for bringing forward this needed legislation. 
Legislation that is long overdue.
In a time when available housing is an issue in our state, Maine households should not
have another road block to securing that basic need, especially when it is not based on
any credible study. The cancellation or non-renewal of a property insurance policy or 
its increase in the premium based on the breed of an animal is without basis. There is 
no evidence that any breed of dog is inherently more violent than any other.
Unfortunately, over time, a false narrative developed and a misperception has 
resulted. A restricted insurance list may include Rottweilers, German Shepherds, 
Doberman Pinschers, Alaskan Malamutes, and of course Pit Bulls, and what about 
mixed breeds? The problem is the policy is based on a falsehood that dog behavior is 
inherent, when it is actually learned. The problem lies with the owner, not the dog. In 
recent years, this issue has been highjacked by irresponsible owners and gang 
members described by the ASPCA as those “whom view the dog as a menacing status
symbol rather then a beloved pet.” Those owners can and do train their dogs to be 
menacing, just as a good caretaker can treat and train them to be loving companion 
animals. In cases where the individual can demonstrably be shown to engage and 
encourage the dog into aggressive behavior, then that person should be held 
accountable for the consequences of said behavior.  
However, the problem is an unfair insurance policy that places an arbitrarily and 
discriminatory restriction on responsible dog owners. Dogs bite people every day, but 
we have dangerous dog laws to address them. This proposed bill addresses what NY 
legislation recently called “animals unfairly maligned as inherently violent.”
We urge the committee to vote “OUGHT to pass” on LD 350. I would be happy to 
respond to any committee member questions.
