TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN SUPPORT  
LD 350, “An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination by Insurance Companies ” 
Committee On Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
February 14, 202 3 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and distinguished  Committee members,  
Thank you for considering my comments in strong support of LD 350, An Act to Prevent Dog Breed Discrimination by Insurance 
Companies.   I am thrilled to see this  initiative under consideration once again.   
Although Maine homeowners can now choose a  progressive  insurer, such as State Farm, that no longer relies on the archaic  
methodology of a "dangerous  dog” breed list to appr ove or renew coverage, renters do not have that same option .  Renters, who are 
already  facing a tough  housing  market in Maine, are forced to rely on the policy that the landlord has chosen, a choice  that is usually  
based on cost or coverage thresholds, not dog breeds.   Additionally, first -time ho meowners are often unaware of potential  breed 
restriction s and find out only after they have committed to a policy.  
I have pe rsonal experience with the  homeowner insurance breed restrictions.  Over 25 years ago,  I bought my first home .  Upon 
closing , I fulfilled  a lifetime dream by heading  straight  to my local shelter to adopt a dog . I ended up bringing home two senior dogs and 
a semi -feral cat.  A short time later, a conversation with my insurance  agent revealed that Brand y, one of the dogs  I adopted , was on 
their “ dangerous dog” breed  list and w as not allowed un der my homeowner ’s policy.  Brandy wa s a 10-year-old Dalmatian /Lab mix who 
had been sitting at the shelter  for months  with no interest .  She was obese , vocal and had mobility issues.  She was also temperament  
tested by the s helter staff prior to adoption and passed with flying colo rs.  She loved every person and animal that crossed her path .  
Thankfully, my agent was sympathetic  to Brandy ’s story.  I nstead of making me return  a sweet senior dog to the shelter, she took into 
consider ation that Brandy w as a mixed breed , senior dog and made a  then unusual  exception  to the rules.  
These arbitrary restrictions result in beloved , well -socialized  family members being ripped from their homes and surrende red to local 
shelters.  Additionally, they greatly impede the ability of animal adoption agencies  to place dogs in deserving homes.  I operated a dog 
rescue in Maine for over a decade , during  which time I received many dogs that were surrendered due to insurance breed restrictions . 
Additionally, I was forced to regularly turn down  qualified adoptive homes due to the same insurance constraints . 
Anyone who works with dogs knows th at any dog, regardless of breed, can bite  under the right circumstances .   
• According to the ASPCA : “A variety of factors may affect a dog’s tendency toward aggression; these include her edity, early 
experience, socialization and training, sex and reproductive status  (Lockwood, 1999). ” 
 
• Studies conducted by the Center for Disease Control  revealed that  a chained /tethered dog is almost three times more likely to 
bite than one that is no t.  Most victims of chained dog attacks are children .   
 
• A report on bite prevention from the American Veterinary Medical Association  states: “Intact (unneutered) male dogs 
represented  80% of dogs presented to veterinary behaviorists  for dominance  aggression, the most diagnosed  type of 
aggression.  Intact males are also  involved in 70 to 76% of reported dog bite incidents .” 
 
Instead of making policy decisions based on breed, insurers should consider and restrict factors proven to increase  bite risk .  
Additionally , insur ance companies  should  encourage responsible dog ownership by providing rewards or discounts for a fenced in yard, 
and/or completion of basic obedience training  courses and other certification s. 
It is time for  all insurance companies in Maine to base  policies in fact and science  and not support unsubstantiated  breed  
discrimination . Please  vote ou ght to pass on L. D. 350.  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
Susanna Richer  
Portland, Main e 
Sources : 
A community approach to dog bite prevention  
https://www.avma.org/advocacy/state -local-issues/community -approach -dog-bite-prevention -abstract   
Chained dog findings  
https://www.peta.org/issues/animal -companion -issues/cruel -practices/chaining -dogs/chained -dog-findings/   
 
ASPCA position statement : Breed -specific legislation  
https://www.aspca.org/about -us/aspca -policy -and-position -statements/position -statement -breed -specific -legislation  
Homeowner ’s insurance : Banned dog breed list   
https://www.f orbes.com/advisor/homeowners -insurance/banned -dog-breed -lists/ 
It’s not the breed, it ’s the dog b ite 
https://www.statefarm.com/simple -insights/family/its -not-the-breed -its-the-dog-bite 
 
 
 
