 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Testimony of Emily Ferry  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 25 , 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1506 , “Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Study the Scarcity of 
Licensed Clinical Behavioral Health Professionals Across the State ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative  Sargent  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Emily Ferry, Director of Workforce Initiatives at Maine 
Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
We su pport LD 1506 and thank Representative Sargent  and the other co -sponsors for bringing this bill 
forward. Ensuring access for behavioral health services remains a priority for MPCA and our Community 
Health Center Network . Maine is experiencing acute workforce shortages in many health care 
professions and there is a pronounced need for more mental health professionals  across our network . 
CHCs are doing everything they can to ensure that patients receive the quality treatment they deser ve, 
but mor e help is needed  to address this growing crisis .  
 
In April 2023 , there were 29 vacant behavioral health positions across Maine’s CHC Network, which 
includes school -based sites. Our health centers are in dire need of professionals to fill positions such as 
LCSWs, LCPCs, psychiatric nurse practitioners, psychologists, an d substance use disorder (SUD) 
counselors. It is critical that we address issues related to  the recruitment and training of  clinical 
behavioral health professionals  to ensure that we are providing the required  mental and physical health 
supports for  all Maine people.  
 
We respectfully ask that the Committee consider adding  individuals with  lived experience navigating 
access to training and education  as members of the  stakeholder group . This could include  healthcare 
staff currently interested in career advancement  by obtaining a degree or licensure in behavioral health 
fields, or students and recent graduates . These voices would provide an important perspective  on real-
world barriers to accessing educational opportunities , costs associated with education programs , and 
methods to empower  individuals  to work in the field while attaining a degree or certification.  
 
We also want  to note our strong support for the current bill language that requires the stakeholder 
group to examine “ opportunities to count time working in the field toward attaining an advanced 
degree or certification .” There are current behavioral hea lth staff , such as  case managers , SUD 
counselors,  and behavioral health support specialists , who are not licensed a s behavioral health 
professionals, but their job requirements have them doing  extensive  work in this field. When they seek 
an advanced  degree  or licensure in the behavioral health field , years of field experience are not 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  accounted for , despite the tremendous amount of lived experience they already have accumulated. This 
barrier can be a deterrent for many individuals  interested in career advanc ement . 
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at eferry@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Emily Ferry, MSW  
Director of Workforce Initiatives  
Maine Primary Care Association  
