northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1506 Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to  
Study the Scarcity of Licensed Clinical Behavioral Health  
Professionals Across the State 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations 
in support of  this bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals 
located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and 
ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and 
specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three 
percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern 
Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with more than 10,000 
employees statewide. 
 
I have had the honor of working on nursing workforce legislation for the past 20 years 
and came to learn early on in this work the critical need to forecast current and future 
supply and demand trends.  The dynamic of the nursing workforce applies to all Maine’s 
health care workforce as the oldest state in the nation, our workers are generally older 
than workers in other states.  This means that our retirement cliffs tend to have more 
significant impact as a large number of workers leave employment at similar periods of 
time.  Knowing the number of workers needed now and projecting the timeline when 
workers will leave the workforce is critically important.  This allows us to determine 
what capacity we need to build into our health professions education programs to 
increase the number of graduates.    
 
In 2017 the Maine Nursing Action Coalition projected that Maine would have a shortage 
of 3200 RNs by 2025.  This was a call to action for our nursing education programs 
hospitals and health care settings to work together to increase the number of new nurse 
graduates annually.  We were successful, between 2017 and 2021, 1000 new  nurses 
entered the workforce with an average age less than 35.  Infusing this number of 
younger nurses into the workforce has reduced the projected shortage to 2,250 RNs by 
2025.  Still a large number but we have had positive  impact and our work to increase 
student capacity continues.   
 
I emphasize the nursing experience in my testimony today to demonstrate why this bill 
is so important.  We know we have a shortage of behavioral health professionals; 
patients are waiting for many months to receive services and the most acute adults and 
children are “living in our hospital emergency departments”.  Increasing capacity 
requires that we know how many behavioral health professionals we need today, how 
many we need to add to the workforce over the next 10 years, what our educational 
capacity is and how many more graduates are needed.  This bill provides the framework 
 needed create a data driven approach to address the behavioral health access 
challenges and serve the people of Maine.  
 
I ask that you support this important legislation so we can answer the most important 
question of all, what’s the number needed.  With this we can make targeted 
investments to produce the workforce for the future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
