'
l 
1' 
“' 
Officers" 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1" Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"" Vice- 
President 
laineGeneral Behavioral Healt 
' 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP lnc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Cent: 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
_' 
Spurwink 
"‘ Board Members "’ 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
ldroscoggin Home & Healthca 
Assistance Plus 
' 
i Catholic Charities, Maine 
1 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
I 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
I Crossroads Maine 
i 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
y Maine Behavioral Health' 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
; Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
>ortland Recovery Communit\ 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
‘i Sweetser 
'iCounty Mental Health Servici 
Wellspring, lnc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 1506 
“Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Convene a Stakeholder Group to Study the Training and Recruitment of 
Behavioral Health Professionals"' 
Sponsored by Representative SargentA 
April 25, 2023 _ 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of 
the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. My name is Malory 
Shaughnessy and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine's community based mental health and substance use 
treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound 
policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, lam here today to speak in support of LD 15061 
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Convene a 
Stakeholder Group to Study the Training and Recruitment of Behavioral Health 
Professionals." As members of Maine's legislature and specifically, as members of 
this committee, you don't need me to tell you that Maine is experiencing a severe 
workforce shortage.I 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to convene a 
stakeholder group to review issues related to the training and recruitment of all 
levels of behavioral health care professionals. The resolve requires the 
department to submit a report related to the study to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services and authorizes the committee to 
report out a bill relating to the report.I 
The Alliance would respectfully request to have a place on this stakeholder group. 
The workforce shortages within the behavioral health safety net providers of the 
Alliance are growing and we need to have solid data and solid plans for how to 
meet these increasing shortages. 
A 2018 report by the U.S Department of Health and Human Services Health' 
Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Workforce, National 
Center for Health Workforce Analysis, titled "State-Level Projections of 
Supply and Demand for Behavioral Health Occupations: 2016'-2030" already 
projected shortages growing in Maine for all behavioral health occupationsl . 
This was before the severe workforce impacts of the Covid Pandemic. 
1 
https://bhw.hrsa.gov/sites/defauit/files/bureau-health —workforce/data-research/state-level-estimates-reporb 
2U18.QClf 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 '" 
theAllianceMaine.org .
l
l
We know this administration has already taken some measures to advance overall healthcare 
workforce shortagesl , but this bill would focus in depth on the behavioral health field, which is sorely 
needed. We already see in the papers nearly every day how patients are languishing in our 
emergency departments awaiting a bed for inpatient care, or awaiting services to be available for 
outpatient support. This bill would provide the framework needed to create a data driven approach 
to address these challenges and assure that Maine people have access to the qua|ity;behaviora| 
health services they need and deserve. 
Thank you for your time today. I urge an ought to pass vote on this bill, am happy to answer any 
questions you have for me and to bring any requested information to the work session. 
1 
https:1/www.maine.gov/dhhs/biog/dhhs~advances-health —care~workforce —clevelopment-strategy-2023-O4-O7 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “’ Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
