 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of Behavioral Health  
11 State House Station  
41 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -2595 ; Fax: (207) 287 -9152  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage,  Insurance , and Financial Services 
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1506 , Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Study the 
Scarcity of Licensed Clinical Behavioral Health Professionals Across the State  
 
Senator Bailey , Repre sentative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage,  Insurance , and Financial Services: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information for the Committee’s consideration 
regarding LD 1506 , Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Study 
the Scarcity of Licensed Clinical Behavioral Health Professionals Across the S tate.  
 
This Resolve would require the Department to convene a stakeholder group to study issues 
related to training and recruitment of clinical behavioral health professionals.  Should the 
Committee be inclined to move forward with this study, the Office o f Behavioral Health would 
like to share a few suggestions:      
 
- The timeline for reporting should be extended.  The current timeline of just 6 months 
(July 1, 2023 – December 6, 2023) is too tight  to generate a quality report.  
- Either this should be a study  staffed by the Legislature or the Department should be 
allocated resources to contract with an entity to research, convene, and facilitate this 
group. OBH does not have existing capacity to do this work.  
- Additional or other representatives should  have a voice in this conversation , including but 
not limited to the Consumer Council System of Maine and the Departments of Labor and 
Professional and Financial Regulation.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide information. Please let us know h ow else we 
might be of service.  
 
Sincerely,  
Sarah Squirrell  
Sarah Squirrell  
Director , Office of Behavioral Health  
