 
 
1 Research and Market Observations on Automotive  Repair Restrictions, April 2019  
2 Massachusetts Vehicle Repair Cost Study, October 20, 2020  
3 IHS Markit and Roland Berger  
 
 
 
 
May 8, 2023  
Committee On Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LB 1677 , AN ACT RELATING TO MOTOR VEHICLES RIGHT 
TO REPAIR  
 
Dear Chairm an Chip Curry and Chairwoman Tiffany Roberts :  
 
As the Government Affairs Manager for LKQ Corporation in the Northeast , I respectfully ask you to 
support LB 1677  which is set to be heard before the Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advan cement and Business  on May 9, 2023 . LB 1677  protects a consumer’s right to 
choose . It allows the consumer to decide  where, when , and by whom they have their vehicle repaired.  
 
LKQ has over 40 employees at 4 Maine facilities located in Bangor , Gardiner , and Gorham . LKQ 
Corporation, an S&P 500 company, is a leading provider of alternative and specialty parts to repair 
and accessorize automobiles and other vehicles. We offer our customers a broad range of 
replacement systems, components, equipment, parts and services to repair, calibrate, and accessorize 
automobiles, trucks, and recreational and performance vehicles. We employ 15,000 people 
nationwide and operate more than 4 40 facilities in 4 6 states.  
 
As the technology in vehicles ha s become increasingly advanced, auto manufacturers have found 
ways to restrict access to vehicles’ necessary repair and maintenance data. These restrictions squeeze 
independent repair shops out of the market, limiting repair op tions , impacting consumer safety, and 
raising costs  for the Maine  consumer. Specifically, LB 1677  addresses these emerging barriers and 
supports consumer choice by:  
 
• Leveling the playing field to give independent repair shops an equal opportunity to compe te 
in the automotive aftermarket. At least 37% of the vehicles in the U.S. have at least one 
repair affected by limited data access1. When access to necessary data is restricted, 
independent repair shops cannot complete proper repairs and maintenance.  
 
• Lowering repair costs for Maine  drivers  who need it most . On average, consumers spend 
36% more on repair at dealerships than at an inde pendent repair shop2. Higher repair costs 
will further hurt Maine  families already struggling against inflation, high fuel prices,  supply 
chain issues, and product backorders.  
 
• Promoting vehicle safety on the roads by i ncreasing repair options for consumer s. The 
average age of a vehicle today is 12 years old, and 77% of vehicles on the road are older than  
 
 
1 Research and Market Observations on Automotive  Repair Restrictions, April 2019  
2 Massachusetts Vehicle Repair Cost Study, October 20, 2020  
3 IHS Markit and Roland Berger  
 
 
 
 
seven years3. Without sufficient access to repair options, service on these older vehicles will 
likely be delayed putting Maine  drivers at risk.  
 
• Preventing even longer repair times for Maine  consumers who depend on their vehicles. 
Restricting necessary repair and maintenance data would exacerbate supply chain disruptions 
that have already caused months -long repairs in the aftermath of the pandemic.   
 
As the Co-Chairs  of this committee , I hope you will recognize the problems that limited data access 
presents to the automotive aftermarket , independent repairers, and Maine  consumers . It is paramount 
to keep drivers safe on the road, and LB 1677  protect s consumer choice and consumer access to  high 
quality and affordable vehicle repair.  On behalf of LKQ Corporation , I ask you to please consider the 
positive impact this legislation would have on  the lives of Maine  drivers and independent repair 
shop s.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any questions. I can be reached at (305) 720 -1877.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
 
Andreas Heiss  
Government Affairs Representative  
LKQ Corporation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

