 
 
 
 
 
 
TechNet North east | Telephone 774.230.6685  
One Beacon Street, Suite 16300, Boston, MA 02108  
www.technet.org | @TechNet NE 
 
Austin  • Boston  • Chicago • Denver • Harrisburg • Olympia • Sacramento  • Silicon  Valley  • Washington,  D.C.  
 May 9, 2023  
 
The Honorable  Chip Curry, Senate Chair  
The Honorable Tiffany Roberts, House Chair  
Joint Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1677 – An Act Regarding Automotive Right to Repair  
 
Dear Chair Curry, Chair Roberts, and members of the Committee : 
 
I write on behalf of TechNet in opposition to LD 1677 which would mandate that 
automakers provide open access to digital information pro duced by automobiles.  
 
TechNet is the national, bipartisan network of technology CEOs and senior executives 
that promotes the growth of the innovation economy by advocating a targeted policy 
agenda at the federal and 50 -state level.  TechNet's diverse membership includes 
dynamic American businesses ranging from startups to the most iconic companies on the 
planet and represents over five million employees and countless customers in the fields 
of information technology, e -commerce, the sharing and  gig economies, advanced 
energy, cybersecurity, venture capital, and finance.  TechNet has offices in Austin, 
Boston, Chicago, Denver, Harrisburg, Olympia, Sacramento, Silicon Valley, and 
Washington, D.C.  
 
Telematics are the wireless technologies that enab le safer and more efficient vehicles. 
Things like rear -view cameras, lane assist and collision -avoidance technologies, GPS and 
more are all powered by digital information that is currently protected by a robust security 
infrastructure. LD 1677 and the comp anion ballot initiative would mandate that 
automakers provide open access to all of this sensitive data. This would create a massive 
risk for consumer privacy and the operation of vehicle controls.   
 
TechNet strongly opposes this legislation and the ballo t initiative. Thank you for your 
consideration and please do not hesitate to contact me if I can provide any additional 
information.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Christopher Gilrein  
Executive Director, Northeast  
TechNet  
cgilrein@technet.org  

