Testimony In Support of LD 1677 
‘ 
"An Act Regarding Automotive Right to Repair" 
Good afternoon, Chair Curry, Chair Roberts and distinguished members of the 
Joint Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business. Please accept this as my written testimony in support of LD 1677, "An 
Act Regarding Automotive Right to Repair." 
My name is Shawn Moody and I am the founder of Moody’s Collision Centers, a 
co-worker owned company with 14 locations throughout Maine. Moody’s 
Collision Centers began as “Moody’s Body Shop” in the fall of 1977 at its current 
Gorham location. I was a senior at Gorham High School, had a vision of providing 
service to local residents that exceeded their expectations. With over 300,000 
customers vehicles repaired and growing, Moody’s philosophy centers on 
community support, customer loyalty and co-worker dedication. I testiﬁed at the 
last “Right to Repair” hearing. With dozens of independent Maine small business 
testifying in favor of Right to Repair we received nearly unanimous support from 
the Legislative Committee. Then what happened next put us 10 years behind. We 
were told let’s wait because there’s a National movement which will result in 
Federal action on this. It never happened. So here we are again, I’ll share with you 
what I shared last time in person.r 
“We built our business by taking care of our customers, standing behind our 
workmanship with a Lifetime Warranty and keeping our services affordable 
(currently $60 per hour)” . That may seem like the old fashioned way to some 
however in Maine that is the recipe in how to grow a business. When customers 
are forced to go to a speciﬁc business by an Automobile Manufacturer because 
they have technology that is proprietary that not only drives up costs (most dealers 
are $100+ per hour) but more importantly provides them with an unfair 
competitive advantage. Let the Auto Manufacturers grow their business like the 
rest of us by earning it ! Please vote to support Right to Repair and ensure Maine’s
independent repairers have a fair and level playing ﬁeld to compete for customers. 
The more competition the better for all consumers ! 
The real strength of Moody’s is in our co-workers. We have the most dedicated, 
committed, and qualiﬁed co-workers in the industry. They care about you, your vehicle and the quality of the workrnanship Moody’s performs. Because Moody’s is employee owned, each and every co-worker has a stake in the business and 
therefore a vested interest in being the best that they can be. 
With that being said, if the State of Maine does not enact Automotive Right to 
Repair, independent, employee owned shops such as Moody’s Collision Center 
will have a hard time surviving down the road. As newer cars are available with 
technological advancements such as telematics that are used to diagnosis what is 
wrong with a vehicle, unless we have the same access as the dealers and 
manufacturers, we will not be able to compete with them. This citizen’s initiative 
simply levels the playing ﬁeld for more than 700 small locally owned shops like 
Moody’s. 
Thank you for your time and the co-workers of employee owned Moody’s 
Collision Centers encourage you to support Automotive Right To Repair.
