4 
§T'&‘i %§— 
¥_*§ 
4» 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Traffic Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHTEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY CHIEF 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
AGAINST LD 63 
An Act to Clarify That Certain Imported Motor Vehicles Are Not Off-road 
Vehicles 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the Ioint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Lt. Bruce Scott, andI 
am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Traffic Safety Unit. I am 
here today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the 
Maine State Police in Opposition of LD 63. 
This bill aims to change the current deﬁnition of an “off road" vehicle to 
exempt motor vehicles imported pursuant to 49 United States Code, Section 
3011z(b)(9). That federal code is simply an exemption to allow the 
importation of non-conforming vehicles that are 25 years or older. To allow 
non—conforming vehicles to be registered for use on a public way just 
because they are old seems counterintuitive to Traffic Safety. Federal law 
prohibits these vehicles from being imported into the United States because 
they don’t meet Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS), 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pollutant requirements or the 
National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA) DOT crash testing 
standards. But Federal law provides an exemption when these vehicles are 
25 years or older. They don't suddenly become safer to operate on public 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
ways the year they reach 25 years of age. The American Association of Motor 
Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA) and the Insurance Institute for Highway 
Safety (IIHS) recommend that all states ban these vehicles for highway use 
due to their safety concerns. The lack of safety components like airbags and 
crumple zones cause some of these vehicles perform very poorly in crash 
testing. Many of these vehicles are imported and used on private properties 
like farms, campgrounds, theme parks, fairgrounds and other off highway 
locations. Most countries that export these vehicles have a reverse excise 
program, meaning the older the vehicle gets the more expensive it becomes 
to register, thereby incentivizing owners to get rid of them as they age and 
replace them with newer, safer and greener models. 
Statistics show that right hand vehicles are approximately 2.7% more likely 
to be involved in a crash than left hand drive vehicles and most of these 
imported vehicles are right hand drive. Also, the headlights are designed to 
illuminate towards the left (towards the ditch in other countries) which 
blind oncoming motorists and these headlights can’t simply be adjusted 
back to the right where they become properly aimed. The entire assembly 
needs to be replaced so that the reﬂectors on the inside of the lens are 
pointed in the right direction to avoid blinding others. In addition to those 
concerns, we don’t have way of knowing why the original manufacturer did 
not certify their vehicles to meet the safety standards discussed above. We 
do know that some other countries ’ laws are less restrictive than ours in the 
United States where safety and emissions standards are paramount. 
To provide some historical information for you, approximately 1o years ago 
this Committee created a working group of stakeholders that included 
members of the legislature, the SoS Office, Maine State Police, owners of 
non—conforming vehicles, auto dealers and other interested parties to look 
into the feasibility of allowing these types of vehicles to be registered for and 
operated on a public way. After extensive research and collaboration, the 
group reported back to the Committee with a ﬁnding that non—conforming 
vehicles of any type should not be allowed to be registered or operated ona 
public way. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote “Ought Not to Pass" on LD 63 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I 
thank you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any 
questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
