 
March 16, 2023  
 
 
Senator Ben Chipman, Chair  
Representative Lynne Williams, Chair  
131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
 
Re: Testimony in support of L.D. 63, An Act to Clarify That Certain 
Imported Motor Vehicles Are Not Off -road Vehicles  
 
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the 
Transportation Committee:  
 
On behalf of the Specialty Equipment Market A ssociation (SEMA), I am 
writing to express support for L.D. 63 (Rudnicki), which would allow 
legally imported vintage foreign market vehicles to receive a 
registration for on -highway use in Maine.  
 
In 2021, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) began sending letters to 
the owners of Mitsubishi Delica vans informing them that their 
registration had been canceled and that they were to surrender their 
license plates within a few weeks’ time. The authority cited in the 
letters was 29A MRSA 354, which stipulates th at off -road vehicles 
may not be registered for on -road use. This left vehicle owners 
confused and befuddled, as their vans had no problem passing BMV 
inspection in the previous year.  
 
So, what changed? In 2021, the definition of off -road vehicle was 
amend ed (LD 1433) to include reference to federal safety and 
emissions standards. These standards were cited in BMV’s letters as 
the reason why the vehicle in question could not be registered in 
Maine.  
 
While BMV asserted in another letter to impacted vehicle owners that 
the 2021 bill simply clarified existing law to reflect inspection 
standards already in use, it made another notable change, which was 
to prevent off -road vehicles from being registered as an antique or 
another hobbyist designation.  
 
This is pr oblematic for two reasons.  
 
First, federal law exempts imported vehicles, such as the Delica, that 
are at least 25 years old from federal safety standards and those that 
 
are at least 21 years old from emissions standards. Thus, holding vintage imports to federal 
regulations would not be appropriate.  
 
Second, while states are not required to register such imported vehicles for use on public 
roads, it is noteworthy that Maine already exempts vintage vehicles from inspection. Under 
current law, an antique veh icle is defined as one being made after 1916 and is at least 25 
years old, well maintained, and not used for primary transportation. However, the same 
2021 law also amended the definition of antique vehicles to prevent offroad vehicles from 
being registere d in such a manner.  
 
If federal law exempts vintage imported vehicles from federal emissions and safety 
standards and the state already provides a pathway for antiques of the same vintage to be 
exempt from inspection, why not imported vehicles?  
 
Make, no mistake, SEMA is not advocating that unsafe vehicles be allowed on Maine’s roads. 
However, simply because a vehicle was imported from another country, it should not be 
automatically classified as an off -road vehicle. LD 63 is a commonsense solution to this  
problem and SEMA respectfully requests your support.  
 
Representing the $51 billion specialty automotive industry, SEMA is a trade association 
made up of approximately 7,000 mostly small businesses nationwide, including 18 in 
Maine. These companies manufacture, market, and sell specialty automotive aftermarket  
products, including appearance, performance, comfort, convenience, and technology 
products for motor vehicles.   
 
If you have any questions, or require additional information please feel free to contact me 
by phone at (202) 794 -8279 or by e -mail at christ ianr@sema.org.    
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Christian Robinson  
Senior Director, State Government Affairs & Grassroots  
Specialty Equipment Market Association  

Christian Robinson
Specialty Equipment Market Association
LD 63
March 16, 2023
Senator Ben Chipman, Chair
Representative Lynne Williams, Chair
131st Legislature
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04330
Re: Testimony in support of L.D. 63, An Act to Clarify That Certain Imported Motor Vehicles 
Are Not Off-road Vehicles
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Transportation 
Committee:
On behalf of the Specialty Equipment Market Association (SEMA), I am writing to 
express support for L.D. 63 (Rudnicki), which would allow legally imported vintage 
foreign market vehicles to receive a registration for on-highway use in Maine.
In 2021, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) began sending letters to the owners of 
Mitsubishi Delica vans informing them that their registration had been canceled and 
that they were to surrender their license plates within a few weeks’ time. The 
authority cited in the letters was 29A MRSA 354, which stipulates that off-road 
vehicles may not be registered for on-road use. This left vehicle owners confused and 
befuddled, as their vans had no problem passing BMV inspection in the previous year.
So, what changed? In 2021, the definition of off-road vehicle was amended (LD 
1433) to include reference to federal safety and emissions standards. These standards 
were cited in BMV’s letters as the reason why the vehicle in question could not be 
registered in Maine. 
While BMV asserted in another letter to impacted vehicle owners that the 2021 bill 
simply clarified existing law to reflect inspection standards already in use, it made 
another notable change, which was to prevent off-road vehicles from being registered 
as an antique or another hobbyist designation. 
This is problematic for two reasons. 
First, federal law exempts imported vehicles, such as the Delica, that are at least 25 years old
from federal safety standards and those that  
are at least 21 years old from emissions standards. Thus, holding vintage imports to federal 
regulations would not be appropriate.
Second, while states are not required to register such imported vehicles for use on 
public roads, it is noteworthy that Maine already exempts vintage vehicles from 
inspection. Under current law, an antique vehicle is defined as one being made after 
1916 and is at least 25 years old, well maintained, and not used for primary 
transportation. However, the same 2021 law also amended the definition of antique 
vehicles to prevent offroad vehicles from being registered in such a manner. 
If federal law exempts vintage imported vehicles from federal emissions and safety 
standards and the state already provides a pathway for antiques of the same vintage to 
be exempt from inspection, why not imported vehicles?
Make, no mistake, SEMA is not advocating that unsafe vehicles be allowed on 
Maine’s roads. However, simply because a vehicle was imported from another 
country, it should not be automatically classified as an off-road vehicle. LD 63 is a 
commonsense solution to this problem and SEMA respectfully requests your support.
Representing the $51 billion specialty automotive industry, SEMA is a trade 
association made up of approximately 7,000 mostly small businesses nationwide, 
including 18 in Maine. These companies manufacture, market, and sell specialty 
automotive aftermarket products, including appearance, performance, comfort, 
convenience, and technology products for motor vehicles.  
If you have any questions, or require additional information please feel free to contact
me by phone at (202) 794-8279 or by e-mail at christianr@sema.org.   
Sincerely,
Christian Robinson
Senior Director, State Government Affairs & Grassroots
Specialty Equipment Market Association
