LD 63   
Maine State House, Room 126   
3.21.23  
 
Thank you Representative Rudni cki and distinguished members of the committee on transportation. My 
name is Nicholas Hahn, and I am from Gardiner, here to testify in support of LD 63.    
As a member of the foreign import community, I have been following these de velopments closely.   I 
conc erned with  first-hand accounts online  of foreign vehicles that had been previously  registered, 
receiving notices  of nonconformance .  From what I understand, the definition of an off -road vehicle was 
amended to include FMVSS standards and emissions in 2021.   
In doing so, this new interpretation was so generic that it encompassed legally imported and registered 
foreign vehicles.   These vehicles were imported under the 25 year rule and we re exempt from these 
standards. Some owners received notices, completely unaware, that their registrations were being 
cancelled and the vehicle could not be operated on public roads.   This is a troubling precedent as it was 
retroactively applied to ve hicles imported before the amended definition.   
The enthusiasts of this community are passionate about their vehicles and the hobby i s a big part of 
their life. There’s a robust online  community  of indivi duals from all over the world that enjoy chatting 
about the good and the bad of owning rare vehicles .  Many  are meticul ously cared for vehicles that are 
garage kept and used for special occasions .  I have made life long  memor ies with  family and friends on 
camping trips in my vehicle.   Whil e not common in Maine, in Japan, 25 year old vehicles still exist  that 
are virtually rust free .   
Those that have gone through the import process on the ir own, compl eted mountains of paperwork  
once the vehicle is eligible for impor tation . After months at sea they then face more paperwork to get 
the vehicles titled and registered.   It is a long and p ainstaking process, only possible by the most detail 
oriented  and passionate individuals .  Not only is it time consuming, it can also be a costly endeavor. 
Some having 10s of thousands or more invested and have played by the rules.  
As an enthusiast and someone that spends countless  hours researching and maintaining rare vehicles, I 
believe there was an error made with the amended definition and it was not originally intended to 
include these vehicles.   I would like LD 63 to clarify that imports are not part of this catch -all term.    
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
Nicholas Hahn  
Nicholas Hahn
Gardiner
LD 63
Dear Justine Griswold,
I was planning to attend the public hearing for LD 63 on March 21, 2023 but I had 
something unexpected come up.  I have attached a pdf with my letter to the 
Committee on Transportation.  It would be very much appreciated if it could be added
to the testimony or shared with the committee.  Thank you.
Regards,
Nicholas Hahn

