Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary:  
 
I am Dr Danae Kershner, and I am a practicing physician from Stockton Springs. I work as a full- time 
hospitalist and I represent the American Association of Medical Ethics.  I am writing to oppose LD 1507. 
One of my frequent duties as a physician is to complete death certificates. I do not take this 
responsibility lightly as it is a legal, permanent document which speaks with validity, and clarity 
regarding the end of an individual’s life. I am required both by law and by ethical duty to report 
accurately on all aspects of this document, whether it is time of death, cause of death, place of death or 
sex. To report anything other than true data is illegal and subject to penalty.  
Sex is a biologic fact which is present in every nucleated cell of the body. Gender identity is a matter of 
preference which is subject to change.  Sex and gender identity are clearly different entities. A death 
certificate is a document of factual data which is not and should not be subject to preference. When I 
have a patient who dies from the effects of AIDS or Covid-19 or the results of tobacco use, I am required 
to document that, completely apart from any patient preference to the contrary. LD 1507 suggests that 
documentation can made apart from the facts regarding a patient’s sex. If this is allowed, why can’t the 
cause of death or time of death also be based on preference? My patients, their families and the State 
of Maine place great confidence in me to accurately record the true nature of conditions at death. The 
facts must remain unalterable.  
LD 1507 is asking physicians who are held to the highest standard of ethics as the greatest safeguard to 
provide necessary care to the most vulnerable citizens, to compromise in our assessment and reporting, 
based solely on personal preference. Furthermore, the physician’s knowledge source of the deceased 
person’s wishes regarding gender identity is stated very loosely in this bill including “…a record prepared 
by someone other than the individual.”  This is a very poorly identified source and open to potential 
abuse and distortion including documentation of which the patient has no knowledge. The close of an 
individual’s life is a sacred time, and I am honored to be trusted by patients and families to be present, 
compassionate and uphold the highest standards of honesty. This bill is fraught with ethical dilemmas 
for physicians, requiring us to compromise in our standard of moral obligation to our patients, their 
families, communities and to our noble profession. For these reasons, I strongly urge you to oppose this 
bill.  
 
Respectfully  
 
Danae Kershner DO 
Danae Kershner
American Association of Medical Ethics
LD 1507
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary: 
I am Dr Danae Kershner, and I am a practicing physician from Stockton Springs. I 
work as a full- time hospitalist and I represent the American Association of Medical 
Ethics.  I am writing to oppose LD 1507. One of my frequent duties as a physician is 
to complete death certificates. I do not take this responsibility lightly as it is a legal, 
permanent document which speaks with validity, and clarity regarding the end of an 
individual’s life. I am required both by law and by ethical duty to report accurately on
all aspects of this document, whether it is time of death, cause of death, place of death
or sex. To report anything other than true data is illegal and subject to penalty. 
Sex is a biologic fact which is present in every nucleated cell of the body. Gender 
identity is a matter of preference which is subject to change.  Sex and gender identity 
are clearly different entities. A death certificate is a document of factual data which is 
not and should not be subject to preference. When I have a patient who dies from the 
effects of AIDS or Covid-19 or the results of tobacco use, I am required to document 
that, completely apart from any patient preference to the contrary. LD 1507 suggests 
that documentation can made apart from the facts regarding a patient’s sex. If this is 
allowed, why can’t the cause of death or time of death also be based on preference? 
My patients, their families and the State of Maine place great confidence in me to 
accurately record the true nature of conditions at death. The facts must remain 
unalterable. 
LD 1507 is asking physicians who are held to the highest standard of ethics as the 
greatest safeguard to provide necessary care to the most vulnerable citizens, to 
compromise in our assessment and reporting, based solely on personal preference. 
Furthermore, the physician’s knowledge source of the deceased person’s wishes 
regarding gender identity is stated very loosely in this bill including “…a record 
prepared by someone other than the individual.”  This is a very poorly identified 
source and open to potential abuse and distortion including documentation of which 
the patient has no knowledge. The close of an individual’s life is a sacred time, and I 
am honored to be trusted by patients and families to be present, compassionate and 
uphold the highest standards of honesty. This bill is fraught with ethical dilemmas for 
physicians, requiring us to compromise in our standard of moral obligation to our 
patients, their families, communities and to our noble profession. For these reasons, I 
strongly urge you to oppose this bill. 
Respectfully 
Danae Kershner DO

