April 27, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair 
Representative Matthew Moonen, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Re: LD 1507 - An Act to Ensure the Accuracy of Vital Records with Respect to Gender 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee on Judiciary: 
I am writing in support of LD 1507.  I am married to a transgender woman.  My 
certificate of marriage, incorrectly lists my wife as "husband," by a name that is no 
longer her legal name. Unfortunately, at this time to obtain a correct marriage certificate,
without any annotations, or incorrect designations, we would need to divorce and then 
remarry.  LD 1507 could remedy this issue while protecting us from the indignity of 
divorcing simply to obtain an accurate document.  We've been a couple for over 34 years
and married for going on 28 years. I have also known my spouse is transgender for over 
34 years.  We are proud of our marriage and the years of love and commitment we have 
invested and would be devastated to end it and remarry because no other option exists to
protect private details of our life.  
Transgender people are under legislative attack in states across the U.S.  It could be 
potentially dangerous to be outed as a transgender person as our marriage license does to
my wife.  Although our marriage certificate records her as the "husband," I have never 
known my spouse as one. It should be possible to have our current marriage certificate 
reflect this truth. No couple should be required to divorce and then remarry to avoid the 
potential discrimination that an annotated or incorrect marriage certificate could enable.
For the same reasons that a birth certificate with an annotated name or gender marker 
shares private information about an individual, potentially causing discrimination, so 
does a marriage certificate with similar notations. It would be pointless to correct her 
marriage certificate if it would still disclose her as transgender by annotations. Although 
the occasions for her displaying our marriage certificate are limited, those instances do 
occur.  If she were to be hired for a new job, she would need to furnish that document to 
add me as a dependent for insurance coverage. Doing so with an inaccurate document 
betrays an intimate detail about her life that could lead to discrimination or even 
termination.  Every other legal identity document she possesses, reflects her legal name 
and gender correctly; even the deed to our home lists me and my spouse as "a married 
couple, joint tenants.”
Since it is now possible to change the name and sex on at least one vital document, 
Maine Birth Certificates, consistency should dictate that this be possible on other vital 
documents such as Death Certificates and Marriage Certificates.  Thank you for your 
consideration and please vote ought to pass on LD 1507 to protect the dignity of 
transgender Mainers and their families.
Georgianna Woodbury
Gorham
