70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify on in opposition to LD 1507 An Act to Ensure the Accuracy of Vital Records with 
Respect to Gender and is presented by Rep. Sheehan. 
 
History has used the true science of Male and Female throughout. It seems like in the past 15 minutes, 
we are now confronted with gender. Some see it as freeing and being one’s self while others see the 
harm as (typically women) are forced out of their own sports and put in possible danger when serving as 
incarcerated. Of course not always but when individuals go from doing their own thing to making 
everyone honor their “thing” society is affected. This bill has far reaching effects on our society. Birth 
certificates are used in many ways and our government gains important information from them, 
information that is used to make decisions. When we leave science and go to preference, the affect will 
last for generations. 
 
Perhaps a different subject but China forced families to one child for generations. The cultural bias is 
that families want a boy. The govern also forced abortion for future children who were conceived in that 
family. Families choose actions that ensured they had a boy. Today, China has (in the age group of young 
adults…5 to 1 males, men must leave China to find a wife. A great example of when government start 
“tweaking” standards. 
 
Please stay the course and vote no on this legislation! 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless, 
 
Mike    
 
 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
  
 
 
