 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 26, 2023  
 
Senator  Anne Ca rney, Chair  
Representative  Matthew Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1507 - An Act to Ensure the Accuracy of Vital Records with Respect to Gender  
 
Dear Senator  Carney , Representative  Moonen , and Members of the  Committee  on Judiciar y: 
 
This letter is to provide in formation about  LD 1507,  An Act to Ensure the Accuracy of Vital 
Records with Respect to Gender . The bill  directs the Maine C enter for Disease Control and 
Prevention  – Data, Research, and Vital Statics (DRVS) to amend a marriage certificate to reflect 
a change of gender and to provide a new sex identifier when the state registrar receives an 
appropriate application, which must include a gender field that includes options for male, female 
and X . Additionally, t his bill p rovides that a certificate  of death must include a gender field that 
includes options for male, female and X. It also provides that a death certificate for an individual 
must reflect the desired gender identity of the individual who has died if the person signing the 
certificate is  aware of that desire either through a valid living will, advance health care directive 
or other record, including a record prepared by someone other than the individual. It also 
clarifies that a health care provider may amend a certificate of death with r espect to the gender of 
the individual who has died . 
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) is neither for no r against this 
bill and offers the following comments for your consideration.  
 
Maine CDC - DRVS administers Maine's vital statistics system , and this includes managing data 
for birth and death s and record s of marriages , as well as reporting detailed population estimates 
and data on health status and health resources.  Any change to recording vital record s has 
potential impact to the State’s statistic s and data used for  statewide surveillance, program and 
funding planning, and policy development .  
 
DRVS support s aligning certificate of marriage with a person’s identity and  has the authority to 
reflect in rule a process for these amendments.  
 
The Maine CDC also believes it is important to retain certain death data in vital record s that 
interfaces with the Social Security Administration (SSA) . The SSA is notified timely of a  death 
to process end of life benefits and estate settlements  and, in  Maine , this is done electronically 
with a link to SSA in the database. In order to do this, the name, sex and date of birth must match 
 
 the SSA records. Discrepancy  in recorded  SSA data and on the State’s death certificate can result 
in delay of processes .  
 
DRVS proposes  that a system enhancement will address these concerns and, we believe,  the 
intent of this bill and respectfully  recommends a second sex field in the system to record gender. 
When  the gender field is completed, the printed certificate  will include this field, and, i f the 
gender field is not completed , then only the sex data will  print as it does now. We also recogni ze 
that some stakeholders may not be comfortable with this proposal, and we welcome the 
opportunity to discuss how to meet the intent of this bill and ensure DRVS can retain the ability 
to interface with the federal SSA system efficiently.  
 
Of note, a potential  unintentional consequence of this bill as written is that , unless it is stipulated 
that these amendments should be marked confidential, changes  will be annotated on the record as 
governed by 22 MRS, § 2705.  We would reco mmend making the changes confidential to ensure 
the privacy and digni ty of those seeking an amendment.  
 
In summary, the Ma ine CDC would encourage capturing both biological sex and gender on the 
death certificate. Matching Social Security Administration’s database  ensures that death benefits 
and estates settlements are processed timely . Retaining record of sex at birth  also allows  for 
furthering scientific understanding  of disease processes or for improving health and social 
services which may have potential for reducing morbidity and mortality within Maine . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CD C is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

