Testlmony of Lam Graham, MD, MPH 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1863 
An Act to Faclhtate the Provlslon of Medlcally Approprlate Levels of Care for 
Cllents of Correct|onalFaclllt1es 
Presented by Representative Sachs 
Before the Cnmlnal ]ust1ce and Publlc Safety Commlttee, May 9 ,2023 
Senator Bee-bee Center, Representatlve Sallsbury and Members of the 
Crlmmal Iustlce and Publlc Affalrs Commlttee, my name 1s Lam Graham. 
I am a former Ch1efPubl1c health Offlcer for Mame. I serve on the Publlc 
Health Commlttee of the Mame Medlcal Assoclatlon I llve 1n Freeport. 
I supportthls b1ll for four reasons. 
Flrst, from a med1cal perspectlve, 1t 1s lmp ortant to assure that people 1n 
the custody of the taxpayer, recelve approprlate medlcal care. I don't 
thmk that anyone belleves that people held 1n our care should, 1n 
add1t1on to loslng thelr freedom, also recelve lnadequate care that could 
prove to be de facto death sentences for them Thls b1ll makes certaln 
that standards for approprlate care are met, whether you are behmd 
bars or 1n the commumty. 
Second, from a publlc health safety perspectlve, those who would be 
ellglble to be transferred to commumty settlngs for care are long past 
the tlme when they would pose any rlsk to others. They are 1n fraglle 
health and may even be demented. All data lndlcates that crlmlnal 
actlons dechne as people age 1 Nevertheless, 1nd1v1duals transferred to 
the cornmunlty under thls system, would st1ll be 1n the custody of the 
Department of Correctlons and 1f problems developed, regardless of 
thelr physlcal or mental state, they could always be transferred out of 
the commumty and back behmd bars. 
Thlrd, Mame along w1th every other state 1s havlng a greater and 
greater challenge deallng wlth older prlson resldents. In the 1980's
1 
https //www C_]C_] org/med1a/1mport/documents/rec1d1v1sm_among_o1der_adults_correlates_0f_pr1s0n_reent 
W pdf
<
across the country there was a “tough on cr1me” p0l1cy1n1t1ated whlch 
resulted 1n longer sentences bemg dellvered for every mfractlon. Many 
of these people, lncarcerated decades ago are now 1n thelr 50's or 60's. 
Th1s problem 1s only expected to get worse as tlme marches on. 
Furthermore, th1s ag1ng,populat1on can be expected to have the usual 
chromc lllnesses of any aglng populatlon, wh1ch are d1ff1cult and often 
expenslve to manage effectlvely Th1s b1ll offers the optlon of more 
creatlve uses of Ma1neCare whlch can reduce expenses for Mame 
taxpayers, but also 1ncrease the quallty of care. Other states are actmg 
on th1s lssue and havmg success Callfornla, Connect1cut,V1rg1n1a, 
Nevada, and other states are currently experlmentmg w1th models for 
better care of these challenglng resldents. All these states have reduced 
thelr prlson costs and lmproved care. 
Last, from the pomt of vlew of compasslon, doesn't 1t seem reasonable 
to make sure that as many people as posslble who are near the end of 
thelr llV€S, are able to spend what UITIG they have left w1th loved ones. 
Th1s means much to those 1ncarcerated, but also to those who love 
them. 
I hope you wlll support thls b1ll unammously and move Mame forward 
1n th1s lmportant area of concern. 
Thank you for your attentlon. I would be pleased to answer any 
questlons you have.
I
