 
The Maine Long-Te rm Care  
OMBUDSMAN 
Program    61 Winthrop  Street  • Augusta,  ME 04330  
1-800-499-0229  • Fax 207-621-0509  
MLTCOP@MaineOmbudsman.org
 
 
 
TESTIMONY 
IN SUPPORT OF 
 
LD 1863; An Act to Facilitate the Provision of Medically Appropriate Levels of 
Care for Clients of Correctional Facilities 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
 
May 9, 2023 
 
Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety.  
 
This testimony is submitted in support of this legislation by the Maine Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program. The Ombudsman Program is a nonprofit agency that provides statewide 
advocacy for older and disabled residents of nursing homes, residential care and assisted living 
and for recipients of home care services. Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals 
who experience barriers in accessing the long-term services and supports they need when they 
are ready for discharge.  
 
This bill enhances and improves the Department of Corrections' Supervised Community 
Confinement Policy contained in the Department of Corrections' rule Chapter 10, subsection 
27.2. The bill provides guidelines for the use of supervised community confinement for assisted 
living and nursing facility levels of care in licensed facilities in the community and for home care 
provided by licensed professionals for clients in the custody of the Department of Corrections. 
 
The Ombudsman Program has many years’ experience providing advocacy for older and 
disabled individuals who need or are receiving long-term services and supports. We provide 
information and assistance regarding concerns about resident rights, quality of care, as well as 

access and payment issues. We assist in addressing any barriers to receiving needed services. 
Our expertise would be helpful in the efforts to plan for services for incarcerated individuals 
outlined in this legislation. We hope to be included in discussions going forward to plan for long-
term services and supports for these individuals.   
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.maineombudsman.org  
