May 8, 2023 
To the Honorable Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee,  
My name is Linda Small, and I am writing to urge you to support LD 1863 - An Act to 
Facilitate the Provision of Medically Appropriate Levels of Care for Clients of Correctional 
Facilities. As a woman with the lived experience of incarceration, I have witnessed the 
devastating effects on family members, loved ones, and the residents within Maine Corrections 
when a woman suffers due to inadequate medical care. The women’s facility within the Maine 
Department of Corrections has no infirmary.  
 
When a woman becomes seriously ill or experiences age-related incapacity, medical care is 
inadequate, physical comforts are scarce, and there is no separate living unit available to attend 
to a woman’s basic needs. Fellow residents watch helplessly, as women suffer needlessly due to 
the lack of services, options, and adequate care. Their pain and suffering are humiliating and 
cause tremendous emotional and mental stress on the entire population of women. From 
necessity, compassion, and love women create families inside the prison. I have lost two former 
roommates that I considered my sisters. Both women died while incarcerated without family, 
comfort, or hope.  
 
Many women with long-term sentences enter the criminal legal system during middle age. As 
such, it is expected that these women will suffer degenerative disease, and age-related 
incapacities, and will not live long enough to return home, given the lack of release options in 
the state of Maine. Therefore, it is necessary to make accommodations for the inevitable result of 
these long sentences.  
 
LD 1863 recognizes the humanity in all of us. Everyone deserves to die with dignity, surrounded 
by loved ones, trained professionals, and an environment free of emotional and mental chains. 
LD 1863 fosters closure for family members, their loved ones, and the residents she leaves 
behind.  
 
Respectfully, 
Linda Small 
Linda Small 
  
 
