 
 
Written Testimony of Mary Price  
General Counsel of FAMM  
In Support of L.D. 1863  
May 9,  2023 
 
I thank Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee for the opportunity to provide tes timony today  in support 
of L.D. 1863 , a bill that enhances and improves  Supervised Community Confinement to provide 
medically appropriate levels of care for qualified incarcerated individuals. I am here  on behalf of 
FAMM, a national sentencing and corrections reform organization . We unite  currently and 
formerly incarcerated pe ople,  their families and loved ones, and diverse people working for 
reform .  
 
FAMM supports L.D. 1863 and urges this committee to advance it  because the bill  
 Refines eligibility criteri a; 
 Improves notice and assistance to incarcerated people  who have increased medical 
needs ; 
 Directs  the corrections Commissioner to ensure provision of licensed assisted living 
and nursing care  to those who need it ; and 
 Creates data collection and reporting requirements to increase transparency .  
 
  Since 2018, FAMM has conducted comprehensive research into state compassionate , 
medical, and supervised community confinement programs. We maintain a set of memos on our 
website that document every  medically based program  in the 50 states and the District  of 
Columbia.1 For each jurisdiction , we describe  eligibility criteria, application requirements, 
documentation , and d ecision -making, as well as post -decision and post -release issues.  Our most 
disturbing finding was that while nearly every state has some f orm of medical release or 
supervised community program , it is too seldom used.  To understand why that is so, we 
examined and reported on the  policies and  practices that pose barriers .2  
 
Last year, we issued report cards on the relevant  policies in all 50 states and the District 
of Columbia. We graded key components of a well -crafted program . They include : eligibility 
criteria, a way to request or refer eligible individuals for assessment, agency policy design, 
procedures, release planni ng support, data collection and public reporting, and a right to counsel 
and appeals. Based on this grading rubric, Maine  received a failing grade  of 13 - the lowest 
score in the country.3 Only Iowa scored lower because it has no program whatsoever.  
                                                      
1 FAMM, Compassionate Release: State Memos (Dec. 2021), https://famm.org/our -work/compassionate -
release/everywhere -and-nowhere/#memos . 
2 Everywhere and Nowhere, Executive Summary, https://famm.org/wp -content/uploads/Exec -Summary -2-page. pdf.  
3 FAMM, Compassionate Release, Maine  State Report Card, Early Medical Release (Oct. 2022) , 
https://famm.org/wp -content/uploads/Maine_Final.pdf .   
2 
  
That research and analysis informs our support of L.D. 1863 . FAMM found a number 
of barriers impeding the performance of Maine’s  Supervised Community Confinement  
program  for severely incapacitated and terminal individuals. They include undefined eligibility 
criteria, incomplete or missing policies and procedures, minimal planning support , and no 
publicly available data reporting.4 The reforms L.D. 1863  would make are sorely needed.  
 
Features of L.D. 1863  will address some of the barriers that exist in current law. We think 
the legislation is an important first step because we believe it will make p ossible the more 
efficient and humane  use of Supervised Community Confinement . 
 
In many states, undefined eligibility criteria  limit the number of people who can appl y. 
Poorly defined criteria frustrate program objectives because corrections and parole authorities 
are left to supply their own definitions of qualifying  conditions . Without sufficient guidance, the 
people who assess incarcerated people f or eligibility and those who make the final decision 
whether to transfer  them  cannot be confident they are identifying the right people at the right 
time. They may fail to act on deserving individuals.  
 
FAMM gave Maine a failing grade for eligibility crit eria. Maine provides eligibility to 
those who are terminally ill or severely debilitated, but it does not define those terms. This bill 
would take an important first step in fixing the problem by considering as eligible people who 
need  long-term care, such  as in an assisted living , nursing, or hospice  facility . This appears to 
add to existing eli gibility criteria. While we think this is an important reform, FAMM maintains 
that legislation is best when terms are defined . FAMM recommends  that lawmakers consi der 
revisiting eligibility criteria at the next opportunity.  In the alternative, lawmakers can direct the 
agency to provide clarity to the criteria by defining eligibility terms.  
 
FAMM also found that initiating requests  takes many forms nationwide.  Some states, 
such as Maine, make applications very difficult by not providing a  straightforward  way for 
incarcerated people or their advocates to apply or by not providing that corrections personnel can 
initiate the process. Others rely entirely on corrections personnel to begin the process without 
imposing a duty on them. With L.D. 1863, Maine would ensure t hat potentially qualified 
individuals would be assessed for Supervised Community Confinement.  It would oblige the 
Commis sioner to provide information to incarcerated people and their advocates about available 
services. Moreover, it would direct the Commissioner to assist individuals upon request or as 
medically indicated in applying for long -term medical care using th e existing Medicaid 
eligibility assessment process provided in Title 22 § 3174 -I.  Assistance can be ess ential for 
medically compromised individuals who may find navigating the application process daunting.  
 
We note that it is not clear from the legislati on what standards corrections staff would use 
to identify “medically indicated” clients for assessment referral. We recommend  that lawmakers 
                                                      
4 Id.  
3 
 address this in future legislation or direct the Commissioner to do so in rulemaking or policy 
design.  
 
 The strong est feature of L.D. 1863 is its clear direction to the Commissioner that 
medically eligible individuals be provided licensed assisted living and nursing  care, either 
within corrections facilities, or barring that, in the community. This feature is both humane and 
forward thinking . It dignifies aging and medically vulnerable individuals by ensuring they have 
an appropriate placement and the c are they require.  
 
Finally, transparency is critical to ensuring programs work as legislatures intend . 
One of the most difficult challenges scholars and advocates such as FAMM encounter is the lack 
of information about how and whether corrections systems use these  programs. When FAMM 
was seeking information for Maine’s report card,  we could not locate any information about how 
many of the people under  Supervised Community Confinement had been transferred due to 
medical concerns. Stakeholders and policy makers cannot hope to understand whether reforms 
work or are needed if they cannot access information about outcomes.  L.D. 1863 would add a 
thorough data gathering and reporting requirement . It would r equire the department to collect 
data and report weekly on applications for medical evaluations and placement, whether they 
were accepted or denied, the kind and number of placements , and demographic data. Every year,  
the data are compiled and included in the department’s annual report to the Legislature. This is a 
best practice followed by some  jurisdictions.   
  
Conclusion  
 
L.D. 1863  is an important and commendable  reform that would  go a long way to  improve 
the Supervised Community Confinement  program , by clarifying the steps necessary to utilizing 
the current community confinement policy for medically qualified individuals.   
 
FAMM urges the committee to support this legislation . 
 
