 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 1863  – Ought to Pass  
 
An Act to Facilitate the Provision of Medically Appropriate Levels  
of Care for Clients of Correctional Facilities  
 
Joint Standing Committee on  
Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
May 9 , 202 3 
 Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel for the American 
Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing 
and preserving civil libertie s guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On 
behalf of our members, we urge the committee to support LD 1863 . 
 Maine has one of the highest percentages of elderly prisoners in the country, 
with at least 1 out of 10 prisoners over the age of 5 5. As a result of 40 years of 
tough -on-crime sentencing, our criminal justice system has undergone  a gargantuan  
expansion. Our nationwide prison population has almost quadrupled  in four 
decades , and with it so too has the number of elderly people in prison.  Maine’s 
prison population has more than doubled since 1983.1 Our jail population has grown 
over six -fold since 1970.  
Like older people in the general population, elderly prisoners tend to be more 
susceptible to chronic health and medical conditions, tran slating into higher health 
care costs and assistance performing daily tasks of survival. The Eight Amendment 
to the federal Constitution guarantees all prisoners a right to health care while 
incarcerated and protects them against indifference to their seri ous medical needs. 
However, prisons are not built to accommodate an aging populace and there are 
 
1 Incarceration Trends in Maine , Vera Institute of Justice, available at  
https://www.vera.org/downloads/pdfdownloads/state -incarceration -trends -maine.pdf  
  
 
serious challenges and costs associated to providing adequate care within the prison 
settings. While we cannot erase the past 40 years of extreme sentencing an d unfair 
and unjust criminal justice policy, there are steps we can take to reform the system 
both in the short and long term.   
In effect, some of our prisons have become assisted living facilities in all but 
name. But unlike accredited assisted living fac ilities, they are not held to the same 
standards of care. This bill would help solve that problem by , among other things, 
requiring the Department of Corrections to provide training to licensed facilities in 
the community regarding the specific needs of in carcerated people.  This and other 
reforms would hold us to the promise of our Constitution.  
We urge you to vote ought to pass.   
 
 
 
