Testimony of Jennifer Murphy Wescott, owner of Feels Like Home Early Care & Education
On behalf of the Family Child Care Association of Maine
In Opposition to L.D. 1061
An Act to Increase the Number of Children a Family Child Care Provider May Care for Without
Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human Services
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Health and Human
Services Committee, the Family Child Care Association of Maine (FCCAM), affiliate of the
National Family Child Care Association expresses its opposition to LD 1061.
FCCAM’ s mission is to unify , promote and strengthen
quality professional family child
care in Maine
FCCAM feels strongly that an increase of children in unlicensed care would not be in the best
interest for the children of Maine. LD 1061 changes the threshold from 2 to 4 children in
unlicensed care. In the interest of child safety, we need to understand that this bill does not take
into account the number of children living within the child care home. It also does not take into
account the ages of the children in care. It does not mention total capacity. This could actually
contradict what is in current licensing rules for family child care providers regarding ratios and
ages of children.
There also would be no requirement to have an inspection by the fire marshall, water tested, be
CPR/First Aid trained, or have a background check. If a provider has 4 children of their own and
they can take in 4 additional children, you now have 8 children in care in a facility that has not
had any safety oversight. The minimum health and safety standards of the current Family Child
Care Licensing Rule help ensure a child’s rights to care in an environment that protects them
from harm and supports their healthy development. In 2022, Maine reported no child deaths in
licensed child care programs and only 2 substantiated cases of child abuse/neglect. These low
numbers lend us to believe that health and safety measures work.
In other parts of the country, we have seen where better regulations have served the health and
safety of children well. Minnesota had an average 10 child deaths in child care programs from
2007-2011 before the state acted and improved regulations of health and safety. After
implementing these measures by 2013, Minnesota was down to 3 child deaths in child care
programs.

Licensing provides training requirements in important subject matter to reduce child injury,
illness, and death including safe sleep, medication administration, cpr & first aid.
The safety of children is not supported by LD 1061. Being active family child care providers, we
understand first hand the childcare crisis that Maine has been experiencing for multiple years.
Increasing the number of children an unlicensed provider can care for is not the solution to this
problem. As a state we need to find ways to increase the number of family child care and center
programs. If your interest is to support a strong child care system by encouraging more
individuals to open small businesses offering family child care, then I encourage you to support
current efforts supported by organizations like FCCAM and MaineAEYC that support Maine’s
child care system.
The Family Child Care Association of Maine offers a business tool kit on their website which is
free to everyone and helps to support providers through the licensing process. LD 1061 is not
the right choice for Maine’s children. FCCAM asks you to oppose this bill.
Thank you for your time and attention.
Jennifer Murphy Wescott
Chairfccam@gmail.com
