Contact: Meg Helming, COO, YMCA Alliance of Northern New England
P: 207.232.9896 E: meg.helming@nneymcas.org 
Testimony of Meg Helming before 
the Committee on Health and Human Services 
in opposition to
LD 1061: An Act to Increase the Number of Children a Family Child Care Provider May 
Care for Without Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human 
Services
March 21, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, esteemed members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Meg Helming and I’m testifying on behalf of the 15 YMCAs in Maine 
in opposition to LD 1061: An Act to Increase the Number of Children a Family Child Care 
Provider May Care for Without Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human 
Services.  
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy. 
The childcare sector is facing significant challenges, and the lack of accessible and affordable 
care hurts Maine families and our economy. We understand the desire to increase access to care 
– but stand firmly with our partners in the field to say, never at the expense of children’s safety. 
Efforts such as this bill undermine the critical health and safety protocols that protect our most 
vulnerable members of society – young children. 
This committee will review several bills this session that address the biggest challenges in our 
sector and present opportunities to invest in our state’s childcare system to increase Maine 
families’ access to safe, high quality care. Our efforts focus on building up our workforce, 
strengthening the subsidy program, and partnering with businesses on shared solutions – not 
rolling back licensing requirements that keep children safe.
We urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 1061.
Respectfully submitted,
Meg Helming
YMCA Alliance of Northern New England
Maine YMCAs:
Auburn-Lewiston YMCA • Bangor Region YMCA • Bath Area Family YMCA • Boothbay Region YMCA • 
Central Lincoln County YMCA • Down East Family YMCA • Kennebec Valley YMCA • Mount Desert Island 
YMCA • Old Town-Orono YMCA • Penobscot Bay YMCA • Sanford-Springvale YMCA • State YMCA of Maine 
• Waldo County YMCA • YMCA of Greater Waterville • YMCA of Southern Maine
