139 State House Station,  Augusta, Maine 04330    207 -480 1478 www.maineddc.org   
21 March  2023 
 
Testimony in Opposition  Against  of LD 1061  An Act to Increase the Number of Children a Family Child Care 
Provider May Care for Without Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human Service  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
(MDDC) .1  Please accept this testimony in opposition  to An Act to Increase the Number of Children a Family 
Child Care Provider May Care for W ithout Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Heal th and Human 
Service.  
 
Childcare p roviders fill an important role in the development of young children .   Studies have shown th at 
higher quality care correlates with better socialization and better outcomes in later years of schooling .  
Childcare workers are also on the first line to catch delays in development .  The impo rtance of early 
intervention  is proven.  It is critical that childcare workers are skilled and knowledgeable  in identifying typical 
developing milestones so that developmental delays can be caught quickly,  and families encouraged to access 
appropriate early intervention.   
 
Without oversight and opportunities for training, providers can’t fulfill their duties in this sphere, and there is 
a great risk that some children will be left behind .  The National Association for Family Child Care 
Accreditatio n, has taken a similar stance as their quality standards require  that professionals keep up to date 
and provide quality early identification and early intervention  methods.2 
 
We at the Maine Developmental Disabilities Council believe that oversight of childcare  providers by the state 
is crucial to maintaining standards of care that will offer the best chances of success for every child, whether 
they are in a daycare with many other children or just a few.   We ask that this law not be changed, and that 
oversight of childcare  providers be strengthened, not weakened.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak.  
 
 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  
Maine’s DD Council has been advocating for individuals with developmental disabilities for over 50 years.  The D D Council is a federally funded, 
independent organization with members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and represe ntatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for services for ind ividuals with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, 
we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with developmen tal and other 
disabilities of all ages are fully included, i ntegrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
 
2 NAFCC (2023) Quality Standards Accessed on 3/20/2023 at chrome -extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpc glclefindmkaj/https://nafcc.org/wp -
content/uploads/2023/01/Standards_5 -Business -Professional -Practices.pdf  

