rm 
Maine Children ’s Alliance Advocating forthe well-being of all Maine families. 
Testimony of Rita Furlow, 
Senior Policy Analyst, Maine Children's Alliance 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
LD 1061 
An Act to An Act to Increase the Number of Children a Family Child Care Provider May Care for 
Without Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human Services 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committees on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Rita Furlow. I am the Senior Policy Analyst at the Maine 
Children's Alliance. I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 1061, An Act to An Act to 
Increase the Number of Children a Family Child Care Provider May Care for Without Having to 
Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human Services. The Maine Children's Alliance, a 
statewide non-partisan, advocacy organization whose mission is to promote sound public policy 
and best practices to improve the lives of children, youth, and families in Maine. 
We know that early experiences shape the architecture of the developing brain. We also know 
that 69% of children under 6 in Maine live in households where all adults are working} That's 
why investing in quality early care and education so that it is accessible and affordable for all 
families in Maine is essential to a healthy economy. 
It is our responsibility as adults to foster the healthy development of children. Maine's early 
childhood programs exist to provide children with the essential stable, nurturing relationships 
and experiences that build strong foundations for their growth. 
1 
The Annie E. Casey Foundation, KIDS COUNT Data Center, Children under age 6 with all available parents in work force (5-yr averages) in 
Maine, retrieved from: littps:lldatacenter.kidscounLorg/data/tables/73l7-children-under-age-6-with-alI~available-parents-in-work-force 
detailed ‘?loc=2l &locl=2#dctailed/2/any/false/2048,574,1729,37,87 l ,870,573,869,36,868/any/14380,1438l 
331 State Street - 
Augusta, Maine 04330 ~ 
(207) 6234868 I 
www.meklcls.org~ mainekids@meklds.org
Primary to all early childhood programing is our children's health and safety. The most 
significant source of funding to support child care in the United States is provided by the Child 
Care Development Block Grant (CCDBG). The block grant delivers funding to the states to 
provide income eligible families with financial assistance for child care while also supporting the 
health and safety of child care for all children through licensing. The reauthorization of the Child 
Care Development Block Grant in 2014, the first reauthorization in 18 years, brought significant 
changes to child care across the country. This update to the law, which received strong 
bipartisan support, resulted in the need for states to improve licensing and monitoring of child 
care. 
Young children require responsive, consistent interaction with caregivers. Infants, need one on 
one give and take to help ensure their emotional and cognitive development? A single provider 
cannot provide these interactions if they are caring for too many children. 
l\/lost importantly, children need to be safe. State licensing and ratios are in place to protect the 
health and safety of children. We are concerned that the potential number of children thata 
single provider could be caring for under the provisions of the proposed bill would be unsafe. 
We understand that families need access to more child care. Unfortunately, compromising 
around issues of health and safety isn't the way to grow the child care sector. The number one 
concern for parents, whether they live in Aroostook or York county, whether they live in a small 
rural community, or the city of Portland, is their child's safety. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
2 Center on the Developing Child (2007). ’/‘he Science Qflfarlv Clzilcl/100:1Dave/rymie/it (lnBriei). Retrieved 
‘from wwwdevclopingcliild.l1:1rvurd.cdu. 
331 State Street - 
Augusta, Maine 04330 ' 
(207) 6234868 r 
www.mel<icls.org~ mainekids@mel<ids.org
