To whom it may concern at 131 Maine Legislature First Regular Session 2023 regarding
proposed bill
An Act to Increase the Number of Children
a Family Child Care Provider May Care
for Without Having to Be Licensed by the Department of Health and Human Services
I cannot
emphasize enough the ill impact passing this bill will have on the already fragile state of quality
childcare in Maine.
I hold an Associates Degree in Early Childhood Education, have homeschooled my 3 children
and run an Accredited, licensed family childcare. I have years of experience working in
residential care facilities for adults and childcare programs.
Even with education and experience the support from a competent and supportive licensing
specialist, Maine Roads to Quality and the Family Childcare Association of Maine was pivotal in
my ability to successfully run a program that could handle the demands of children from diverse
family backgrounds each day.
I want to testify with consideration to the childcare crisis in Maine. If you have not been actively
involved in the childcare field over the past several years increasing capacity for unregulated,
unlicensed care may appear to be the solution to create more availability for care. However, I
cannot emphasize enough that it is not the solution. For one reason unregulated, unlicensed
care providers often operate “under the table” without paying taxes, insurances or other costs
associated with licensed care. This reduces the overall market rate of childcare, creating
confusion on the part of parents on the value of quality childcare and hurting enrollment for
licensed care providers. We know from the Covid-19 pandemic that childcare programs cannot
withstand reduced enrollment and often close their doors. This not only reduces availability of
childcare but deprofessionalizes a field in which children are spending their most
developmentally crucial years. All in all what we may gain in unregulated spots we may
ultimately lose in quality, licensed spots.
Licensing is the absolute baseline of quality and safety. Regulations such as fire safety and
infectious disease protocols require us to be prepared to meet the health & safety needs of
children. In an unlicensed situation the amount of immobile, non-walking infants could surpass
what is legally allowed under ratio regulations if a provider had their own children under the age
of 2. This poses a risk to children & the provider if they had to quickly exit the premises in the
case of fire or other hazard.
