 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1415  
 
AN ACT TO EXPAND ACCESS TO SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION FUNDING  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee.  I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association , in support of  L.D. 1415 . 
 
In almost every town in Maine there is a school building. They are used for learning, libraries, sports and 
feeding our students, but they are also used for community meetings, school programs and in emergencies.  
 
On the Maine DOE website it state s that the Maine DOE is committed to assisting school districts in 
improving the quality and condition of learning environments for students in Maine.  However due to the lack 
of funds , honoring this commitment is next to impossible.  
 
School systems seeki ng State -subsidized construction projects periodically apply to the Department for a 
major capital school construction project. A team from the Maine DOE reviews the applications and conducts 
a site visit to each applicant’s school district.  A rating list  is developed based on need and t he Board funds as 
many projects from the list as available debt limit funds allow.  
 
New school construction projects are only considered in instances in which renovation projects are not 
economically or educationally feasibl e. However, renovation projects that exceed the cap under the Revolving 
Renovation Fund or don’t fall into Priority 1 status are likely to go unfunded  and the conditions of our schools 
continue to worsen.  
 
In 2010 -2011 , seventy -one schools applied for majo r capital construction projects and only sixteen  were 
funded . Seven years later , in the next rating cycle seventy -four applications were submitted and seven projects 
were funded . The next rating cycle is schedule d to take place in 2024.  
 
Maine has 504 schools that were built in between the 1900’s and the 1980 ’s. Our students and staff deserve to 
learn and work in healthy learning environments that support 21st century learning needs.  Our associations 
hope that by establishing the Maine Public School Construction Authority , this authority will find innovative 
and creative approaches to financing school construction projects  that will improve the learning and wo rking 
conditions for our students and staff . 
