State of Maine       STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION  Testimony of Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education  Neither For Nor Against: L.D. 1415 An Act to Expand Access to School Construction Funding   Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  Introduced by: Representative Brennan  Date: May 1, 2023, 10:30 AM  Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:  My name is Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education. I am here to speak neither for nor against L.D. 1415: An Act to Expand Access to School Construction Funding.  The Maine State Board of Education is neither for nor against L.D. 1415 because of the three distinct parts of the bill, as delineated in the summary.   First, the bill seeks to allow a single high school or regional high school to apply for funding under the integrated, consolidated 9-16 educational facility provision of 20-A MRS §15905 and Chapter 61 State Board of Education Rules for Major Capital School Construction Projects Section 15. In 2016-2017, the Commissioner and the State Board initiated an application process to identify an Integrated, Consolidated 9-16 Facility pilot project. I emphasize “pilot project” because the school to be built under this provision required that applicants “support the general concept of being involved in developing a model of a regional consolidated and integrated secondary and post-secondary campus.” The intent of Section 15 was to create a new regional high school integrated with a career and technical school, the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System and support industry training programs.  “Integrated” and “consolidated” are key components of this project.  In fact, the application required that there be at least two high schools or a regional high school together with a CTE center or region.  Having only an existing regional high school with a CTE partner was rated 5 points whereas three or more high schools in different districts with one or more CTE partners could garner up to 30 points.  Projects rated #1 and #2 were unsuccessful in getting their three and four School Administrative Units, respectively, to approve moving forward at different points of the process.  Project #3 has made good progress on a governance structure and in their local support for the project.  They are now challenged with identifying financial resources to support the planning process, more specifically, to secure funding to support the next steps of Site Selection and Educational Visioning.  It is unfortunate that Maine has a provision for the Integrated, Consolidated 9-16 Educational 
	2	Facility Project, yet no effort is made to partially help fund the next step of the process to move the project forward.  I share all these details about the Integrated, Consolidated 9-16 Educational Facility Program to point out that when you bring it down to one high school or a regional high school to apply, that is really the Major Capital School Construction Program and not the Integrated, Consolidated 9-16 Educational Facility Program. That leads me to the second item in the summary of the bill – that a SAU be eligible to apply for funding for both the Major Capital School Construction Program and the Integrated, Consolidated 9-16 Educational Facility Program.  That opportunity already exists.  SAUs were not limited to applying under only one program in the 2017-2018 rating cycle.   The part of number 2 that is of concern is that applications would be accepted in the calendar year 2024. To open the application process in January 2024 requires planning that is not currently in place. The Maine State Board of Education 5-Year Strategic Plan identifies 2024 as the year to initiate the process and announce construction applications and timelines, 2025 as the year SAUs can submit their applications, and 2026 as the year to approve the 2025-2026 Major Capital School Construction Proposed Priority List and the Integrated, Consolidated 9-16 Educational Facility Proposed Priority List. To receive applications in 2024 is not a realistic expectation under current conditions. Lastly, the bill requires the convening of a stakeholder group to develop recommendations for the establishment and financing of the Maine Public School Construction Authority. What does it mean for Maine to have a “new authority?” Many questions arise with the wording of number 3.    The need for greater funding for school construction and renovation projects is a concern that the School Construction Committee of the State Board hears from school administrators on a regular basis. Nearly one quarter of the State’s 610 public schools were built in the 1950s alone, and with rising construction costs and the aging infrastructure of the majority of our state’s public schools, the financial needs SAUs are facing far outweigh the resources we currently have available. This is a topic the Board has been deeply involved with and is encouraged to see the Education Committee address in a number of bills in this session.   The State Board supports this bill if the intent of convening a group of qualified stakeholders is to make recommendations on researching and identifying alternative pathways or revenue sources to finance school construction needs in our State. As mentioned in my testimony in support of L.D. 280, An Act to Make Maine Schools Safer and Healthier by Increasing the Maximum Debt Service Limit, the State Board is grateful for the discussion of how we can sustainably address rising school construction costs and increasing needs.   In my testimony in support of LD 280, I spoke in favor of raising the debt ceiling by some amount to make possible the replacement of more schools in the current 2017-2018 rating cycle priority list and in future rating cycles, but stated that perhaps the time has come to look at alternatives for funding school construction. I raised concerns around the payment of school construction in our State through the selling of state bonds and its impact on the overall education budget. The Board views 
	3	this proposal as an opportunity to explore and identify other funding models and ways of creating more sustainable funding sources for school construction in our State.  In the last two meetings of the Maine Education Policy Research Institute (MEPRI) Steering Committee, members discussed school construction funding as a potential research study to identify innovative or alternative methods that other states are using to address the challenges of school construction costs and funding mechanisms. MEPRI contacted the Education Commission of States (ECS) to inquire about what research may currently exist on the topic and ECS created a memo outlining the latest research on sources of school construction funding across the country. The preliminary overview of the study, “School Facilities Funding Background & Examples,” was forwarded to one of your committee members, Rep. Millett. ECS anticipates that the project they have underway will be ready this summer/early fall. I think that it may be a very good resource for the stakeholder group.  Thank you for this opportunity to comment. I would be happy to answer questions the Committee may have.  The State Board will be available for work sessions on this bill.                              
