May 16, 2023 
 
To the members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
 
Please find the below written testimony in opposition of LD 1415.  While on the face of the bill 
it sounds like it will help districts applying for school construction it only will help those urban 
districts with access to more funds than rural districts.  All the sponsors of this bill are from 
urban locations.   Also there are no members for the Committee that represent a rural area and 
may not fully appreciate what rural areas are facing.   
 
The law was changed to help with lower pupil counts to and help with consolidation.  Under the 
previous law change 2 to 3 high schools basically have to join forces, close the local school to 
make a larger region school.  Also under that law change 3 projects were selected to possibly 
obtain funding for a 9 to 16 regional high school and technical center.  2 of those projects have 
failed to gain any traction and the 3rd is at a stand still due to lack of start up costs.  That 3rd 
project is a collaboration of 3 to 4 districts in one of the poorest areas of the state. 
 
I feel it is disingenuous for the State Board of Education to back a bill that will allow bigger 
districts to apply for funding as a singular entity.  I understand that some of the more urban 
area have had an influx of population but what about rural areas.  Student enrollment is 
shrinking and the age of residents is going up.  How are rural districts supposed to survive and 
provide quality education to students and adults if the law is changed.   
 
Having a high school in every town is not sustainable with the current age of school buildings, 
age of town residents, and decreasing student enrollments.  Consolidating schools is not a 
popular idea, but unfortunately it is the way of the future for some areas.  Those rural areas 
need all the help they can get.   
 
I think this law should not pass and the State Board of Education should support the current 
law.     
