 
 
 
 
 
April 12, 2023 
 
Sen. Craig Hickman, Chair 
Rep. Laura Supica, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1357 An Act to Impose an Expanded Prohibition on Lobbying for Former Executive Branch 
Employees 
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs: My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti-corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in support of LD 
1357, and we thank Rep. Kessler for bringing forward this important legislation.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government 
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to 
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring 
meaningful change. We unite people across the political spectrum to pass laws that hold corrupt 
politicians accountable, defeat special interests, and force the government to meet the needs of the 
American people. 
As you likely know, lobbying takes many forms, but perhaps most frequently it is a person who is paid to 
influence decisions made by a public official to pass or defeat legislation.  While there is nothing 
inherently wrong with sharing information with a public official, there is something insidious about a 
public official trading their past public position to promote their current private interests.  
A cooling off period of one year for former Executive Branch employees, as proposed in LD 1357, is a 
sensible step in the right direction. It will help limit the fact, or even the perception, that a lobbyist is 
using their previous public status to promote the private interests of a client.  According to the Pew 
Charitable Trust, there is already a crisis of confidence in public institutions .  When former public 
officials misuse their influence to further their private financial interests, it compounds that distrust in 
institutions.  
At the federal level, 50% of Senators and 42% of Representatives become lobbyists after 
leaving Congress. Members of Congress who become lobbyists see their salaries increase on 
average 1,452%. For the private sector, the Return On Investment For Lobbying (ROIFL) is mindboggling.  
For every dollar top companies spend lobbying, they get an average $760 in federal support and tax 
savings, so the ROIFL is 76,000%.  

Maine has done a good job preventing former legislators from immediately changing roles to become 
lobbyists, but it is even more important to extend those policies to administration officials who have 
more individual authority to trade for favors when they reach the private sector.    
Whether there are actual favors being traded, or just the perception of favors being traded, it is critical 
to limit the inappropriate influence that undermines the credibility of our public institutions.  
 
