 1 March 20, 2023  
Senator Baldacci, Rep resentative Meyer, Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health  and Human Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am the parent and guardian of a 22 -year -old with 
significant disabilities who receives Section 21 support. I am testifying FOR LD 464  to eliminate 
wait lists for MaineCare -funded Home and Community Based Services for adult Mainer s with 
significant disabilities and to eliminate wait lists for state -funded support for elder Mainers  who 
need support .  
Wait Lists for 
MaineCare -funded 
Home and Community 
Based Services  
Section 18 Brain Injury Wait 
List 
Five years ago there was no 
wait list for Mainers needing 
MaineCare -funded Section 18 
brain injury service, but it 
began to appear in 2019 (the 
red line  in the graph in my 
testimony). Every budget since 
then has failed to appropriate 
any money to address this wait 
list, which has now grow n to 
170 Mainers with brain injury  
on the Section 18 wait list . 
There is no initiative in the 
supplemental or biennial budget, and no plan in any bill before the Legislature —other than LD 
464—to address this wait list. The lifespan waiver bill includes no provision to address people 
waiting for Section 18 supports. Please pass LD 464 to eliminate this neglected wait list of 
Mainers with brain injury.  
Section 29 Supports Waiver Wait List for Adults with Intellectual Disability or Autism  
The Governor’s bienni al budget proposal does include an initiative to gradually eliminate the 
wait list for the MaineCare -funded Section 29 “supports waiver” for people with autism or 
intellectual disability (the purple line  in the graph in my testimony —185 Mainers with autism  
or intellectual disability on the Section 29 wait list ). You might therefore safely strike that 
initiative from LD 464. Or you might choose to leave it, to reinforce the message to the 

 2 Appropriations Committee how important it is to fund eliminat ion of  this wait list —as it was 
previously eliminated for the f our years leading up to 2019.  
Section 21 Comprehensive Waiver Wait List for Adults with Intellectual Disability or 
Autism with the Highest Needs  
The wait list for comprehensive MaineCare -funded Section 21 supports is prioritized by need. 
The Governor’s biennial budget proposal includes an initiative to keep the Priority 1 portion of 
the Section 21 wait list cleared, for people who DHHS has determined are at extremely high risk 
for abuse , neglect , or expl oitation without Section 21 supports. LD 464 would also eliminate the 
Priority 2 portion of the wait list for Mainers with autism or intellectual disability at risk of 
abuse neglect or exploitation  without Section 21 supports, as well as the Priority 3 portion of 
the Section 21 wait list. There are 1,951 Mainers on the Section 21 wait list  (dark blue line in 
graph ), and they spend an average of 6 years on the Section 21 wait list ! Enough already. 
Eliminate it. Please don’t ask Mainers with disabilities to wait years longer as the new lifespan 
waiver ramps up.  
Section 20 Wait List for Adults with Other Related Conditions  
MaineCare -funded Section 20 supports Mainers with “other related conditions ” like spina 
bifida, cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy , and other circumstances that require support similar 
to those typically required by persons with intellectual disabilities (the orange line in the 
graph ). The Department’s plan for the lifespan waiver is f or people on the wait list for Section 
20 to become eligible for the lifespan waiver during “Phase 2” of the lifespan waiver’s 
implementation. Please don’t ask the 16 people on  the Section 20 wait list to wait an additional 
unspecified time for “Phase 2” o f the lifespan waiver. Eliminate the Section 20 wait list now.  
Wait Lists for State -Funded Elder Supports  
The lifespan waiver does not address state -funded elder supports, but LD 464 does. The 
biennial budget includes money to reduce, but not eliminate th e wait list for state -funded elder 
supports. Please finish the job by passing LD 464.  
Relation to Work Force  
The Department may suggest that eliminating wait lists without addressing workforce 
shortages doesn’t help anyone. This is correct. It is necessary  to both eliminate wait lists and 
address workforce —including by raising direct care worker wages to market rates. Instead of 
solving neither problem, please solve both. To solve the wait list part of the problem, please 
pass LD 464. The lifespan waiver ma y offer a long -term solution, but the people on the wait lists 
have already been waiting years. Don’t ask them to wait any longer.  
