am Community Housing of Maine 
Board Members 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director, Cumberland County 
Board President 
Chip Newell 
Principal, The NewHeight Group 
Board Treasurer 
Gunnar Hubbard 
Principal, Thornton Tomasetti 
Board Secretary 
David Birkhahn 
Vice President, TD Bank 
Elizabeth Boepple 
Partner, Murray, Plumb, & Murray 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing 
investment Executive 
Luc Nya 
Mental Health Program Coordinator 
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident 
Thomas Ptacek 
Huston Commons Caseworker, 
Preble Street 
Jennifer Putnam 
Executive Director, Waypoint 
Jennifer Rottmann 
Deputy Director/CFO, The Genesis Fund 
John Ryan 
President, Wright-Ryan Construction 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President, Evernorth 
Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President, NBT Bank 
Staff Contacts 
Cullen Ryan 
Executive Director 
Kyra Walker 
Chief Operating Officer 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager 
Mara O‘Shea 
Compliance Manager 
Meredith Smith 
Supportive Housing Manager 
Chris Harmon 
Controller 
Jenny Jimino 
Bookkeeper 
Vickey Merrill 
Advocacy Director 
Bree LaCasse 
Development Director 
Brian Kilgallen 
Development Officer 
Robyn Wardell 
Development Officer March 20, 2023 
Re: LD 464, An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community-based Services for People with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability, Brain Injury or Other Related Conditions 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM. I am also the parent of a 26-year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD). I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD. I also serve as chair the Maine Developmental Services Oversight 
and Advisory Board (MDSOAB). 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 464, An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community- 
based Services for People with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability, Brain Injury or 
Other Related Conditions. 
LD 464 would provide funding to eliminate the Section 18, 20, 21, 29, and 63 waitlists in their 
entirety. I urge the Committee to support any bill which would address the waitlists for HCBS. 
Passing LD 464 would be a complete garne-changer for people with ID/DD in Maine. For the ﬁrst 
time since 2008, when the Section 21 waitlist first emerged, people with ID/DD in Maine would 
have their needs sufficiently met. 
I can tell you that the biggest concern parents have, including myself, is what happens when we 
die. 
As a society, we long ago decided: Care for this vulnerable population should be a state obligation. 
As citizens, we empowered and entrusted DHHS to step in and ensure that our most vulnerable 
citizens received proper care and support for success in their lives. Waiting lists ﬂy in the face of 
that commitment. They leave individuals hanging, and also keep parents out of the workforce 
during the prime of their careers. Providing services to people in need is wise and sound policy. 
People and their families thrive when they are supported in reaching their potential. Leaving 
people with no or insufﬁcient support steers them away from their potential and throws individuals 
and families into expensive and often redundant crises. Why would we do that? Why would we 
short sell on our investments in people who leave high school ready to make the most of 
themselves in the world; why would be throw people into instability rather than see them thrive? 
I would like to thank DHHS, speciﬁcally leadership and staff within the Office of Aging and 
Disability Service (OADS). OADS has been working diligently to improve and streamline the 
ID/DD service system, seeking stakeholder feedback on how best to do so, and incorporating this 
feedback into its short- and long-term planning efforts. And, over the past few years the 
Legislature has approved funding for the elimination of the Section 21, Priority I waiting list, as 
well as addressing the growing Section 29 waitlist. This is huge and should be applauded. 
However, more work remains. 
As of September 20, 2022, there were 2,028 people on the Section 21 waitlist, and 218 people on 
the Section 29 waitlist — with some waiting years for services. This means there are more than 
2,000 people waiting for services lacking adequate support and care. Appropriating funding to 
cure the waitlists, as LD 464 would do, would solve for this completely. So long as agencies have 
adequate staffing capacity, the crux of which is having the ability to pay direct support staff 
suitable wages. 
Society cannot afford to fail these people. 
I hope that you will invest in helping people with intellectual/development disabilities have access 
to and receive the services they need by supporting LD 464. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
One City Center, 4"‘ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org
