Darla Chafin
Augusta
LD 464
March 20, 2023
Re: LD 464 An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community-Based Services for People with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intelectual Disability, Brain Injury or Other Related Conditions
                                                           (Emergency) 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Darla Stimpson Chafin. I am the parent and 
guardian of a 56-year-old daughter, a former resident of Pineland Center, and a 
current resident of a group home in Auburn. 
I know of no way to explain the impact of waiting lists but to tell you a bit of my 
family’s history even though it was before waiting lists. However, it may help to 
understand what happens without needed services, let alone without an understanding 
of needs. When my daughter was 3, we lived in El Paso, Texas where there was a 
preschool for children like Cathy, a trainable school for older and less impacted 
children, and the regular school system. The ability to be in others’ care and to be 
with similarly impacted children made a great difference in our lives. It introduced 
her to other people and gave me a chance to catch up on basic necessities like cooking
and laundry and just briefly not have the worry about someone else’s immediate 
safety.  
My daughter was frightened of sleeping or of having no one with their eyes open 
around her.  The stress and restrictions involved added to accidents.  During that time 
her brother who was two years older suffered a concussion from a fall and damage to 
his eyesight in an accident with another child. At the time of the eye accident, my 
daughter had been in a series of small seizures for about 12 hours.  
Returning to my parent’s home in Maine, Cathy was taken into the day program there 
immediately. Since my father died suddenly in the next week, I am so glad I didn’t 
have to face a waiting list. It was tough enough on my Mom to be invaded by two 
young children while trying to figure out how she could get through this sudden 
change in her life. I was job hunting, but someone had to be with Cathy at all times, 
so that was one more problem to solve. We made it, but I also had relatives in Maine 
to help ease the stress.  And my mother worked tirelessly at finding a placement at 
Pineland. After a 30-day evaluation, my daughter was admitted long-term, evidently 
in an emergency placement. Since medical insurance was a problem because of my 
son’s injury, I found a job where I could get State covered health insurance for us and 
moved to Augusta, allowing us to go to Pineland on weekends.
I can’t imagine how we could have survived if we’d been faced with a shorter waiting list. As it
was, my mother and my fantastic family took care of a lot of bills for that first year I was back 
and heaven knows how much more.  The point is that waiting lists for many means 
sleeplessness, sometimes loss of jobs, and poor health. In the late 1960s March of Dimes did
a survey and found that the income of almost anyone with a seriously mentally disabled child 
had reached its peak on the day the child was diagnosed. Most families in this situation 
ended up divorced.  Hopefully, we’ve improved on that. The first thing I noticed in Maine was 
it seemed families were still whole in spite of it all. The survey showed much worse results 
and, much to my surprise, my marriage didn’t last either. 
I hope I’m still here to see the benefits that can result from this LD and LD 659. 
Taking away the constant worries from these people who can only wait for their 
chance to get help may result in more holistic communities where people have the 
opportunity to help each other more easily and in doing so, find life becomes easier 
and healthier for all.  
Thank you for your consideration of this matter.

