Dixie Redmond
Hampden, ME
LD 464
Testimony submitted for LD 464
To the Esteemed Chairs of the Health and Human Services Committee SenatorJoseph 
Baldacci and Representative Michele Meyer,  and the Honorable Members of the 
HHS Committee:  
* Rep. Colleen Madigan (D-Waterville)
* Rep. Margaret Craven (D-Lewiston)
* Rep. Samuel Lewis Zager (D-Portland)
* Rep. Daniel Joseph Shagoury (D-Hallowell)
* Rep. Anne Graham (D-North Yarmouth)
* Rep. Kathy Irene Javner (R-Chester)
* Rep. Abigail Griffin (R-Levant)
* Rep. Michael Lemelin (R-Chelsea)
* Rep. Ann Fredericks (R-Sanford)
* Sen. Henry Ingwersen (D-York)
* Sen. Marianne Moore (R-Washington)
Thank you for your service. 
My name is Dixie Redmond and I am the mom of a grown son who lives with us who 
is autistic. I live in Hampden, Maine. 
I support the passing of LD 464 for clearing waitlists, in conjunction with initiatives 
to improve the wages of Direct Support Personnel, so that people with disabilities can 
find services now. 
Intense trauma is created when graduating to no support services for after school. Our 
son graduated in 2013 to waitlists without access to services needed to live his life. 
He and we were deeply impacted by the lack of needed services while on waitlists. 
Please prevent this for other people and their families. 
1. Disabilities do not disappear upon school ending.
In school, our son needed occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, a 
one to one educational technician, adaptive physical education, and the consultation 
of specialists. Two parents cannot replace the team of people our son needs. The lack 
of support at such a critical time creates trauma for the individual and the family. 
2. Disabilities do not disappear while better waivers are being developed.
The Lifespan Waiver being developed hopefully will meet needs more seamlessly for 
people with disabilities in the future. But it is years until it will be fully operational. 
Many people have already been waiting for years - some more than a decade. They 
continue to face debilitating trauma now from not having needed supports in place. 
They are not relaxing at home but are actively suffering. Through no fault of their 
own, some people need significant help to live. These people need help *now*, not 
years later when the Lifespan Waiver fully rolls out. 
3.  Clearing waitlists is fiscally conservative in the long run. 
Providing services when needed prevents regression and loss of skills for people. 
Providing services without a gap eliminates the need for remedial services to regain 
skills. Funding waitlists now may prevent the need for a permanent higher level of 
support following a traumatic time of no supports for some people. Available and 
timely supports may prevent expensive hospitalizations for mental health issues 
caused by a lack of services. Available and timely supports may prevent costly 
out-of-state placements for some individuals. Funding waitlists would eliminate the 
use of the emergency room as an expensive gateway to gain supports. Funding 
waitlists would prevent trauma for many individuals, as well as their families. 
Funding waitlists would enable both parents to continue to work and contribute to the 
economy. 
Since 2008, Maine's budget process has asked people with autism, developmental 
disabilities, intellectual disabilities, and brain injury to wait and wait and wait in both 
difficult economic times and times of economic surplus. So many people with 
legitimate, significant disabilities are not just waiting but suffering, right now. 
When you drive into Maine there is a sign that says, "Welcome Home". Passing LD 
464 will clearly say "Welcome Home" to people who have been waiting to be 
recognized by their governor, their legislators and their communities for many years. 
Thank you for hearing this testimony. 
Respectfully, 
Dixie Redmond
Hampden, Maine

