Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services
In Favor of LD 464 – An Act to Eliminate Waiting 
Lists for Community-based Services for People 
with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual 
Disability, Brain Injury or Other Related 
Conditions
Provided on March 16, 2023
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Moore, and the members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. 
My name is Jena Jones and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on Aging 
(MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, businesses, 
municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live healthy, engaged and 
secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in community settings. I am testifying 
in favor of LD 464.
 For older adults and people with autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disabilities, and people with 
brain injuries or other related conditions, accessing community-based services allows those in need to 
remain safely in their homes and communities with a sense of autonomy and security. Many of these 
services provide social connections, assist Mainers with activities of daily living, and help keep people 
out of higher-cost institutions like nursing facilities and hospitals. 
However, for the thousands of Mainers who are current on waitlists for services, the lack of availability 
of these services can have catastrophic consequences. There are currently more-than 2,000 older and 
disabled Mainers waiting for services, and of those 22% have no other coverage to supply the care 
and/or support they need1. The lack of these services is not only associated with poorer health 
outcomes that lead to an increased likelihood of facility or hospital stays, they also threaten vulnerable 
Mainers’ ability to remain housed.
Of those 2,000 waitlisted individuals, 1,268 older and disabled Mainers are facing a lack of independent 
support services2, also known as homemaker services. Homemaker services, such as those provided by 
Catholic Charities Maine, assist folks with household tasks like getting laundry done and dishes washed. 
Yet, because of a lack of workers available to meet demand, we are now hearing horror stories of older 
Mainers facing eviction because they cannot manage taking their trash out without the aid of these 
services. 
1 (State of Maine Department of Health and Human Services, 2022)
2 Ibid.
The cause of these staggering waitlists are historic direct care workforce shortages and a declining 
affordable housing market. Chronically low wages, few benefits, and burnout all impact the current 
availability of workers and a lack of housing these workers can afford ensures that the need for care and 
support continues to go unmet. 
The Governor’s biennial budget proposes funding to eliminate the waitlist on Section 29, and reduce the 
waitlist on Section 63, but these investments fail to account for 2/3 of the total waitlist population. 
While this funding is vital and a step in the right direction, the effort to correct this unfortunate reality 
must be more bold to impact all in need. 
Additionally, the Department of Health and Human Services has put forth an effort in LD 659, An Act to 
Promote Seamless and Flexible Home and Community Supports Across the Lifespan for Individuals with 
Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or Autism, to transition new enrollees in Sections 20, 21, and 
29 to the State’s new lifespan waiver. The MCOA supports the Department’s efforts but these 
transitions are often time-intensive and Mainers need solutions that work for them today. 
These waitlists are an unnecessary cost to a long history of undervaluing those who these programs 
serve and the workers who provide the services and supports within them, and they are a testament to 
the pervasiveness of ageism and ableism. Passing LD 464 begins to build the supports necessary to 
ensure all Mainers in need have access to the services and supports they need when & where they need 
them, and we urge you to support this legislation. 
Thank you. 
Jena Jones
