Testimony in support of Increased funding for waitlisted Adult services waivers 18, 20, 21, 29
For LD 464. 
My son has a brain injury from encephalitis as an infant.  He is receiving some adult services 
now; a Direct Support Person (DSP) for Community and Home-Based Services. This allows him 
to live in a subsidized apartment in the town where he grew up. If he was in an institution or 
group home, he would not be in the town that he grew up, and he would be very unhappy. He 
likes to have a job and be near his life time friends.  He is where he can walk to his part time 
job, and where he has a community of friendships and natural supports. Many people in town 
know him from, growing up there. 
What he lacs are more activities to do. He is only capable of part time work, based on his 
intellectual abilities and focus skills. He needs other activities,  and this is what we are working 
on with his DSP, and the DSP is an important part of this process. The DSP drives him to 
activities that are not in walking distance. They do grocery shopping together, they volunteer at 
the Recreation Center down the street. He could not do these without his DSP support, who set 
these up, and is there to stay focused in the activities. 
He has gone on and off wait lists, as staff are available. He cannot live unsupported. He is living 
in his own apartment but needs support to be there. I love him and would do many more 
activities with him, if he wanted me to. He is in the point in his life where he does not want to 
do things with “his Mom”.
 As his parent, I do many hours a week to support him in other ways. I am in contact with his 
case manager every week, I supervise his schedule or work, activities, different kinds of support 
he has.  We have a DSP 20 to 25 hours a week. This is working well, when we have staff 
available. The amount of staff available affects the quality of services. If there were more DSP’s, 
he would have a choice about who he has as a DSP. Right now he has the same DSP all of the 
time. This man is very skilled and good at what he does. But his interests and style are not 
always a good match for my son. To be able to mix up the personalities, schedule times and 
options would be ideal. 
He will begin going to a day program one day a week but, the centers/ facilities are not fully 
staffed on some days, so they cannot do community activities. They cannot leave the buildings 
without more staff. This can only happen with more funding and taking away the wait list.
His other supports are Meals on Wheels, Vocational Rehabilitation, and a neighbor we pay to 
assist him one evening meal a week. A LCSW counselor. His Case Manager, who has been 
extremely helpful. She has made everything happen so that he can live a dream he had, to live 
outside of our home. He loves that he walks in town. He cannot drive.  He loves seeing people 
when is lonely. He loves showing us what he can do without us. This has been a incredible time 
of positive growth for him.
I also want to comment on other people I know in our community. Because of the wait lists, I 
have friends who cannot access adult services. They want to move out of their parent or 
guardians’ home but they need the support. Their parents are getting too old to properly care 
for them. This situation is going to increase as Baby Boomers reach an older stage of life now. I 
have several friends who are “ too old or facing medical conditions “ and cannot do a great job 
caring for their ward, the adult with a disability. 
The other group of people affected by the waitlist, are young adults in Transition from school to 
life out of school. They are the people who would benefit from the removal of the waitlist the 
most. Adult Services help in a way that may influence the rest of their lives and the directions 
that they go in life. The negative directions could be depression, possibly running away, crime, 
negative role models, lac of activities, structure, and support. 
This is the transition my son has been in for the past 6 months, and Adult Services are crucial 
for a positive direction in his life. 
Please fund taking away the waitlists.
Jessie Greenbaum
greenbaumcmt@gmail.com
364 Sound Drive
Mount Desert, ME 04660
