 Speaking Up For Us                  PO Box 4139 •Presque Isle • Maine 04769               (207) 956-1004 
March 17, 2023
Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Senate Chair
Rep. Michele Meyer, House Chair
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony For LD 464 “An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community-based Services 
for People with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability, Brain Injury or Other 
Related Conditions.”
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, 
My name is Kile Pelletier, and I live in Fort Kent, ME, and I am a person with a disability as well 
as a spouse of a person that lives with a disability.
Please accept this testimony to support LD 464. I'm testifying on this bill to be passed, to 
open up section 29 and eliminate the waiting lists.
As a person with a disability, I had to wait a long time when I first got section 29 and it's 
frustrating for me to just sit around.  There are plenty of people with disabilities that don't speak 
up and that are just coming out of high school. People will just be put in the system to be stuck 
waiting for services. Opening section 29 waiver services for people with disabilities that need 
services right away will allow people to be able to get those types of services that they need to 
make their lives better.
People should be able to say, “hey I know what I want to do with my life, and here are my 
supports to help me with that.” I don't want to see people that have disabilities without services 
and just be stuck waiting and wondering what type of services they will be receiving. 
I want to see a better chance for persons with disabilities to make their own decisions to broaden 
their skills further through everyday living.  Passing LD 464 will show people with disabilities 
they are important and that they can lead full lives with the right support.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr. Chair of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, and the respectful 
Representatives for working on LD 464.
Kile Pelletier
Fort Kent
kpelletier@sufumaine.org 
