To: Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human Service Committee From: Kim Humphrey, mother of Dan and Founder and President of Community Connect Maine •In Support of LD 464: An Act to Eliminate Waiting Lists for Community-based Services for People with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disability, Brain Injury or Other Related Conditions   •In Support of LD 1106: An Act to Improve the Transition to Adult Services for Children with Intellectual Disabilities My name is Kim Humphrey and I am from Auburn. I am the mother and guardian of Daniel Humphrey, an adult living with autism, and I am founder and president of Community Connect Maine (CCME), a 501c3. This testimony is from both CCME and myself. Our vision is that all people have the support they need, when they need it, to live a full life within their communities of choice. Our mission is to connect individuals, families, caregivers, and communities to improve the system of care for people with developmental disabilities and related conditions. We are a network of over 4,000 people statewide.  LD 464: Waitlists diminish the quality of life for the I/DD population and increase long-term care costs for the state of Maine. Waits that keep people from accessing the daily support they need shouldn’t exist. Smooth transitions between school and adulthood keep individuals from losing skills that were hard-earned during their school years. They prevent individuals from learning challenging behaviors that then may become a lifelong way of dealing with frustration and negative emotions.  The state is putting a lot of work into creating a new developmental services system of care. It has promise but it will force people with higher needs to be on hold until the department finishes its reform work in 2025. Those who have lesser needs that can be served successfully with section 29 will be served in the meantime. Then over the next 4 years after 2025, they will slowly allow people into the new waiver. Individuals who don’t fit the section 29 waiver but aren’t in the most absolute dire situation where they can receive a section 21 waiver will be waiting at least 2 to 6 more years for basic support. I know people who have already waited for a decade. While the state says they need to keep people waiting while they reform the system of care, they are a highly active, smart group of people. They can keep their reform project on track while at the same time providing desperately needed services now. It is unacceptable to put higher needs people on hold for their basic daily support needs. Reforms should be possible without relying on a subpopuation of higher needs people to carry a burden in order for DHHS’ vision of the future to become a reality. In order to move people off the waitlist, the state will need to improve the ability of providers to take on new clients by establishing viable reimbursement rates. This must be done. We are rapidly losing the resources that high-needs individuals with I/DD depend on, and once they are lost, it will be very difficult to get them back.  LD 1106: Having a transition liaison will make it much easier for individuals to make good decisions as they make the complicated move from educational services to adulthood. It will help people to make the best choices for themselves by understanding how to build a life that includes what they need for support and where they will receive it. Until one knows that, it is hard to set up much else. How do you get a job if you don’t know where you will live, for example?  Please vote to pass LD 464 and LD 1106 to save the state money and give the I/DD population the opportunities that we all have to make the most of our lives.
