Maggie Hoffman
Hampden
LD 464
To the Esteemed Chairs of the Health and Human Services Committee Senator Joseph
Baldacci and Representative Michele Meyer,  and the Honorable Members of the 
HHS Committee:  
Rep. Colleen Madigan (D-Waterville)
Rep. Margaret Craven (D-Lewiston)
Rep. Samuel Lewis Zager (D-Portland)
Rep. Daniel Joseph Shagoury (D-Hallowell)
Rep. Anne Graham (D-North Yarmouth)
Rep. Kathy Irene Javner (R-Chester)
Rep. Abigail Griffin (R-Levant)
Rep. Michael Lemelin (R-Chelsea)
Rep. Ann Fredericks (R-Sanford)
Sen. Henry Ingwersen (D-York)
Sen. Marianne Moore (R-Washington)
I’m Maggie Hoffman, and I am in FAVOR of LD 464, as it would finally clear the waitlists for 
appropriate services for people with IDD, brain injury, or other related conditions. Jake age 35
lives at home without the support he needs to live, work and enjoy life in Maine. 
It took a year to come off the Section 29 waitlist, but being offered a waiver is only 
the first hurdle to jump, as disability services providers aren’t able to offer services 
because they are unable to find and hold on to workers. Jake has regressed, his 
co-occurring mental health challenges have magnified, and his ability to find meaning
in his days has disappeared. Too many Mainers are home on their couches, truly 
wasting away as skills are lost, and hope vanishes.
It’s too easy to explain away the loss of skilled workers on the pandemic, as 
pre-covid, the disability service system was on life support.  We talk about the 
thousands of Mainers with intellectual, developmental and medical disabilities whose 
support needs go unmet, and we hear about the providers who are unable to recruit 
and retain direct support staff, but we keep forgetting that wages must reflect the cost 
of living, the impact of inflation, and the hard, focused, skilled work of being the 
skill-teacher, peer model, personal care provider, communication facilitator, mobility 
tool, and mindfulness expert that is the minute to minute job of a support worker. 
Jake is still on the waitlist for his 24/7 waiver, currently the only one available is 
Section 21.  We look forward to the Lifespan Waiver. However, we’ve been told that 
those who already have a Section 29 waiver will have to wait four more years before 
being funded for the services that have been necessary all along.
Mainers who have been found eligible for home & community-based service waivers 
need their services immediately and consistently. Please pass LD 464, along with the 
funds to take people’s lives off hold.
With appreciation for all you do,
Maggie Hoffman
Hampden

