Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 376
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT 
Committee     
Now comes along a courageous group of legislators who knew at the time this bill 
was hammered through the House and the Sente with no roll call votes that the 
lawmakers have no right to burden the ratepayers of investor-owned utilities with a 
billion-dollar gun to the head, so to provide favor to a Senator from a county.
   How many of you know how much taxpayer money goes to enrich developers, a 
few landowners, a few contractors and an abundance of lawmakers preparing their 
future after public dis-service. How could anyone know, you have silenced the only 
transparency of electric costs due to renewable policies that the PUC once published.
    So, here we are, paying a billion dollars to move wind power out of Aroostook 
County. With the capacity factor of wind generation at best,30%, perhaps these 300 
megawatts would be better off staying in Aroostook County, serving the NMISA, 
saving them $1.08 billion dollars as the PUC points out: :"Longroad Energy's King 
Pine 1,000 MW wind generation project was chosen resulting in savings of $1.08 
billion."       Maine PUC " "COMMISSION SELECTS WINNING BIDS FOR 
NORTHERN MAINE TRANSMISSION LINE AND RENEWABLE ENERGY 
PROJECTS" October 26,2022
      What do we get for a billion dollars? What have we received for the billion dollars
plus of ratepayer money already spent on renewable energy laws? Reduction in 
electric prices? HA. Reduction in carbon emissions from Maine generation plants? 
HA. Maine carbon emissions from electric generation plants jumped 89% from 2019 
to 2022. It's in RGGI data, Look it up, NRCM. It's also in EIA data. Look it up, Sierra
Club.
     It's past time to bring this greenhouse gas bus to a halt, before we are all tossed 
under it. 
    Now, to read what the Governor's Energy Office has to say about this Billion-dollar
project:       " Mills Administration Statement on PUC’s Approval of Northern Maine 
Renewable Energy Projects"       “We applaud the Maine Public Utilities 
Commission’s Approval of the new transmission line and 1,000-megawatt wind 
project in Northern Maine, which are the result of legislation signed into law by Gov. 
Janet Mills and proposed by Sen. Troy Jackson,” said Dan Burgess, Director of the 
Governor’s Energy Office. “With Maine households and businesses facing high 
energy costs due to New England’s overreliance on expensive, imported natural gas to
generate our electricity, these projects are poised to deliver new renewable energy to 
the region that will reduce our dependence on volatile fossil fuels and deliver 
significant new job and economic opportunities to communities in Northern Maine. 
We are pleased Massachusetts has agreed to share 40% of the cost of these projects, 
as regional coordination to advance renewable energy solutions is critical. We look 
forward to further discussions with the Legislature, PUC, and others as this project 
moves ahead, to demonstrate Maine’s commitment to a clean, affordable, reliable 
energy future. “
   I guess Dan hasn't heard about the 89% uptick in burning fossil fuels in Maine.   I 
guess Dan doesn't know this project was offered to Massachusetts in 2017 as a bid in 
the 83D Clean Energy Request for Proposals. It     was rejected.   If wind is so 
reliable, it should be welcomed by NMISA, right, Dan?   I guess Dan doesn't 
understand, each state has its own renewable mission goals, Massachusetts is setting 
out to force the retirement of their state's fossil fuel plants and interrupt the fuel that 
feeds them to achieve their greenhouse gas reductions. They have no qualms if Maine 
fossil fuel plants take up the slack to feed the ISO-NE grid.
What did the PUC commissioners have to say?    "We were very pleased with the number and 
creativity of the proposals we received in this complex bidding process," said PUC Chair Philip L. 
Bartlett II. These projects will provide significant benefits to Maine and the region, including jobs 
during construction, property tax revenue for local communities, and environmental benefits from new 
renewable energy displacing fossil fuels. The influx of renewable energy into the regional grid will also
place downward pressure on electricity prices, benefitting consumers in Maine and throughout New 
England. Importantly, these benefits will accrue to Maine whether we pay for this line or someone else 
does."                           
Again, "the replacement of fossil fuels" but where is it replacing fossil fuels? Mr. Bartlett. If NECEC, a
1200-Megawatt line expected to deliver 1200 MW for almost every second throughout the year was 
only saving Maine customers pennies as opponents declared, then what is the amount of savings with a 
30% capacity output plant. Mr. Bartlett
This project has seemed to produce a billion words of propaganda.
 Maine people have enough problems paying for electricity, we don't need the 
legislature helping to reduce costs by staking us to a billion dollars of worthless wind
Dan McKay  Dixfield, Maine
