PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committ ee on Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities andTechnologyFrom:Jacob St ernDate:February 14, 2023Re:Testimon y inOpposition t o L.D . 376: An A ct toRepeal the La w R egarding theNorthern Maine R ene wable Ener gy De velopment Pr ogram
 Senat or La wrence, R epresentati ve Zeig ler, and the members of the Joint Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities, and T echnology ,
I am submitting the f ollowing t estimon y on behalf of Sierr a Club Maine, r epresenting o ver22,000 support ers and members stat ewide. F ounded in 1892, Sierr a Club is one of ournation ’s oldest and lar gest en vironmental or ganizations. W e work diligentl y to amplify thepower of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as w e work towards combating climat echange and pr omoting a just and sustainable econom y. To that end, w e ur ge an “oug ht notto pass” r eport on L.D . 376:An Act to Repeal t heLaw R egarding t he Nort hern MaineRenew able Ener gy Dev elopment Pr ogram.
L.D. 376 is y et another bill aimed at r ewriting hist ory b y repealing legislation that w assigned int o law less than tw o years ago. If enact ed, it w ould nullify L.D . 1710:An Act ToRequir e Prompt and Eff ectiv e Use of t he R enew able Ener gy Resour ces of Nort hern Maine,which r ecei ved an “oug ht to pass” r eport b y this committ ee and passed under the hammerin both the House and Senat e in June 2021.
The original legislation (L.D . 1710) r equir ed that the Public Utilities Commission (PUC)request pr oposals f or solar , wind, and biomass r enew able ener gy pr ojects. Maine consumes11.6 TWh of electricity annuall y.1Mor e than 80% ofour electricity is curr ently supplied b yrenew ables.2While this is good, it means ther e isstill appr oximat ely 2 TWh of annual f ossilfuel gener ation that needs t o be displaced b y renew ables t o meet our climat e goals.Mor eover, we need t o eliminat e the billions of barr els of fuel oil, g asoline and g as usedannuall y in Maine. The most eff ective way to do this is thr ough beneficial electrification,replacing f ossil-fueled appliances with electricall y-powered alt ernati ves.
2“Maine Energy State Profile and Energy Estimates.” U.S. Energy Information Administration, 15 Sept. 2022,https://www.eia.gov/state/analysis.php?sid=ME.1“State of Maine Energy Sector Risk Profile.” U.S. Department of Energy,https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2015/05/f22/ME-Energy%20Sector%20Risk%20Profile.pdf.

The legislation w as designed t o give Northern Maine an opportunity t o contribut e to theener gy tr ansition and, in doing so, cr eate jobs and gr ow the local econom y. With thepotential f or thousands of meg awatts of wind ener gy, northern Maine has the pot ential t oaccount f or a significant amount of Maine’s r equir ements f or new ener gy. However, becausenorthern Maine is not connect ed to ISO-NE, most of that ener gy cannot curr ently be used.The situation is similar f or solar .  Northern Maine has significant solar r esour ces, muchgreater than in German y, where solar adoption is much hig her.  Ho wever, the pot ential f orlarge-scale solar is sharpl y limit ed due t o the lack of tr ansmission.
Sierr a Club submitt ed testimon y in f avor of L.D . 1710 last session because w e belie ve thatconnecting r enew able r esour ces in northern Maine t o ISO-NE could pla y a significant r olein helping Maine meet its climat e goals.
It’s also w orth noting that e ven r epealing L.D . 1710 at this point w ould ha ve a limit edimpact since pr ojects outlined in the original legislation ha ve alr eady recei ved PUCappr oval. A ccor ding t o PUC Chair Phil Bartlett , “These pr ojects will pr ovide significantbenefits t o Maine and the r egion, including jobs during construction, pr operty tax r evenuefor local communities and en vironmental benefits fr om new r enew able ener gy displacingfossil fuels. The influx of r enew able ener gy int o the r egional grid will also place do wnwardpressur e on electricity prices, benefiting consumers in Maine and thr oughout NewEngland. ”3
We agr ee with Chair Bartlett and ur ge an “oug ht not t o pass” r eport on L.D . 376:An Act toRepeal t he Law R egarding t he Nort hern Maine R enew able Ener gy Dev elopment Pr ogram.Thank y ou for your time and consider ation.
Sincer ely,Jacob St ern
--Member , Executi ve Committ eeSierr a Club Maine Chapt er
3Turkel, Tux. “Northern Maine wind power project wins PUC approval.” Portland Press Herald, 31 Jan. 2023,https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/31/northern-maine-wind-power-project-wins-puc-approval/.
