conwrnsrom-3 -~_ /-\|\: El\/lPLOYEE —OV\/l\lED COI\/IPANY-mi 
February 14,2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Paige Ziegler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 376, “An Act To Repeal the Law Regarding the Northern 
Maine Renewable Energy Development Program” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Jeremy Payne and I am a principal with Cornerstone Govermnent Affairs Group here 
to testify in opposition to LD 376 on behalf of our client LS Power Grid Maine. 
As you may know, recently, LS Power Grid Maine, an affiliate of LS Power, was selected to build 
transmission facilities in order to facilitate adding new renewable energy from Aroostook County 
to Maine’s energy mix. The Maine Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) unanimously voted to 
approve entering into contracts to fund 60% of the transmission and wind projects in Aroostook 
County, and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts ’ Department of Energy Resources has also 
approved their participation for funding up to 40% of the projects. Both states decided to approve 
these projects because of their ability to help each state cost effectively meet their renewable 
energy goals While also creating new investment and job opportunities. “Repealing the Northern 
Maine Renewable Energy Development Program now would forgo this unique opportunity to 
develop these in-state resources with the majority of the beneﬁts to Maine ratepayers, but with 
another state helping to foot the bill. 
LS Power was founded in 1990 and has raised just under $50 billion in debt and equity capital to 
construct and invest in energy infrastructure across the United States. The company is the nation’s 
leading competitive transmission developer and owner, having constructed approximately 700 
miles of transmission lines in Nevada, Texas, Indiana, Kentucky, New York, New Jersey, and 
Delaware with an additional 100+ miles and multiple substations under construction. 
They are also the owner/operator of the 132-megawatt Kibby wind farm right here in Franklin 
County that is part of a diverse national mix of generation assets including gas, solar, wind, hydro, 
biofuels and battery storage, as well as electric vehicle charging, demand response and microgrids. 
LS Power is a strong advocate for competition in the electric transmission space. Through their 
unique solutions and cost contaimnent measures adopted nationwide through competitive
solicitations, they have become the leading developer of transmission system improvements and 
upgrades, similar to those contemplated in its Aroostook County project. 
Passing LD 376 would send a damaging signal to the energy marketplace at exactly the moment 
we are seeking to make a cost-effective renewable energy transition and attract new taxable 
investment, jobs and growth opportunities for Aroostook County and beyond. Many companies, 
including LS Power Grid Maine, invested time, money and resources to ready their bids for 
competitive review by the PUC staff and ultimately the commissioners, and this legislation seeks 
to change the rules not just in the middle of the game, but in fact after the referees have blown the 
ﬁnal whistle at the game’s end. This would have a chilling effect on potential new energy 
investment in Maine. 
The new Aroostook projects are an important step toward bringing more cost-effective renewable 
energy to Maine. Being able to interconnect Maine-made, low-cost renewable energy will reduce 
the need for more expensive alternatives and lower market prices while growing our economy and 
reducing emissions. 
Importantly, the LS Power Grid Maine transmission facilities will help unlock 1,200 megawatts 
of renewable energy, which provides beneﬁts in Maine and across New England. As found by the 
PUC this project was found to be the most cost-effective and efﬁcient proposal to fulﬁll the 
objectives of the legislature. LS Power is especially excited at the prospect of helping to provide 
new economic opportunity and prosperity in Aroostook County. 
All of these efforts are underway because of the bipartisan efforts of Senate President Troy 
Jackson, and Senate Republican Leader Trey Stewart in the spring of 2021 — through their 
visionary leadership there is a great opportunity to ﬁnally do what other legislatures have been 
unable to accomplish: unlock the renewable energy potential of Northern Maine. 
LS Power Grid Maine looks forward to engaging with all stakeholders — community members, 
elected ofﬁcials, schools and municipalities, environmental and conservation organizations, 
regulators, and many others — to ensure they deliver the most beneﬁcial project possible with the 
least amount of community and environmental impacts. 
We respectfully urge this committee to vote ought not to pass. 
Thank you.iA
