 
                                                                                                                                                              www. aroostookpartnership.org  
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551-6601 , Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  
 
 
February 1 3, 2023  
 
The Hon. Mark Lawrence, Co-chair  
The Hon. Stanley Paige Zeigler , Jr., Co-chair  
Joint Standing  Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
State House  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 376, “ An Act to Repeal the Law Regarding the Northern Maine 
Renewable Energy Development Program”  
 
Dear Sen. Lawrence, Rep. Zeigler , and members of the EUT Committee:  
 
I represent the Aroostook Partnership (AP), a unique private/public partnership of nearly 100  
businesses , the Northern Maine Development Commission and the three colleges in Aroostook County.  
The mission of the Partnership is to speak with one voice to engage the private sector leadership, talents  
and resources to ensure the economic survival and growth of A roostook County. In alignment with our  
mission, I am writing in opposition to L.D. 376, “ An Act to Repeal the Law Regarding the Northern Maine 
Renewable Energy Development Program .” 
 
AP’s primary mission is to drive economic development in Aroostook County and a great deal of our  
economic development focus is centered around using our abundant natural resources.  Along with  
forestry and agriculture, we also have another significant natural resource, and that is our potential for  
generating re newable wind energy. AP has been supportive of all the major wind developers in  Northern 
Maine over the past several years and continue to support the prospect of this project being  built in our 
region.  
 
AP is firmly in support of further developing wind i n our region provided a County TIF district can be  
established to ensure tax revenues largely remain in Aroostook County to further support economic  
development within our rural region.  
 
Wind project development like this project at King Pine is good for M aine and Aroostook’s economy for  
several reasons:  
 
1. The construction phase of this multimillion -dollar project will support many local and statewide  
construction companies and contractors.  
2. Those companies will spend a great deal of that revenue on local ser vices such as food, lodging,  
fuel, parts and repair of their equipment, further benefiting Aroostook and other rural Maine  
areas where the transmission line will be built.  
3. This project will generate millions in tax dollars which, through well -planned TIFs,  can benefit  
the rural  economically depressed  counties in which this project will be built.  
                                                                                                                                                              www.aroostookpartnership.org  
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551 -6601, Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207)  498-6377  
 
 4. The 1,000MW of  low cost electricity  generat ed will create downward pressure on electricity  
rates and sta ndard offer pricing in Maine.  
5. This project would create much -needed alternative revenue sources for forest and  agricultural  
landowners through long -term lease agreements.  
6. This project would create technical jobs with higher than average salaries and benefits which are  
exactly the kind of jobs we hope to grow in rural Maine.  
7. Nearby Northern Maine Community College offers a Wind Power Technology program to meet  
the increased demands expected in Aroostook for wind power s killed employees.  
8. This project will offer tremendous local benefits negotiated with the areas around the project  
sites.  
 
Additionally, our Governor has set aggressive goals for generating clean energy in the coming years and,  
with little hope of hydro deve lopment in Maine, wind, solar and biomass remain our best options to  
achieve these goals. The challenge is locating the projects in wind -rich regions where the residents need  
and welcome the economic impacts, but also has the land available for the develop er to build or  
upgrade merchant transmission lines to deliver the power to the grid. AP believes that this 20 -year PUC  
contract, in combination with a supportive wind development region in the Unorganized Territories of  
Aroostook, presents a great opportun ity for Maine to move closer to achieving its renewable generation  
goals.  
 
From a Maine ratepayer perspective, we believe Massachusetts agreeing to procure 40% of the project  
will make this a much more appealing and rate -beneficial contract for Maine ratepayers. From an  
economic development perspective, wind development is a win -win for the County and the state of  
Maine in that we receive the many benefits outlined above while Maine and our planet benefit from  
replacing fossil fuel generation with clea n energy produced right in Maine.  
 
Aroostook Partnership fully supports the development of this renewable infrastructure project in our  
region and sincerely hopes the Legislature will stay the course with the Northern Maine Renewable 
Energy Development Program . 
 
Respectfully,  
 
 
 
President  & CEO , Aroostook Partnership  
ptowle@aroostookpartnership.org  
207-551-6601   

