 Morgan Rielly 
 16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
 Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Phone: (207) 228-5767 
 Morgan.Rielly@legislature.maine.gov  H  OUSE OF   R  EPRESENT ATIVES  
 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
 AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
 (207) 287-1400 
 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 April 27, 2023  
 Testimony of Repr esentative Mor gan Rielly pr esenting  
 LD 397, “  An Act to Allow Sponsorship Signs at Outdoor   Athletic Facilities   ” 
 Befor e the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
 Good   afternoon   Senator   Chipman,   Representative   Williams   and  distinguished   members   of  the 
 Joint   Standing   Committee   on  Transportation.   My  name   is  Morgan  Rielly ,  and  I  represent   House  
 District   127,  which   includes   part  of  Westbrook.   I  am  here  today   to  present   LD  397,  An  Act  to 
 Allow Sponsorship Signs at Outdoor Athletic Facilities   . 
 I  have   put  this  bill  in  on  behalf   of  the  city  of  Westbrook,   which   I  represent   a  part  of.  Westbrook’ s 
 Economic   Development   Director ,  Daniel   Stevenson,   and  the  Director   of  Planning   and  Code  
 Enforcement,   Jennie   Franceschi   have   joined   me  today .  They   can  speak   to  the  specifics   of  the  bill, 
 but  LD  397  is  simple   in  concept.   It  will  allow   athletic   facilities   owned   by  the  city  or  schools   to 
 maintain   advertising   signs   visible   from   a  public   way  if  the  content   of  the  sign  is  directly   related  
 to  a  contribution   for  the  construction,   maintenance,   operation   or  programming   of  the  athletic  
 facility   and  the  sign  is  oriented   inward   to  persons   visiting   or  using   the  facility .  I  want   to  stress   we 
 are  not  trying   to  allow   for  advertising   billboards   as  seen  along   city  streets   and  highways   in  other  
 states.  
 Thank   you  very  much   for  your  time  and  consideration.   Please   direct   any  questions   to  Westbrook  
 Economic   Director   Daniel   Stevenson   and  the  Director   of  Planning   and  Code   Enforcement,  
 Jennie   Franceschi   They   will  also  be  happy   to  provide   you  with  any  information   for  your 
 upcoming   work   session.   I  believe   they  will  also  be  presenting   an  amendment   to  the  bill  that  I  will 
 support. Thank you so much for your time.  
 District 127: Westbrook 
 1 

