 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 3 97 
 
AN ACT TO ALLOW SPONSORSHIP SIGNS AT OUTDOOR ATHLETIC FACILITIES  
 
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams  and members of the Transportation  Committee.  I am Steven 
Bailey , executive director of Maine  School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association , in 
opposition to L.D. 3 97. 
 
This bill would allow an owne r or operator o f a public  or private  athletic field to erect signage only if it is  
directly relate d to a contribution for the construction, maintenance,  operatio n or programming of the athletic  
facilit y. 
 
Our Associations oppo se this  legislat ion fo r a variety of reason s. 
 
First, schools have policies that outline whether signs are  permitte d on campu s. Second, many towns have 
ordinances  regardin g signage that school districts must follow when erecting sign s. In many cases this 
legislation would directly oppose those  policie s and  ordinances . Third, whe n signs ar e permitte d, installing 
advertising signs can be a source of revenue for schools as part of a fundraising campaign . 
 
This bill would leapfrog over this effort and allow signs to be erected for fre e. Finally, limiting s igns wh ere 
they are allowe d to only companies who are  directly relate d to an athletic facilit y as the resul t of construction, 
maintenance or operation  is discriminator y. There are many businesses across Maine who support our 
schools, who should have the same opportunity if  permitte d to erect signs for free . 
