MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Opposition to L.D. 1203,  
An Act to Clarify Deadlines in the Freedom of Access Act and 
Disclosure Provisions in the Intelligence and Investigative Record 
Information Act
April 3, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of the Cumberland 
Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of 
Police Association in opposition to section three of LD 1203.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill amends the Freedom of Access Act to specify that the reasonable 
time within which an agency or official having custody or control of a 
document has to provide a good faith, nonbinding estimate of the time that 
it will take the agency or official to comply with the request may not be 
longer than 30 days following receipt of the request.  This bill allows the 
public access officer for an entity subject to the Freedom of Access Act to 
give priority to requests for public records from residents of Maine and 
journalists.  This bill also amends the Intelligence and Investigative  Record  
Information  Act  to  allow  the  disclosure  of  a record  that  may  constitute  
an  unwarranted  invasion  of  privacy  if  that  disclosure  is consented  to  
by  the  individual  who  is  the  subject  of  the  record  or,  if  the  individual  
is deceased, incapacitated or a minor, by a family or household member of 
that individual. 
We are in opposition to section three of the bill because it has the potential to add 
a tremendous amount of work to the process of fulfilling a record request. This 
provision adds a complicating factor to records which, if released, would constitute 
an unwarranted invasion of privacy and would require us to determine whether 
someone consents to the release.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
Many of the records in law enforcement possession reference multiple subjects, 
and in the case of a subject who is deceased, incapacitated or a minor, this statute 
change would allow for release of the record if there is consent by “a,” or one 
person who is a family or household member of the individual. In practice, this is 
unworkable – generally, individuals who are deceased, incapacitated or a minor 
have multiple family or household members and frequently, those individuals are 
not in agreement with the decision to release a record. This law would require us 
to identify and then contact each family or household member, to determine if they 
ALL consent to the release.  
We are not taking a position on the other pieces of this bill. 
And so, for these reasons, we ask that you strike section three of LD 1203 in the 
work session. And, on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want 
to thank the committee members for your work on this Committee.  
