      
                    
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Judith 
Meyer. I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the Morning Sentinel. 
I am here today on behalf of the Maine Press Association to urge this committee not to pass LD 1203, An 
Act to Clarify Deadlines in the Freedom of Access Act and Disclosure Provisions in the Intelligence and 
Investigative Record Information Act.
* * *
The Maine Press Association enjoys a seat on the Right to Know Advisory Committee, 
a committee established by the Legislature more than a dozen years ago specifically to 
serve as a resource for ensuring compliance with Maine’s Freedom of Access Act and 
upholding the integrity of the purposes of the Act as it applies to all public entities in the 
conduct of the public’s business.
Every year, every single year since its inception, RTK Committee members have 
discussed, debated and deliberated on the question of what is a “reasonable” response 
time for FOAA estimates and requests and each and every time have landed on what is 
known as the “reasonable” standard for response, a specific legal standard that applies 
when one entity owes a duty to another. That means government may take only so long 
to respond as is reasonable, and no longer. 
So, if a person were to request access to Planning Board records approving a recent 
development project, for instance, a reasonable response time for both estimate and 
records might be the same or next day. The more complicated the request, the longer it 
takes for an entity to respond. Which is reasonable.
According to the 2022 annual report of Maine’s Public Access Ombudsman, which 
tracks response time of FOAA requests at various state agencies, there were a total of 
2,625 FOAA requests made to these agencies in 2022, of which 1,423 of the requests 
were fully responded to within five days. Another 639 requests were responded to within 
30 days; the remaining requests – 573 – took 30 days or longer for response.
That’s a lot of numbers, but the gist is that of all requests received, 2,062 were 
responded to in full within 30 days, or 78.5 percent. Estimates for these requests flowed 
much faster than 30 days.
Under the proposal before you, government entities would continue to provide a receipt 
acknowledging a request within five days, but would have 30 days to provide an 
estimate of cost rather than the current “reasonable” standard of time.
Thirty days is too long to receive an estimate, and in most cases would be 
unreasonable. Waiting 30 days to get an estimate on what could be an urgent request 
and/or a simple request – which includes most media requests – especially if the record 
access is needed within that 30-day timeframe, is unreasonable and significantly 
hinders access.
Everyone at the Maine Press Association loves a hard deadline, but the fact is if a 
person has a 30-day deadline to respond to any request for anything, more than likely 
they will take nearly all – or all – of that time to respond. It’s how we’re all wired.
Establishing a 30-day deadline to provide a cost estimate will significantly slow access 
for a vast majority of requestors and does not serve the public good. We know this 
because we have years of hard data collected by the Ombudsman showing FOAA 
estimates and responses are currently made much more quickly.
This bill also proposes giving priority FOAA access to journalists and Maine people, 
which we do not support for two reasons.
Journalists should have no greater access to public records than the public itself. 
Separating the two would create a tiered system of access – something RTK has also 
frequently discussed and rejected – because it could create tension to offer privileged 
access to journalists and not to other "people." 
When "people" other than journalists make FOAA requests, it's often for urgent personal 
needs that --- I would argue --- are equally important if not more important than what we 
ask for as professionals. As a matter of practicality, journalists may already get quicker 
access because we know what we're looking for, how to ask for it, and that we may 
have to pester people to get it. The general public doesn't necessarily have that skillset.
As for giving priority to Maine people, we have seen other states adopt such practices 
and the instant response is the creation of a network of residents who serve as paid and 
unpaid proxies for out-of-state requestors. A plea went out on a national FOIA listserve 
just two weeks seeking in-state proxies in Arkansas and Kentucky “who can help 
facilitate public records requests” for out-of-state researchers and others. It’s become a 
cottage industry in some states to work around this obstacle and make in-state 
standards ineffective. 
