 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1203 (Oppo sed to Section 3)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1203, an Act to Clarify Deadlines in the Freedom of Access Ac t and Disclosure 
Provisions in the Intelligence  and Investigative Record Information Act  
 
DA: April 3,  2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to Section 3 of LD 1203.    
 
CLAC members see the proposal  as unw orkable .    The “subject ” of a record may be any 
number of persons, including a defendant who is charged with a crime, an uncharged su spect who is 
not aware of an investi gation, a witness, a victim, or a person na med or described by persons 
interviewed as part of an investigation.   One “subject ” of a record cannot waive privacy rights o f 
others identified in the record .   
 
Unintended negat ive consequences  may flow from a statutory requirement  to disclose  if a 
family or household member consent s to release on behalf of an incapacitated , deceased,  or minor 
subject.  Mem bers of the same family or household may not  agree as to whether records should be 
released .   Family or household members  may be involved in crim es against the subject of a record  
or not be the next of kin or pe rsonal representative of a deceased subject.    Record custodians may 
not know which persons to contact or whether there are conflicts between people named in or acting 
on behalf of persons named in records .    
 
 CLAC has no  position with respect to Sections 1 and 2 of the bill , which address provisions 
of the FOA A outside the statutory role of the Commission .      
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    
It consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
