CLAC MEMORANDUM/TESTIMONY 
LD 1203 (Opposed to Section 3) 
TO: Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matt Moonen 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC) 
c/0 laurayustalqalmaine.gov 
RE: LD 1203, an Act to Clarify Deadlines in the Freedom of Access Act and Disclosure 
Provisions in the Intelligence and Investigative Record Information Act 
DA: April 3, 2023 
The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following 
testimony in opposition to Section 3 of LD 1203. 
CLAC members see the proposal as unworkable. The “subject” of a record may be any 
number of persons, including a defendant who is charged with a crime, an uncharged suspect who is 
not aware of an investigation, a witness, a victim, or a person named or described by persons 
interviewed as part of an investigation. One “subject” of a record cannot waive privacy rights of 
others identiﬁed in the record. 
Unintended negative consequences may ﬂow from a statutory requirement to disclose ifa 
family or household member consents to release on behalf of an incapacitated, deceased, or minor 
subject. Members of the same family or household may not agree as to whether records should be 
released. Family or household members may be involved in crimes against the subject of a record 
or not be the next of kin or personal representative of a deceased subject. Record custodians may 
not know which persons to contact or whether there are conflicts between people named in or acting 
on behalf of persons named in records. 
I 
CLAC has no position with respect to Sections l and 2 of the bill, which address provisions 
of the FOAA outside the statutory role of the Commission. 
*CLAC is an advisory body established by the Legislature. 17-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357. 
It consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.
