?»§'§'1i iii;_ 
iI 
ms 
AMERICAN CIVIL UBERTIES UNIUR 
Mame 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ._ 
- 
LD 1203 — Ought To Pass 
An Act to Clarify Deadlines in the Freedom of Access Act and Disclosure 
Provisions in the Intelligence and Investigative Record Information Act 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 3, 2023~
. 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and 
I am the policy counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support section 1 of LD 
1203 because it would provide clarity to the public when they seek public records. 
Currently, when a person submits a request to a public agency or official, the 
agency or official must acknowledge receipt of the request within five working days. 
However, there is no specified time limit for when the agency or official must give an 
estimate of how long it will take to fulfill the request for information. If this bill 
passed, it would require the agency or official to give a “good faith, nonbinding 
estimate of the time within which the agency or official will comply with the request, 
as well as a cost estimate ” of the request, no later than 30 days following receipt of 
the request. .- 
. The purpose of Maine’s FOAA law is to promote transparency in government 
by, among other things, ensuring that “public proceedings exist to aid in the conduct 
of the people’s business, ” and that the records of actions from such proceedings are 
“open to public inspection. ” 1 M.R;S. §401. _The purposes of FOAA are frustrated 
when citizens must wait for an indeterminate amount of time to get a mere estimate 
of when their document request may be fulfilled. Section 1 of this legislation strikes 
a balance between the public’s right to receive information from its government, and 
government officials ’ needs to perform their jobs outside of responding to FOAA 
requests. Itigives clarity to both parties about what is expected, and when. It does not 
change FOAA requirements in terms of what work government entities prioritize, but 
sets clear expectations for both the government and the public. For that reason, we 
support Section 1 of this bill. 
We take no position on Sections 2 or 3 of the bill, but note that Section 2 may 
encounter legal challenge under the privileges and immunities clause.
