           
8 Bailey Hall, Gorham ME 04038 (207) 780-5371, TTY (207) 780-5646, FAX (207) 780-5315 www.usm.maine.edu A member of the University of Maine System  
NFNA Testimony on LD 1020, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules   From Amy Johnson (amyj@maine.edu) and Janet Fairman (janet.fairman@maine.edu) on behalf of the Maine Education Policy Research Institute (MEPRI)   Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,   In recent years the Maine Education Policy Research Institute (MEPRI) has prepared several reports for the Education committee about Maine’s educator workforce. Given the various bills this session that relate in some way to educator qualifications (Education Rule Chapter 115), this testimony attempts to synthesize some key findings about the evidence base for quality educator preparation. Our full reports are listed chronologically at http://mepri.maine.edu.  The empirical knowledge base on teacher quality is still growing. Research on teacher effectiveness is not an exact science, and the available evidence is not detailed enough to establish specific guidelines. However, research can help to inform policy with additional consideration for professional wisdom and pragmatic constraints.  Evidence Base for Certification Requirements  Each educator credential has a set of varying requirements. We find it useful to consider them in three categories: content knowledge, pedagogy, and clinical practice.   • Content (or subject matter) knowledge – learning experiences, typically college coursework, that provide the foundational basis for what the person will teach.  o Examples: a secondary school math teacher is required to have passed 24 college credits of math.  An elementary classroom teacher needs only 6 credits of math, but also needs other subjects.  o Research base: Strong, particularly for secondary grade levels.   • Pedagogical knowledge – learning experiences, typically college coursework, related to the practice of teaching the specific subject matter.  o Examples: methods of teaching, child development, exceptionalities, laboratory/shop safety (for CTE teachers) o Research base: Mixed. In observational studies, beginning teachers with demonstrated pedagogical knowledge (i.e. able to apply knowledge) have 
 positive outcomes on student learning. Correlational studies based on inputs (i.e. completion of required coursework or course grades, but no performance assessment) generally show only weak positive effects.  • Clinical experience – Internship, student teaching, or prior experience. Intended to provide an opportunity to learn how to apply the above types of knowledge. Typically includes assessment of demonstrated skill by a trained observer. o Research base: Strong. Teacher effectiveness increases with each year of practice, with the steepest improvements made in the first 1 to 3 years. Emerging research on residency programs verifies that pre-service and co-teaching experiences contribute toward this growth.  Note: Educational technicians require a total number of college credits of unspecified subject: Ed Tech I = 0 college credits, Ed tech II = 60 credits, Ed tech III = 90 credits. Ed techs do not have pedagogy or clinical requirements.  Certification Framework – Classroom Teachers  Certification plays a key gatekeeping role. In these times of staff shortages it is a considerable policy challenge to set appropriate expectations. Setting the bar too high will exclude potentially qualified educators, but setting it too low may risk students’ access to an adequate education. There are two general tiers of teacher certification:   • The professional certificate is for candidates who have the basic knowledge and skills needed to lead a classroom independently. School-based evaluation systems act as a safety net to ensure this is the case, as well as to identify areas for professional growth.   • In cases where a professionally certified teacher is not available, policy allows for conditional certification, emergency certification, or a certification waiver. All of these individuals are missing some of the requirements, but the range is large. Teachers must work toward completing any missing requirements while on the job. A robust professional growth and evaluation (PG/PE) system is needed to plan appropriate professional learning for each individual teacher. o Conditional teachers have completed all of their content knowledge requirements. Some have almost all of the necessary pedagogical requirements and/or clinical experience, while others have none. o Emergency teachers must a) hold a bachelor’s degree or equivalent, b) be enrolled in a teacher preparation program, or c) hold ed tech III certification (i.e. 90 college credits). [MRSA Title 20-A, Sec 13012-B] o Certification waivers are issued at the discretion of the Commissioner. o Best national practice is to reduce these teachers’ loads / duties so that they have more time to prepare lessons and pursue any missing requirements. However, our 2021 study found this is very rarely the case in Maine for conditionally or emergency certified teachers.  
 Prior Related MEPRI Reports   Fallona and Johnson (January 2017). An Examination of Features of Evidence-Based Teacher Credentialing Systems.   Morris, L. & Johnson, A. (April 2018). Teacher turnover in Maine: Analysis of staffing patterns from 2005-06 to 2016-2017.   Fallona and Johnson (March 2019). Approaches to Grow Your Own and Dual General and Special Education Certification.  Fairman, Mills, and Lech (May 2019). Challenges with Teacher Retention and Staffing Shortages in Maine School Districts.    Morris, L. & Johnson, A. (December 2019).  Feasibility Study of Assessing the Supply and Demand for Educators in Maine.  Jessen, Fairman, Fallona and Johnson (April 2020). Considering Grow Your Own Models: Examining Teacher Preparation Models in Maine.  Fairman, Mills, Lech, and Johnson (June 2020). Maine Principals’ Perceptions of Beginning Teacher Preparation.  Johnson, Hawes, and Olson (October 2020). Educator Recruitment and Retention in Maine Schools.  Johnson and Morris (June 2021). Certification Patterns of Grades K-8 Teachers in Maine Public School Districts.   Pending in 2023:   o School administrator perceptions on various workforce issues, including supports for emergency certified teachers and employee exit surveys  o Updated analysis of teacher and school administrator turnover          
