23 March 2023
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cross Building, Room 208 
100 State House Station
Augusta, Me 04333
Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 "Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Update 
Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive 
Rules"
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:
My name is Benjamin Doherty and I am a 3rd year Chemical Engineering student at the University of 
Maine at Orono.  I am writing in support of LD 1020 today because I believe it will help future students 
discover a passion for engineering in Maine.  
Before attending the University of Maine, I studied at Central Maine Community College.  While there, I 
became a professional tutor for math and science.  This sparked my love of teaching and educating 
students.  I helped bridge gaps in students understanding and tried to foster a love of learning in them.  I 
also helped to create math courses to prepare students for four year university programs.  
I decided that Chemical Engineering was my path when I graduated CMCC, but never lost that love for 
teaching.  If a program such as the one proposed in LD 1020 had been available to me, I would have 
heavily considered it.  My plan after school is to work in industry for ten years and then move in to 
teaching science in Maine schools.  This program would help facilitate this goal and remove the need to 
go back to school later. 
My only concern for this program is adapting it to compete with current engineering curriculum at UMaine.  
The program has an integrated, two semester co-op program that allows students to gain valuable 
industry experience, get paid to do so, and still graduate in four years.  This program is a significant 
financial opportunity to many students and provides the ability to attend a four year university without 
major financial burden.  With the proposed teaching program, I would want there to be a similar incentive 
to students to prevent disparity between students with varying means.  
In summary, LD 1020 is something that I believe would benefit engineering students and preschool 
through twelfth grade students in the state of Maine.  It would foster a love of science and engineering 
across the board and encourage college attendance.  
Thank you,
Benjamin Doherty
