Chad Braley
Bonny Eagle High School
700 Saco Rd
Standish, ME 04084
(207) 929-3840
cbraley@bonnyeagle.org
March 15, 2023
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cross Building, Room 208
100 State House Station
Augusta, Me 04333
Dear Senator Libby, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished Members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,
I am writing in regards to Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 
"Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Update Course 
Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt 
Major Substantive Rules".
I am currently a teacher at Bonny Eagle HIgh School and I applied for a 700 
certification because it better suited to the role that I would like to play at 
Bonny Eagle High School.  I am in the Technology and Engineering 
department, and there is currently a strong need for hands-on projects and 
education.  This area of education is shrinking when it should be growing, 
and the workplace is suffering because students are not developing skills and 
knowledge to be work ready.
My 700 certification application was not accepted because there was a very 
small scope of classes that were acceptable.  I have an engineering degree, I 
spent hours in the machine shops developing projects, and I have years of 
real-world project development as a practicing engineer, but I was limited 
from receiving a 700 degree because the scope of classes taken did not 
specifically match the current requirements for 700 certification.  In my tenure 
as a practicing engineer, we developed projects from inception to working 
products.  This included machining, wood working, tool care, maintenance, 
prototyping, computer modeling, plastic forming, material science and 
engineering.  These skills are exactly what I should be translating into the 
classroom, but still I am not able to receive the 700 certification because the 
classes/requirements are so limited.
I fully support the opening of the 700 certification to more 
sources/classes/requirements.  I would suggest that the classroom is only 
going to benefit from having more teachers who are providing hands-on skills.  
Limiting this certification is hindering student growth and this option should be 
made available to more teachers who want to share their knowledge.
Sincerely,
Chad Braley
Technology Teacher
Bonny Eagle High School
