March 21, 2023
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Cross Building, Room 208
100 State House Station
Augusta, Me 04333
Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 "Resolve, Directing the
Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for
Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major
Substantive Rules"
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural
Affairs:
Maine needs a technologically literate citizenry and workforce, and it is
the goal of Technology and Engineering (T & E) Education to develop
this literacy.  Maine has not produced a technology (and engineering)
teacher since the early 2000’s due to the elimination of the teacher
preparation program at the University of Southern Maine, and the
majority of the current T & E teachers are approaching retirement age. 
LD 1020 “
Resolve, Directing the Department of Education
to Update
Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to
Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules" has the potential to addresses
these needs by allowing engineering coursework to fulfill the technical
course requirements for obtaining a 700 Certification.  
 
Maine students deserve hands-on classes that allow them to practice
problem solving, learn marketable skills, and create products without
having to commit fully to a career and technical education. Maine
students deserve to be able to explore new fields and topics that allow
them to create and explore the created and engineered world, being
exposed to traditional and cutting edge tools, processes, and workflows.
Maine students deserve diverse and qualified 700 certified teachers.
As a Maine certified mathematics and physical science teacher, I
strongly support the need to make the 700 certification viable for
educators in Maine once again. However, I am concerned that the
current pathway sees a licensed engineer who likely has received no
training in education, shop safety, manual processes, etc. as ready to
teach our students in these varied contents and environments. Being a
licensed engineer does not make one an high quality educator anymore
than a degree in math makes one a talented and competent math
teacher. Certainly it is an important portion of the training, but it is not all.
To be clear, engineers should have a well defined pathway to earning the
700 certificate, but there needs to be additional learning, as well as
consideration of the branch of engineering one is licensed in.
Similarly we need an accessible method for existing educators to earn
the 700 certificate. As a physical science teacher with experience
teaching with project based learning, CAD/CAM, and robotics, as well as
background experience (through hobby and/or employment) in
mechanics, machining, woodworking, home repair/construction, and
composite repair/construction among others, I should not be subject to
the same course load as someone without any of that experience.
In many schools across our state and our country, programs like we
have are falling victim to lack of funding and lack of qualified staff.
Personally, I work in a small school with a very talented 700 teacher who
is nearing retirement. The thought of losing the programs and
capabilities that we have and what that means for kids is scary, and I
would like to be in a position to earn this certification and help ensure
that does not happen. However, there is simply no way I can complete
an additional 24 credits beyond my experience. Similar to the
engineering candidate, I bring strengths and experience to the table that
need to be considered before deciding what additional learning and
training I need to earn that certificate. We cannot have a one size fits all
solution to such a wide ranging and pressing problem.
Making the 700 certification viable again is absolutely needed. Equally
needed is to include pathways for those new to the teaching profession,
licensed engineers, and current teachers all to be considered.
Sincerely, 
 
 
Chris Liberti
Boothbay Region High School STEAM Teacher
156 Townsend Ave, Boothbay
Resident of: Boothbay
