March 9, 2023 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cross Building, Room 208 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Me 04333 
Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 "Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to 
Update Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt 
Major Substantive Rules" 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
As an experienced STEM educator with over three decades of teaching in the field of 
technology and engineering, I cannot stress enough the importance of the proposed bill moving 
forward. The state is currently facing a critical shortage of teachers possessing the 700 type 
certification required to fill vacancies, resulting in numerous schools struggling to find qualified 
candidates to replace retiring or departing educators. 
Compounding this issue, the last batch of graduates from the University of Southern Maine's 
Bachelor of Science program in Technology Education, which provided the required alignment 
for the 700 certification, was in the early 2000s. Consequently, there is now no clear path for 
teachers to obtain this certification, further exacerbating the shortage crisis. 
Moreover, the nature of technology and engineering education has significantly evolved from its 
earlier iteration as industrial arts or technology education. The current focus is on open-ended 
design challenges that emphasize engineering principles, which require educators with 
specialized training and knowledge to teach effectively. Without qualified teachers, schools may 
need to resort to either eliminating positions or employing individuals lacking the 700 
certification, a situation that will undoubtedly have an adverse impact on students ‘ education. 
In 2019 LD 1478 tried to address this with a resolve pertaining to Chapter 115 which was signed 
by Governor Mills on June 28 2019. This was well before the final decision was made 
pertaining to Chapter 115. According to the Law and Legislative reference library LD 1478 was 
not acted upon at the level of the State Board of Education and the DOE never implemented it. 
As a firm believer in the potential of technical education to provide students with the skills they 
need to succeed in their chosen careers, I cannot overstate the importance of providing quality 
engineering and technology education to our students. This is critical not just for their future 
success but also for the state's economic growth.
Given the increasing demand for students with strong technical literacy skills in post-secondary 
institutions and the world around them, l implore each of you to educate yourselves about the 
challenges facing our education system today by visiting the International Technology 
Engineering Education Association website. I strongly support L.D.1020 and urge you to do the 
same, as we need highly qualified and competent teachers to impart the knowledge and skills 
required to help our students compete in today's dynamic and ever-changing economy. 
httgs:!/www.iteea.org/ 
https:/Iwww.iteea.orq/File.a§px?id=954OJ&v=b6130163 
Thank You, 
Donald Denico 
(700 certified) 
Teacher! Department Head Technology and Engineering 
Bonny Eagle High School 
Standish, Me. 
Resident of Standish, Me. 
Technology - The innovation, change, or modification of the natural environment to satisfy perceived 
human needs and wants. (lTEEA) 
Engineering - involves the knowledge of the mathematical and natural sciences (biological and physical) 
gained by study, experience, and practice that are applied with judgment and creativity to develop ways to 
utilize the materials and forces of nature for the benefit of mankind. (ITEEA) 
Technological Literacy - The ability to use, manage, understand, and evaluate technology. (ITEEA)
