March 20, 2023  
 
 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Cross Building, Room 208  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Me 04333  
 
 
Re: Written testimony in support of  L.D. 1020 "Resolve, Directing the Department of Education 
to Update Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally 
Adopt Major Substantive Rules"  
 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished Members of  the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,  
 
 
As a 3rd year chemical engineering student at the University of Maine , I wholeheartedly support 
L.D. 1020. I believe this legislation would benefit both engineers in the work force as well as the 
understaffed schools of the state of Maine.  
 
 
First of all, as an engineering student, I know the importance of professionals who have 
experience in the field.  Many students don’t have much insight into what industry is really like, 
and having experienced teachers can help students in making decisions about how they want to 
move forward academically. Details about the industry also go a long way in helping stude nts 
learn more effectively as they can see how the material they are learning can be applied outside 
of class. Personally, it helps me to understand the importance of what I learn and how I can take 
advantage of my education in my future career.  
 
 
Secondly, by allowing engineers to teach engineering in K -12 schools , L.D. 1020 is helping to 
address the current teacher shortage throughout the country, especially in the STEM fields. This 
would offer teaching as a possibility to an entire n ew population, particularly those who are 
proficient in the subjects that many schools are lacking expertise in.  
 
 
Additionally , I am very interested in going into teaching after graduation. While I do want to 
gain some experience in the field myself, I se e myself wanting to change up my career 
eventually.  While I love to learn myself, I also get excited to see others engaged in learning as 
well. I feel that many engineers are drawn towards learning in this way, as it is a field in which 
there is always mor e to learn. Teaching helps us to better master the subjects that we are 
passionate about, which as an engineer, feels exciting.  
 
 
Finally, apart from the engaging educational aspect of teaching, I believe that engineers would 
like the opportunity to be able to choose to have a more rewarding work -life balance. After a 
long hands -on career in the field, having the option to easily change career paths would be very 
advantageous.  Many individuals change throughout their careers and their values and goals shift 
accordingly, resulting in wanting to have a better work life balance, which teaching K -12 
provides.  
 
 
In conclusion, I fully support L .D. 1020  as I believe that it would create positive changes in 
students relationships with learning, offer engineers an exciting new challenge, create a new 
solution to getting more teachers in scho ols, and provide us with the opportunity of changing 
their careers as their goals and values shift throughout our lives.  
 
 
 
Thank you,  
 
Hannah Milne  
Junior Chemical Engineering Student  
University of Maine  
 
 
 
 
