March 20, 2023 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cross Building, Room 208 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Me 04333 
Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 "Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for Certification of 
Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules" 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
l am very much in favor of LD 1020 and the industrial Arts (l.A.) programming in public education. 
l have been an I. A. teacher for 43 years and have witnessed the decline in programming in our schools 
partially due to the lack of instructors resulting in the decrease of our skilled workforce in the local 
industries. l believe in the l.A. curriculum and the remarkable results it has on our students. Right nowI 
am afraid for the future of the program and for our next generation of young adults without having l.A. 
teachers to continue relating and adding some real world relationships to all the education they are 
learning. Itn 
is the goal and intent of Industrial Arts/ Technology Educationl Technology and Engineering 
(T & E) Education to interface with the core courses within our educational system, enhancing the 
relevance and helping produce a future population of Maine students who understand the world of work, 
problem solving, communicating, and valuable work habits to fix problems and create solutions. industrial 
Arts is uniquely qualified to work in many areas of the professional world of work during a single year or 
even a semester of secondary education. 
After the retirement of the last certified l.A. teacher in our district we have been trying to 
hirel locate“ 
another teacher with the 700 certificate, Mr. Rivers is the closest we have had , with both 
experience and the student instruction, but does not have the 700 certificate. The problem now is finding 
a pathway to getting him fully certified. Our path for getting the 700 certificate has been complex and 
perplexing at best, with no clear direction for the process. He has struggled, going from one direction to 
another with paths set by the state, local school district, and / or colleges. Each of which have changed 
their own minds as well as differing from each other time and again. LD 1020 has the ability to smooth 
out some of these bumps and help create a clear and concise path for not only our new teachers to be 
but for our student population as well. We need LD 1020 desperately, and immediately, please consider 
the future of our students and the workforce of tomorrow l 
As one who is concerned about the future of the state and of engineering and technology 
education in Maine, I strongly support this legislation and encourage the Distinguished Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee onEducation and Cultural Affairs to do the same. 
Sincerely, 
John R. Wells 
industrial Arts instructor 
Charles M. Sumner Learning Campus 
2456 US Hwy. Route1 
Sullivan, Maine 04664 
1-207-422-3510 
Jwells@rsu24.org
