 March 20, 2023 
 Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
 Cross Building, Room 208 
 100 State House Station 
 Augusta, Me 04333 
 Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 "Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Update 
 Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive 
 Rules" 
 Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
 Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
 This letter is in support of LD 1020 and represents support of those working on the Maine Engineering 
 Education Committee (MEEC) for K-12 education. MEEC is a group of concerned professionals in the 
 fields of K-12 education, higher education (UMaine & USM), engineering and industry who have been 
 meeting on a bi-weekly basis to consider teacher shortage and workforce needs in engineering and 
 technology education. 
 LD 1020 will: 
 ●  Allow qualified engineering students from our degree-granting institutions to be eligible to obtain 
 licensure to teaching in our public schools; 
 ●  Allow for updating the description of a 700 Certification from “Industrial Arts / Technology 
 Education” to “Technology and Engineering Education”; 
 ●  Amend the list of required technical courses used for transcript analysis by the DoE to certify 
 prospective teachers, and USM’s ETEP and UMaine’s Masters of the Art of Teaching programs to 
 enroll prospective teachers in their graduate programs; 
 ●  Bring the Department of Education (DoE) back to the conversation.  The two DoE representatives 
 who were working with the committee left the department at the end of 2022; 
 ●  Ensure that our public schools have the teachers they need to prepare students for academic 
 careers in engineering and supply the workforce with employees who are appropriately prepared 
 in the field. 
 Kenneth Volk, writing in the “Journal of Technology Education” (v31 n1 p2-18 Fall 2019) reported that, 
 “...only 15% of the technology and education degree-granting university programs remain since 1970”. 
 Maine’s program at the University of Southern Maine closed in the early 2000’s and since then, the 
 courses required to earn a 700 certification (industrial arts / technology education) have been unavailable 
 in the state, making certification impossible.  As teachers retire, school districts find it impossible to find 
 certified replacements and must settle for teachers who lack the training necessary to deliver these 
 hands-on / minds-on classes that are essential to Maine’s future. 
 In 2009 the National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council described, “The potential 
 benefits to students of including engineering education in K–12 schools can be grouped into five areas: 
 ●  Improved learning and achievement in science and mathematics; 
 ●  Increased awareness of engineering and other technical fields; 
 ●  Understanding of and the ability to engage in engineering design; 
 ●  Interest in pursuing engineering as a career; and 
 ●  increased technological literacy.” 
 All of these would benefit every Maine student. 
 This written testimony reflects the position of the current members of the committee.  The original group 
 included two representatives from the DoE, however they left the department at the end of 2022, and 
 have not been replaced leaving a large void in our committee. 
 Speaking for the MEEC committee, we the undersigned, strongly support LD 1020 and encourage the 
 members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to do the same. 
 Sincerely, 
 Donald Denico, co-chair and teacher at Bonny Eagle High School (700 Certified) 
 John Kraljic, co-chair and recently retired Engineering Technology Teacher (700 Certified) 
