March 23, 2023 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Cross Building, Room 208 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Me 04333 
Re: Written testimony in support of LD 1020 "Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for Certification 
of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules" 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the Distinguished 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs: 
My name is Kit Rivers and since 2019 I have been the industrial Arts Metal 
Shop teacher at the RSU 24 Charles M. Summer Learning Campus in 
Sullivan, Maine, the school I graduated from in 1991. I have also served as 
Selectman for the Town of Winter Harbor, my home town, since 2018. I am 
currently stuck on this hamster wheel. 
As long as I can remember, I have been curious and hands-on about what 
makes things work. And all through my pre-teen and teens, I worked. I 
worked for my father in construction, and I worked for my brothers and my 
neighbors on their fishing boats. At 12, I replaced the clutch in my aunt’s 
front wheel drive Mazda. At 16, I rebuilt my very own 1981 GMC half-ton 
pick-up. In high school, I lived in Shop. 
After graduating from Sumner, I was accepted into the Maine Maritime 
Academy for the Marine Engineering Program. I realized pretty quickly that 
college was not meant for me at 18, so I joined the United States Coast 
Guard. While sen/ing, I attended several schools, including law 
enforcement, firefighting, electrical, plumbing, welding, and small and large 
propulsion systems. I was honorably discharged with a sen/ice-connected 
disability in 2000 at the rank of E5, Damage Controlman Second Class.
I returned home to Winter Harbor, took a few classes at Eastern Maine 
Community College, including computer-aided drafting and design, and 
hung my shingle as a carpenter and independent contractor. 
I have four children, all Sumner Tigers like me. The oldest is a nurse in the 
RSU. This year, my second-oldest daughter became a math teacher for 
Sumner. My third is a senior and will be attending the veterinary technician 
program at the University of Maine. And the youngest will graduate next 
year 
In 2019, the kids told me that they were playing Uno in Metal Shop 
because their teacher had left and the school could not find a qualified 
substitute. As it happens, that teacher had been able to get certification in 
Career and Technical Education, but not 700 Industrial Arts, and as a result 
accepted a position at one of the regional CTE centers. 
I searched my heart and figured I could step in until the position could be 
filled. I had quite a lot of experience teaching new Coast Guardsmen and 
Cadets at my various duty stations, including serving as Damage Control 
Instructor on the USCGC Eagle. So I took the required “Teaching 
Exceptional Students ” course and became the Metal Shop's long-term 
substitute. I had such a great time, I decided that I would like to be the one 
to fill the position permanently. 
With the full support of the RSU, we began researching how to get me 
certified. And the answer is, we can’t. After three years, we figured out that 
I qualified to be an Ed Tech 3, which allowed me to apply for emergency 
certification. But even if I get a Bachelor ’s Degree, it still won't satisfy the 
requirements for the 700 Industrial Arts endorsement. Not only is there no 
post-secondary school in Maine that offers 24 semester hours in Industrial 
Arts and Methods of Teaching Industrial Arts, there is no school anywhere 
in the country.
lronically, l also already have the conditional certification to teach Career 
and Technical Education. But that endorsement is apparently not good 
enough to teach at the high school where I graduated and with John Wells, 
the man who taught me in WoodShop and is now my mentor. l am here to 
tell you that if you want me to get a Bachelors in Engineering to keep my 
job, l will do it. 
There are communities all over the state that want to keep or bring back 
their high school shop classes, and they need teachers. We must clear the 
roadblock and this legislation is a start. A path to certification and 
endorsement in Industrial Arts is better than no future for the program at all. 
l strongly support LD 1020 and encourage the Distinguished Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to do the 
same. 
Sincerely, 
Kittridge Rivers, Teacher, Industrial Arts Metal Shop 
RSU 24, Charles M. Sumner Learning Campus 
2456 US Highway 1 
Sullivan, ME 04664 
Resident of Winter Harbor, Maine
