College of Engineeringj 
U/fire of the Dem; I 8 6 5 THE UNIVERSITY OF 5?96AMCBuilding,RnomZ1£l r" W" 
1 Oronta, Maine 04469-Si 96 
Tel Z0” ‘itii 2.111 
University of Maine System Testimony Presented by Mohamad Musavi, Associate Dean, 
University of Maine College of Engineering, ln Support of LD 1020, Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial 
Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules - March 23, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: My name is Mohamad Musavi and I serve as the 
associate dean of the University of Maine College of Engineering, the state's premier 
engineering education program. On behalf of the University of Maine System, I testify today in 
support of LD 1020, with friendly amendments that l will address in my testimony. 
The United States, and Maine in particular, faces a severe shortage of engineers to support our 
economy and global competitiveness. The aging of the Baby Boomer Generation is resulting in 
unprecedented numbers of engineers retiring from the workforce at a time when technological 
advances in our lives and our economy require an increasing number of trained engineers. 
It is estimated that 27% of engineers currently employed in Maine are over the age of 55. 
Moreover, engineering employment in Maine has increased 25% in the last decade. 
To both replace retiring engineers and to meet future growth needs, UMS, led by the R1 
UMaine, has committed to doubling our output of engineering and computing graduates over the 
next decade. The opening in 2022 of UMaine’s Ferland Engineering Education and Design 
Center, thanks, in large part, to the generous investment by the Legislature, and the System’s 
development of a statewide Maine College of Engineering and Computing, led by UMaine and 
the University of Southern Maine, will enable us to achieve this important goal for Maine. 
Concurrent with higher education ’s preparation of more engineers, PK-12 schools must also be 
able to prepare their students with engineering mindset and education. This need has been 
clearly highlighted by the National Research Council (NRC) Framework for K-12 Science 
Education that recommends “a|| students over multiple years of K-12 schools should engage in 
scientific and engineering practices." 
While there are shining examples of excellent Maine teachers who have a firm grasp of 
engineering and share this knowledge with their students in engaging ways as part of broader 
STEM education, there is still a significant need for even more teachers in our state with 
engineering knowledge and skills. 
UMS has long supported the creation of pathways to PK-12 classrooms for experienced 
engineers that leverage their specialized content expertise, while also ensuring they have the 
pedagogical preparation research shows is necessary to be an effective educator. 
Consistent with this, we support the Maine Department of Education and the State Board of 
Education renaming the 700 certification "industria| arts/engineering and technology ” as 
directed in 2019 legislation and updating that certification ’s Pathway 2 rules to be inclusive of 
engineers. Specifically, we recommend the 120 college credit hours in STEM content engineers 
have typically earned through their postsecondary education count toward the required 24 credit 
3\*l.-\il\it~:J ‘s LAND (}:t;~wr. Sm QR,-\Ni‘ AND Sr.~\t:r. GRAN!" UNI\’H{S!TY , 
A I N I i, Fax; 202531 2220 /J 
engineeringumalnt. edu
hours of content knowledge, thus requiring them to only need to additionally take the 
appropriate methods, exceptionality, diversity, and human development courses to qualify for 
this certification. Doing so could allow engineers to help alleviate the concerning shortage of 
STEM PK-12 teachers in Maine, while also ensuring Maine students have exposure to 
engineers and the rewarding good-paying engineering career opportunities in Maine, while 
improving their college and career readiness, including for in-demand engineering fields. 
We thank Rep. Carlow for bringing this legislation and for his support and yours to amending the 
current bill language to be more clear that the engineer ’s previous STEM coursework only 
replaces the content courses needed for 700 certification, and is not a substitute for all course 
requirements. 
The university appreciates that educator certification is complex, and our world-class 
engineering and education faculty and researchers welcome participating in further conversation 
with this Committee, the Maine DOE and SBE about developing this and other certification 
pathways to meet the needs of our state and our students. This is a critical component to 
solving the state’s pressing shortage of engineers who are needed to grow our economy and 
improve the well-being of Maine citizens and communities. 
Please let me or Samantha Warren know if we can provide additional information in advance of 
your work session. Thank you for your ongoing support of Engineering in Maine and the 
University of Maine System.
