 
 
University of Maine System Testimony Presented by Mohamad Musavi, Associate Dean, 
University of Maine College of Engineering, Regarding LD 1020, Resolve, Directing the 
Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial 
Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules -  March 22, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs:  My name is Mohamad Musavi and I serve as the 
associate dean of the University of Maine College of Engineering, the state’s premier 
engineering education program. On behalf of the University of Maine System, I write  to inform 
your consideration of LD 1020.   
 The United Stat es, and Maine in particular , faces  a severe shortage of engineers to support our 
economy  and global competitiveness . The aging of the B aby Boomer Generation is resulting in 
unprecedented numbers of engineers retiring from the workforce at a time when technological advances in our lives and our economy require an increasing number of trained engineers.  
It is estimated that 27% of engineers currently employed in Maine are over the age of 55.  
Moreover, engineering employment in Maine has increased 25% in the last decade.  
 To both replace retiring engineers and to meet future growth needs, UMS , led by the R1 
UMaine,  has committed to doubling our output of engineering and computing graduates over the 
next decade. The opening in 2022 of UMaine’s Ferland Engineer ing Education and Design 
Center , thanks,  in large part, to the generous investment by the Legislature, and the System’s 
development of a statewide Maine College of Engineering and Computing, led by UMaine and 
the University of Southern Maine,  will enable us to achieve this important goal for Maine.     
 
Concurrent with higher education’s preparation of more engineers, PK -12 schools must also be 
able to prepare their students with engineering mindset and education. This need has been 
clearly highlighted by the National Research Council (NRC) Framework for K -12 Science 
Education that recommends “all students over multiple years of K -12 schools should engage in 
scientific and engineering practices .”  
 
While there are shining examples of excellent Maine teachers who have a firm grasp of 
engineering and share  this knowledge with  their students in engaging ways as part of broader 
STEM education, there is still a significant need for even more teachers in our state with 
engineering knowledge and skills.     
 
UMS has long supported the creation of pathways to PK -12 classrooms for experienced 
engineers that leverage their specialized content expertise, while also ensuring they have the 
pedagogical preparation research shows is necessary to be an effective educator.  
 
Consistent with this, we support the Maine Department of Education and the State Board of 
Education updating Pathway 2 certification rules associated with the 700 endorsement, as the Legislature directed in 2019, to be inclusive of licensed engineers. Specifically, we recommend 
the 120  college credit hours in STEM content engineers have  typically  earned through their 
postsecondary education count toward the required 24 credit hours of content knowledge, thus 
requiring them to only need to additionally take the appropriate methods  courses to qualify for 
this certification.  Doing so could allow licensed engineers to help alleviate the concerning 
shortage of STEM PK -12 teachers in Maine,  while also ensuring Maine students have exposure 
to engineers and the  rewarding good- paying engineering career opportunities in Maine, while 
improving their college and career readiness, including for in- demand engineering fields .   
 
We appreciate that educator certification is complex and our world- class engineering and 
education faculty and researchers welcome participating in further conversation with this 
Committee, the Maine DOE and SBE about developing this and other certification pathways to 
meet the needs of our state and our students.  This is a critical component to solving the state’s 
pressi ng shortage of engineers who are needed to grow our economy and improve the well -
being of Maine citizens and communities.  
 
Please let me or Samantha Warren know if we can provide  additional information in advance of 
your work session. Thank you for your ongoing support of UMaine Engineering and the 
University of Maine System.   
 
