MAINE S T A TE 
QEAIXIEEE 
<“<>;\/imziaczg
_ ___,__.~ _ — — ' ‘ ‘~”— --@-/;q~;5¢v32r ,»»f¢;¢/V" , -'-:;;'_,~;;:;~; . 
,,,.,, ~ ij;??i?f.i; _ J .. .. VF\/K 
The "voice of Mc.2ir1e1 bmmess 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support 
of 
LD 1020 Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Update Course 
Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt 
Major Substantive Rules 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner andI 
represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
made up of both large and small businesses, here to provide you with my 
testimony in support of aligning the technical requirements for certification of K- 
12 Industrial Arts with course offerings of the University of Maine System. 
The Maine State Chamber supports this legislation as a way to ease 
workforce shortages and help align student learning with the required knowledge, 
skills, and abilities to be successful in today’s workforce. Our current workforce 
shortages can not be tracked to a single source but it is in our best interest to 
ensure that we do everything we can to reduce instances of structural 
unemployment. As a member of MaineSpark, the Maine State Chamber supports 
policies and initiatives that help Maine people earn a certificate of value. Our goal 
is to ensure that 60% of Maine people hold some form of a certificate of value by 
2025. Obtaining this 60% objective reduces the likelihood that our workforce age 
population lacks the adequate skills to be successful in today’s economy. LDlO20 
supports MaineSpark ’s goals. 
Early in 2022 I participated on a Career & Technical Education stakeholder 
group that was asked to uncover systemic barriers to attendance and growth in 
Maine’s CTE offerings. Among the barriers uncovered, staffing shortages was 
high on the list. Whether in the K — 12 school setting or at CTE centers, it is 
important to adequately staff schools so that students interested in technical, 
engineering, and technology courses can find a seat in the class. Aligning 
certification for K — 12 Industrial Arts teachers with the technical requirements for 
certification through course offerings at the University of Maine System isa
sensible approach. This alignment will clarify certification requirements and 
ensure teachers have had adequate training through the University of Maine 
System. 
The bill also states that an engineer licensed under Maine Revised Statutes, 
Title, 32, Chapter 19 or with comparable licensure from another jurisdiction would 
be eligible for certiﬁcation as a K -12 Industrial Arts, engineering, or technology 
teacher. This portion of the bill does not waiver or stance of support, but We offer 
the suggestion that licensed technical professionals have some instruction on 
classroom management before they are fully certified. We Want to increase our 
teaching workforce without diluting its quality or ability to administer learning. As 
with the technical side, the classroom management could be aligned with courses 
at the University of Maine System. I hope you give LD 1020 your support and give 
some consideration to our suggestion. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.
