MAINE SPACE GRANT CONSORTIUM An affiliate of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program  
 Suite 200, 87 Winthrop Street • Augusta, Maine 04330 Tel: (877) 397-7223 • Fax: (207) 622-4548 • E-mail: info@msgc.org • Web: www.msgc.org  
Testimony In Support of LD 1020, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Update Course Requirements for Certification of Industrial Arts Teachers and to Finally Adopt Major Substantive Rules  Terry Shehata, Ph.D., Executive Director, Maine Space Grant Consortium  March 23, 2023  Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Committee, my name is Terry Shehata.  I live in Winthrop, and I am the Executive Director of the NASA-funded Maine Space Grant Consortium, a 501(c)(3), Affiliate-based corporation, and a member of a national network of state-based consortia in all 50 states, Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia. I am testifying in support of LD 1020.  For the last four years, my organization led an effort to create a vision for engaging Maine in the growing global new space economy which is projected to reach $1 trillion by 2040.  This effort culminated in the 130th Legislature enacting LD 1923, An Act to Establish the Maine Space Corporation, a quasi-state body to manage the growth and development of the Maine Space Complex and to facilitate the state’s engagement in the new space economy. LD 1923 became law on April 18, 2022, upon the signature of the Governor. We are currently waiting for the confirmation of the corporation’s Board of Directors. An infographic on the corporation and the complex is attached.  Among the many responsibilities of the corporation, there are two that underline the importance of LD 1020. The first responsibility is to recruit businesses to Maine that are involved in the space industry and help Maine businesses diversify their products and services that align with the new space economy. The second responsibility is to facilitate the creation of a highly skilled workforce and attract and retain young workers in Maine’s new space economy by working closely with the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System, career and technical education centers, K-12 schools.  This is a classic chicken or egg scenario. On the one hand, to attract and grow businesses in Maine in this new space economy, businesses need skilled workers at all levels. On the other hand, to get skilled workers for the new jobs businesses want to create, we need more K-12 students to aspire for STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics) careers in the new space economy.  The solution is not easy but we cannot afford not to do anything. We all need to do our part. We need to attract and grow businesses in Maine. We need to do whatever we can to inspire our K-12 students to consider STEAM career pathways. And we need our K-12 students to aspire for STEAM careers in Maine. At the end of this testimony, I included a list of career opportunities in the new space value chain that I share with K-12 students.  For students to aspire for STEAM careers, we need teachers that are trained and certified to teach STEAM subjects.  Unfortunately, as others have detailed, we have a shortage of STEAM teachers in Maine, especially those with the appropriate background to teach engineering and technology.  By allowing engineering graduates and professional engineers to be eligible for certification as kindergarten to grade 12 industrial arts or engineering and technology teachers, LD 1020 will go a long way to alleviate the shortage of teachers and prime the workforce pipeline early in the education process to address current shortage in engineers in the state as well as engineers that are needed to bring Maine into the new space economy.  Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1020, and I ask the Committee to move the bill to Ought to Pass.  I would be delighted to answer any questions you may have. 
 
 Suite 200, 87 Winthrop Street • Augusta, Maine 04330 Tel: (877) 397-7223 • Fax: (207) 622-4548 • E-mail: info@msgc.org • Web: www.msgc.org What can I aspire to become   … A TECHNICAL SPECIALIST • Aerospace Engineering and Operations • Assembly Technicians • Automation and Robotics Technicians • Avionic Technicians • CAD Drafters and Designers • CNC Machinists • Cyber Security Specialists • Electricians and Electrical Technicians • Fabricators • Intelligent game developer • Materials specialists • Mechanical Technicians • Meteorological Technicians • Pipefitters • Production Test Technicians • Welders Engaging YOU in the new space value chain opens the door to many career pathways in Maine. You can aspire to become... …A SCIENTIST • Animal migration scientist • Astronomers • Atmospheric & Space Scientists • Physicists & Plasma Physicists • Astrogeologist • Astronomer • Astrophotographer • Archaeoastronomer • Astrobiologist • Astrochemist • Climate change scientist • Data Scientist and Analyst • Earth Observation Scientist • Farming scientist • Flight Surgeons • Mapping scientist • Plasma Physicist • K-12 Teacher • Weather forecasting …AN ENGINEER SPECIALIST • Aerospace Engineer • Communications • Computer Engineer • Disaster response • Engineer Technologist • Engineering Technician • Electrical, Electronics & Avionics Engineer • Machine Learning and AI Engineer • Material Engineers and Composites Engineers • Mechanical Engineers  • Propulsion Engineer • Robotics Engineers • Space Systems Engineer • Software Developers and Software Engineer • Spacesuit Designer • K-12 Teacher … A TECHNICAL SPECIALIST • Aerospace Engineering and Operations • Assembly Technicians • Automation and Robotics Technicians • Avionic Technicians • CAD Drafters and Designers • CNC Machinists • Cyber Security Specialists • Electricians and Electrical Technicians • Fabricators • Intelligent game developer • Materials specialists • Mechanical Technicians • Meteorological Technicians • Pipefitters • Production Test Technicians • Welders …SPACE JOBS OF THE FUTURE  • Additive manufacturing • Battery engineers • Biotechnology • Fabricator of Carbon Fiber Spaceships and Airplanes • Food engineers • Fusion Power Specialists • Holoportation specialists • Mining specialists • Robot Designer and Interaction Specialists • Space Tourist Managers • Space Architects and Construction Experts • Space Medicine • Space Traffic Managers • Space Pilot • Space Psychologist • Space Lawyer …A MEDIA AND COMMUNICATION SPECIALIST • Technical Writers • Public Relations Specialists • Producers and Directors • Photographers • Space Educator • Science Historian 
…OR start your own business in Maine in any area along the new space value chain. 
Maine Space CorporationEstablished in 2021 by 5 MRSA c. 393.www.mainespace2030.org
INSET TEXTLegislative Purpose
Maine Space ComplexTo achieve this vision, 5 MRSA c. 393 authorizes the corporation to establish a geographically distributed shared resource-based Maine Space Complex, which is restricted  to commercial, research and educational uses, and must include but is not limited to the following business units:
The Vision Is Not Simply About Launching SmallSats and Rockets…Engaging Maine in the Growing Global New Space Economy
FEBRUARY 2023GovernanceThe Board of Directors of the Maine Space Corporation consists of 17 directors, of whom 6 directors are ex officio.  Non ex officio members are appointed by the Governor and subject to confirmation by the Senate.The corporation shall leverage the State's geographic, rocketry, manufacturing and higher education assets and capabilities to establish the State as a national and international industry destination and an authority in launching small launch vehicles and small satellites into polar orbit.
TheSpace Data & Advanced Analytics Center will be a cloud-based, digital platform resourced to import/downlink, store, cleanse, manage, and analyze satellite data in concert with terrestrial data to solve local business public policy issues in innovative ways. The New Space Innovation Hub,to be located at Brunswick Landing, with a spoke at Loring Commerce Centre, is envisioned as a knowledge and innovation hub for new business incubation and acceleration, hardware and materials component development facilities, and satellite and launch vehicle manufacturing and testing. TheLaunch Sites & Services will include both vertical launches at one or more sites along the coast of Maine, as well as horizontal launch capabilities from aircrafts that leverage the long runways at Brunswick Landing and Loring Commerce Centre. By 2045, Maine will be an integral player in the emerging global network of suborbital and orbital space sector, providing a significant return on investment asan engine of workforce development and economic growth. Vision
… it is about engaging Mainers across the three segments of the new space economy value chain and the underlying infrastructure needed to support these segments. •Upstream segment: Research, manufacturing, and ground systems; all include fundamental and applied research activities, scientific and engineering support activities, materials and components supply, manufacturing of space systems, subsystems, equipment, telemetry, tracking, and command stations. •Downstream segment: Space operations for terrestrial use and products and services which rely on satellite technology, signal, data to function (e.g., selected GIS, Global navigation satellite system-enabled devices).•Space-related segment: Space applications, products, and services from spin-offs or technology transfer from the space sector, which use satellite technology but do not depend on it.
Outcomes –Talent and Innovation*Maine’s New Space Economy Assets and Applications
FEBRUARY 2023New Space Economy Assets
Small Launch Vehicles –Maine’s FocusGeographic location for polar orbitsOffers direct and sun-synchronous polar orbit access (inclination angle between 80o and 100ofrom equatorial plane) for full Earth coverageCoastline for vertical launchesLower population density and risk; allowance for a southernly launch.Physical assets at Loring and BrunswickBuildings and resources; allowance for horizontal launches.Small but growing supply chainDirectly and indirectly supplying the new space economy.Maine-based launch providersbluShift Aerospace and VALT Enterprises.Education and public and private R&D assetsUMaine System, Community College System, Roux Institute, private colleges, non-profit research entities, CTEs, and Investment groups.Regional AssetsHigher Education institutions, high tech industries
Examples of SmallSats –Maine’s Focus
Nano -CubeSatPico
Micro –NASA’s Mars Cube 1
305 feet from the ground to tip of torch.
Height: 78 ft.Max Alt:polar low-Earth OrbitPropulsion: Green fuel powered hybrid engineFuel:non-toxic, bio-derived solid fuelbluShift Red Warf Statute of Liberty
•Retain Maine’s students and Immigrants with STEM degrees.•Attract highly skilled workers and their families from out of state.•Encourage startups and spur development in all seven technology sectors.•Develop globally based applications for research, commercial and consumer uses.•Facilitate STEM learning opportunities for Maine high school and higher education students.•Promote economic aspirations for All Mainers.•Advance Maine to a new competitive level in a fast-growing Knowledge Economy.*Contributesto the state’s Economic Development Strategy 2020-2029 TALENTand INNOVATIONGoals•Climate Change Monitoring•Environmental Monitoring•Food security•Land use monitoring•Natural resource management•Search and Rescue•Biological and physical sciences•Asset tracking•Air and maritime, AIS, ADS-8•Agricultural monitoring•Astronomy/Astrophysics•Disaster monitoring/response•Earth ImagingMajor Customers•Federal agencies•Telecommunications•Air & Maritime Transportation•Research institutions•Educational Institutions•Consumer Services•General public
NASA ArtemusSLS322 feet
Femto
Developing SmallSat Applications –Economic Opportunity for Maine
