 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330 
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org 
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION  AND ADVOCACY  AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
January 26, 2023 
Submitted Electronically  
Senator Anne Carney, Chair Representative Matt Moonen, Chair Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 100 State House Station, Room 438 Augusta, ME 04333  
Re:  LD 140 “An Act to Amend the Laws Go verning the Right to Counsel for Juveniles 
and Due Process for Juveniles” 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:  My name is Atlee Reilly and I am the Legal Director at Disability Rights Maine, Maine’s 
protection and advocacy agency for people with disabilities.  I wa s also a member of the Maine 
Juvenile Justice Assessment and Reinvestment Ta sk Force and serve on Ma ine’s Juvenile Justice 
Advisory Group.  Disability Rights Maine writ es in opposition to LD 140 - "An Act to Amend 
the Laws Governing the Right to Counsel fo r Juveniles and Due Process for Juveniles". 
As you will likely hear from many others, LD 140 is nothing more than a line by line attempt to 
repeal reform efforts that grew out of the work  of the Maine Juvenile Justice Assessment and 
Reinvestment Task Force
1 and which began as LD 1684 in the 129th Legislature and concluded 
with the passage of LD 320 in the 130th Legislature.2 We oppose LD 140 for all of the reasons  
                                                            
1 Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (2020), Maine Juvenile Justi ce System Assessment . 
https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.co rrections/files/inlinefil es/Maine%20Juvenile%20Ju
stice%20System%20Assessment%20F INAL%20REPORT%202-25-20_2.pdf   
 
2 The Judicial Branch wrote the following about this history in its testimony in support of LD 320: “As 
you may recall, this bill began as LD 1684 in the 12 9th Legislature. The Judicial Branch provided 
testimony in favor of the bill but had some suggested changes. After the public hearing, proponents of the 
bill worked very hard with stakeholders, including Judicial Branch representatives, to improve the bill 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
January 26, 2023 Page 2  we supported LD 1684
3 and LD 3204, and for the reasons outlined in the sign on letter this 
Committee will receive today from a host of orga nizations supporting the healthy and successful 
development of Maine children and youth and thei r successful transiti on into adulthood.   
LD 140 would take Maine backwards at a time when  Maine must move forward to ensure it does 
not continue to use the juvenile justice system in ways that harm  children and violate federal law. 
Reinstituting mandatory minimums, reducing access to attorneys, allowing 11-year-old children 
to be incarcerated and limiting judicial review, are all the oppos ite of best practice and would 
result in further harm to children. 
And if the harms to children that would resu lt are not reason enough to reject these proposals, 
Maine should consider the findings outlined in the July 2022 letter from the United States 
Department of Justice, which found that Maine is  violating the Americans with Disabilities Act 
by failing to provide behavioral he alth services to children in the most integrated settings 
appropriate to their needs, resulting in unnecessary segregation and institutionalization.5  With 
regard to the use of L ong Creek, the DOJ wrote: 
 “Our meetings with children at Long Creek, facility staff, and attorneys representing 
young people similarly echoed that the State’ s lack of community -based behavioral 
health services leads to unnecessary and prolonged incar ceration. In fact, CCLP found 
that 73% of children detained  longer than 30 days were awaiting placement in the 
community or in a different setting, and appr oximately 53% were detained so the State 
could “provide care.” These numbers underscore that Maine is using Long Creek as a de 
facto children’s psychiatric f acility instead of providing more integrated treatment 
options.” 
                                                            
with agreed-upon amendments. The amended version of the bill was nearing completion when things 
were shut down in March of 2020. U ltimately, it was one of many bills that died upon the adjournment of 
the 129th. LD 320 is the final, or nearly final, version of the same piece of legislation. The Judicial 
Branch supports this draft and will work to implement the new law should it pass in the 130th” 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/ bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=143973   
 
3 DRM’s May 20, 2019, written testimony in support of LD 1684 is available here: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/ bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=126892   
 
4 DRM’s February 24, 2021, written testimony in support of LD 320 is available here: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/ bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=143981   
 
5 The July 2022 Letter of Findings from the DOJ can be reviewed here: 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/press- release/file/1514326/download   
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
January 26, 2023 Page 3 
 
 “Long Creek is also a segregated setting unde r Title II for incarcerated children with 
behavioral health needs who could be supported in their families’ homes or Treatment 
Foster Care if community-based behavioral health services were available to them. 
Maine’s juvenile code prioritizes treatment a nd rehabilitation, and pr ovides that both pre- 
and post-adjudication, i.e., before  and after trial, children in the juvenile justice system 
should be placed in the least restrictive se tting, typically the family home, with few 
exceptions. However, even when juvenile justice system actors recommend placement 
outside of Long Creek, children are frequently  confined at Long Creek due to Maine’s 
failure to provide more integrated behavior al health services. L ong Creek is a secure 
facility and the majority of its young resident s have multiple mental health diagnoses. As 
noted above, children with behavioral health  needs are routinely incarcerated at Long 
Creek solely to receive be havioral health care.” 
 
 “Law enforcement responses to mental health  crises are not only  ineffective, they 
increase the likelihood that ch ildren whose needs could be met with behavioral health 
services will instead enter the juvenile just ice system. In the worst situations, children 
end up incarcerated at Long Creek. Maine’s Department of Corrections Commissioner 
has acknowledged that despite efforts to re duce detention solely to provide care to 
children, ‘some of our youth are at Long Creek  because there are no other options[.]’ In 
recent years, several children in acute crisis and struggling with thoughts of suicide spent 
weeks or months at Long Creek isolated on suicide watch due to a lack of appropriate 
treatment options for them.”  
Making it easier to lock younger children up for l onger will not help Maine move away from its 
well documented and inappropriate reliance on L ong Creek. We are hopeful that this Committee 
will quickly and decisively reject LD 140. 
 
Respectfully,   Atlee Reilly Legal Director 
Disability Rights Maine 
 
 

