 1January 26, 2023 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen  
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
LD 140: An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Due Process for 
Juveniles  
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
 
My name is Jill Ward, and I am a resident of South Portland, Maine. I have worked on juvenile justice 
policy and reform for more than 20 years and for the past decade have served as a policy consultant on 
juvenile justice and children’s issues both nationally and here in Maine.  Currently, I am Director of the 
Maine Center for Youth Policy and Law in partnership with the Youth Justice Clinic at Maine Law. I also 
served as one of three co-chairs of the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task 
Force. My testimony in opposition to LD 140 represents my personal views only and not the position of 
the University of Maine School of Law or the University of Maine System. 
 
One of the main areas of my work has been educating policy makers, stakeholders and the public about 
the harmful effects of justice system involvement, particularly incarceration, on children and youth and 
the ineffectiveness of the youth prison model to reduce recidivism and produce positive outcomes for 
young people and their communities.  In testimony submitted to this Committee in the 129th and 130th 
Legislatures, I summarized the research documenting the negative impacts on youth from both formal 
juvenile justice system processing and subsequent confinement, including the increased risk of abuse and 
violence,1 educational disruption,2 poor health outcomes as adults,3 and harmful family and community 
separation.  
 
Research has repeatedly confirmed what common sense tells us. Removing youth from their homes and 
communities and placing them in correctional settings disrupts healthy psychological development by 
disconnecting youth from their parents or parent figures, from peers who model and value academic 
success and positive social behavior, and from participation in activities that require critical thinking and 
independent decision-making.4  Research also confirms that these harms fall disproportionately on youth 
of color, girls, LGBTQ GNC youth, and youth with disabilities. And, Maine’s system is no exception.  
 
Rather than providing a public safety benefit, formal system processing often has the opposite result: 
youth who have had some justice system involvement are more likely to reoffend than those who were 
 
1 See, Maltreatment in Youth in U.S. Correctional Facilities . (2015). Baltimore, MD: The Annie E. Casey Foundation. Available at: 
https://www.aecf.org/resources/maltreatment-of-youth-in-us-juvenile-corrections-facilities . Conditions of Confinement: Findings from the survey 
of youth in residential placement . (2010). Washington, D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Available at: 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/227729.pdf . 
2 See, Just Learning . (2014). Atlanta, GA: Southern Education Fund.  See also, Juvenile Reentry . (2014) Washington, D.C.: Federal Interagency 
Reentry Council which found that “approximately two-thirds of young people do not return to school after release from secure custody.” 
Available at: http://csgjusticecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Juveniles.pdf. 
3 Barnet, E. et al. (April 2019). What Is the Relationship Between Incarceration of Children and Adult Health Outcomes?  American Pediatrics. 
Volume 19, Issue 3, Pages 342–350, which found, “child incarceration independently predicted adult mobility limitations, adult depression and 
adult suicidal thoughts.” 
4 Reforming Juvenile Justice: A Developmental Approach . (2012) Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences.  
 2effectively diverted from the system.5 Re-offense rates are similarly higher for those youth who are 
confined as compared to those who are diverted or managed in the community.6  Adjudicating and 
incarcerating our children is not making us safer and is, in fact, contributing to a variety of other harms, 
including increased risk of abuse and trauma, a lack of fairness, harm to families, and negative 
developmental and educational impacts; all at a higher cost than community-based alternatives.  
 
In May of 2019, the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force was 
established to work with the Center for Children’s Law and Policy (CCLP) to conduct an assessment of the 
state’s juvenile justice system.  From July 2019 to February 2020, with input and guidance from task force 
members, the CCLP analyzed data, reviewed policies, procedures and programs used in the juvenile 
justice system, interviewed more than 100 stakeholders from across the state, conducted six focus 
groups with youth, including tribal youth and youth detained and committed at Long Creek, and gathered 
community input from four town hall forums and a community survey distributed statewide and 
accessible online. It was a tremendously thorough and collaborative undertaking which has resulted in 
more information than we have ever had about Maine’s current system coupled with a comprehensive 
compilation of best practices, policies and programs from across the country.   
 
Before this process, the last time Maine looked comprehensively at the functioning of our juvenile justice 
system was more than a decade ago.7  We know much more now than we did then about what works, 
what gaps exist today, and what we can learn from other jurisdictions across the country. Released at the 
end of February 2020, the CCLP report is an incredible resource that provides a roadmap for Maine to 
implement policy and practice changes to improve outcomes for youth and families. And, given the 
success of the Department of Corrections in reducing the number of detained and committed youth over 
time, Maine has an incredible opportunity to fundamentally transform the youth justice system and to 
ensure that all Maine youth have access to a robust continuum of community-based services.  
 
One key finding of the CCLP’s review of the state’s juvenile code, and possible disincentive to the 
development of a robust continuum of alternatives to incarceration, was that “Maine currently lacks a 
strong presumption of keeping youth in the community in state law, and it also lacks the limits on the 
use of confinement as a disposition that are common in other state codes. ”8 
 
One important measure in response to that finding and related task force process was LD 320, which was 
approved by the 130th Legislature and signed by the Governor in June 2021.  The bill responded directly 
to several findings and recommendations in the system assessment designed to bring Maine in line with 
best and more common practice with the rest of the field around how long a child may be incarcerated, 
who makes that determination, how often that determination is reviewed and by whom.  Major 
provisions included: 
 Elimination of the one-year mandatory minimum commitment requirement . Research has 
demonstrated that “residential placements generally fail to produce better outcomes than 
 
5 Juvenile Justice Resource Hub, “Community-Based Alternatives: Key Issues,” retrieved at: http://jjie.org/hub/community-based-
alternatives/key-issues/#_edn6 ; citing Anthony Petrosino, Carolyn Turpin-Petrosino, and Sarah Guckenburg, “Formal System Processing of 
Juveniles: Effects on Delinquency,” Campbell Systematic Reviews (January 29, 2010), 38. Available at https://bit.ly/30md72U . See also National 
Juvenile Justice Network, “Emerging Findings and Policy Implications from the Pathways to Desistance Study,” (Washington, DC: 2012). 
http://bit.ly/14jXkQl .   
6 Richard A. Mendel, “No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing Juvenile Incarceration” (Baltimore: The Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2011), 10. 
Available at: http://www.aecf.org/noplaceforkids   Also see Richard A. Mendel, “Less Cost, More Safety: Guiding Lights for Reform in Juvenile 
Justice,” (Washington, DC: American Youth Policy Forum, 2001), 8, available at http://bit.ly/1DtNfjz , which states that studies of youth sent to 
large juvenile correctional institutions in the past 30 years have found a 50-70 percent recidivism rate within one to two years of release; James 
Austin, Kelly Dedel Johnson, and Ronald Weitzer, “Alternatives to the Secure Detention and Confinement of Juvenile Offenders” (Washington, 
DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, September 2005).  
7 The Maine Juvenile Justice Task Force. (June 2010). An Integrated Approach to Transforming Maine’s Juvenile Justice System.  
8 Center for Children’s Law and Policy, et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment . (p 108). Available at: www.mainejjtaskforce.org .  
 3alternative sanctions, cost much more, and can actually increase reoffending for certain youth."9 The 
CCLP report noted that well-established research from the field shows that incarceration for longer 
than 3-6 months has limited to no rehabilitative effect with respect to reducing re-arrest and 
recidivism rates.10 In its review, the CCLP Assessment Team found excessive length of stays, with low 
risk youth staying longer than high risk youth, variability by judge and region when determining when 
to commit a young person, and a consensus that youth are often committed because there are no 
other places for youth to go. To reduce unnecessary length of stays and create more equity across 
the state, one short-term recommendation in the CCLP report called for Maine to “ eliminate the 
mandatory required year of commitment to DOC and create a length of stay guidelines for youth in 
placement that are aligned with research, both in Maine law and in policy. ”11 The report goes on to 
say that this mandatory commitment provision in Maine law is “not a feature of other states’ juvenile 
justice systems” and is “at odds with an individualized approach to working with youth.” The vast 
majority of states, including the other New England states, have no such minimum in either statute 
or rule, and where there is a minimum it is most often offense-specific to the most serious offenses. 
Conversely, some states, like Maryland12, have statutory provisions prohibiting  enacting mandatory 
minimums for juveniles. Other states limit use of incarceration by limiting or prohibiting commitment 
for misdemeanors and other low-level offenses, like Illinois, Kentucky, California, Texas, and Hawaii.13  
 Strengthening a juvenile’s right to counsel and enhancing judicial review to ensure that youth are 
safe and that the services they are receiving are appropriate and could not be provided in a less 
restrictive setting . Taken together, these provisions place a higher scrutiny on the use of 
incarceration and are in line with the CCLP recommendation, which calls on Maine to “ create a 
process for regular judicial review of commitments and out-of-home placements .” The report also 
suggests that, “without a change to Maine law that allows for more explicit judicial oversight of the 
appropriateness of continued incarceration and out-of-home placement, the representation may 
not achieve its full intended goal”  and that Maine should “ identify a legal framework that will allow 
for meaningful and consistent oversight of the appropriateness of placements and other services 
for youth.”14 It is worth noting that prior to passage of LD 320, Maine lagged behind other New 
England states’ review processes.  For example, in Massachusetts post-disposition reviews are 
scheduled by the court every three months, but any party can request a review sooner and in New 
Hampshire and Rhode Island reviews occur every three months.  In Vermont, there is a review 60 
days after disposition.  
 Enacted certain age restrictions on detention and commitment .  Originally, LD 320 sought to 
establish 12 as the minimum age a child can be prosecuted in juvenile court.  The final bill did not 
enact that provision, but did put limits on the detention of youth under age 12 and added criteria for 
the court to consider before committing children age 13 and younger to a secure facility. Children 
this young lack the capacity to fully understand what is happening in court or to participate in their 
defense in any meaningful way, and they are at greater risk of being physically harmed and 
emotionally traumatized by the experience. More than one-quarter of youth under age 13 were 
 
9 Re-Examining Juvenile Incarceration High cost, poor outcomes spark shift to alternatives. (April 2015) PEW Center of the States. The PEW 
Charitable Trusts. Available at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2015/04/reexamining-juvenile-incarceration .  
10 Center for Children’s Law and Policy, et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment . (p 103-104). Available at: 
www.mainejjtaskforce.org . 
11 Id at p 113. 
12 In re No. 1140, 39 Md.App. 609, 387 A.2d 315  (1978). 
13 Re-Examining Juvenile Incarceration High cost, poor outcomes spark shift to alternatives . (April 2015) PEW Center of the States. The PEW 
Charitable Trusts. Available at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2015/04/reexamining-juvenile-incarceration .  
14 Center for Children’s Law and Policy, et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment . (p 113-114). Available at: 
www.mainejjtaskforce.org . 
 4
victims of some type of violence while confined, compared to nine percent of 20-year-olds.15 These 
children are better supported by their families, schools, and systems better equipped to provide a 
response that is trauma-informed and age-appropriate. Furthermore, justice system processing is a 
response that is disproportionately used for children of color, enhancing the racial and ethnic 
disparities in the youth justice system.16 The United States is an outlier throughout the world in the 
practice of trying young children in court. In 2019, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, which 
monitors the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), 
issued General Comment No. 24 stating that 14 is the most common minimum age of criminal 
responsibility internationally, and urging nations to set their minimum age of criminal responsibility 
to at least age 14.17 It’s why state legislatures in Connecticut, Mississippi, Washington, Indiana, Texas, 
North Carolina, Illinois, Maryland, Kansas, Kentucky, Oklahoma and Pennsylvania are also considering 
legislation to set the minimum age of juvenile court jurisdiction at age 12 or higher.  
The reforms included in LD 320 are grounded in principles of public safety, fairness and child welfare and 
reflect the purposes of the Maine Juvenile Code. Efforts to repeal these improvements should be rejected 
and I ask that the Committee vote “ought not to pass” on LD 140.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
Jill Ward 
 
 
 
15 Sickmund, M. and Puzzanchera, C. (eds.), “Juvenile Offenders and Victims: 2014 National Report” (Pittsburgh, PA: National Center for Juvenile 
Justice, 2014): 216. Available at: https://bit.ly/37TiLON. 
16 Abrams, L.S., Mizel, M.L. & Barnert, E.S. The Criminalization of Young Children and Overrepresentation of Black Youth in the Juvenile Justice 
System. Race Soc Probl (2021). Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12552-021-09314-7   
17 United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC),Committee on the Rights of the Child, General Comment No. 24 (2019) on 
Children's Rights in the Child Justice System (2019): 6, CRC/C/GC/24. Available at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/TBSearch.aspx?DocTypeID=11&Lang=en&TreatyID=5 .  
