CLAC MEMORANDUM/TESTIMONY 
LD 140 (Opposed) 
TO: Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matt Moonen 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Com1nission(CLAC) 
c/0 laura.yustak@maine.gov 
RE: L.D. 140, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Due 
Process for Juveniles 
DA: January 23, 2023 
The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following 
testimony in opposition to LD 140. 
LD 140 would repeal recent changes to the Juvenile Code made by P.L. 2021, Chapter 326, 
An Act to Provide the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Improve Due Process for Juveniles. The 
understanding of CLAC members and consultants is that the proposal to repeal these changes was 
likely prompted by concerns of communities that have recently encountered criminal conduct 
allegedly committed by groups of juveniles and the perception that recent changes to the Juvenile 
Code interfere with the ability to hold persons accountable. 
CLAC was not made aware of and identiﬁed no speciﬁc causal link between repeal of these 
recent amendments and adjudication of responsible juveniles. Indeed, members of CLAC with 
experience in Juvenile Court noted the generally positive impact of the recent amendments to the 
Juvenile Code, particularly associated with early appointment of counsel and continuing availability 
of counsel to the juvenile post-adjudication. It was noted that Chapter 326 resulted froma 
collaborative effort by a variety of stakeholders, and that wholesale repeal without similar 
collaboration may be too broad a reaction. CLAC agrees that Chapter 326’s amendment of the 
deﬁnition of juvenile has created some confusion, but understands that legislation is being proposed 
by the Dept. of Corrections in response to that issue. CLAC suggests that a more precise approach 
to identiﬁed implementation issues is more appropriate. 
*CLAC is an advisory body established by the Legislature. 17-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357. It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current 
defense attomeys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.
