1 
 Testimony of Mary L. Bonauto for G LBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders  (GLAD) , EqualityMaine, 
Maine TransNet, OUT Maine , and Portland Outright  
 
LD 140 – Ought  Not To Pass  
 
An Act To  Provide the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and  
Improve Due Process for Juveniles  
 
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
 
January 26, 2023  
Chairpersons Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee,  
 
Good afternoon.  I am Mary Bonauto , a Maine -based  attorney with GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders,  and am submitting this written testimony in opposition to LD 140, An Act 
to Amend the Laws Governing the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Due Process for J uveniles , 
because I am out of state today .  GLAD works primarily in New England  and also nationally for 
equal justice under law without regard to sexual orientation, gender identity or HIV status.   A 
primary feature of GLAD’s work involves families and children, and we therefore have worked with 
justice -involved youth and with the Department of Corrections staff at Long Creek Youth 
Development Center .  We  supported Representative Morales in her exte nsive outreach and 
negotiations on both versions of her bill, LD 1684 (129th Leg.) and LD 320 (130th Leg.) .  
This testimony explains the major reforms codified by LD 320.  These provisions were 
robustly  vetted and negotiated by Rep. Morales with stakeholder s.  Ultimately the Governor’s 
Office, Department of Corrections, Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Judicial 
Branch, Maine Prosecutors’ Association, a bipartisan majority of legislators, young people and their 
families affected by th e justice system, and many others supported LD 320 (Public Law 2021, 
Chapter 326).  
The signatories joining this testimony  with GLAD  – EqualityMaine,  Maine TransNet, OUT 
Maine, and Portland Outright  all support LGBTQ young people . As a juvenile policy and l aw expert, 
Jill Ward explained in her 2021 testimony to this Committee  in support of LD 320 the harms 
imposed by the juvenile system fall widely, but also disproportionately , on some groups of youth.  
Research has repeatedly confirmed what common sense tells us. Removing youth from their 
homes and  communities and placing them in correctional settings disrupts healthy 
psychological development by  disconnecting youth from their parents or parent figures, from 
peers who model and value academic  success and positive social behavior, and from 
participation in activities that require critical thinking and  independent decision‐making. 
Research also confirms that these harms fall disproportionately on youth  of color, girls, 
LGBTQ GNC youth, and youth with disabilities. And, Maine’s system is no exception.1 
 
1  Testimony of Jill Ward to Committee on the Judiciary In Support of LD 320 (130th Leg. Feb. 2 4, 
2021 ), attached as Exhibit A.  The over -representation of LGBTQ young people in the justice system is 
especially acute for girls and Black, Indigenous and other people of color.  The reasons for this disparity 
include rejection from their families, disproportionate physical and sexual a buse, dual involvement with 
state child welfare systems, heightened scrutiny and school discipline for expressing same -sex attraction, 
transgressing gender norms, or defending themselves against harassment . See generally, National 
Academies of Sciences, En gineering, and Medicine. (2019).  
2 
  
Turning to the legal reforms made by LD 320, it is important to remember both that the 
juvenile code and system that had not been significantly updated for m any years  and that reform 
must continue to meet the public safety goals of the Juvenile Code and to provide the care and 
support young people need in their communities . LD 320 implemented basic imperatives of due 
process , such as counsel, judicial review, and individuated sentencing and some measure of 
accountability for the agencies that take our children into custody. To the ir enormous credit , and 
despite systemic barriers and meager options for supporting justice invol ved youth, the Department 
of Corrections and the Department of Health and Human Services  have both implemented LD 320, 
and have undertaken other efforts to reduce justice -system involvement for young people and to 
remove young people from Long Creek when s afe and appropriate arrangements can be made in the 
community.  
Everything in the protections provided by LD 320, which LD 140 now seeks to repeal, 
makes the same good sense for public safety and young people today as it did in 2021.   
1. Counsel Provisions.   
LD 320 requires counsel for all children in the juvenile justice system.2 Among others, the 
Criminal Law Advisory Commission, the Maine Association of Criminal Defense Attorneys, and the 
Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services each supported legal counsel for children as they 
navigated a legal system that even many adults s truggle to understand. 3  The testimony of Skye 
Gosselin regarding LD 320, now an organizer for Maine Youth Justice, shared her story of being 
arrested while in middle school for failure to appear after receiving a summons because neither she 
nor her fami ly had appreciated its significance.4  Understandably, the Maine State Bar Association 
viewed access to counsel, judicial reviews, and removal of the one -year mandatory minimum of 
 
The Promise of Adolescence: Realizing Opportunity for All Youth . Washington,  
DC: The National Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/25388 , at 133, at 
https://www.nap.edu/download/25388 ; Bianca D.M. Wilson et al., Disproportionality and Disparities 
Among Sexual Minority You th in Custody (Springer 2017), available at :  
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10964 -017-0632 -5 ; Center for American Progress, 
Movement  Advancement Project, Youth First, Unjust:  LGBTQ Youth Incarcerated in the Juvenile 
Justice System , at 5 (June 2017), https://www.lgbtmap.org/file/lgbtq -incarcerated -youth.pdf ; Caitlin 
Ryan, Family Acceptance Project, Supportive  Families, Healthy Chi ldren: Helping Fa milies w ith 
Lesbian, Ga y, Bise xual, & Transgen der Children (2009), 
http://familyproject.sfsu .edu/sites/d efault/files/FAP_English%20 Booklet_ pst.pd f; Caitlyn Ryan, David 
Huebner, Rafael Diaz, Jorge Sanchez, Family Rejection as a Pr edictor of N egative Health Out comes in 
White and Latino Lesbian, Gay  and Bise xual Young Adu lts, Pediatrics 123 (1), 346-52 (2009).  
Angela Irvine, Aisha  Canfield, The Overrepr esentation of  Lesbian,  Gay, Bise xual, Qu eer, Gender 
Nonconforming, and Transgender Youth in the C hild Welfare to Juvenile Justice Crosso ver Popula tion, 
Journal of Gender, Soc ial Policy & the Law, 24 (2) 243-61 (2016); Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention, LGBTQ Youths in the Juvenile Justice System (2014 ); available at: 
https://www.ojjdp.gov/mpg/litreviews/LGBTQYouthsintheJuvenileJusticeSystem.pdf ;   
GLSEN 2016, Educational Exclusion:  Drop out, push out and the school to prison pip eline for LGBTQ 
youth (New York 2016), available at :  
https://www.glsen.org/sites/default/files/Educational%20Exclusion_Report_6 -28-
16_v4_WEB_READY_PDF.pdf    
2  Right to counsel was effectuated by amending 15 MRSA § §3203 -A, 3301, and 3306 . 
3  The rich array of testimony in support of LD 320, only a small portion of which is quoted here, is 
available at  http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/d isplay_ps.asp?ld=320&PID=1456&snum=130 . 
4  Testimony of Skye Gosselin Neither for Nor Against LD 320 to Committee on the Judiciary 
(130th Leg. Feb. 24, 2021), attached as Exhibit B.  
3 
 commitment as it as an access to justice issue . The Maine Judicial Branch a ssured this Committee 
they were prepared to implement this protection  and they have done so .   
The only thing that has changed between  2021 when LD 320 became law and now is that 
Maine has been called to account for its failure to provide counsel to indigent persons to the extent 
required by the U.S. Constitution’s 6th Amendment .  This Committee is well informed about these 
issues, and th ere is no need to worsen Maine’s counsel crisis by undoing a functional, well -
implemented and executed system for counsel.5   
2.  Age Provisions  
LD 320 rais ed the age for secure confinement to age 12 rather than age 11 .6  There are 
serious competency issues for many children - cognitive, emotional and social , and even more so for 
the youngest children . As Doctor of Psychology Carlann Welch  testified7, in her professional 
experience with hundreds of young people in the justice system  and as an expert for the Court, for 
DOC, and individual clients,  
 
How young is that  [12 years old] ? Please, think of your children or your own personal 
history. Remember being in the 5th and 6th grades? Have you recently spoken with a 
youngster who was in early phases of puberty, or even prepubescent?  
 
These are children. Their immaturity is a function of their brain development, they are not 
mini adults  who simply need ex posure to develop maturity. The scientific advances in brain 
imaging  have taught us about the complicated process of brain development (that continues 
into one’s  twenties). If we look solely at the cognitive immaturity of youth under age 12, we 
would find  that most of them would not be found competent to proceed or stand trial. Youth 
under the age of  12 often lack the skills to appreciate the charges, to understand the legal 
system, and/or to work  cooperatively with their attorney. Already, we have many you ths 
entering the system at age 12  whose interface consists of competency evaluations, hearings 
and dismissals. It is also  noteworthy that brain development includes pathways and networks 
involved in social and  emotional development, not simply cognitive de velopment. For 
example, it is about age 10 when  children begin perceiving the human face as a whole 
construct vs. the individual’s parts that  make up a face. The breadth of their immaturity 
renders youth under age 12 highly dependent on  adults and thus int erventions to support their 
functioning must involve their family and often  their school programming. Children’s 
Behavioral Health Services (CBHS) is the appropriate  department to serve and support these 
youth, NOT the correctional system . 
  
 This child -centered provision against incarcerating children 11 years old and younger  
recognizes that it is fundamentally unfair to lock up children who lack competence and who are 
likely to need behavioral health services from DHHS and in their homes and commu nities .  
 
5  The Right  to Counsel  in Maine:  Evaluation  of Services  Provided  by the Maine  Commission  on 
Indigent  Legal  Services  (April 2019), available at https://sixthamendment.org/maine -report/   
6  LD 320 amended 34 -A MRSA §3895 (1)(B)  to effectuate this change.   The bill initially sought to 
eliminate juvenile court jurisdiction for children age 11 and under by amending 15 MRSA §3101 (2). 
That provision was dropped during the negotiations with stakeholders.   See also Exhibit C (Graphic on 
Age in Support of LD 1684) .  Importantly, LD 320 limited the length of time a child age 11 or under 
could be held in detention at Long Creek to no more than 7 days, unless agreed otherwise by the parties.  
7  Testimony of Dr. Carlann Welch  to Committee on the Judiciary,  In Support of LD 320 (130th 
Leg.), Feb. 23, 2021 , attached as Exhibit D.  
4 
 One significant change s ince LD 320 became law  is the US Department of Justice ’s letter to 
Maine finding Maine in violation of the Americans With Disabilities Act for placing children with 
behavior health needs in a highly restrictive setting rather than the least restrictive environment.  The 
letter specifically discusses the improper use of Long Creek as a behavioral health intervention :   
Even though Maine law requires that juvenile justice rehabilitative services be provided in 
the least restrictive setting, many children with mental health disabilities are sent to or 
remain in Long Creek because of the insufficient behavioral health services available to them 
in the community. The  overwhelming majority of children at Long Creek have behavioral 
health needs.   . . .  Maine violates Title II of the ADA because it fails to serve children with 
behavioral health needs in the most integrated setting appropriate to their needs.8   
 Given the Department of Justice’s  finding Maine in violation of the law, it is reasonable to 
question the use of  Long Creek for therapeutic care at all, let alone for the youngest children, where 
therapeutic care could be p rovided, pending sustained state and private efforts and funding, in 
homes, communities and other appropriate settings.   
3.  Criteria for Institutional Disposition  
Although scaled back from what the sponsor had earlier sought  in the 129th Legislature , LD 
320 added two “additional factors” to be accorded weight against ordering placement in a secure 
facility  under 15 MRSA  § 3313 .  On factor looks to whether  the juvenile is under age 14 at the time 
of the alleged conduct .  The other is wheth er the adjudication is for a crime that would be a Class D 
or Class E crime for an adult, and where the parties agree, and the judge finds , that the underlying 
conduct did not generate probable cause to believe that the juvenile had committed the equivalent of 
Class A, Class B, or Class C adult crime.   
 While these provisions do not limit secure confinement, they are modest and common sense 
provis ions requiring judges to pause to consider these two factors at the dispositional phase of 
juvenile proceedings .  As juvenile law and policy attorney Jill Ward testified9,  
One key finding of the [contracted expert’s]  review of the state’s juvenile code, . . . was that 
“Maine currently lacks a  strong presumption of keeping youth in the community in state 
law, and it also lacks the limits on the  use of confinement as a disposition that are 
common in other state codes. ”10     
 
Requiring judges to focus on the extreme youth of the child and the relative seriousness of the 
offenses charged  is a small check on the legal impetus toward secure confinement and a step toward 
fundamental fairness .  Repealing these very modest steps is also unnecessary where the Juvenile 
Code  still authorizes judges to order secure confinement in their discretion.   
  
 
8  Findings Letter of U.S. Department of Justice to Governor Mills and Attorney General Frey, 
United States’ Investigation of Maine’s Behavioral Health System for Children Under Tit le II of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act  (June 22, 2022) (discussing Long Creek as filling a gap in children’s 
behavioral health services, at 6-8), available at https://www.justice.gov/crt/case -
document/file/1514441/download .  
9  Ward Testimony , Exhibit  A. 
10  Id. citing Center for Children’s Law and Policy, et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice System 
Assessment . (p 108). Available at: www.mainejjtaskforce.org  (emphasis added).  
5 
 4. Removal of Mandatory Minimum of One Year  Commitment  
For decades, the juvenile justice system has allowed for indeterminate commitments to a 
secure correctional facility as long as “the court does not limit the commitment to less than one year” 
or extend the commitment past an individual’s 21st birthday.  15  MRSA §3316 (2)(A).   LD 320 
removed that cookie cutter approach.  As attorney Ward testified11: 
Research has demonstrated that “residential placements generally fail to produce better 
outcomes than alternative sanctions, cost much more, and can actually increase reoffending 
for certain youth."12 
 
The CCLP report [the 2020 Report on Maine’s juvenile justice system] noted that well‐
established research from the field shows that incarceration for longer   than 3‐6 months has 
limited to no rehabilitat ive effect with respect to reducing re‐arrest and recidivism  rates.  
In its review, the CCLP Assessment Team found excessive length of stays, with low-risk 
youth staying  longer than high risk youth, variability by judge and region when determining 
when to c ommit a young  person, and a consensus that youth are often committed because 
there are no other places for youth to  go. To reduce unnecessary length of stays and create 
more equity across the state, one short‐term  recommendation in the CCLP report calls 
for Maine to “eliminate the mandatory required year of  commitment to DOC and 
create a length of stay guidelines for youth in placement that are aligned with  research, 
both in Maine law and in policy. ” 
 
Attorney Ward, citing the report, also note d that Maine was an outlier in New England in 
maintaining a mandatory minimum commitment period for all offenses.  In short, judges retain the 
power and authority to issue indeterminate commitments for more than a ye ar, but are no longer 
required by statute  to do so .  There is no basis to reinstate the mandatory minimum .   
 
5. Judicial Reviews  
LD 320 strengthened two provisions where  judges have “eyes on” young people committed 
to Long Creek , including those youth who are committed because they have no other  appropriate 
home.  First, 15 MRSA §3315 (3) was strengthened to make the se annual reviews meaningful  rather 
than perfunctory  by requiring concrete information about the individual’s circumstances , namely:  “If 
an appropriate treatment or appropriate and less restrictive placement is not being provided of 
offered to the juvenile, the court may order the Department of Corrections or the Department of 
Health and Human Services, or both, to demonstrate the reasonableness of the current treatmen t or 
placement provided or offered.”   
This modest accountability measure for the two Department s is eminently reasonable, and 
could even be strengthened, given that “treatment” is supposed to occur in in the least restrictive 
environment  appropriate to the child, as the Department of Justice noted . 
 The second review involved amend ments to 15 MRSA §33 17, denominated “Disposition 
after return to Juvenile Court .”  The amendments allow juveniles, and not only the Department of 
Corrections and the Department of Health and Human Services, to seek judicial review of a 
dispositio n and to do so no more than every 180 days except for “extraordinary circumstances .” The 
amended law requires the departments to provide basic information about the status of the young 
 
11  Ward Testimony, Exhibit A.   
12  Footnotes in Ward’s Testimony are not reproduced here but are available on the original .  
Emphases are added.  
6 
 person and the supports the y receive and to allow the young person and their attorney,  family 
members, service providers, community members and others as appropriate to address the conditions 
of confinement, whether there are available alternatives to secure confinement, the status of 
community reintegration efforts, and whatever is relevan t to the young person.  This intervention can 
also create a “lighthouse” effect where the judge can assist the parties in seeing the issues more 
clearly  and making appropriate changes.    
 As an expert who has been consulted widely on juvenile justice issue s, Dr. Welch provided 
valuable insights about the necessity of this provision.   
I strongly support this bill’s emphasis on providing continued representation for youth who 
have been placed in the custody of the Department of Corrections. I have had the op portunity 
to evaluate committed youth at Long Creek when they have developed new charges. I have 
often  found that the new charges, e.g., assaults, were preceded by signs of difficulties that 
were not  adequately explored or addressed. A judicial review, as posed in this bill, would 
allow for  outside input into the juvenile’s program and maximize the juvenile’s 
rehabilitation. Treatment  programming can become insular in institutions like Long 
Creek and a lthough this may not have  negative impact on all youth, there are many 
youths who have suffered greatly because of this.  I cannot share details of the various 
youth I have evaluated but I can share that in those  circumstances where my evaluation has 
been p art of a review, there have been pivotal changes  made in the course of treatment 
and transition to the community . A number of unintended  consequences relating to 
detention/incarceration have been identified by the research including  congregating 
delinquent  youth together, increasing recidivism rates, worsening mental health  problems, 
increased risk of self -harm, disrupting a youth’s engagement with school, and finally,  
negatively impacting short -term and long -term employment.  
 
I want the Committee to understand that given the gravity of juvenile commitment and 
the risks  that are associated with placement in a secure facility like Long Creek, it is 
essential that such a  placement not operate in a vacuum, nor that it be elongated more 
than necessary.  Having a  judicial review allows for broader input and supports 
dispositional planning across the system  (attorneys, court, families) rather than placing 
the sole responsibility onto Long Creek. It is my  opinion that these reviews would 
facilitate the treatmen t programming for youth while they are  incarcerated as well as 
facilitate their transition back into the community.13 
 
For all of the above reasons, GLAD, together with Equality Maine, Maine TransNet , OUT Maine 
and Portland Outright respectfully request you  vote ought not to pass on LD 140.  
 
 
       Truly yours,  
       Attorney Mary L. Bonauto  
       GLAD  
       257 Deering Ave, #203  
       Portland, ME  04103  
 
 
 
 
13  Welch Testimony , Exhibit  D (emphasis added) . 
  1February 24, 2021 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative  Thom Harnett 
Joint Standing Committee  on Judiciary 
100 State House  Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: LD 320, An Act to Clarify the Right to Counsel  and Improve Due Process for Juveniles   
 
Dear Senator Carney,  Representative  Harnett, and Members  of the Joint Standing  Committe e on Judi ciary: 
 My name  is Jill Ward,  and I am a resident of South  Portland, Maine.  I have worked on juvenile justice 
policy and reform for more than 20 years and for the past decade have served as a policy consultant  on 
juvenile  justice and children’s  issues both nationally  and here in Maine.  Currently,  I mana
 ge the Maine 
Center for Juvenile  Policy and Law  in partnership  with the Juvenile  Justice Clinic  at Maine  Law. I also serve 
as one of three  co‐chairs of the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment  and Reinvestment  Task Force. 
My testimony  in support of LD 320 represents  my personal views only and not the position of the 
University  of Maine School  of Law or the University  of Maine Syste
m. 
 One of the main  areas  of my work has been educating  policy makers, stakeholders  and the public  about 
the harmful effects of justice system involvement,  particularly  incarceration,  on childre n
  and youth  and 
the ineffectiveness  of the youth  prison model  to reduce recidivism  and produce  positive outcomes  for 
young people and their communities.   In testimony  submitted  to this Committee  in the 129th Legislature,  
I summarized  the research documenting  the negative impacts on youth from both formal juvenile justice 
system processing  and subsequent  confinement,  including the increased  risk of abuse and violence,1 
educational  disruption,2 poor health outcomes  as adults,3 and harmful  family and community  separation.   
 Research has repeatedly  confirmed  what common sense tells us. Removing  youth from their homes and 
communities  and placing them  in correctional  settings  disrupts healthy  psychological  development  by 
disconnecting  youth from their parents or parent figures, from peers who model and value academic  
success  and positive social behavior,  and from partici
 pation in activities that  require critical thinking and 
independent  decision‐making.4  Research  also confirms that  these harms fall disproportionately  on youth 
of color, girls,  LGBTQ GNC youth, and youth  with disabilities.  And, Maine’s system is no exception.  
 Rather than providing  a public safety benefit, formal system processing  often has the opposite result: 
youth  who have had some justice system involvement  are more likely to reoffend  than those who were 
effectively  di 
verted from the system.5 Re‐offense  rates  are similarly higher for those youth who are 
                                                       
1 See, Maltreatment  in Youth in U.S. Correctional  Facilities . (2015). Baltimore,  MD: The Annie E. Casey Foundation.  Available  at: 
https://www.aecf.org/resources/maltreatment ‐of‐youth‐in‐us‐juvenile‐corrections‐ facilities . Conditions  of Confinement: Findings  from the survey  
of youth in residential  placement . (2010). Washington,  D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency  Prevention.  Available  at: 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pd ffiles1/ojjdp/ 227729.pdf . 
2 See, Just Learning . (2014). Atlanta, GA: Southern  Education  Fund.  See also, Juvenile Reentry . (2014) Washington, D.C.:  Federal Interagency  
Reentry Council which found that “approximately  two‐thirds of young people do not return to school after release from secure custody.”  
Available at: http://csgjusticecenter.org/wp‐ content/uploads/2014/06/Juveniles.pdf.  
3 Barnet, E. et al. (April 2019). What Is the Relationship  Between Incarceration  of Children and Adult Health Outcomes?  American  Pediatrics.  
Volume 19, Issue 3, Pages 342–350,  which found, “child incarceration  independently  predicted  adult mobility limitations,  adult depression  and 
adult suicidal thoughts.”  
4 Reforming  Juvenile Justice:  A Developmental  Approach . (2012) Washington, D.C.:  National Academy  of Sciences. 
5 Juvenile Justice Resource  Hub, “Community ‐Based Alternatives: Key  Issues,” retrieved  at: http://jjie.org/hub/community ‐based‐
alternatives/key ‐issues/#_edn6 ; citing Anthony Petrosino,  Carolyn Turpin ‐Petrosino,  and Sarah  Guckenburg,  “Formal System Processing  of 
Juveniles:  Effects on Delinquency,”  Campbell  Systematic  Reviews (January 29,  2010), 38. Available  at https://bit.ly/30md72U . See also National  
Juvenile Justice Network,  “Emerging  Findings and Policy  Implications  from the Pathways  to Desistance  Study,” (Washington,  DC: 2012). 
http://bit.ly/14jXkQl .   
Exhibit A
  2confined as compared  to those who are diverted or managed  in the community.6  Adjudicating  and 
incarcerating  our children is not making us safer and is, in fact, contributing  to a variety of other harms, 
including increased  risk of abuse and trauma, a lack of fairness, harm to families, and negative 
developmental  and educational  impacts; all at a higher cost than community ‐based  alternatives.  
 
In May of 2019, the Maine Juve nile Jus
tice System Assessment  and Reinvestment  Task Force was 
established  to work with the Center  for Children’s  Law and Policy (CCLP) to conduct an assessment  of the 
state’s juvenile justice system.  Conducting  an assessment  was  one of the recommendations  put forth in 
the September  2017 audit of the conditions  Long  Creek Yout h Development  Center  to help  determine  
factors outside  of Long Creek that may  be contributing  to youth being  incarcerated  for low‐level  offenses, 
the high rate of referrals to Long  Creek from mental health placements,  and the lack of community ‐based 
alternatives.7  It was  also a recommendation  coming out of a November  2017 summit hosted by the 
Justice  Policy Program at the University  of Southern Maine and the Maine  Center  for Juvenile Policy and 
Law  with more than one hundred local youth  justice practitioners  and stakeholders.  The summit report 
echoed the call for a comprehensive  syst em review  “to assess  needs and service gaps.  The review  would 
cover all system policies and practices including all agencies that serve at‐risk‐youth (including  DHHS), as 
well  as stakeholders  like law enforcement,  judges, prosecutors,  defense attorneys,  youth  and family 
members.”8 
 From July 2019 to February 2020, with input and guidance from task force members,  the CCLP analyzed 
data, reviewed  policies, procedures  and programs  used  in the juvenile justice system,  interviewed  more 
than 100 stakeholders  from across  the state, conducted  six focus groups with youth, including tribal 
youth  and youth  detained and committed  at Long  Creek, and gathered community  i
 nput from four town 
hall forums and a community  survey  distributed  statewide  and accessible  online. It was  a tremendously  
thorough  and collaborative  undertaking  which has resulted in more information  than we have ever  had 
about Maine’s current system coupled with a comprehensive  compilation  of best practi ces, policies and 
programs  from across  the country.   
 The last time  Maine looked comprehensively  at the functioning  of our juvenile justice system was  more 
than a decade  ago.
9  We know  much more now  than we did then about what works, what gaps exist 
today, and what we can learn from other jurisdictions  across  the country. Released at the end of 
February 2020,  the CCLP report is an incredible  resource that provides a roadmap for Maine to 
implement  policy and  practice chang es to improve ou tcomes for youth  and families. And, given the 
success  of the Department  of Corrections  in reducing the number of detained and committed  youth over 
time, Maine has an incredible  opportunity  to fundamentally  transform  the youth justice system and to 
ensure that all Maine  youth have access to a robust  continuu m of commu nity‐based services.  
 
One key finding of the CCLP’s  review  of the state’s  juvenile code, and possible disincentive  to the 
development  of a robust continuum  of alternatives  to incarceration,  was  that “Maine currently lacks a 
strong presumption  of keeping youth  in the community  in state law, and it also lacks th e limits on the 
use of confinement  as a disposition  that are common  in other state codes. ”10 
 
                                                       
6 Richard A. Mendel, “No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing  Juvenile Incarceration”  (Baltimore:  The Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2011),  10. 
Available at: http://www.aecf.org/noplaceforkids   Also  see Richard A. Mendel, “Less Cost,  More Safety: Guiding Lights for Reform in Juvenile 
Justice,” (Washington,  DC: American  Youth Policy Forum, 2001),  8, available  at http://bit.ly/1DtNfjz , which states that studies of youth sent  to 
large juvenile correctional  institutions in  the past 30 years have  found a 50‐70 percent recidivism  rate within one to two years of release; James 
Austin, Kelly Dedel Johnson,  and Ronald  Weitzer, “Alternatives  to the Secure Detention and  Confinement  of Juvenile Offenders”  (Washington,  
DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency  Prevention,  September  20 05). 
7 Long Creek Youth Development  Center, Conditions  Assessment  Narrative  Report (Center for Children’s Law  & Policy, September  2017),  
8 Sanchez,  M. King, E., & Ward, J. (2018). Youth Justice in Maine: Imagine  a New Future Summit,  Summary  and Recommendations .  
9 The Maine Juvenile Justice Task Force. (June 2010). An  Integrated  Approach to  Transforming  Maine’s Juvenile Justice  System.  
10 Center for Children’s Law  and Policy,  et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice  System Assessment . (p 108). Available  at: www.mainejjtaskforce.org .  
Exhibit A
  3LD 320 addresses  this finding and includes several key recommendations  to help  bring Maine in line with 
best and more common practice with the rest of the field around how long a child  may  be incarcerated, 
who makes that determination,  how  often that determination  is reviewed  and by whom.   
First, LD 320 would  eliminate  the one‐year mandatory  minimum  commitment  requirement  in current 
law. Research has demonstrated  that “residential  placements  generally fail to produce better outcomes  
than alternative  sanctions,  cost much more, and can actually increase reoffending  for certain youth."11 
The CCLP report noted that well‐ established  research from the field shows that incarceration  for longer 
than 3‐6 months has limited to no rehabilitative  effect with respect to reducing re‐arrest and recidivism  
rates.12  
In its review,  the CCLP Assessment  Team  found excessive  length  of stays, with low risk youth staying 
longer than high risk youth, variability  by judge and region when  determining  when to commit a young 
person, and a consensus  that youth are often committed  because there are no other places for youth  to 
go. To reduce unnecessary length
 of stays  and create more equity across  the state, one short‐term 
recommendation  in the CCLP report calls for Maine to “eliminate  the mandatory  required year of 
commitment  to DOC and create a length  of stay guidelines  for youth in placement  that are aligned  with 
resear ch, both in Maine law and
 in policy. ”13  
The report goes on to say that this mandatory  commitment  provision  in Maine law is “not a feature of 
other states’  juvenile  justice systems”  and is “at odds with an individualized  approach  to working with 
youth.” The vast majority of states,  including the other New England states,  have no such minimum  in 
either statute or rule, and where there is a minimum it is most often offense
‐specific to the most serious 
offenses.  Conversely,  some  states,  like Maryland14, have statutory  provisions  prohibiting  enacting 
mandatory  minimums  for juveniles.  Other states limit use of incarceration  by limiting or prohibiting  
commitment  for misdemeanors  and other low‐level offenses, like Illinois, Kentucky,  California,  Texas, and 
Hawaii.15  
Second, LD 320 strengthens  a juvenile’s  right to counsel  and enhances  judicial review  to ensure that 
youth  are safe and that  the services they are receiving are appropriate  and could not be provided in a less 
restrictive  setting. Taken together,  these provisions  place a higher scrutiny on the use of incarceration  
and are in line with the CCLP recommendation,  which calls on Maine to “cr
eate a process for regular 
judicial review of commitments  and out‐of‐home placements. ” The report also suggests that,  “without a 
change to Maine law that allows for more explicit judicial oversight  of the appropriateness  of 
continued  incarcera
tion and out‐of‐home  placement,  the representation  may not achieve  its full 
intended goal” and that Maine should “identify a legal framework  that will allow for meaningful  and 
consistent  oversight  of the appropriateness  of placements  and other services for youth.”16  
 
In it worth noting that other New  England  states have more robust review  processes  than Maine.   For 
example, in Massachusetts  post‐disposition  reviews are scheduled  by the court every three months, but 
any party  can request a review  sooner and in New  Hampshire  and Rhode Island reviews  occur every 
three months.  In  Verm ont, ther e is a review 60 days after disposition.   
                                                       
11 Re‐Examining  Juvenile Incarceration  High  cost, poor outcomes  spark shift to alternatives.  (April 2015) PEW  Center of the States. The PEW 
Charitable  Trusts. Available  at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research‐ and‐analysis/issue‐ briefs/2015/04/reexamining ‐juvenile‐ incarceration .  
12 Center for Children’s Law  and Policy,  et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice  System Assessment . (p 103‐104). Available  at: 
www.mainejjtaskforce.org . 
13 Id at p 113. 
14 In re No. 1140, 39 Md.App.  609,  387 A.2d 315  (1978).  
15 Re‐Examining  Juvenile Incarceration  High  cost, poor outcomes  spark shift to alternatives . (April 2015) PEW  Center of the States. The PEW 
Charitable  Trusts. Available  at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research‐ and‐analysis/issue‐ briefs/2015/04/reexamining ‐juvenile‐ incarceration .  
16 Center for Children’s Law  and Policy,  et al (2020). Maine Juvenile Justice  System Assessment . (p 113‐114). Available  at: 
www.mainejjtaskforce.org . 
Exhibit A
  4When  progress  on LD 1684 was  halted  by the pandemic  last session, it was  encouraging  to see the 
Judicial  Branch in collaboration  with MCILS and the DOC take some action to implement  a program to 
provide post‐dispositional  representation  to committed  youth in Long Creek. The legislature  has the 
opportunity  to codify that program and a more comp rehensive  protocol of repr esentation  and judicial 
review  with LD 320.  
 
Finally, LD 320 includes important  provisions  to exclude  children age 11 and younger from prosecution  in 
juvenile  court and to make it more difficult  to incarcerate  children age 13 and younger. Children  this 
young lack the capa city to fully un derstand what is happening  in court or to participate  in their defense in 
any meaningful  way,  and they are at greater  risk of being physically  harmed and emotionally  traumatized  
by the experience.  More  than one‐quarter of youth under age 13 were victims of some  type of violence 
while confined , compare
d to nine percent of 20‐year‐olds.17 These children are better supported  by their 
families,  schools, and systems  better equipped  to provide a response that is trauma‐informed  and age‐
appropriate.  Furthermore,  justice system processing  is a response that is disproportionately  used  for 
children  of color, enhancing  the racial and ethnic  disparities  in the youth justice system.18 
 The United States is an outlier  throughout  the world in the practice of trying young children in court. In 
2019, the Committee  on the Rights of the Child, which monitors the implementation  of the United 
Nations Convention  on the Rights of the Child (CRC), issued  General Comment  No. 24 stating that 14 is 
the most common minim um age of cri 
minal  responsibility  internationally,  and urging  nations to set their 
minimum  age of criminal  responsibility  to at least age 14.19 It’s why state legislatures  in Connecticut,  
Mississippi,  Washington,  Indiana, Texas,  North Carolina, Illinois, Maryland,  Kansas, Kentucky,  Oklahoma  
and Pennsylvania  are also considering  legislation  to set the minimum  age of juvenile court jurisdiction  at 
age 12 or higher. 
 The reforms included in LD 320 are grounded  in principles  of public safety,  fairness  and child  welfare and 
reflect the purp oses of the Maine Juve 
nile Code. There  are limits to who should be subject to the justice 
system and for how  long. Young children  should be kept out of the justice system and once in the system, 
policies and practices should be designed  in such a way expedite their ex it from the system – both to 
protect them from unnecessary  harm and to maximize  their  opportunity  for rehabilitation.     
 Consider this from a 2016 report published  by the National Institute  of Justice
20: 
 
“The failure of youth  prisons to help young people  get back on track, as well  as their failure to 
protect public safety, flows from inherent flaws in the model itself.  Adult‐style  prisons that 
emphasize  confinement  and control are devoid of the essentials  required for healthy adolescent  
development  — engaged  adults focused on their  development,  a peer group  that models 
prosocial  behavior,  opportunities  for academic  success,  and activities that contribute  to 
developing  decision‐making and critical thinking skills.  At the same time, these facilities 
provide  too many of the elements  that exacerbate  the trauma that most confined youth  have 
already experienced  and reinfor ce poor choices and impulsive  behavior.  Maltreatment  is 
endemic and widespread.”  
                                                       
17 Sickmund,  M. and Puzzanchera,  C. (eds.), “Juvenile  Offenders and  Victims: 2014 National Report” (Pittsburgh,  PA: National  Center for Juvenile 
Justice, 2014): 216. Available  at: https://bit.ly/37TiLON.  
18 Abrams, L.S., Mizel, M.L. & Barnert, E.S. The Criminalization  of Young Children and Overrepresentation  of Black  Youth in the Juvenile  Justice 
System . Race Soc Probl (2021). Available  at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12552 ‐021‐09314‐ 7  
19 United Nations Convention  on the Rights of  the Child (CRC),Committee on  the Rights of  the Child, General Comment  No. 24 (2019) on 
Children's Rights in  the Child Justice System (2019): 6, CRC/C/GC/24.  Available  at: 
https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyex ternal/TBSearch.aspx?DocTy peID=11&Lang=en&TreatyID=5 .  
20 McCarthy,  P., Schiraldi, V., and Shark,  M. (2016). The Future of Youth Justice: A Community‐ Based Alternative  to the Youth  Prison Model. New  
Thinking in Community  Corrections (October 2016). National  Institute of Justice, Harvard Kennedy  School. Available  at: 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pd ffiles1/nij/250142.pdf .  
Exhibit A
  5
 
Razor  wire fences,  concrete beds, steel  toilets, deadbolt  doors and cement  walls and floors are not 
healing and rehabilitative  environments  and are no place  for our children.   Shifting investment  away from 
incarceration  and into a community ‐based continuum  of care is the right thing to do, but it takes  time 
and should not preclude policymakers  and system lead ers from taking steps to limit, protect and 
ultimately  reduce the number of young people  caught  up in the system. 
 LD 320 creates appropriate  boundaries  around  justice system involvement  and incarceration  for very 
young children  and incentivizes  responses  that are proven to be more effective and result in less harm. A 
similar bill was  approved  by this Com 
mittee last session and was  broadly supported  before the pandemic  
shut  everything  down. This Committee  has the opportunity  to finish the job and, on behalf of Maine’s 
children, I hope you take it.  
 
Respectfully  submitted,  
  Jill Ward
 
 
 
Exhibit A
Exhibit B
Exhibit B
Exhibit B
 
 
 JUVENILE JUSTICE REFORM  
LD 1684 : AN ACT TO CLARIFY THE RIGHT 
TO COUNSEL FOR J UVENILES AND 
IMPROVE DUE PROCESS OF JUVENILE S 
 
AGE-RELATED ISSUES IN TH IS BILL  
 
Maine has no law specifying a minimum age for 
juvenile justice jurisdiction, meaning that young 
children of any  age can be prosecuted in the 
juvenile justice court system.  LD 1684 would 
exclude children 11 years old and younger from 
prosecution in juvenile  court . Introducing a child at 
such a young age to the juvenile justice system 
causes  harm and derail s a young child’s path for 
successful development. Non -juvenile justice, 
community -based interventions are far more 
effective in holding a young child accountable for 
their actions.  
 
Maine ’s current law specifies age 11 as the 
minimum age for incarceration . LD 1684 would 
set 14 as the minimum age for incarceration.  
 
According to court data , in FY 2017  there were : 
• 1,660 juvenile petitions . 
• 1,013  children  charge d that calendar year . 
• 13 were  under the age of 1 2, and 28 were 12 
years old  at the time of their alleged offense . 
 
And i n FY 2018  there were:  
• 1,583 juvenile petitions . 
• 913 children  charged  that  cale ndar  year . 
• 3 were age 10 or under , 10 were  age 11, and 
another 27  (3%) were age 12.  
 
Young children under  the age of  12 represented 
only 1.3% and 1.4% of the total number of children 
charged in 2017 and 2018 . If 12-year -olds are 
included, the total  for children 12 and under  is 4% 
and 4.4% of all children charged. It is important to 
protect this  young,  extremely vulnerable group.    
 
BACKGROUND  
 
Numerous scientific studies, court decisions , and 
our own life experience have demonstrated that 
children are less culpable than adults for the same 
acts and are less able to meaningfully navigate justice system processes, including working with 
their own attorneys.  
 
Trying very young children  in criminal court  is al so 
constitutionally problematic, as these children  are 
very unlikely competent to stand trial. It is 
extraordinarily difficult for a young child to 
understand the legal and trial process es, risk 
assessment, or what’s at stake, and they have a 
limited capac ity to reason and therefore exercise 
their legal rights in a ny meaningful way.  
 
   
 
Moreover, juvenile system involvement can have 
lasting and negative psychological and health 
impacts on children. Ultimately, children’s 
misbehavior is  better addressed through What are kids capable of understanding 
at each age?  
Typical Development of Children 7 -11 
Age  Grade  Most popular book  
7 1st-2nd  
 
8 2nd-3rd  
 
9 3rd-4th  
 
10 4th-5th  
 
11 5th-6th  
 
 
Exhibit C
 
 
 alternatives to prosecution, including through child 
welfare, education, health care , or human services.  
 
The reasons to consider setting a minimum age 
of juvenile justice jurisdiction and juvenile 
incarceration include:   
 
• The inherent lesser culpability of young 
children under criminal law , given their 
expected developmental immaturity, as 
repeatedly recognized in recent United States 
Supreme Court decisions  
• The diminished capacity of young children to 
make intentional decisions  regarding 
participation in crime or understand that an act 
was morally wrong ; 
• The lesser ability of young children to 
understand court proceedings and 
meaningfully participate , emotionally or 
cognitively, in working with attorneys to wage 
their own defense ; 
• Evidence that formal justice processing and 
incarceration are  harmful for children’s health 
and development ; 
• Alternative services outside of the juvenile 
justice system – such as community and family -
based health, education and welfare services – 
are more beneficial  for young children and for 
public safety ; 
• The disproportionate impact juvenile court 
prosecution has on young children of color ;  
• The wasteful spending on prosecution and 
court proceedings  on cases that end up largely 
dismissed or not sustained . 
 
OTHER JURISDICTIONS  
 
The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the 
Child recommends a minimum age of criminal 
responsibility of at least 12 years old. As of 2019, 23 
states had established a minimum age threshold for 
1  Nat’l Juv , Defender C tr., Minimum Age for Delinquency 
Adjudication —Multi -Jurisdiction Survey , 
https://njdc.info/practice -policy -resources/state -profiles/multi -
jurisdiction -data/minimum -age-for-delinquency -adjudication -
multi -jurisdiction -survey/ (accessed May 15, 2019).  juvenile jurisdiction, with 15 states setting a 
minimum age of at least 10.1 
Several states have set or are considering a policy 
of excluding children from juvenile court 
proceedings:  
 
• California : There is a presumption that a child 
younger than  14 lacks understanding of 
wrongfulness and the state “needs clear proof” to 
rebut the presumption. Children 11 years old and 
younger are excluded from prosecution in 
juvenile court.  
• Ohio : Rules of evidence presume incompetence 
of a child younger than  10. Case law suggests that 
courts rarely find competence for a child younger 
than  14. 
• Florida : Despite have no lower  age of 
jurisdiction, age 12 is “universally accepted” as 
the lower age, and in the past 30 years, no child 
under age 12 has been processed in juvenile 
court.  
• New Jersey : There is a rebuttable presumption 
of incapacity for criminal intent for children 
betw een the ages of 7 and 14.  
• New York : The Governor’s Commission on 
Youth, Public Safety, and Justice recommends 
raising the lower age of juvenile jurisdiction to 
age 12, except for homicide offenses, which 
should be raised to 10.  
• Massachusetts : Sets 12 years  as the age of 
juvenile jurisdiction.  
• Other States: Bills pending  in Minnesota, North 
Carolina, North Dakota, Puerto Rico, and Texas.2 
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION  
 
Rep resentative  Victoria Morales , House District 33  
Victoria.Morales@legislature.maine.go v 
 
 
Prepared by Attorneys Mary L. Bonauto, GLAD , and 
Tina H. Nadea u, MACDL
2  Nat’l Conf . of State Legislatures, Juvenile Justice Bills 
Tracking Database , http://www.ncsl.org/research/civil -and-
criminal -justice/ncsls -juvenile -justice -bill-tracking -
database.aspx (accessed May 15, 2019).                                                   
Exhibit C
Testimony in support of LD 320 by Carlann Welch, to the Committee on Judiciary  
 
February 23, 2021 
 
Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Thom Harnett 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Rm. 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony in Support of an Act to Provide the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Improve 
Due Process for Juveniles 
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Harnett, and Members of the Committee on Judiciary,  
 
My name is Carlann Welch and I am a psychologist w ith a private practice in Portland. I am a 
resident of North Yarmouth. I have evaluated hundreds of youth involved in the juvenile justice system as this has been the predominant focus of my practice over the past 15+ years. This has 
included providing expert testimony in several of Maine’s District Courts. Through the years I 
have been hired by legal parties, the court, and sometimes directly by Long Creek.  
 I support the bill’s proposal that a juvenile who has not attained 12 years of age at the time of t he 
alleged crime would not be subject to jurisdiction of the court.  How young is that? Please, think 
of your children or your own personal history. Remember being in the 5
th and 6th grades? Have 
you recently spoken with a youngster who was in early phases of puberty, or even prepubescent? These are children. Their immaturity is a function of their brain development, they are not mini -
adults who simply need exposure to develop maturity. The scientific advances in brain imaging 
have taught us about the complicated process of brain development (that continues into one’s 
twenties). If we look solely at the cognitive immaturity of youth under age 12, we would find 
that most of them would not be found competent to proceed or stand trial. Youth under the age of 
12 often lack the skills to appreciate the charges, to understand the legal system, and/or to work cooperatively with their attorney. Already, we have many youths entering the system at age 12 
whose interface consists of competency evaluations, hearings and dismissals. It is also noteworthy that brain development includes pathways and networks involved in social and 
emotional development, not simply cognitive development. For example, it is about age 10 when 
children begin perceiving the human face as a whole construct vs. the individual’s parts that 
make up a face. The breadth of their immaturity renders youth under age 12 highly dependent on 
adults and thus interventions to support their functioning must involve their family and often 
their school programming. Children’s Behavioral Health Services (CBHS) is the appropriate department to serve and support these youth, NOT the correctional system.  
 The larger problem is that the juvenile correctional system has been the safety net for youth with 
social and emotional problems. Sometimes the juvenile system has been a strategy to access services for youth – both by parents who call the police as a last resor t and by prosecutors who 
see at-risk youth with limited resources. Sometimes youth are detained, not necessarily to protect the public but because the safety of the youngster is of great concern. I am confident that the 
Exhibit D
correctional system is not the best place for these younger youth (whether this be charging a 
youth under the age of 12 or committing a youth age 12 or 13 to a correctional facility) . It is my 
opinion that efforts to build other safety nets through DHHS is needed concurrent with imposing limits on entry into the correctional system.  
 I strongly support this bill’s emphasis on providing continued representation for youth who have 
been placed in the custody of the Department of Corrections . I have had the opportunity to 
evaluate committed youth at Long Creek when they have developed new charges. I have often 
found that the new charges, e.g., assaults, were preceded by signs of difficulties that were not 
adequately explored or addressed. A judicial review, as posed in this bill, would allow for 
outside input into the juvenile’s program and maximize the juvenile’s rehabilitation. Treatment 
programming can become insular in institutions like Long Creek and although this may not have negative impact on all youth, there are many youths who have suffered greatly because of this. I 
cannot share details of the various youth I have evaluated but I  can share that in those 
circumstances where my evaluation has been part of a review, there have been pivotal changes 
made in the course of treatment and transition to the community. A number of unintended 
consequences relating to detention/incarceration h ave been identified by the research including 
congregating delinquent youth together, increasing recidivism rates, worsening mental health 
problems, increased risk of self-harm, disrupting a youth’s engagement with school, and finally, 
negatively impacting short-term and long-term employment.   
 
I want the Committee to understand that given the gravity of juvenile commitment and the risks 
that are associated with placement in a secure facility like Long Creek, it is essential that such a 
placement not operate in a vacuum, nor that it be elongated more than necessary . Having a 
judicial review allows for broader input and supports dispositional planning across the system 
(attorneys, court, families) rather than placing the sole responsibility onto Lo ng Creek. It is my 
opinion that these reviews would facilitate the treatment programming for youth while they are 
incarcerated as well as facilitate their transition back into the community.  
 Thank you for taking the time to address these important issues . 
 Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
 
            Electronically signed, 2/23/21 
  
57 Exchange St, Ste 403  
Portland, ME 04101 
Exhibit D
