9% Eex ?3%@ 
Portland, ME 941% 
(28?) W4-5444 
www.ac!umaine.org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY 
LD 140 — Ought Not To Pass 
An Act To Amend the Laws Governing the Right to Counsel for Juveniles 
and Due Process for Juveniles 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
January 26, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am 
Policy Director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to oppose 
LD 140, legislation that would reverse hard-fought protections for youth caught in 
the juvenile legal system. 
The harms of juvenile incarceration have been well-documented. They include 
“damaged social networks, decreased educational opportunities, severe functional 
limitations, and worsened health and mental health outcomes. ”1 These effects 
compound over time. Studies have shown that, while “any length of incarceration 
[is] associated with higher odds of having worse adult health... cumulative duration 
of incarceration (one to twelve months) as a juvenile predicted worse health and 
mental health outcomes as an adult/'2 
The ACLU of Maine opposes all of the provisions of LD 140. However, today I Wish 
to focus on the portions of the law that we are most concerned with: lowering the 
age at which we sentence children to prison, reinstating a mandatory one-year 
minimum for kids sentenced to prison, and removing the guarantee of counsel for 
children at every stage of their juvenile criminal case. 
1 
Thalia Gonzalez, Youth Incarceration, Health, and Length of Stay, Fordham Urban L. 
Journal, Vol. 45, N0. 1 Article 2, at pp. 45-46, available at 
httpszifir. lawnet.fordham.edu/ c gi/ viewcontentc gi‘? article=2 7 1 9&context:ulj. 
2 Id. at p. 66.
This Committee Should Not Undo Recent Modest But Important Changes 
to Raise the Age of Incarceration in Maine 
Kids who are eleven years old read books like Goosebumps or Charlotte ’s web. Most 
have not yet begun puberty. They are pre-teens who are beginning to shift 
developmentally from following adult authority to pushing boundaries and trying to 
impress their friends. Eleven year old kids are impulsive, and their brain chemistry 
is such that they’re easily riled up, but much harder to calm down. In 2021, the 
legislature made a small but meaningful change in that it limited the amount of 
time a child aged 11 or younger can be detained pretrial to seven consecutive days, 
and made it so that children age 11 or younger are not sentenced to prison. This 
committee should not reverse this change in the law. 
The United States Supreme Court has recognized that “children are constitutionally 
different from adults... Because juveniles have diminished culpability and greater 
prospects for reform... ‘they are less deserving of the most severe punishments. ’”3 
That court has also noted that “developments in psychology and brain science 
continue to show fundamental differences between juvenile and adult minds—for 
example, in parts of the brain involved in behavior control. [It] reasoned that those 
findings —of transient rashness, proclivity for risk, and inability to assess 
consequences ——both lessened a child’s moral culpability and enhanced the prospect 
that, as the years go by and neurological development occurs, his deficiencies will be 
reformed. ” 
Layered onto this issue is how race, and our perceptions of race, affect children. The 
Children ’ s Center on Law and Policy found that 23 percent of kids who were 
detained at Long Creek in a year were Black or African A1nerican,5 despite that 
Black people make up only 1.9 percent of the state’s population. This is likely, in 
part, because of how society views Black and white children differently. Studies 
show that Black boys as young as 10 years old are perceived as “responsible for 
their actions at an age when white boys still benefit from the assumption that 
children are essentially innocent. ”6 
3 Miller v. Alabama, 567 U.S. 460, 471 (2012) (quoting Graham v. Florida, 560 U.S. 48 at 68 
(2010)). 
4 Id. at 472 (quotations omitted). 
5 Children ’s Center on Law and Policy, et a1., Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment, 
February 2020, at p. 33, available at https:!/irp- 
cdn.multiscreensite.comfde726780/filesfuploaded ﬂ\/Iaine%20Juvenile%20Justice%20Sx/stem 
"/<>20Assessment°/<320FlNAL%20REPORT%202-25-20.pdf. 
6 See American Psychological Association, Black Boys Viewed as Older, Less Innocent Than 
Whites, Study Shows, Mar. 6, 2014, available at 
https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2014/03/black-boys~older
2
The constitutional requirement that youth are necessarily different from adults 
empowers the legislature to make categorical rules establishing which young 
children are so young, so underdeveloped, that imprisonment is an inappropriate 
responses when they do harm. This committee should not undo this line. 
This Committee Should Not Reinstate a One Year Mandatory Minimum for 
Young People Sentenced to Prison 
Mandatory minimum sentences should be abolished because they generate 
unnecessarily harsh sentences, tie judges’ hands in considering individuals ’ 
circumstances, and empower prosecutors to force defendants to bargain away their 
constitutional rights. Mandatory minimum sentences are especially inappropriate 
for minors in light of the purposes of Maine’s juvenile code, 15 M.R.S.A. §3002, 
which focus on care and guidance of young people, not punishment. The one-year 
mandatory minimum sentence, when it was in effect, meant that young people often 
spent longer in prison than adults do for committing the same offense. This Was 
developmentally inappropriate and subjected young people to harsher punishment 
just because they are young. 
This committee should look for ways to erase the scourge of mandatory minimums 
from Maine’s laws, not double-down on an outdated and ineffective policy applied. 
This Committee Should Provide Counsel to Children Throughout Their 
Time in the Criminal Legal System 
Both the federal constitution and Article I Section 6-A of the Maine Constitution 
guarantee people accused of crimes the right to an attorney. “The Sixth Amendment 
stands as a constant admonition that if the constitutional safeguards it provides be 
lost, justice will not ‘still be done.”’7 This right extends to young people in the 
juvenile court system.8 If anything, the right to counsel is even more important for 
children than adults, because children generally cannot advocate for their own legal 
rights or make decisions about what is in their best interest Without guidance.9 
Right now, as the committee deals with how to address the burgeoning crisis in 
7 Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 343 (1963) (quoting Johnson 0. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 
462 (1938)). 
8 See In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, 13 (1967). 
9 See, e.g., J.D.B. v. N. Carolina, 564 U.S. 261, 272 (2011), In re Gault, 387 U.S. at 37; see 
also Megan F. Chaney, Keeping the Promise of Gault: Requiring Post-Adjudicatory Juvenile 
Defenders, 19 Geo. J. on Poverty L. & Pol’y 351, 387 (2012) (“Without an advocate 
specifically appointed to represent the child's continuing interest in due process, one cannot 
be entirely sure if 1) the child is being rehabilitated, 2) the time he is spending in juvenile 
custody is achieving rehabilitation, 3) that the specific programs designed to make hima 
lawabiding citizen are in fact Working, and 4) that the time he is spending under state 
control and custody is meaningful and rationally related to his transformation toa 
lawabiding citizen”)
3
adult indigent criminal legal defense, it should not exacerbate that crisis by 
supporting this bill. 
If LD 140 were to pass, young people would lose their right to counsel as soon as 
they were adjudicated of a juvenile crime. They would then be sent to Long Creek 
without an attorney to look out for their interests. Not only that, but the law gives 
the state the right to ask the court to extend the amount of time a young person is 
committed to Long Creek, without giving the young person a right to an attorney to 
defend them from the government ’s request.1° 
A court hearing in which a young person’s imprisonment could be extended, but at 
which they are not afforded counsel, is not a fair fight. It violates the long- 
established constitutional principle that where a child’s physical liberty is 
threatened by the government, they have the right to an attorney. “ It also offends 
concepts of fundamental fairness and implicates young peoples’ due process rights, 
which are still significant even in juvenile court,12 and in essence leaves a young 
person’s fate almost entirely to the Department of Corrections. “Juvenile Court 
history has again demonstrated that unbridled discretion, however benevolently 
motivated, is frequently a poor substitute for principle and procedure. ”13 
This committee has the power to reaffirm young peoples’ constitutional rights, and 
provide protections needed as they navigate a complicated juvenile legal system. 
The stakes for those who are ensnared in the system are exceedingly high. In order 
to secure better lives for them now and in the future, we urge you to vote ought not 
to pass on LD 140. 
1° 15 M.R.S.A. §33l'?. 
11 The rights to which young people are entitled in juvenile court include notice of the 
charges against them, right to counsel, right to confrontation and cross-examination, 
privilege against self-incrimination, right to a transcript of the proceedings, and right to 
appellate review. See, generally, In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1. 
12 See State v. Gleason, 404 A.2d 573, 584 (Me. 197 9) (“This provision of the Code [directing 
that in all respects other than the right to a jury juvenile proceedings shall be the same as 
adult criminal proceedings] represents their effort to abide by the due process requirements 
of the Maine Constitution and the Federal Constitution, even as they adhered to those 
traditional goals [of rehabilitation and protection] ”). 
13 In re Gault at 18.
4
