January 26, 2023 
Chairperson Senator Anne Carney 
Chairperson Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Rm. 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
LD 140: An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Due 
Process for Juveniles 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Committee on Judiciary, 
We, the undersigned, represent organizations who support the healthy and successful development of Maine 
children and youth and their successful transition into adulthood. Many of us signed a similar letter to this 
Committee in the 130th Legislature in support of LD 320, An Act To Clarify the Right to Counsel for 
Juveniles and Improve Due Process for Juveniles. That bill built on reform efforts in the previous 
legislature interrupted by the pandemic, and codiﬁed a number of recommendations in the 2020 Maine 
Juvenile Justice System Assessment ‘ to strengthen and improve Maine’s juvenile justice system. We were 
gratiﬁed that, after much deliberation and compromise, the bill was signed into law in 2021.2 LD 140 seeks 
to repeal these improvements and we urge vou to oppose it.' 
As many of us explained to the previous Legislature, there is signiﬁcant evidence and agreement that very 
young children do not belong in the justice system. Research shows that incarceration increases rather than 
heals pre-existing trauma and further traumatizes young people, in addition to separating them from their 
families, disrupting their education, and posing heightened risks of physical and sexual abuse, suicide, and 
mental health issues. It does not improve public safety. Incarceration has been shown to increase recidivism 
and is a signiﬁcant predictor of involvement in the adult criminal legal system and worse adult physical and 
mental health outcomes? 
We join major child and adolescent associations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, American 
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, American Council for School Social Work, American 
Psychological Association, Clinical Social Work Association, National Association of Social Workers and 
Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine, in support of establishing a minimum age of jurisdiction for 
juvenile court at age l2. While the compromise reached in LD 320 did not do that, it did limit the amount of 
time that children under age l2 can be detained in prison without being adjudicated of a crime. We continue 
to support keeping all children under age 12 out of the justice system and, therefore, oppose any attempt to 
further weaken this provision. 
Because we know that incarceration harms children, we also supported the effort in LD 320 that requires a 
judge to take into account whether a child is under the age of 14, in addition to other factors, before 
sentencing them to the Long Creek Youth Development Center or another secure facility. Many of the 
children who have been at Long Creek have unmet behavioral health needs and many have experienced 
neglect, instability, trauma, and child welfare system involvement, all of which calls for building out 
Maine’s children ’s behavioral health system and community-based supports and activities for young people. 
Community-based alternatives to incarceration, such as restorative processes, home conﬁnement, 
alternative education, family preservation, mentoring, victim-offender meditation, community services, 
respite care, and day and evening reporting centers with educational, recreational and counseling 
opportunities, are less harmful to a young person’s well-being and have better outcomes for the youth and 
for public safety. 
1 
Center for Children ’s Law and Policy et al. Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment. pp. I32-I36. (February 2020). 
2 L.D. 320 (l30th Legis. 2021). 
3 
See, Mendel, R., Why Youth Incarceration Fails: An Updated Review of the Evidence. The Sentencing Project. Washington, DC 
(December 2022) and Barnert ES, Dudovitz R, Nelson BB, Coker TR, Biely C, Li N, Chung PJ. How Does Incarcerating Young 
People Affect Their Adult Health Outcomes? Pediatrics. (February 2017). 
Page 1 of3
The harms and risks of incarceration are also why we supported elimination of the one-year mandatory 
minimum commitment provision contained in LD 320. As noted in the System Assessment, “well- 
established research from the ﬁeld shows that length of stay has a negligible impact on re-arrest rates after3 
to 6 months.”" A length of stay in a secure setting beyond 3-6 months is punitive, not rehabilitative for the 
child, and is counterproductive to public safety. In line with research and best practice, the System 
Assessment recommended the elimination of this outdated mandatory minimum. LD 140 would erase this 
hard-Won move in the right direction and serve only to harm and punish young people. 
Finally, we oppose the attempt to roll back the due process provisions that LD 320 put into law. The system 
works better, and children are more supported, when they have greater access to legal counsel who can 
advocate for them at each step of the legal process. We cannot expect children and young people to engage 
the legal system without an attorney. The right to counsel and judicial review provisions included in LD 
320 provide opportunities for information sharing among the young person, DOC, and judiciary, as well as 
collaborations, innovative problem-solving, and oversight of children who have been committed to secure 
conﬁnement. Concerns about implementation of this law change, if any, can be addressed with all the 
stakeholders involved to make certain the protections work as intended, rather than repealing them in one 
broad stroke and leaving children unprotected. 
We believe that children and youth should be diverted away from legal system involvement whenever 
possible. When children do come in contact with law enforcement, they should be held accountable in 
ways that are developmentally appropriate, address their underlying needs, and are consistent with the 
rehabilitative purposes of the Juvenile Code. Instead of repealing the important changes made by LD 320, 
we should focus our efforts on creating a more robust continuum of care for all of Maine’s children and 
youth so they can obtain the developmentally appropriate stability, support, and individualized services they 
need to become healthy, productive adults. 
We thank those of you who supported LD 320 in the 130th Legislature and we encourage this committee to 
reject LD 140 and the effort to repeal important improvements to Maine’s Juvenile Code. 
Sincerely, 
Mary Bonauto Meagan Sway 
Senior Director of Civil Rights Policy Director 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders ACLU of Maine 
Gia Drew Stephanie Eglinton 
Executive Director Executive Director 
Equality Maine Maine Children ’s Alliance 
Quinn Gormley Malory Shaughnessy 
Executive Director Executive Director 
Maine Transgender Network Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services 
Robyn Merrill Jamie Pratt, PsyD 
Executive Director President 
Maine Equal Justice Maine Psychological Association 
Atlee Reilly Dee Kerry 
Legal Director Executive Director 
Disability Rights Maine Maine Chapter, American Academy of 
Pediatrics 
4 
Center for Children ’s Law and Policy et al. Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment. p. 103. (February 2020). 
Page 2 of3
Richard Hooks Wayman Kathleen Forti-Gallant, DNP 
President and CEO Jennifer Mora, FNP 
Volunteers of America Co-Chairs — Legislative Committee 
Northern New England Maine Nurse Practitioner Association 
Joseph N. Jackson Chris Bicknell 
Executive Director Executive Director 
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition New Beginnings 
Tina Heather Nadeau Abdul Ali 
Executive Director Advocacy Director 
Maine Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers Maine Youth Justice 
Mufalo Chitam Sue Roche 
Executive Director Executive Director 
Maine Immigrants ’ Rights Coalition Immigrant Legal Advocacy Project 
Bruce King 
Co-Executive Director 
Maine Inside Out S. Osgood 
Executive Director 
Portland Outright 
National Organizations 
Susan Vivian Mangold 
CEO 
Juvenile Law Center 
Philadelphia, PA Katrina L. Goodjoint 
Youth Policy Counsel 
Defender Center) 
Washington, DC 
Alyson Clements 
Co-Executive Director 
National Juvenile Justice Network Vera Institute of Justice 
Washington, DC New York, NY Lindsay Rosenthal Gault Center (formerly National Juvenile 
Initiative Director, Ending Girls’ Incarceration 
Page 3 of3
