   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
 
         
MDOC’s Mission Statement:  
Making our communities safer by reducing harm through supportive intervention, empowering change, and restoring lives.  
 
Phone : (207) 287 -2711  (TTY) Maine Relay 711  Fax: (207) 287 -4370  
TESTIMONY OF  
 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
In Opposition  to 
 
LD 140 An Act to Amend the laws Governing the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Due 
Processing for Juveniles  
 
 
Before the  
Judiciary Committee  
January 26, 2022  
 
 
Senator Carney  and Representative Moonen and other distinguished members of the Committee on 
Judiciary  Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in opposition to LD 140.   
 
The re peals  made in this bill  run counter to work done last se ssion with stakeholders to ward  
improv ing outcomes for juveniles  involved with the system.  
 
While there is more work to be done to improve services for youth, the  MDOC believes there are  
other bills,  including our own department bill , that carry the spirit of positive reforms brought forth 
last session in the CJPS.   
 
The Maine Department  of Corrections serves youth involved with, or at risk for becoming involved 
with the Maine’s juvenile justice system .  The Department’s Division of Juvenil e Services (DJS) is 
focused on prevention and effective intervention designed to improve outcomes for youth. As such, 
the DJS:  
 
▪ Provides funding, more than $5 million, to community -based programs and services, 
including those that prevent youth from enter ing the juvenile system, and those that intervene 
with youth who are involved with the juvenile system.  
 
▪ Provides supervision to youth by diverting from formal court process, including youth who 
have court -ordered conditions of release or probation; and yo uth who are returning to the 
community after a stay at Long Creek Youth Development Center.  
 
▪ Collaborate with other state agencies and community -based  providers on individual juvenile  
cases and on broader systemic challenges through participation in numerous multi -
disciplinary groups;  
 
▪ Ensures individual  programming for youth ordered detained at or committed to Long Creek 
Youth Development Center.  
 
▪ Manages and supports transitional living and attendant care in the community for justice -
involved youth. This may include community -based residents operated by MDOC.  
 
Over the last several years, the MDOC has worked closely with legislators, advocates, com munity 
partners , including Regional Care Team s and others to ensure that the least restrictive options are 
avaible for juveniles who come in contact with the system.  
 
We will continue this important work towards a more equitable and just system for youth.  
 
We ask that the Judiciary Committee  opposes this bill so that spirit of positive reforms  may continue 
through other legislation.   
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Commissioner Randall A. Liberty  
