 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org  Testimony in opposition to LD 140 
Maine AAP    January 26, 2023 
 
 
Sen. Carney, Sen. Lyford, and members of the Judiciary Committee: 
 
I’m speaking as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy 
of Pediatrics, an organization dedicated to improving outcomes for ALL of 
Maine’s children, even those that present the most challenges.   
 
LD 140 appears to be aimed at rescinding the reforms made in the last session 
when LD 320 was approved by this committee, both houses of the legislature, and 
signed into law in June 2021.   Those reforms were the outcome of years of work 
by juvenile justice advocates who cited the evidence accumulated over the last 
decades showing that incarcerating a child is unlikely to have the desired outcome 
– improved behavior and the ability to function is society.   
 
90% of the kids involved with the legal system have experienced some degree of 
emotional trauma, some were likely exposed to intrauterine toxins (FASD – 
alcohol exposure, et al), some with histories of physical and/or sexual abuse.   This 
doesn’t absolve them of responsibility but does support the idea that putting them 
in jail is not going to put them on a path toward a productive life.   
 
Over the last two decades, advances in neuroscience have revealed that the brain 
undergoes numerous structural and functional changes throughout childhood – with 
maturation ongoing until the mid-20’s.  The areas that modulate impulse control 
and emotions, as well as those that allow for future planning and abstract thought 
are the last to come online.   Those of you who have raised kids know that young 
adolescents all are somewhat oppositional – but these traumatized kids go beyond 
the norms, displaying more frequent and persistent impulsive, irrational, and 
potentially dangerous behaviors.  With developmentally appropriate trauma-
informed behavioral health interventions, these maladaptive patterns can be turned 
around.   That was the goal of LD 340.  What’s changed? 
 
The improvements in Maine’s approach to juvenile offenders that would be 
eliminated by LD 140 are detailed in the summary section of the LD document.     
Experts agree that kids under 12 lack the capacity to understand the concept of 
criminal responsibility, a fact ignored in the proposed bill.  Right to counsel is 
fundamental to the American legal system – again ignored.     Will the state really 
benefit from restoring a minimum duration of confinement of 12 months, and 
elimination of periodic judicial review – it’s unlikely the children will.    
 
In summary, Maine Pediatricians believe, along with our national organization, that 
passage of LD 140 would be a step backward.   These kids should not be thrown 
away.   
 
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH 
Hallowell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
