1       
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                            
              
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION
ADA TANYA PIERSON, JUVENILE PROSECUTOR
                                                                                                              
LD 140
“An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Right to Counsel for Juveniles and Due Process for 
Juveniles.” 
Public Hearing Date: January 25, 2023
Senator Anne Carney, Chair
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
My name is Tanya Pierson and I am an Assistant District Attorney for York County Maine. I have 
spent the vast majority of my 33 year career helping to create and administer a juvenile docket in 
York County.  I am one of approximately eight prosecutors statewide who primarily handle a 
juvenile caseload.  I am here before you today on behalf of the Maine Prosecutors’ Association, 
specifically the District Attorneys, to provide testimony on LD 140.
I believe it is fair to state that LD 140 is intended to essentially repeal most, if not all, the changes 
to the Maine Juvenile Code that were enacted under LD 320 by the 130th legislature.  
There are several portions of LD 140 that the MPA does not support, and portions that the MPA 
would support.  For this reason, the MPA is choosing to testify neither in support of, nor against  
LD 140.   
I would like to break down LD 140 into what I identify as five distinct proposed sections that would 
amend the current juvenile code.  
They are as follows:
1). Amend the definition of a “juvenile.”
2). Eliminate the automatic appointment of defense counsel for juveniles at a detention hearing or 
prior to their initial appearance.
3). Reduce to age 11 the minimum age of a commitment to the Long Creek Youth Development 
Center. 
4). Reduce a minimum sentence of a year for commitment to the Long Creek Youth Development 
Center.
5). Reinstate judicial reviews of any commitment to the Long Creek Youth Development Center 
back to a minimum of every 12 months.     STATE OF MAINE144 SwedStreet
Caribou, ME 04736-2353
207-498-2557
FAX 207-493-3493   _____
27 Riverside Drive
Presque Isle, ME  04769-2730
207-764-0504
FAX 207-764-2046  _____
25 School Street
Suite 210
Houlton, ME  04730KATHRYN SLATTERY
DISTRICT I
JACQUELINE SARTORIS
DISTRICT II
NEIL MCLEAN
DISTRICT III
MAEGHAN MALONEY
DISTRICT IV
R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY
DISTRICT V
NATASHA IRVING
DISTRICT VI
ROBERT GRANGER
DISTRICT VII
TODD R. COLLINS
DISTRICT VIII
21). Amend the definition of a “juvenile” (Title 15 Section 3003(14)).  LD 320 did change the 
definition of a “juvenile,” which in our opinion was unnecessary and actually had the effect of 
removing youth from the jurisdiction of the Department of Correction’s Juvenile Services.  Under 
the definitional change that occurred with LD 320, youth who are adjudicated of a juvenile offense 
after they have turned 18, cannot be placed on a juvenile probation or be committed to the Long 
Creek Youth Development Center, unless they have engaged in new criminal conduct as an adult.   
We strongly support the Court’s authority to sentence youth to juvenile probation, or a commitment 
to Long Creek, for a juvenile offense, even if they have turned 18.   The Department of Correction’s 
currently proposed bill, LD 39, attempts to address this issue.
2). Elimination of the automatic appointment of defense counsel.  Both juvenile and adult 
prosecutors unequivocally support the appointment of counsel, as soon as possible in the trajectory 
of a criminal case.  With juvenile matters, this is critically important and the sooner counsel is 
involved in the process, the better the predicted outcome.  Moreover, the Judiciary is currently 
administering a pilot project under which defense counsel is appointed prior to an initial appearance 
date, as well as when a juvenile is detained.  Only juveniles and their families who meet the 
financial requirements are eligible for court-appointed counsel. Therefore insuring the appointment 
counsel as early in the process as possible does not cost the State any additional monies.  It does 
however assure that a juvenile has adequate representation and support, and often results in a more 
efficient resolution of a case.   
3). Reduction of the minimum age of commitment to Long Creek to age 11.  There are no juvenile 
prosecutors in Maine who support this reduction in age.  Personally, in my career, I have never 
recommended commitment of an eleven year old juvenile to Long Creek and I cannot recall any 
youth under the age of thirteen ever being committed to Long Creek in York County. I am sure this 
committee will received plenty of information on “best practices” with regard to this issue and 
suggestions on which State agencies should be involved with these young offenders, in addition to 
the Department of Corrections.  I will add that the State often finds itself struggling to establish 
competency in the juvenile court for our youngest offenders.  Reducing the age of commitment is 
unnecessary and I would suggest undesirable.
4). Reinstate a minimum one-year commitment to Long Creek.  LD 320 added in language to the 
juvenile code that permits the Court to impose less than the previous minimum one-year 
commitment to Long Creek.  There are distinct differences between what we call a “shock 
sentence” (a sentence that can be no longer than 30 days under Maine’s Juvenile Code) and a 
commitment to Long Creek.  A commitment to Long Creek triggers numerous obligations for the 
Department of Corrections in evaluating and assessing a youth and creating an appropriate and 
unique program for any juvenile committed to Long Creek by the Court.  We believe the 
Department of Corrections is in the best position to address this question; however, the District 
Attorneys do support the return of the minimum one-year indeterminate commitment.
35). Removal of the 180-day commitment reviews by the Court.  LD 320 reduced the time period of 
judicial reviews of commitments to Long Creek from once every twelve months, to once every 180-
days.  To date this has resulted in a number of lengthy hearings, to “re-litigate” the sentence that 
was imposed by the Court six months earlier.  Juvenile prosecutors must spend a considerable 
amount of time preparing for these hearings and litigating these reviews in court. While we do 
support a juvenile’s ability to seek judicial review of a commitment to Long Creek, this reduction 
of the time to every 180 days is extreme and unwarranted.  Moreover, it undercuts the Department 
of Correction’s authority to administer an indeterminate commitment, precisely what we have 
entrusted the Department of Corrections to oversee under Maine’s Juvenile Code.   Once again, we 
believe the Department of Corrections is in the best position to address this issue; notwithstanding 
the District Attorneys do support the return of the yearly commitment reviews that were in place 
prior to the passage of LD 320.
Thank you for your attention and time.  
