                          
Re: L.D. 1090 An Act to Require Driver Education Programs to Include Education Regarding the 
Risks of Impaired Driving Due to the Use of Alcohol, Cannabis or Other Substances
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation. My name is Pat Moody  (resident of Windham) and I am the manager 
of public affairs for AAA Northern New England. On behalf of our organization, which serves more 
than 1 million members in the states of Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont, I am here to express a 
position of neither for nor against to LD 1090. 
AAA appreciates the intent of this legislation due to the following facts. 
According to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, about 1.5 million people 
were arrested in a given year for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs. That means 
that one out of every 121 licensed drivers were arrested for drunk driving.
Arrests represent a small portion of the times impaired drivers are on the road. 
One person is killed in an impaired driving crash every 45 minutes in the United States
Approximately 1/3 of all fatal motor vehicle crashes are related to impaired driving.
The reason AAA is taking a position for neither for nor against is because Maine’s driver education 
rules and curriculum already cover the topic of impaired driving.  
To further qualify myself on this topic, I have been a licensed driving instructor in Maine for the past 
20 years and work closely with AAA National on driver training curriculum development. I am also 
currently serving as an advisor on driver education technical review panel appointed by Secretary of 
State Bellows. 
The State of Maine has invested significantly in modernizing driver education over the past few 
years. One specific development relevant to this proposal is the distribution of AAA’s standardized 
driver education program. In 2021, AAA worked with the Maine Bureau of Highway Safety and the 
Maine Bureau of Motor Vehicles to grant fund and distribute the AAA How to Drive novice driver 
education curriculum to every driving instructor in Maine. This curriculum is the gold standard and 
endorsed by the (ADTSEA) American Driver and Traffic Safety Education Association as the only 
curriculum that meets the national driver education standards (funded development by NHTSA). 
The AAA How to Drive dedicated two of the nineteen chapters on impairment by alcohol and drugs. 
I have provided the committee with samples of presentation files from chapter 13 (Drug Impaired 
Driving). The curriculum’s Instructor Guide provides supporting videos and research-based content 
to help the instructor facilitate discussion on impaired driving. There are some driving schools in 
Maine that have yet to transition to AAA How to Drive and still use the dated Responsible Driving 
curriculum, which also cover drug and alcohol impaired driving in chapter 18 “Handling Social 
Pressures”. 
                          
Currently the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs is considering LD 730 
which is a requirement for traffic safety education in grades K-12. The AAA Foundation for Traffic 
Safety found that approximately 30% of teens forgo formal driver education and wait until they are 
18 years of age to be become licensed. The proposal before the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs would target all Maine teens with the valuable impaired driving 
safety education. 
AAA has launched a free program to educate on cannabis impaired driving. Our ShiftingGears 
program delivers potential life-saving information to teenagers and young adults about the dangers 
of driving high. (According to a study by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, younger drivers are 
more likely to say they think it is safe to drive after using marijuana.) This program has been 
implemented in high schools throughout New England and is available to Maine schools at no cost. 
We have offered ShiftingGears as a component to the high school requirement if LD 730 passes. 
In conclusion, impaired driving is an important topic that is already required to be taught in Maine 
driver education programs. This legislation might have greater impact if directed at high school 
health classes or other public education opportunities. 
 
Patrick Moody
Manager of Public Affairs
AAA Northern New England 
