(at‘
I 
.134» 
Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff, President and CEO 
Maine Health Care Association4 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
May 1, 2023 at 10:00 AM 
in Opposition to LD 1575, An Act to Promote Quality and Innovation in Nursing and 
. 
Residential Care Facilities 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the 
President & CEO of the Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 
nursing homes, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical 
Institutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
l am here today to provide testimony in opposition to LD 1575, An Act to Promote Quality and 
Innovation in Nursing and Residential Care Facilities. While currently opposed, we have met 
with the Department to discuss our concerns and were encouraged by our conversation. We 
are committed to working collaboratively with the Department to address the top concerns 
with the bill and provide amended language before your work session. 
Our first reservation is that this bill would sunset the existing reimbursement system before 
the new rate system has been fully developed. Section 2 of the bill would repeal 22 MRSA 
§1708, sub-§3, 11F on June 30, 2024, which is a fundamental component of the nursing facility 
reimbursement current reimbursement rate system, including a guaranteed rebasing of rates 
with regular frequency (every two years). Section 3 of LD 1575 would give DHHS the Mto
replace the lost system starting January 1, 2025. Section 3 also does not include any required 
actions since the language is built on "may" statements. 
So essentially, LD 1575 would guarantee to stop the current reimbursement system with the 
hope that a new system will be ready when it needs to be. What ifthe new rate model isn't 
ready by January 1, 2025? lt is deeply concerning to us that the proposal before us is asking to 
repeal the current system and to support the implementation of a new rate system that has not 
yet been developed. It's hard to take a leap of faith not knowing what a new rate system might 
look like or how nimble and responsive it might be to cost drivers. Under the current 
framework, regular rebasing and cost of living increases have not kept pace with the escalating 
costs long term care providers are facing,\ but to reduce or eliminate either one without 
knowing what would concretely replace them would be impossible to support. Moreover, there 
is a 6 month window between the sunset of the old system and when new rates would take 
effect. That is concerning. 
We fully appreciate that the department needs to unwind the old system and also have the 
time to develop and implement the new system. Reform isn't easy. That is why sunsetting the 
current system by a specific date set in statute before a new plan is fully vetted is premature 
and could have a disastrous impact on a sector of the health care continuum that is already 
struggling. Long term care providers have risen to the challenges before them time and time 
again throughout the pandemic, during a time when fear of the unknown was pervasive, state 
and federal guidelines and regulations were ever-changing, and there were continuous 
requests to do more without corresponding resources. These past few years have been the 
most challenging years in the history of the profession and our caregivers should be 
commended for their efforts. 
Second, Section 4 of this bill refers to specific areas of policy and quality measures that have yet 
to be discussed through the stakeholder process. We previously believed that the stakeholder 
process would establish what Maine's long term quality measures should become. However,
2
this bill indicates that there is already a predetermined list of priorities, regardless of what our 
collaborative meetings conclude. Having the end goal already written does not honor the time 
investment that stakeholders are putting forward to engage in a meaningful rate reform 
process. Additionally, best practices change over time, and what is a quality indicator today 
may not be tomorrow. Why codify this into statute? We are not at all opposed to quality 
improvement initiatives and welcome engagement with the Department on these topics, but 
we don't think it needs to be in law right now. 
Third, passing this bill would mean this committee relinquishes its authority and legislative 
oversight abilities to review a new rate system prior to implementation. The legislature would 
have no vehicle for further discussion ifthere are fundamental disagreements or concerns 
about how rate reform is implemented. 
To be clear, we are in support of rate reform and our members are actively engaging in the 
various committees and councils related to rate reform, the long term services and supports 
needs assessment, and the innovation and quality advisory committee. l think we can all agree 
that given the increasing number of long term care facility closures the current system isn't 
working. There have been 15 facility closures in the last three years - and a new closure 
announcement just last week. However, the rate reform stakeholder process has just begun, 
and the pathway forward is unclear. We've had two meetings thus far and the third meeting 
has just been cancelled. Voting on this bill now causes too much otherwise avoidable 
uncertainty.c 
The long term care industry is in a fragile state. On numerous occasions, l have testified before 
this committee on the severe workforce crisis facing the sector. ln addition to workforce 
challenges, current reimbursement rates do not cover all allowable costs of providing long term 
care and there is a $40 per day difference between the allowable costs per resident day and the 
average MaineCare reimbursement rate for nursing homes. And while we are very grateful for
3
supplemental funding, our sector still faces a $47 million annual shortfall (per BerryDunn's 
analysis of 2021 cost report data). 
We call upon the legislature to invest in long term care in order to protect access to these 
critical services for the people of Maine. I would be remiss ifl did not remind this committee 
that at present there are zero dollars appropriated to address rate reform for long term care. 
The continuing services budget does not include any funding for rate reform. Further, the $29 
million that was originally proposed in the Biennial Budget was roughly equal to rebasing 
nursing homes rates under the current system and is grossly inadequate to fund a new system 
especially one that makes meaningful and significant investments in innovation, quality, 
technology, and a well-supported, well-trained, and well-resourced workforce. Thank you for 
the opportunity to provide comments today, and l would be happy to answer any questions.
