61 Winthrop Street - Augusta l\/ll-E 04330 
i-800-499-0229 - Fax 207~6?i~O"509 
i\/iLTCOF ’@i\/‘iaineOrnbudsman org 
t \i lino l.<»iig¢i1ri ‘iii (‘ exit 
OMBUDSMAN Pm gimm 
TESTIMONY 
ln Support of 
LD 1575; An Act to Promote Quality and Innovation in Nursing and Residential 
Care Facilities 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
May 1, 2023 
Maine Long Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is John Hennessey. I am an Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. I am here 
today to present testimony in support of this legislation on behalf of the Maine Long 
Term Care Ombudsman Program. 
The Ombudsman Program is a nonprofit agency that provides statewide advocacy for 
older and disabled residents of nursing homes, residential care, assisted living and for 
recipients of home care services. Additionally, the program sen/es patients in hospitals 
who experience barriers in accessing the long-term services and supports they need 
when they are ready for discharge. 
We are very encouraged by this legislation that requires the Department of Health and 
Human Sen/ices to bring stakeholders together to plan innovation and quality initiatives 
in both nursing and residential care facilities to promote person- centered care, access, 
health, quality of life, autonomy and safety. The Department may also implement 
updated reimbursement rates to take effect January 1, 2025. 
An Advisory Committee has been established with a broad base of expertise to 
implement this effort to consider the needs of older and disabled residents served in 
these settings. We are very pleased to serve on the Committee.
Maine’s long-term care facilities have faced many challenges in recent years due to 
staffing shortages, the pandemic and the closure of both nursing facilities and residential 
care. lt is critical that we prioritize initiatives that are focused on facility innovation to 
assure the highest possible quality of care and quality of life for residents. There is work 
to be done in reducing the use of antipsychotic medications, staff recruitment and 
retention as well as person centered care. 
We look fon/vard to the work of the Committee. 
Thank you for your consideration.
