Janet T. Mills s_§;e,- Maine Department 0fHealth and Human Sen ices 
Gm ernor Q, C0n|missione\"s Office 
11 State House Station 
Jeanne M. Lambrew Ph.D. 109 , Capitol Sn cat 
’ Augusta, Mame 04333-0011 
C°""“'“'°“°" l 
Tel: (207) 287-3701; Fax: (201)281-3005 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
In Support of LD 1575, An Act to Promote Qualily and Innovation in Nursing 
and Residential Care Facilities 
Hearing Date: May l, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Paul Saucier, Director of the Office of Aging and Disability 
Services (OADS) in the Department of Health and Human Services. I am here today to help 
introduce and speak in favor LD 1575, An Act to Promote Quality and Innovation in Nursing and 
Residential Care Facilities. 
COVID-19 had a disproportionate impact on nursing facility residents, accounting for nearlya 
quarter of all deaths nationally. The physical layout of most nursing homes, with long open 
hallways, shared rooms and shared baths allowed infection to spread with ease once in a facility. 
In many cases, inadequate infection control practices exacerbated the intensity and duration of 
outbreaks. Although Maine fared better than most other states, we shared in this national tragedy 
with scores of outbreaks and deaths. 
The pandemic also had a significant impact on the viability of nursing and residential care 
facilities as businesses. Staffing challenges, already evident before COVID, became far worse as 
staff became infected or left their jobs. Facilities needed to rely more heavily on temporary 
staffing agencies to meet minimum staffing requirements, adding to their costs and impacting 
morale among the permanent staff. Occupancy dropped, and while it has been recovering 
recently, it has not returned to pre-pandemic levels. 
The pandemic made clear that our current payment system, which includes a cost settlement 
process at the end of a year, is outdated and does not adapt quickly enough for emergency 
situations. Fortunately, MaineCare was able to use emergency authority to make several 
supplemental payments through the pandemic. But the experience has underscored the 
importance of designing a new payment system that looks forward rather than backward, that 
rewards nursing facilities that provide high quality services, and that does not divert critical 
resources from focusing on the provision of quality care to focusing on administratively 
burdensome reporting. Facility operators in Maine have described the current payment 
methodology as “broken” and called for a new approach. The Department agrees and is engaged 
with operators and other stakeholders to develop one within the framework of rate system reform 
developed by the Department, stakeholders, and the Legislature last year. 
LD 1575 authorizes the Department to move away from the current reimbursement system, 
based on retrospective rates and an administratively burdensome cost settlement process. Instead,
the Department wants to develop a forward-looking prospective payment system that aligns 
nursing home payments with MaineCare ’s rate setting system adopted in PL 2021, c. 639 to 
reward providers for high quality, reduce administrative burden, and improve the fairness of the 
reimbursement system. This work has already begun. A rate study is underway and a rate setting 
stakeholder group has been meeting to advise the Department on the work. 
In addition to modernizing payment methods, this bill authorizes the Department to launch 
innovation and quality initiatives in nursing and residential care facilities. On April 26, the 
Department launched the Nursing Facility and Residential Care Innovation and Quality Advisory 
Council, as envisioned in the bill. The Council will help the Department prioritize among many 
possible initiatives to improve access to high-quality nursing and residential care facilities. 
Initiatives may include but are not limited to: 
Q Enhanced person-centered care that recognizes resident preferences; 
0 Safer homes with better infection control practices, reduced medication errors and 
reduced falls; 
Q Small-house models that are more home-like, have better staff retention and prevent the 
spread of disease; 
0 Universal support positions that empower staff to provide more holistic support; and 
0 Incentives in the form of technical assistance, waivers of certain requirements and grants. 
Maine’s nursing and residential care facilities have been battered by the pandemic. Providers 
have been working incredibly hard to ensure care for their residents, and they are our partners in 
this work. Together, we will build a better system for Mainers needing residential long-term 
care. 
As we work to rebuild and strengthen the sector, simply reverting to pre-pandemic approaches is 
not an option. Public perceptions of nursing and residential care facilities were damaged by the 
highly visible challenges experienced in the sector, necessitating a new approach that emphasizes 
resident preferences, quality of care and safety. This bill seeks to set Maine on that path. 
Thank you for your time. l and my colleagues at MaineCare, Licensing, and across the 
Department are happy to engage further with this Committee and answer questions now or for- 
the work session.
