 
 
 
Written testitony of Wanda Pelkey, CPA 
CFO First Atlantic HealthCare and Board Chair of Maine Healt h Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standine Committee on Health & Human S ervices 
 
In opposition to LD 1575, An Act to Promote Quality and Innovation i n Nursing and 
Residential Care Facilities  
  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and di stineuished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services .   My name is Wanda Pelkey, and I serve as the board 
chair of the MHCA and CFO of First Atlantic HealthCa re.  My company represents 23 nursing 
facility and residential care homes throughout Maine:  Saco, Portland, Freeport, Falmouth, 
Skowhegan, Lewiston, Dexter, Dover-Foxcroft, Bangor, E llsworth, Machias, Lincoln, 
Millinocket, Calais, Houlton, Waterville and Madawaska. 
 
I fully support promoting quality and innovation for nursi ng facilities and residential care 
facilities and I believe it’s good policy to build rate  setting provisions that rewards and promotes 
those advancements.  Further I’m pleased the DHHS is le ading work to develop a new system 
that promotes efficiency, administrative ease and sust ainability.  However as this bill is drafted 
there are elements I feel strongly don’t align with t he essential goals of preserving access to 
services, high quality care and adequate funding.  For that r eason, I don’t support the bill as 
written.   
 
Foremost, I believe this bill would strip away a stat ute that requires nursing facility rate rebasing 
every two years and every year COLA adjustments.  This  is a provision that several years ago 
was voted in by the legislature so reimbursements could better keep pace with the actual costs of 
providing good quality care.  Back then the NF rate-setti ng system of COLA increases without 
regular cost-based resets led to a rash of closures sev eral years ago.  While our current system 
 
 
2 
 isn’t perfect and closures continue to this day, I know it ’s prevented many closures too thereby 
preserving access to NF services.  Undeniably, it’s an imp ortant protection. 
 
DHHS officials claim this provision needs to be removed  to enable rate reform scheduled for 
2025.  I’m afraid this will destabilize the current rate se tting system without the certainty that 
new rates proposed by DHHS will be adequate or implement ed on time.  For certain it will 
eliminate a much-needed rebasing scheduled for July 1, 2024.  To me it would be like someone 
quitting a stable job without another in place and hopin g the mortgage can still be paid.  Where is 
the wisdom in that approach?  Wouldn’t it be better to  let rate reform work (now underway) 
finish and then determine whether a law change is necess ary?  A bill could be introduced next 
spring when more is known.  Although it may delay the Jan uary 2025 implementation, it seems 
wiser to allow the Rate Reform committee to do its ca reful work first, then create laws to enable 
the change.   Better to take it a bit slower and get it right.    
 
Many other provisions in Section 4 of the bill appears t o promote good quality care and 
innovation.  That’s good yet upon reading the referenced MRS title 22 Section 3173-J, it seems 
the DHHS already has the authority to design rates to  promote these goals.  Therefore, I don’t 
understand why this bill is necessary and perhaps the HHS Committee could explore this 
question during the work session.   
 
For the finish, I do support value-based pay and promotio n of innovation, but only in addition to, 
not instead of the essentials of funding full reasonabl e and necessary costs.  As presently written 
I feel the stripping away of the present NF rebasing la w without adequate new system designed 
and in place will cause dire consequences.  For that re ason, I don’t support the bill in its present 
form.   
   
