,. 
W~_ %‘n 
Maine Education Association 
gm Grace Leavitt President l Jesse Hargrove Vice President l Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cote NEA Director i Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support of 
LD 477 Resolve, Directing the Department of Education, Maine School Safety 
Center to Convene a Stakeholder Group to Develop the Best Practices for Lockdown Drills and 
Allowing Parents to Opt Out of Lockdown Drills for Their Children 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certiﬁed teacher. The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as Well as many retired 
educators. 
l am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 477 Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Education, Maine School Safety Center to Convene a Stakeholder Group to Develop Best Practices for 
Lockdown Drills and Allowing Parents to Opt Out of Lockdown Drills for Their Children. 
Before going on leave to serve as President of the MEA, I participated in the required lockdown drills 
that we began to have several years ago. The ﬁrst time we did this, the instructions were to shut and lock 
the classroom door (only to learn that some of the doors could only be locked from the outside, requiring 
the teacher to go into the hallway and possibly encountering danger), and to turn off lights and cover the 
door Window with a curtain (Which our doors didn’t have, so many of us taped a large sheet of 
construction paper over the window), close the shades on the exterior Windows and put a color coded 
paper in the exterior window (green for everyone was in the room and safe; red for an emergency or 
someone missing from the room), and of course keep all the students silent, off their phones, seated on 
the ﬂoor in a corner of the room where no one would be visible from any of the windows. If a student 
was missing from the room (they had just left the room prior to the drill, for example), even if they 
knocked at the door to be let in, we were told under no circumstances to let them in. Students were told 
to hide in a stall in a restroom or wherever they could hide if the drill caught them outside of their 
assigned classroom. Of course, we all knew it was a drill, and most took it pretty lightly or were annoyed 
at the interruption or inconvenience. But when a drill happened soon after there had indeed been a tragic 
school shooting in another state, the drill caused at least some degree of angst in us all, and a great deal 
of anxiety——even trauma—-in at last a few. 
Then came the change in instructions ——do not put a color-coded paper in the wind0w—it would bea 
sign that people were in the room. 
Then I remember hearing from an educator in another district about A.L.l.C.E. trainings that they were 
being trained in—Alert, Lockdown, Inform, Counter, Evacuate. The trainings had a cost, but they 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME D4330 I i349 Broadway, Bangor, ME OM01 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 06736 i 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207~888~2070 tax l wWw.maiueea.org
seemed to make sense. That is, they made sense until I started hearing how some—both students and 
staff—were feeling traumatized when undergoing such trainings. The negative effect was substantial for 
some. 
Other trainings are being done~—sorne with the same traumatic impact. In an article, “Mitigating 
Psychological Effects of Lockdowns ” , on the website for the National Association of School 
Psychologists, it states: “Armed assailant drills that are not conducted appropriately may cause physical 
and psychological harm to students, staff, and not to mention disrupting the overall learning 
environment? ‘ 
In the position I hold, I have received phone calls from parents who are concerned about the impact of 
such drills on their children. I spoke with one of our members who said that their school proceeded to 
hold a scheduled drill the day after the horriﬁc tragedy in Uvalde. He was shaken, to say the least. 
And, unfortunately, I have heard from some members that the training they have for these drills in their 
district does not include all staff, but often leaves out many of the support staff. 
The MEA and the National Education Association with Whom we are affiliated, along with our fellow 
state associations, are working to urge lawmakers to enact laws that help prevent these all too frequent 
acts of gun violence in our country. We will continue to do so. As a country we must do better to keep 
our children and our communities safe. It is outrageous that our schools even need to have lockdown 
drills. But until We do have better laws to address this issue, the very least-—the very least-—that we can 
do is be sure that we are protecting our children and the adults Who work with them by convening this 
stakeholder group to examine and arrive at the best possible practices that will be implemented in each 
school district. 
Our children ’s very lives depend on our doing our best to keep them safe. 
We urge you to vote unanimously ‘ought to pass’ on LD 477. 
‘https://www.nasponline.org/resources-and~publications/resources-and-podcasts/school-safety-and 
crisis/systems-level-prevention/mitigating-psychological-effects-of-lockdowns
