Testimony of Tara Williams 
before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee in support of 
L.D. 477 “Resolve, Directing the Department of Education, Maine School Safety Center to 
Convene a Stakeholder Group to Develop Best Practices for Lockdown Drills and Allowing 
Parents to Opt Out of Lockdown Drills for Their Children" 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Tara Williams and I am a resident of Cumberland anda 
mom of two children, one in elementary school and one in middle school. 
I support LD 477, because it is very important that we understand the research associated with 
school lockdowns and active shooter drills, as well as the impact on Maine's children and youth. 
I encourage you to support the convening of a stakeholder group to explore this issue further. 
We need to plan together and implement best practices for drills to minimize traumatic impact 
on students and staff. I believe strongly that all staff need to be trained in their SAU's emergency 
plan. That was important to me when I was a teacher. I also belief strongly that students do not 
need to be part of any active shooter aspects of emergency drills. I saw the detrimental impacts 
when I was a teacher and see them even more acutely as a mom. 
Students, educators, and staff have experienced distress and sometimes lasting trauma because 
of active shooter drills. This is why I support the second section of this proposal, to allow 
parents to opt out their children from these drills. My local school district adopted the ALICE 
program this past year. l asked to opt my children out and my request was granted. Then my 
middle schooler came home and told me she would feel left out. She didn't want to be singled 
out and asked me if it was okay if she participated. I went against my betterjudgement and 
opted her back in. 
She came home after that ﬁrst day of ALICE practice and had a lot to say, starting with, "You 
were right." and I don't hear that phrase often these days. My 7"‘ grader continued, "That 
scared me. It scared my friends. Everyone looked freaked out. They had wide eyes, and some 
were near tears. Mom, they taught us to throw a chair at an attacker, to throw anything, that 
the shooter won't expect violence from the children and it will disrupt their aim. They taught us 
to block our door and how to run down the hall and escape if the shooter is in a dlﬂerent 
hallway. What are we being trained for? To be soldiers? Why do we have to learn how to ﬁght 
an active shooter? ” 
I don't know how to answer that question... so, I turn to this committee and all Maine legislators 
to think about my child's question. Is that how we want to focus on gun safety and preventing 
gun violence in Maine, through children learning how to hide from and ﬁght people with guns? 
Please think about this... Do any potential, but unproven, beneﬁts of active shooter and 
lockdown drills outweigh the well-documented and damaging consequences to our children's 
wellbeing?
Study: Active Shooter Drills Could Further Increase Depression, Stress, Anxiety for Months 
httnszl/momsdemandaction.org/new-stuclv-active-shooter-drilIs-could-further-increase-denression-stress-anxiety-for-monthsl 
Georgia Tech and Everytown Researchers Analyzed Nearly 28 Million Social Media Posts Before and After 
Active Shooter Drills; Research Suggests that the Cost of Active-Shooter Drills May Outweigh their 
Beneﬁts 
w Active shooter drills in schools are associated with increases in depression, as evidenced bya 
statistically signiﬁcant increase in posts with words like therapy, cope, irritability, suicidal, and 
more; 
~ Active shooter drills in schools are associated with increases in stress and anxiety, as evidenced 
by a statistically signiﬁcant increase in posts with words like afraid, struggling, and nervous and 
more;* 
0 These trends were sustained at least 90 days following drills and spanned diverse school 
districts across the country and a wide variety of drill tactics. 
l can tell you personally, just as an educatog we were not okay [after drills]. We were in 
bathrooms crying, shaking, not sleeping for months. The consensus from my friends and peers is 
that we are not okay.” K-12 teacher 
Report: Unannounced Active Shooter Drills Have No Place in Our Schools 
httns:[/momsdemandaction.org/new-report-unannounced-active-shooter-drilIs-have~n0-place-in-our-schoolsl 
Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund, American Federation of Teachers, and National Education 
Association Release Recommendations on Active Shooter Drills and Proactive School Safety Solutions 
Companies like ALICE Training Institute Promote Extreme Drills That Are Not Supported by Research 
”My kindergartener was stuck in the bathroom, alone, during a drill and spent a year in therapy 
for extreme anxiety. in a new school even, she still has to use the bathroom in the nurses oﬂice 
because she has ptsd from that event.” K-12 Parent 
ob Student-involved Shooter Drills Cause Harm to Entire School Communities 
httns:[/evervtownresearch.org/report/how-to-stop-shootings-and-gun-violence-in-schoolsl 
In response to concerns about school shootings, many schools elect or are required to perform 
school shooter drills. These drills typically require students and school staff to go into lockdown 
and to practice speciﬁc emergency procedures, which often include staying quiet, locking the 
door, and turning off lights. 
Since the 1999 Columbine shooting, active shooter drills have proliferated in America's schools, 
with school-based shooting drills currently required in at least 40 states.;Q But state statutes 
on this type of drill are often vague and leave the content and identiﬁcation of who participates
up to school administrators. As a result, drills vary dramatically across schools, from some that 
involve advance parental notiﬁcation of trauma-sensitive, developmentally appropriate 
exercises, to others that do not notify parents in advance, deploy ”masked gunmen” actors, 
simulate gunﬁre, require students as young as three and four years old to be conﬁned in a space 
for long periods, and fail to inform children that they are in a drill until it is ovenL3 
Everytown, the AFT, and the NEA support trauma-informed training for school staff on how to 
respond to active shooter situations, with instruction in such areas as lockout and evacuation 
procedures and emergency medical training. However, almost no research affirms the value of 
school shooter drills involving students for either preventing school shootings or protecting the 
school community when shootings do occur. 103 And while the proof of their effectiveness is 
limited, evidence is mounting on their harm to entire school communities. 
ln order to examine these concerns using scientiﬁc methods, Everytown partnered with the 
Georgia Institute of Technology's Social Dynamics and Wellbeing Lab to study the immediate 
and long-term impacts of active shooter drills on the health and well-being of students, 
teachers, and parents. Study of activity in over 100 K-12 schools found that school shooter drills 
can lead to alarming and sustained increases in depression, stress, anxiety, and fear of death 
among students, parents, and educators ﬁ 
Further, school drills with students may be ineffective because the preparedness procedures are 
being shared with the very individuals most likely to perpetratea school shooting: former and 
current students. Therefore, while training for teachers and staff on how to respond to an active 
shooter threat is essential, our organizations do not recommend training for students asa 
QFEVG l'lt8tiVE ITIEGSUFG. 
Even relatively tame active shooter drills with plenty of warning can traumatize students, critics say, 
raising the question of whether schools should do them at all. ”Children are much more likely to be 
abused by a parent than shot at school, to be in a car accident, to be screamed at by a teacher. We don't 
practice that,” said Joy Levinson, a New York City-based clinical psychologist who has had elementary —age 
clients tell her they wet their pants in class because drills made them afraid to go down the hall to the 
bathroom. ”It causes school to feel unsafe, like a place we can't Iearn," she said. "That's what schools are 
j.- 
on /1 
httnszl/www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/active-shooter-d rills-are-scaring-kids-may-not-nrotect-them- 
n992941?fbclid=lwAR02iVR-Hv-E3hMrcTdvL9XL1ZSdggSrbx1mZOdeo4QV2kx1bsX3p_glrJul 
Best Practice Considerations for Armed Assailant Drills in Schools 
httpszl/www.nasponline.0rg/resources-and-publications/resources-and-podcasts/school-safety-and-crisisgystems-level~ 
prevention/best-practice-consideralions-for-armed-assailant-drills-in-schools 
The National Association of School Psychologists, the National Association of School Resource Ofﬁcers, 
and Safe and Sound Schools have partnered to provide updated guidance on Best Practice 
Considerations for Armed Assailant Drills in Schools. The author organizations represent key stakeholders 
in school safety and crisis planning, preparedness, and implementation. We are committed to supporting 
school communities ’ understanding and implementation of best practices related to this work.
DEVELOPMENTAL AND MENTAL HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS 
1. The threat perceptions of children are typically based on adult behavior, so effective drills include the 
presence of staff who inspire calm and conﬁdence in students. 
2. it is critical that participation in drills be appropriate to developmental level and physical abilities, and take 
into consideration prior traumatic experiences, special needs, and temperaments. 
3. School-employed mental health professionals should be involved in every stage of preparation.‘ 
0 Prior to the drill, staff should be trained to recognize common trauma reactions. 
0 During the drill, adults should monitor participants and remove anyone exhibiting signs of 
trauma. 
0 After completion of the drill, staff and students should have access to mental health support. 
4. Participation should never be mandatory,_parental consent should always be obtained, 
and alternative methods to teach skills should be provided. 
”[After drills, kids] think a villain is coming to school and wonder when it's happening, not if it's 
happening." K-12 parent 
How To Stop Shootings and Gun Violence in Schools: A Plan to Keep Students Safe 
https:[/evervtownresearch.org/report/how —to-stop-shootings-and-gun-violence-in-schools[ 
Key recommendations of this report are as follows: 
1. Enact and Enforce Secure Firearm Storage Laws 
2. Pass Extreme Risk Laws 
3. Raise the Age to Purchase Semi-automatic Firearms 
4. Require Background Checks on All Gun Sales 
5. Foster a Safe and Trusting ’ School Climate 
6. Build a Culture of Secure Gun Storage (Be SMART program, parent education) 
7. Create Evidence-Based Crisis Assessment/ Prevention Programs in Schools 
8. Implement Expert-Endorsed School Security Upgrades: Entry Control and Locks 
9. Initiate Trauma-Informed Emergency Planning (training for staff) 
10. Avoid Practices That Can Cause Harm and Traumatize Students 
1. ENACT AND ENFORCE SECURE FIREARM STORAGE LAWS 
The most common sources of guns used in school shootings and across all school gun violence 
incidents are the shooter's home or the homes of friends or relatives. This is unsurprising, as 
nearly 4.6 million American children live in homes with at least one gun that is loaded and 
unlocked.g3 _ Everytown, the AFT, and the NEA recommend that states enact and enforce secure 
fi rea rm storage laws. In addition, policymakers should promote public awareness programs that 
can encourage secure gun storage and induce behavior change.
2. PASS EXTREME RISK LAWS 
With most active shooter incidents in schools, there are warning signs prior to the shooting. 
If the shooter legally bought the gun used and had never been convicted of a crime, and their 
mental health history did not legally prohibit them from buying or having guns, then there may 
be no existing legal mechanism in the state to prevent the shooter's easy access to guns. 
To ﬁll this critical gap in our laws, Everytown, the AFT, and the NEA recommend that states 
enact Extreme Risk laws. These laws create a legal process by which law enforcement, family 
members, and, in some states, educators can petition a court to temporarily prevent a person 
from having access to ﬁrearms when there is evidence that they are at serious risk of harming 
themselves or others, giving them the time they need to get help. 
3. RAISE THE AGE TO PURCHASE SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARMS‘ 
Despite the evidence that most active shooters are school-age and have a connection to the 
school, few states have stepped in to close gaps that allow minors to legally purchase high- 
powered ﬁrearms. Everytown, the AFT, and the NEA believe states and the federal government 
should raise the minimum age to purchase or possess handguns and semi-automatic riﬂes and 
shotguns to 21 in order to prevent school-age shooters from easily obtaining ﬁrearms. 
Under federal law, in order to purchase a handgun from a licensed gun dealer, a person must be 
21.5; Yet to purchase that same handgun in an unlicensed sale (online or from a private 
individual), or to purchase a riﬂe or shotgun from a licensed dealer, a person only has to be 
18.5‘§ Only a few states have acted to close these gapsgg 
4. REQUIRE BACKGROUND CHECKS ON ALL GUN SALES 
Background checks are the key to enforcing US gun laws and are an effective tool for keeping 
guns out of the hands of people with dangerous histories. As part of a comprehensive plan to 
prevent gun violence in schools, Everytown, the AFT, and the NEA recommend that states and 
the federal government act to pass laws that require background checks on all gun sales so that 
potential shooters cannot easily purchase ﬁrearms. 
Current federal law requires that background checks be conducted whenever a person attempts 
to purchase a ﬁrearm from a licensed gun dealer, to ensure that the prospective buyer is not 
legally prohibited from possessing guns.4_6 For example, when a person becomes subject to an 
extreme risk protection order, that record is entered into the federal background check 
database, and a background check at the point of sale prevents that person from buyinga 
ﬁrearm at a gun store. However, current federal law does not require background checks on 
sales between unlicensed parties, including those at gun shows or online. As such, people with 
dangerous histories can easily circumvent the background check system simply by purchasing 
their ﬁrearm online or at a gun show. 
Maine Ranks 25"‘ in Gun Safety 
LEARN MORE 
https:[/everytownresearch.org/rankings/state/maine[
