7”/’ ‘Tie 
MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs, 
on Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 358, An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use During Business Hours at 
Certain Drive-tlz rough Restaurants 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services: 
My name is Alison Sucy and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for the Maine 
Tourism Association (MTA). The Maine Tourism Association, a non-profit, is the state’s'largest tourism organization 
with 1500 members and the only one supporting members in every type of tourism business such as restaurants, 
lodging, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, amusements, and historical and 
cultural attractions. We’ve been promoting Maine a11d our members for over 100 years. I present this testimony in 
opposition to LD 358. 
This new deﬁnition of “drive-through restaurant ” is unclear as there may be restaurants that do serve food inside but 
close that portion of the business at certain hours and operate only as a drive through. There could be confusion as to 
which type of establishment they are—the new “drive through restaurant ” or an “eating establishment ” under 22 MRS 
l 6 8 5( 1). 
Additional staff would be required if a restaurant were serving only as a drive through but was required to keep the 
building open to the public. Tourism, and restaurants in particular, are experiencing tremendous staffmg challenges 
and restaurants operate on the thinnest of proﬁt margins and have high failure rates. They don’t need another 
burdensome requirement. As a practical matter, under this proposal restaurants would have add one or more employees 
to monitor the indoor restaurant. The reasons a business may close its indoor food service may be due to less business 
during those hours but also more likely due to staffing shortages. As you have probably seen at any number of your 
local businesses over the past several years, restaurants that once were open seven days a week are now only open four 
to six days a week. To have to hire additional staff just for this reason may be nearly impossible for the many 
businesses already struggling with workforce shortages. If more workers can”: be added, then those trying to focus on 
the drive through While watching for people entering the building will not be able to provide the quality customer 
service Maine’s tourism businesses strive for and would be veiy burdensome. Finally, since this likely is going to take 
place during early moming hours or late at night, there is a safety risk to the staff who are not watching the front of the 
house and are focusing on the drive through. 
Presumably, this bill is intended to help travelers since local residents picking up food or drinks at a drive through can 
quickly return home and aren’t in need of a public restroom. For travelers, there are public restrooms available at 
businesses that are open seven days a week for extended hours such as national chain fast food restaurants, grocery 
stores, and big box stores. Other options include the State Visitor Information Centers——seven of which we operate on 
behalf of the state from Kittery to Calais—and other highway rest stops and travel plazas. MTA is in charge of the 
cleaning staff at four of these State Visitor Centers and since we took over those contracts six years ago, the number of 
complaints have decreased and the positive reviews have greatly increased. 
This proposal is unnecessary and burdensome to Maine’s restaurant and food service businesses, and is unsafe for their 
employees. I respectfully ask that you vote Ought Not To Pass. Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members include 
lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural and 
historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and armually 
produces the state’s ofﬁcial travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933).
ONLINE REVIEWS OF RESTROOMS AT MAINE STATE VISITOR INFORMATION CENTERS 
KITTERY, YARMOUTH, FRYEBURG, AND HAMPDEN 
CLEANING SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE MAINE TOURISM ASSOCIATION 
BetsyB 
The absolute best highway rest area ever. Spacious clean bathrooms, a giant information center, nice woody areas to 
walk your pets 
Sherri Barham 
Excellent visitors center! Pristine restrooms! Staff was very friendly. 
Mrs Bill 
I basically kiss the ground when l stop here. The restrooms are very clean. It's super friendly to tourists and meets all 
of my needs. There are plenty of trash cans to clean my car and recycle from the drive. 
Rhea Tulio 
l often stop to this visitor Information area to have a bladder break from a 4 hrs drive from NY. They have a very clean 
and well maintained restrooms and fully stocked guide pamphlets about Maine. 
JD West 
We visited this place on our road trip and as far a rest stops go this was immaculate. 
lone Couch 
My husband and l both thought that the restrooms were very clean at this location. 
John Mahoney 
Nice large parking lot, easy access to Route l or l-295. Lots of information of what to see and do in Maine. And best 
fortravelers, large clean bathrooms. 
Law Tem 
Anything you want to know about Maine is here. Restrooms are clean and modern. 
Tim Howell 
it's nice to know there's a clean place to stop along the highway, stretch, use the facilities (which are always clean), 
and be able to walk my dog. Thank you for always being open! l appreciate all your hard work of always being clean. 
TheBGravit 
Nice & clean restrooms. All the visitor centers have very helpful information and attendants. 
Wendi Bailey 
Excellent parking and clean building. Restrooms is clean and has handicap access. Free WiFi is available. Easy to get 
to walking trail. Nice employees. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members include 
lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural and 
historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kitteiy to Calais, and annually 
produces the state’s ofﬁcial travel planner, Maine Invites You (since I933).
