es 
$1 
2,.»- 
;. _ _v. 
5 1'; 31! 
James Libby, Ph.D. THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 22 1315+; Legjglafjurg Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator James D. Libby 
Sponsor of LD 358 (SP 165) 
"An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use During Business Hours at Certain Drive- 
through Restaurants" 
Public Hearing, Wednesday, March 22, 2023_ 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, 
My name is Jim Libby, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District # 22, comprised of the 
towns of Naples, Sebago, Baldwin, and Standish in Cumberland County; Hiram and Porter in Oxford 
County; and, Lirnington, Limerick, Cornish, Parsonsﬁeld, Newﬁeld, Acton, and Shapleigh, in the 
County of York. 
It is my honor to bring to your attention the contents of LD 358 (SP 165) 
"An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use During Business Hours at Certain Drive- 
through Restaurants" 
Committee members, I’d like to begin by discussing the purpose for bringing you a bill of this nature. 
Since COVID — 19 struck us all, many of my constituents and yours have had to make changes in their 
daily lives. They’ve been important changes, and this Committee more than any other knows how 
difﬁcult and complex these changes have been. 
But there is great news. We have all learned that our society can be nimble and ﬂexible if we need to 
be, and still get the job done. I especially appreciated the response of everyday people in going to their 
place of employment under a new deﬁnition of “essential ” worker. The person that stocked our 
grocery isles are just as important as any other worker during a pandemic. What a great way to have 
all of our eyes opened to the world around us. 
My eyes are still wide-open. What I am seeing now in our society are legacy, post-pandemic practices 
that clearly should end. 
One event that bothered me greatly occurred in the parking lot of a McDonald ’s restaurant. 
McDonalds is a great franchise, so please do not take my comments the wrong Way. 
What I witnessed was a closed interior of the McDonalds with drive-through only service. One after 
another, as I sat out in the parking lot eating my breakfast in the car, I saw people of all types — young, 
old, able, less-able, and so forth, trying to enter the restaurant. Some left the restaurant muttering, why 
can’t we at least use the restroom here?
Well, we are about to ﬁnd that out, since the Maine CDC opposes this bill. 
My bill does not direct a restaurant to open their counters. It does not ask much of anything. It just 
asks that We have a little common courtesy and human decency and allow people who have likely 
purchased and consumed the food at a restaurant the ability to use the facilities, change their baby’s 
diapers, and the like. 
Really, are we still going to accept practices like this, or are we going to move on from the pandemic? 
OK, my objective was to keep this short. You have important Work. But I will remain to respond to 
any questions. 
Thanks to the Chairs.
