Janet T_ Mms .. ‘ lvlaine Department 0fHealth and Human Services 
Guvemm. .' 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
’*’r£,;:;.: ’< 
;_ 
_%,E§i| ll State House Station 
Jeanne M. Lambrew Ph.D.» 
. 28 .6 Water street 
’ \i3**~' /‘ ,ﬂ-.’-' /-*§*' -31 Augusta, Mame 04333-0011 
c°“““i“i°“°' Ta; (207) 287-8016; Fax (207) zsv sass 
TTY: Dial 711 (1\/Iaine Relay) 
Testimony of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Opposition to LD 358, An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use 
During Business Hours at Certain Drive-through Restaurants 
Sponsored by: Senator James Libby 
Hearing Date: March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Lisa Silva and I am the Program Manager for the Division of 
Environmental and Community Health, Health Inspection Program. I am here today to provide testimony 
on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) and will be speaking 
against LD 358, An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use During Business Hours at 
Certain Drive-through Restaurants. 
This bill requires restaurants that have indoor dining facilities, but are open only for drive-through food 
service, to provide at least one toilet facility for the use of its customers. Additionally, LD 358 amends 22 
MRS §l685 by adding a deﬁnition for ‘drive-through restaurants ’ to further clarify that restaurants with 
indoor dining facilities, even when serving food only via drive-through service, must keep their restroom 
accessible to customers. 
The following comments are offered for your consideration. 
The Department of Health and Human Services, Maine CDC - Health Inspection Program (I-HP) licenses 
restaurants as deﬁned in 22 MRS §249l1 as Eating Establishments, meaning “Any place where food or 
drink is prepared and served or served to the public for consumption on the premises or prepared and served 
or served ready to eat oﬁ‘ the premises. ” For the purposes of HIP licensing and enforcement, this definition 
already includes ‘drive-through restaurants. ’ 
Currently, an eating establishment licensed by HIP ll11Cl6I' Title 22, chapter 562 which prepares and serves 
food to the public for consumption inside the premises must provide at least one toilet facility for customer 
use. Eating places where customers do not dine food inside (i.e. catering establishments, establishments 
dispensing food solely from vending machines, pushcarts and mobile eating places or any other such places 
1 
22 MRS§ 2491(7) states, "Eating establishment" means any place where food or drink is prepared and served or 
served to the public for consumption on the premises or prepared and served or served ready to eat to the public for 
consumption off the premises. "Eating establishment" includes places in the entertainment, hospitality, recreation, 
restaurant and tourism industries; catering establishments; correctional facilities; hospital cafeterias; mobile eating 
places; public and private schools; retail frozen dairy product establishments; and workplace eating establishments 
and places where food is prepared for vending machines dispensing food other than in original sealed packages. 
"Eating establishment" does not include: a place preparing and serving food that is licensed pursuant to state law by 
a state agency other than the department as long the licensing of the place includes regular food safety inspections; 
a place serving food only to residents, such as a boarding home, a retirement home or an independent living place; 
and a farm stand that offers only whole, uncut ﬂesh fruits and vegetables.
where customers do not consume food inside the building) are exempt from this requirement. (22 MRS 
§1685.) 
Additionally, licensed restaurants with indoor dining facilities that do not have a toilet facility available are 
required to post a sign to that effect Which may be seen upon entry to the eating establishment. (22 MRS 
§1686). It is reasonable to permit restaurants to limit entry into the inside premises of the restaurant (i.e. 
eating areas and restrooms), when deemed necessary. Upon inspection, I-HP will look for required signage. 
Due to stafﬁng shortages that started during the COVID pandemic, some businesses have elected to close 
their indoor dining areas and remain open to drive-through or curbside pickup only. Access to an eating 
establishment ’s inside eating facilities and restrooms has been an owner’s business decision. Circumstances 
affecting an eating estab]ishment ’s decision whether to restrict consumer access to restrooms include safety 
issues, illicit drug use in restrooms, and improper use and/ or vandalism of facilities. An eating establishment 
that has closed its indoor dining and restroom access due to stafﬁng shortages may be unable to maintain 
the cleanliness and safety of their dining facilities and restrooms. 
Furthermore, LD 358 would require that the Department consider whether a drive-through restaurant was 
in compliance with 22 MRS §l686 before renewing their restaurant license. This would create 
programmatic and ﬁscal impacts for HIP. HEP estimates that there are approximately 2,000 drive-through 
restaurants operating in Maine. This change would require enhancements to H[P’s database and online 
renewal system through InforMe, to confirm restaurants are complying upon renewal. The preliminary cost 
estimate for this work is $13,472.60. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I can 
address questions from Committee and I will be available to participate in the Work session.
