Testimony of Nate Cloutier
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
March 22, 2023
In Opposition to LD 358, “ An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use During 
Business Hours at Certain Drive-through Restaurants” 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine representing 
more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. HospitalityMaine opposes 
LD 358, “ An Act to Ensure That Restrooms Are Available for Use During Business Hours at Certain Drive-
through Restaurants .”
LD 358 would require restaurants that have facilities for customers to consume food inside the building 
where the food is being prepared, but that are open only for drive-through food service, to provide at least 
one toilet facility for the use of its customers. We thank the bill Sponsor, Senator Libby, for sharing the 
impetus of this bill with us. We understand that during the pandemic customers would order a meal at a 
drive-through restaurant and eat in our parking lots as a way to leave the home safely during pandemic 
era restrictions. Since restaurants were not open for inside dining, some chose to allow the use of their 
restrooms while practicing social distancing, as a courtesy to their customers.
By their nature, drive-through restaurants are not intended for remaining on premises—they serve as a 
quick grab and go option for people on the road. The State is still in a workforce crisis and businesses are 
often forced to adjust their hours of operation at the last minute due to unanticipated staffing shortages. 
When this happens, restaurants that offer drive-through service close their lobby and only operate the 
drive-through as means to keep the restaurant open, often during mornings or evenings when there is 
already minimal staff working. Requiring these establishments to keep their lobby open available to the 
public while staff is preoccupied with manning the drive-thru and other duties presents concerning safety 
issues for employees, and liability issues for employers. Leaving the lobby door unlocked for public use of 
the restroom could lead to any number of scenarios where someone with ill-intentions could enter the 
restaurant. 
Additionally, we do not see the need to add the “drive-through restaurant” definition in statute. See that 
“Restaurant” is already defined in Title 28-A and would capture drive-through restaurants. “Eating 
establishment” in Title 22 where this bill proposes statutory changes could be amended to include drive-
through style restaurants by removing language that limits consumption to inside the premises. 
This bill’s passage could create the potential scenarios we never want to hear about and leave our 
employees feeling unsafe. We urge you to please vote LD 358 ought not to pass. Thank you for your 
attention, and I would be happy to answer any questions. 

