_.__ ~ 
,- _ ._
S 
. 
3 Depar dtment of gth _e-Secretaiyi of State , 
til-3' 
Y 
Bureau of Motor V8/lAlCledS ‘r 
qyl ' ‘ ' 
Shenna Bellowsl 
Catherine Cums l l 
Secretmy ofstate 1 
Deputy Secretary qf State
‘ _ I V. 
' 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON‘ TRANSPORTATION ;'
r 
' 
Testimony of Shemia Bellows Secretary of State 
A Department of the Secretaryof Statet 
7 t 
April 6, 2023-
0 
.‘ 
.' 
. 
Testifying In Opposition To L.D. 1245' 
~ » -'
- 
. " ‘ 
“An Act to Require Registration of Motorized Bicycles orTri_cycles' or Motorized Scooters ”'
d 
Senator Chipman,_Representative Williams, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on‘. 
4.
W 
Tran_sportatio'n,my name is She _nna Bellows, and I amthe Secretary of State and chiefmotor vehicle _ -' 
, . 
ofﬁcer. I am speaking today -in opposition to LD 1245,‘ 
_“ 
. V W 1"A
' 
- iV
‘ 
-'
“ - "S 
tV 
This bill would allow a motorized bicycle or tricycle or motorized. scooter to be registered to operate Y 
onapublicway." ’ "'V 
A . . 
_-' 
It is important to note that the current ‘deﬁnition of a motorized bicycle or tricycle in motor vehicle 
statutesl ‘ means a bicycle or tricycle that may have pedals to permit human propulsion-and has-a motor 
attached to a wheel that is, rated at no more than 1.5’ brake horsepower and .has _a cylinder capacity;'
A 
capable of propelling thevehicle‘ 
unassisted at a speedof 25 miles per hour or less on Va levelroadi~ 
surface. »
~ 
. . 'V 
YV 
Electric bicycles are also different from bicycles that have motors attached to them after being 
manufactured, which are deﬁned in Title 21-A2 . Since October 1, 2019, manufactures of electric'
‘ 
bicycles-have had to afﬁx a permanent label to each electric bicycle, with the classiﬁcation number, _, 
top.assi'ste'd speed, and -motor wattage Also, a person cannot tamper or modify electric bicycles. The 
top speed of just using-the motorialone-is: _ 20 mph and the top speed with the motor and person pedaling I_ 
is28mph.' 
0 A 0
I 
dT o _‘ .' 
We have all seen pedal bicycles or tricycleswith motors attached that were not m' anufactured~with - I ~ ~ 
those motors, as motors can be puton and taken ‘off bicycles or tricycles at any time. "If registered, ‘ the' 
plate could‘ still be on the bike if the motor is not. Some bikes require the rider to pedal to startthe’
.
_ 
motor, others do not. The rider can also use the pedals if they choose to. This bill does not address the» 
1 29-A MRS 101(41). 
2 29-A MRS 2063(14). 
4 y ~ 
29 State H0use,Stati0n, Augusta, _ Maine 0433370029 .-
_ 
S 
http://www.maine.g0v/sos/bmv; tel. .207 ,-624-9000 .'
——<- ., ._ 
.. 
manufacturer afﬁxing if the motor must have been put on by the manufacturer or if anyone -can add the 
motor after purchase, and then register the bicycles or tricycle.I 
Additionally, this bill does not address if excise tax will be paid“ to the municipalities. It would be< 
extremely difﬁcult for municipalities to determine the excise tax amount if it is to be‘ 
paid as pa'
- 
A‘ 
prerequisite to registration. There would. not-be any documentation for the municipalities. to determine 
what the MSRP of the motorized bicycle or tricycle and then calculate the excise tax. When at' 
municipalityidoes not have documentation todetennine MSRP, they must reach out to contact Maine- 
Revenue Services. for assistance" ; F - -' 
. < < 
. - fI~ - -A -
T 
Trying to locate and ﬁnd serial numbers on motorized bicycles or tricycles, ormotorized scooters is 
very different than ﬁnding a Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN) on a vehicle. VlNs tell us the 
vehicle’s information; serial numbers do not. This issue alone would also create the need to make_ 
signiﬁcant computer updates to BMV systems and municipal systems. It will be extremely difﬁcult to 
assist municipalities and BMV branch ofﬁces to create these types of registrations. Likewise, there also 
will be difficulties with registrants providing the year, make, model and serial number of motorized _ 
bicycle or tricycle, or motorizedscooter to mtmicipalities. W - -* 
- I -‘ 
It is important to note that a person must possess a valid driver’s license to operate a motorized bicycle 
or tricycle or motorized scooter. This bill does not require motorized bicycle or tricycle, or motorized" 
scooter to be inspected. Also, insurance is not addressed in this bill. If there are, no insurance' 
-'
. 
requirements, would the vehicle owner’s insurance be required to pay for an accident involving a. 
motorized bicycle or tricycle or motorized scooter? All of this would make it difﬁcult forlaw . 
enforcement to enforce safety.. 
. , , . 1 
_ .‘ 
_ .t 
I 
:» 
.- 
We are also opposing this bill because it require_s_the_Secreta1y of State to create a new class of plate, 
with a unique 3-number and 3-letter numbering sequence. As this committee is aware, there is- 
currently amoratorium on creating new plates."i 
V "" 
3"" 
- 
i j xV 
nA
A 
Finally, as you know, the BMV computer systems are outdated and our priority is to modernize them.- 
Any system changes that are required to implement a new law will cause delays in this much needed 
modernization project. It should also be noted the vendor computer systems that the municipalities use 
to register vehicles, would also need to be modiﬁed, resulting in municipalities paying fee_s_to 
implement the changes; There will be a signiﬁcant ﬁscal note to implement this bill.Y
p 
The bill also requires the bureau of adopt rules, which takes several months to accomplish. Therefore, 
if you vote ought to pass on -this bill,we respectfully requestan implementation date of April 2024 to' 
have time to create a plate, develop the computer systems and adopt‘ rules. - t 
f _'
I 
; ' ' 
This concludes my testimony. I am happy to answer any questions. .' 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029I 
h_tzjp."//www.maine.g0v/sos/bmv: tel. 207-624-9000
