Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished 
members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial services 
committee. It is an honor to be back before this committee of whichI 
served in the 127*“ , 12l3;“_and 129*“ Legislative sessions. I'm here today 
to speak in favor of LD I want to thank Representative Morris for 
sponsoring this legislation at my request. . 
For those who don't know me my name is Bob Foley and I recently 
retired from a 45-year career in the insurance industry. During my 
career I spent time in claims, sales and agency management. I also hold 
the designation as a Certified Insurance Councilor, or CIC for the short. 
This bill provides a simple solution to a growing problem in the 
insurance industry. When a bank or mortgage company sells a property 
owner's mortgage to another entity, they notify the property owner, 
the registry of deeds and the town tax assessor if the taxes are 
escrowed. However, they do not contact the insurance company 
insuring that property. In many cases the property owner will contact 
his or her agent or company to request the change. But more 
frequently, especially when the insurance premiums are escrowed, the 
property owner assumes the mortgage company or bank has notified 
the insurance carrier. 
This causes several problems. First when the policy renews the renewal 
bill, reminder notices and the cancellation notice are sent to the prior 
lender who no longer has the escrowed funds. While the property 
owner has received the same notices, they assume the lending 
institution is taking care of it. Once the policy cancels, coverage ends 
until someone, either the property owner or the new lender requests 
proof of insurance and then coverage must be rewritten, sometimes 
months down the road and sometimes after a claim has occurred.
I actually had this situation happen several years ago to my brother 
who thought his mortgage company had contacted his insurance 
company of the change. 45 days after the policy cancelled, he had a bad 
fire loss. Fortunately, l was able to get the coverage reinstated but not 
without a great many conversations with his mortgage company and 
the insurance carrier. 
The second issue concerns a claim during the policy period. If the 
insurance carrier makes a payment on a large property loss, they must 
include the mortgagee on the check for the damages. Having the wrong 
mortgagee on the policy makes things more complicated and delays in 
settling the claim. Insurance companies are obligated to protect the 
interests of the lender, so it is important to know when the mortgage 
changes. 
The simple solution is to require the initial mortgage company or bank 
to ”cc" the insurance carrier on the same notice sent to the property 
owner informing them of the change to a new mortgagee with the new 
mortgagee information provided. This should not be an added burden 
or much cost to the lender to simply mail the notice to the insurance 
company on record. 
I thank you for your time and consideration and I'm happy to answer 
any questions.
