May 11,  2023   
  
 
  MaineJobsCouncil.com                    
 Testimony in Opposition to LD 1896, An Act to Index Workers’ 
Compensation Benefits to the Rate of Inflation  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Honorable Members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee,  
My name is Alexander Price. I am here today on behalf of the Maine Jobs Council to speak in 
opposition to LD 1 896, An Act to Index Workers’ Compensation Benefits to the Rate of 
Inflation . The Maine Jobs Council is a statewide, nonpartisan, member -driven advocacy 
organization that advances public policies to support the creation and preservation of 
foundational jobs in Maine.  
The Maine Workers’ Compensation Act  is the exclusive remedy available to employees who 
sustain work -related injuries for claims against employers who have secured workers’ 
compensation coverage. The employer is immune from civil liability for injury to the employee 
if the employer has met its obligation to provide workers’ compensation benefits. This 
immunity extends to all employees, supervisors, officers, and directors of the employer. The 
current system has worked  well since the reforms enacted by the Maine Legislature went into 
effect th ree decades ago.  
We oppose LD 1 896 because, when combined with the other workers’ compensation bills that 
have been introduced this session, it would create more uncertainty and significantly increase 
costs on Maine businesses. This, in turn, would make investment less attractive and make 
businesses less competitive at a time when Maine’s  business  and regulatory  environments 
already rank among the lowest in the nation. Workers’ compensation has been one of the most 
volatile economic issues in Maine’s histor y. In fact, the cost -of-living adjustment was one of 
the drivers that caused Maine’s workers’ compensation system to collapse in the late 80’s and 
early 90’s. While the current system isn’t perfect, employers and employees can be assured 
that the remedy is  exclusive, and the benefits are predictable. LD 1896 w ould add tens of 
millions of dollars, if not more, to present and future costs that Maine businesses would have 
to bear. Maine’s small businesses simply would not be able to afford these extra costs. 
Although undoubtedly well -intended, this bill could very easily cause serious damage and 
create tremendous economic difficulties for both insurers and businesses.  
While the Maine Jobs Council certainly supports making workers a top priority, we believe the 
best way to do that is with a robust economy full of quality foundational jobs that provide 
choices, career growth, and increasing wages. Individual pieces of legislation such as LD 1 896 
 Maine Jobs Council | Testimony in Opposition to LD 1896   May 23 11 
 are not the solution to solving our state’s economic prob lems. Our overall business environment 
is 46th, we have the 3rd highest tax burden, the 9th highest healthcare cost, the 11th highest 
cost of living, and the 13th highest energy cost. Our overall economic ranking is last in New 
England. We encourage this c ommittee to take a comprehensive look at how workforce 
challenges, taxes, regulations, infrastructure, and other issues act as a barrier to job creation 
in our state. Maine needs to develop and follow a long -term strategic plan to create a tax base 
that wo rks for all Mainers.  
The MJC thanks the committee for its time and consideration of this issue, and we would 
welcome any opportunity to discuss it with you.  
Thank you,  
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood  
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council 
 
