-
- 
. - 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1896- 
. . -T 
An Act to Index Workers’ Compensation Benefits tothe Rate of Inflation 
-» 
T T 
May 11, 2023
' 
_ - 
Presented by Elizabeth Brogan, 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee, my name is Elizabeth Brogan and I am the Executive 
Director of the Workers’ Compensation Coordinating Council and Maine Council 
of Self-Insurers. My testimony is. in opposition to LD _ 1896. _. 
_ V_ 
The elimination of cost-of-living adjustments wasone of nine "key components" 
for reform identified by the Blue Ribbon Commission in its 1992 report, intended 
to save a system which was in collapse, with Maine recognized for having the 
costliest workers’ compensation in the nation; with businessesciting those costs 
in decisions to close or leave the state; with the last workers’ compensation 
insurer in the state on its way out; and with a three-week government shutdown 
over workers’ compensation in the national spotlight. The objective of the new 
system, reflected in the 1992 Act, was to provide substantial protections —high 
quality medical care, prompt delivery of benefits and income support—at an 
affordable cost "no greater than the median cost among states." Today, 
substantial benefits are provided, and were significantly increased in 2019, but we 
are not at the median cost among states and getting further from that goal. 
In fact, Maine had the 9"‘ highest premium rates in the nation in 2022, up from 
the 16"‘ highest in 2020 and 19"‘ highest in 2018, according to the State of 
Oregon's bi-annual ranking of the states and the District of Columbia by 
premium. The National Council on Compensation Insurance (NCCI), the rating 
and statistical organization for Maine and 37 other states and the District of 
Columbia, determined Maine had the 5"‘ highest average loss cost in its most 
recent report. (These statistics are cited in section B of The Annual Report on the 
Status of the Maine Workers’ Compensation System, submitted to this committee 
in February by Workers’ Compensation Board Executive Directoriohn Rohde, 
Bureau of insurance Acting Superintendent Timothy Schott and Labor 
Commissioner Laura Fortman.)
The potential cost of this bill has not yet been estimated by NCCI, but clearly 
would be steep and onerous for Maine businesses, all of which also battleT 
inflation in an uncertain economy. Many of these emp|oyers —towns and cities, 
schools and hospitals, businesses large and small—-will pay these increased costs 
directly, as self-insurers. A potential retroactive application of this law would 
result in a catastrophic level of unfunded liabilities, as insurers would become 
responsible for costs for which they cannot retroactively collect premiums. 
Finally, application of this law in addition to the cost-of-living adjustment on total 
compensation already in the statute would usher in a new era of confusion and 
instability. These adjustments on total benefits, after 260 weeks, were just added 
back to the workers’ compensation system in the 2019‘ omnibus bill, the result of 
a long negotiation process, one which the business community trusted would lead 
to a period of stability. (There have been no cost-of-living adjustments on both 
total and partial benefits in Maine since 1987.)' 
For these reasons, I urge the committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 1896. l‘ 
am happy to answer any questions.
