‘ 
i~iosPi"rALi"rY 
___MA.lNE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
May 11, 2023 
In Opposition to LD 1896, “An Act to Index Workers’ Compensation Beneﬁts to the Rate of 
Inﬂation” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Committee Labor and Housing: 
My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine representing more than 1,200 
restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. HospitalityMaine opposes LD 1896, “An Act 
to Index W0/'ker5 ’C0mpensat/on Beneﬁts to the Rate of Inﬂation.” 
LD 1896 is an after-deadline bill that was introduced and deemed an emergency by a majority of the 
Legislative Council. The bill requires beneﬁts awarded by the Maine Workers’ Compensation Act (Comp) of 
1992 to be annually increased to account for inﬂation. 
HospitalityMaine is concerned with the changes proposed in this legislation and we believe it will 
signiﬁcantly increase the cost of beneﬁts provided under the Workers’ Compensation Act. This bill ﬂies in 
the face of a lengthy and thorough review of updates to Comp in 2019, where all sides were able to reach 
consensus. The ﬁnal agreed upon amendment in 2019 provided for a cost—0f-living adjustment after an 
employee received 260 weeks of total beneﬁts. 
Our state's workers’ compensation statute is quite strict; it requires virtually all public and private sector 
employers to provide workers’ compensation insurance. It would not behoove this Legislature to make such 
fundamental changes that will create ﬁnancial burdens on employers who will have to bear the increased 
costs. It would be best to let this law remain as it is, as changes in this proposal could lead to unintended 
consequences that we have seen in other states, such as, overcompensation of some injured workers and 
under-compensation of others, a bogged system, and legal challenges of fairness and due process. 
I have said it in previous testimony, and it is relevant here again. This bill, along with dozens of other 
concerning proposals that have made their way to this this Committee, will have the cumulative effect of 
signaling to our current businesses and any future potential investment that they should look elsewhere. 
We urge you to please vote ought not to pass on LD 1896. Thank you, and I would be happy to answer 
any questions you may have.
