/\‘/Rilﬁ l\/lalneS_tre-ei 
Solutions Government Relations I Public Affairs 
Alﬁlialed with Verrill Dana. LLP 
PETER coma 4s MEMORIAL cmcte, sums 202 
SENIOR GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS CONSULTANT AUGUSTA, MAINE 04332-S307 
Qgore@mainesueetsolutionscom 207-622.7432 0 FAX 207.622.3117 
Testimony of 
Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
And 
Maine Employers Mutual Insurance Company 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 1896, An Act to Index Worker's Compensation Benefits to the Rate of Inflation 
May 11, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
my name is Peter Gore, and I am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street Solutions, and I am 
here on behalf of two of my clients, Maine Employers Mutual Insurance Company (MEMIC), this states 
largest commercial market workers’ compensation insurer, and the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, 
a statewide business association representing both large and small businesses speaking to you today in 
strong opposition to L.D. 1896, An Act to Index Worker's Compensation Benefits to the Rate of Inflation. 
L.D 1896 proposes to increase worker's compensation benefits for all injuries on a yearly basis 
as indexed by the consumer price index (CPI). It does not state which measurement of CPI will be used, 
who will calculate the indexing, or when employers and commercial market carries will be notified of 
the required adjustment. The bill appears to make the change effective at the first anniversary of the 
date of injury, without any waiting period, and also appears to be retroactive to all dates of injury, 
creating a dramatic and significant unfunded liability that would likely amount to millions, if not tens of 
millions of dollars. As we have in the past, we are strongly opposed to this change. 
In 2019, the Labor and Housing Committee considered nearly 30 legislative workers 
compensation changes to the 1993 reforms. The Maine State Chamber was part of a group of 
stakeholders, that included representatives of organized labor and the Governor's office, who worked to 
craft a compromise that did make changes — increases in injured worker benefits - at that time. One of 
the most significant changes to our system was the reinsertion of cost-of-living adjustments (COLA's) 
back into our comp law. Not all injured workers receive COLA's, instead it was agreed that only those 
injured workers with the greatest need would see annual benefit increases. Thus. After 1/1/2020, any 
individuals who fall under Section 212 of our Act- those who are totally incapacitated and are deemed to 
lack any work capacity of any kind — receive COLA’s after they have received 260 or five years, worth of 
benefits.
2 
Prior to the bi-partisan reforms that have governed this state for 30 years —the longest period 
of workers comp stability in this state history — the presence of COLA's in our system - along with our 
excessive litigation and legal costs were identified as two of the leading cost drivers leading to the 
collapse of our workers’ compensation commercial market. The fact is, annual cost of living adjustments 
adds significant cost to comp premiums, and thus the cost of doing business here. It may interest you to 
know, that in 1998, when similar legislation was discussed, the retroactive, portion of the proposal —- the 
same type contained in LD 1896 — was estimated to result in a $29-$39-million-dollar unfunded liability. 
in today's dollars, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, that equates to roughly $55- 
$65 million. A staggering number that would be catastrophic for our market. 
The Maine State Chamber of Commerce has steadfastly advocated for stability in Maine's 
workers’ compensation system. The reforms passed by the state Legislature now more than 30 years 
ago, have been a critical element to Maine's economic health, helping us to attract and retain companies 
who, absent the reforms, would have abandoned Maine long ago. Instead of being a deterrent to 
economic development, the status of our workers’ compensation system has provided the state with an 
economic development tool to attract new jobs and new opportunities for Maine people. 
While some may argue the merits, it is true that Maine no longer has the most expensive 
workers’ compensation system in the country. Yet according to the report by the National Council on 
Compensation Insurance (”NCCl") on Economic Conditions for the State of Maine, Maine's comp benefits 
are currently 5th highest in the nation, above the median of 38 other states for which they price. The 
State of Oregon's state ranking survey — long considered the standard for nationwide comp costs, places 
us at the 9"‘ most costly state — a significant uptick from 19"‘ most costly just in 2018. These numbers 
are critical, as it was the overall goal of the Blue-Ribbon Commission on Workers’ Compensation, the 
commission responsible for developing the framework of our current act, to have Maine's workers’ comp 
system and costs lie at the middle of the other 50 states. By either measure above, we are still 
considered a high-cost state. 
More importantly, Maine has seen a dramatic decrease since 1992 in incidences of lost time 
injuries. Fewer lost time injuries are taking place and the severity of those that do have dropped 
dramatically. Workers who are injured on the job are returning to work faster within their existing work 
capacity due to the return-to-work programs many employers have instituted. Returning a worker to 
their job within their capacity in most cases improves the employee's moral while at the same time 
saving costs for the employers. 
Leading up to 2019, and in the subsequent 4 years leading to today, Maine has enjoyed a period 
of relative stability when it comes to workers’ compensation public policy. Stability and certainty are 
both critical elements for controlling costs, but also in market perceptions. For a long period of time, 
Maine's workers’ compensation market was viewed nationally as extremely volatile — to the point of 
avoidance for both insurers and businesses. The reforms passed in 1992 helped change that. But it 
takes very few public policy changes to reinsert instability and higher costs back into the systems. 
Litigation, which is already under consideration in this legislature, and COLA's and unfunded liabilities as 
represented in LD 1896 are two sure was to destabilize our comp system, and our economy. Because of 
the potential significant costs associated with this bill and the detrimental effect it may have on our 
overall workers’ compensation system and our economy as a whole, we urge this Committee to reject LD 
1896. Thank you.
