  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 14 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1059 – Resolve, to Allow Reimbursement for Remote Ultrasound Procedures and Fetal Nonstress 
Tests Under MaineCare  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1059 , Resolve, to Allow Reimbursement for Remote 
Ultrasound Procedures and Fetal Nonstress Tests Under MaineCare . This resolve directs the Department 
of Health and Human Services to amend its rules regarding reim bursement under the MaineCare program 
to allow reimbursement for ultrasound procedures and fetal nonstress tests performed remotely in a 
residence or other off -site location through telehealth under the MaineCare program .  
 
The services identified in this bill are already covered under MaineCare Telehealth Services policy so 
long as the services are medically necessary and of comparable quality when delivered via telehealth as 
compared to delivered in person.  Chapter I, Section 4.04 -1 of the MaineCare Benef its manual  states:  
 
With the exception of  those services described in Section 4.05 of this policy (Non -Covered 
Services and Limitations), any medically necessary MaineCare Covered Service may be delivered 
via Interactive Telehealth Services, provided the following requirements are met:   
1. The Me mber is otherwise eligible for the Covered Service, as described in the appropriate 
section of the MaineCare Benefits Manual; and   
2. The Covered Service delivered by Interactive Telehealth Services is of comparable quality to 
what it would be were it deli vered in person.  
 
It is possible that providers do not understand what is covered under the current Telehealth Services 
policy. The Department would be willing to distribute  an electronic informational bulleti n containing  
links to existing  telehealth resources  to interested parties  if the committee feels this would be beneficial .  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have 
any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

