 
ATA ACTION  
901 N. Glebe Road, Ste 850 | Arlington, VA 22203  
Info@ataaction.org  
 
April 12 2023 
 
The Honorable Joe Baldacci  
Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature  
House Majority Office  
P.O. Box 1423,  
Bangor, ME 04402  
 
The Honorable Michele Meyer  
Chair, Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature  
58 Odiorne Lane  
Eliot, ME 03903  
 
RE: ATA  ACTION  SUPPORT FOR  LEGISLATIVE DOCUMENT  1059  
 
Dear Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services,   
 
On behalf of ATA Action, I am writing you to express our support for Legislative Document 
1059  regarding ultrasound and fetal nonstress telehealth services.  
 
ATA Action, the American Telemedicine Association’s affiliated trade association focused on 
advocacy, advances policy to ensure all individuals have permanent access to telehealth services 
across the ca re continuum. ATA Action supports the enactment of state and federal telehealth 
coverage and fair payment policies to secure telehealth access for all Americans, including those 
in rural and underserved communities. ATA Action recognizes that telehealth an d virtual care 
have the potential to truly transform the health care delivery system – by improving patient 
outcomes, enhancing safety and effectiveness of care, addressing health disparities, and reducing 
costs – if only allowed to flourish.  
 
ATA Action s upports the Legislature’s efforts to expand access to affordable, high -quality care 
by directing the Department of Health and Human Services to allow reimbursement for 
ultrasound and fetal nonstress test procedures through telehealth under  the MaineCare Pr ogram. 
Across the country, patients are using telehealth technologies to access high -quality health care 
more efficiently and affordably. Allowing patients to be reimbursed for maternal telehealth care 
will make it substantially easier for patients – espec ially those in rural and underserved 
communities – to receive the services they need to ensure safe and healthy pregnancies. Instead 
of travelling long distances to see their preferred providers, maternal health care patients will be 
able to get high -quali ty, affordable care from the comfort of their own homes, and health care 
providers will be able to monitor MaineCare patient progress.  
 
ATA ACTION  
901 N. Glebe Road, Ste 850 | Arlington, VA 22203  
Info@ataaction.org  
 
Additionally, w e encourage the legislature to further consider if there are other  telehealth 
services , for maternal pati ents or for any patient condition,  that the Department of Health and 
Human Services currently does not reimburse through MaineCare which would continue to 
increase patient access to affordable telehealth care if reimbursed.  
 
Thank you for your support for telehealth . We encourage you and your colleagues to pass 
Legislative Document 1059  in the interest of expanding Maine Care  patients’ access to 
affordable, high -quality care. Please let us know if there is anything that we can do to assist you 
in your efforts to adopt practical telehealth  policy in  Maine . If you have any questions or would 
like to engage in additional discussion regarding the tele health  industry’s perspective, please 
contact me at kzebley@ataaction.org . 
 
Kind regards,  
 
 
 
 
Kyle Zebley  
Executive Director  
ATA Action  
