Dv_ - " 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coaiition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 207-_43O_8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In Support of LD 1116: “An Act to Provide Rural Sober Living Housing for Mothers” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Tuesday, April 25, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, l am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to 
End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ in support of LD 1116, “An Act to Provide Rural Sober Living 
Housing for Mothers. ” 
It is not uncommon for survivors of domestic abuse and violence to have co- 
occurring substance use disorder - either because their abuser has forced or coerced their 
use or because their use has developed as a way to help cope with the abuse. Our network 
works with hundreds of mothers each year who are struggling with substance use for these 
reasons? The availability of substance use recovery services in rural Maine is nearly non- 
existent, and there just are not options for substance affected parents with small children. 
As a result, though our programs provide as much support, advocacy and direct connections 
to other community resources as they can, helping survivors struggling with substance use 
recovery to achieve real safety and stability for themselves and their children is often an 
unattainable goal. 
The needs of survivors of domestic abuse and violence are almost always complex — 
largely requiring a person to rebuild their entire lives and support systems - and even more 
so when the survivor is a parent and a parent whose struggles include substance use. Our 
communities and system responses are not only not resourced to support the full range of 
their needs, these survivors, in fact, face real risks of losing custody of their children by even 
admitting their substance use and asking for help; because help is mostly unavailable, and so 
the State then needs to intervene. A lack of recovery resources results in the reality that the 
‘ MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state, this included sheltering more 
than 261 children with their parents in our network of emergency shelters. 
1 
Over the last few years, the prevalence of significant substance use amongst the survivors we serve and 
shelter has meant shelter advocates across the network have not only all had to receive training in the 
administration of Narcan, several of our programs have had to use it in response to overdoses within their 
facilities. This compounds not only the trauma of the family directly impacted, but also the other residents 
seeking refuge from abuse in our shelters and the ability of our staff to sustain themselves in this work. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
mothers we work with are all too often functionally forced to choose between being open 
about their struggle and trying (often unsuccessfully, at least in the short term) to get the 
support they need for their recovery on the one hand or hiding their struggle in an effort to 
keep custody of their children on the other. With LD 1116, policymakers and appropriators 
have an opportunity to start eliminating the need for families in rural Maine to be faced with 
that impossible choice. 
Children in Maine are dying from exposure to their parents’ substance use. Even 
where they are not, their parents’ substance use is likely to negatively impact these children 
in a variety of ways throughout their lifespan. It is critical that support is given to programs 
like the one proposed in LD 1116 that will help prevent this by supporting parents to recover 
and become healthy caregivers to their children. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our strong support for expanded access to 
recovery services for parents in Maine, particularly in Maine's rural communities. MCEDV and 
our member programs are happy to provide any additional information that might be helpful 
to the Committee as you continue your work on this bill. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: anclrea_@n1cg_c_ly_.Q_rg
