I 
ﬁlieccwery 
,§ﬁrr§voc<x»;y ‘ 
% Pmiect 
Testimony in Favor of LD 1116 
An Act to provide Rural Sober Living to Mothers 
April 25, 2023 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing, 
My name is Courtney Gary-Allen. 1 am the Organizing Director of the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project 
(1\/[E-RAP), a grassroots bi-partisan network of lawmakers, advocates, and organizations working on 
community and public policy based solutions to substance use in Maine. Throughout my professional 
career I have helped to propose, write, and pass countless pieces of legislation on matters relating to 
recovery housing. I am here today to testify in Favor of LD 1116 An Act to provide Rural Sober Living to 
Mothers on behalf of our network. 
This legislation seeks to meet a dire need in Maine: housing for mothers who are in recovery and their 
children. As you all are well aware, Mainer’s from all walks of life are struggling to ﬁnd, secure, and 
maintain quality housing that ﬁts their needs, and mothers in or seeking recovery are no different. 
Furthermore, this housing seeks to center on the family reuniﬁcation process. This is particularly 
important as in Maine more than 50% of Child Protective cases have something to do with a parent's 
parental substance use. This bill isn’t just about building housing, it's about rebuilding families, 
communities, and investing in the next generation of Mainers. 
I was also asked to let the committee know that the Maine Association of Recovery Residences is also in 
favor of this legislation. They wish they could be here today but have another pressing matter to attend to 
and they wanted me to read the following statement: 
“MARR, the Maine Association of Recovery Residences, is a statewide nonproﬁt with 75 residences and 
800 bed capacity, fully supports the concept of LD 1116. Currently we have less than a dozen beds that 
can accept women with children and none for men with children. LD 1116 would more than double this 
capacity, and for the ﬁrst time add recovery living for any qualiﬁed family. Substance use disorder isa 
family illness and LD 1116 will go far to enhance family healing and reuniﬁcation. \7Vhile we have 
questions about sustainable funding, we look forward to deﬁning this at the forthcoming work session. ” 
And with that I am happy to answer any questions and will be available to you if you need me at the work 
session. Thank you. 
Sincerely, 
Courtney Gary-Allen 
Organizing Director, ME-RAP 
§:_Qufine}/@recoveryvoice§,c0m 
(207) 593-6251
