Cullen Ryan
Portland
LD 1116
April 25, 2023
Re: LD 1116 – An Act To Provide Rural Sober Living Housing For Mothers
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of 
Community Housing of Maine (CHOM).  CHOM’s small staff works collaboratively 
with service providers across Maine to house hundreds of people experiencing 
homelessness, particularly the longest stayers in homelessness, victims of domestic 
violence, and homeless Veterans – all of whom require supportive housing, including 
recovery residences.  I am a member of the Statewide Homeless Council and also 
chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care Board of 
Directors, and the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee. 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 1116.  This bill requires the Maine State 
Housing Authority to contract for the construction of at least 15 housing units, to be 
located in certified recovery residences and in counties with a county seat of no more 
than 35,000 residents. The certified recovery residences are required to serve mothers 
recovering from substance use disorder and promote reunification with minor children
and are required to be staffed with peer-to-peer staff. The bill establishes the Rural 
Recovery Residence Fund to receive funds to support the certified recovery 
residences. The bill requires that the Maine State Housing Authority distribute funds 
through a competitive bid process to grantees, who will provide a minimum of 1:1 
matching funds. 
More than 107,000 individuals died of drug overdoses in the US during 2021, a 15% 
increase from 2020.  Maine has one of the country’s highest numbers of fatal drug 
overdoses and a continuing rise in homelessness among women, and families with 
children.  Overdose deaths are steadily rising with new record numbers of deaths 
every year.  In 2022, 716 people died of overdoses. In 2021, 631 people died, and in 
2020, 502 people died.  That number had never exceeded 200 prior to 2014.  
Substance use disorder, poverty, and homelessness frequently interconnect and set the
stage for generational barriers to healthy and productive lives.  
Members of this population with long-term homelessness are up to 29 times more 
likely to be in the hospital, and up to 57 times more likely to be in jail when 
unhoused, than when housed. Simply put, this population ricochets though our most 
expensive emergency systems when unhoused.   
Recovery residences work.  The reasons are obvious; no one will overcome their 
substance use disorder if they don’t have a place to live.  No one will recover without 
support.  Recovery residences provide both.  We lack them in rural areas.  This bill 
aims to take an important step to correct that.  
Good things happen when people have housing and the support they need for success.
People recover, reunite with family, pursue further education, secure gainful 
employment, and participate positively in society.  Please support this legislation that 
will accomplish all of this and more.  
Thank you for your consideration and the opportunity to provide testimony.  
