April 24, 2023
109 State St. Ste 6, Bangor, Maine 04401-5343ADDRESS PHONE
 (207) 331-4489 info@DignityFirst.MEEMAILDear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and Housing
Committee,
My name is Jamie Beck, and I am writing to offer my strong support for LD 1116, an act to provide
rural sober living housing for mothers. As Executive Director of Dignity First, a nonprofit
organization working to create a village of permanent, recovery-oriented, supportive tiny homes
for unhoused people and intentional neighbors, I have seen firsthand the transformative power
of stable, supportive housing.
For mothers in recovery, having safe and stable housing is absolutely crucial to keep custody of
their children and maintain or reestablish secure relationships with them. Addiction often leads
to a loss of stability and safety, which can result in children being placed in foster care or other
out-of-home settings. This separation can be incredibly traumatic for both the mothers and their
children, making it all the more important to provide safe and stable housing that can support
reunification and family preservation. Access to sober living options for mothers and their
children which provide dedicated recovery support for both the mother and her children does
not exist in many communities where the need is desperate. 
By providing rural sober living housing for mothers, LD 1116 would help to address this urgent
need for stable and supportive housing that is essential to family preservation and reunification.
This housing would provide mothers with a safe and stable environment in which to focus on
their recovery and rebuild their lives, while also providing the necessary support and resources
to keep families together. Sober living options for mothers in recovery would also reduce the
strain on DHHS and the foster care system, keeping children in safe and supported relationships
with their families.
At Dignity First, we have seen firsthand the positive impact that stable, supportive housing can
have on families of all kinds, including mothers in recovery and their children. By providing a safe
and stable home environment, mothers are better able to maintain sobriety, regain custody of
their children, and establish or reestablish secure relationships with them. This not only benefits
the mothers and their families, but also contributes to the overall health and well-being of our
communities.
I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1116 and help to create a more supportive,
compassionate, and equitable society for all, particularly for mothers in recovery and their
children.
Sincerely,
Jamie Beck
Executive Director
Jamie Beck
Bangor
LD 1116
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee,
My name is Jamie Beck, and I am writing to offer my strong support for LD 1116, an 
act to provide rural sober living housing for mothers. As Executive Director of 
Dignity First, a nonprofit organization working to create a village of permanent, 
recovery-oriented, supportive tiny homes for unhoused people and intentional 
neighbors, I have seen firsthand the transformative power of stable, supportive 
housing.
For mothers in recovery, having safe and stable housing is absolutely crucial to keep 
custody of their children and maintain or reestablish secure relationships with them. 
Addiction often leads to a loss of stability and safety, which can result in children 
being placed in foster care or other out-of-home settings. This separation can be 
incredibly traumatic for both the mothers and their children, making it all the more 
important to provide safe and stable housing that can support reunification and family 
preservation. Access to sober living options for mothers and their children which 
provide dedicated recovery support for both the mother and her children does not 
exist in many communities where the need is desperate. 
By providing rural sober living housing for mothers, LD 1116 would help to address 
this urgent need for stable and supportive housing that is essential to family 
preservation and reunification. This housing would provide mothers with a safe and 
stable environment in which to focus on their recovery and rebuild their lives, while 
also providing the necessary support and resources to keep families together. Sober 
living options for mothers in recovery would also reduce the strain on DHHS and the 
foster care system, keeping children in safe and supported relationships with their 
families.
At Dignity First, we have seen firsthand the positive impact that stable, supportive 
housing can have on families of all kinds, including mothers in recovery and their 
children. By providing a safe and stable home environment, mothers are better able to
maintain sobriety, regain custody of their children, and establish or reestablish secure 
relationships with them. This not only benefits the mothers and their families, but also
contributes to the overall health and well-being of our communities.
I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1116 and help to create a more supportive, 
compassionate, and equitable society for all, particularly for mothers in recovery and 
their children.
Sincerely,
Jamie Beck
Executive Director
