TESTIMONY 
 
In support of LD 1116, An Act to Provide Rural Sober Living Housing for Mothers 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
 
To:  Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and fellow members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing, as a Brewer Maine resident and long-standing advocate for recovery, 
and sober housing I am honored to provide testimony in strong in support of LD 1116, An 
Act to Provide Rural Sober Living Housing for Mothers. 
 
From: Joanna Russell, retired workforce development professional, Bangor Area Recovery 
Network, past B.A.R.N. board member and advocate, currently an owner, and manager of 
sober housing  
My background includes being an active member of 12-step programs, and educational resources 
involving community-based organizations and peer support.  Overall, I have been involved and 
supporting recovery for over 30 years. The last six years have included managing sober living 
homes for women, first for the B.A.R.N. at Holyoke Haven and currently at 7 Holyoke Place 
where I own and operate a women’s sober house.   
I raise the following points in strong support of LD 1116, An Act to Provide Rural Sober 
Living Housing for Mothers. 
 
• Living in a safe and sober environment allows the mother and her children space and 
time to heal. Once the healing begins their ability to grow and learn will expand, allowing 
everyone to make healthy and right choices for their lives and for the family.   
 
• Women who are separated from their children feel discouraged and hopeless and too 
often revert to using substances.  This decision is grounded in shame and stigma 
surrounding their past choices and behaviors.  Once the mother has demonstrated the 
ability to participate and develop her sobriety, uniting her with her children is the most 
powerful incentive to support forward movement in a positive direction. Maine has a 
great need for these homes.   
 
• The sober housing model described above benefits the mother and her children. By 
funding this proactive housing model for women and their children, Maine is making a 
huge investment in our future.  Both mother and children can utilize community, 
education, and eventually job training resources to progress and become a member of our 
future workforce and be a tax paying citizen. 
 
• This unique model allows the family (mom and children) to utilize family support which 
in turn enables each person to build their self-confidence and develop a new way of 
living clean and sober. 
 
In closing LD 1116 serves to support Maine by acknowledging the value of family and 
reuniting children with their mother.  We have spent a lot of time and energy on 
developing strong recovery support including our recovery centers, recovery coaching 
and resources throughout our great State of Maine.  Providing Rural Sober Living 
Housing for Mothers and their children just makes sense as an added layer to our 
recovery structure.   
 
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to provide my thoughts on this very 
important matter. 
 
Joanna Russell 
7 Holyoke Street 
Brewer, Maine 04412 
207-951-5332 
russelljeruss@aol.com 
-- 
 
