April 25, 2023 
Public Testimony 
LD 11 16 
John Clark 
Good Afternoon Senator Tipping and Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee. My name is johnny Clark, I am a person in long term recovery, a person with a history of 
incarceration and I am the proud owner and operator of recovery residences in Andtoscoggin County. I am also 
the program director For the Maine Prisoner Re-entry Network and a peer support member of the Western 
Maine Treatment Court for Oxford and Franklin counties. 
I am here today in support of LD 1116, An Act to Provide Rural Sober Living Housing For Mothers . 
This bill would be life-changing For families in Maine. As an owner of a recovery residence, I’ve witnessed first 
hand how the traumas of generational substance use, poverty, racial injustice and lack ofhealthcare access harm 
families in Maine. Wl1en parents lose custody of their children as a result of their substance use, it is often alsoa 
result of these other factors. 
Right now in Androscoggin county, I am working with an advisory group of recovery and harm 
reduction experts to build Maine’s ﬁrst apartment units for families who are looking for safe and supportive 
recovery housing, with comprehensive support and treatment access including counseling, childcare, financial 
literacy, meal planning groups, yoga, meditation, peer support, medical care and integrated services with 
Dl-ll-IS. 
However, the biggest barrier For people to access a program like this is funding. It is often assumed that 
recovery residences can be billed to insurance or access Funding that is readily available. This is not the case. 
While some of these services I listed would be billable, most are not. And while I recognize the importance of 
providing these services regardless of ability to pay, I need to make sure thatl can pay staff and utilities to 
operate the program in the best Way possible. 
This is a tangible way we can address the effects of substance use and the overdose crisis in Maine. Let’s 
stop the cycle of trauma and harm caused when families are torn apart. Let’s take a step towards protective 
factors For our community. 
One suggestion I have, to ensure the broadest access for everyone, is to remove the requirement for 
“rural communities ” and to consider including Fathers and Families in the description. We don’t have programs 
like these anywhere in the state and by excluding locations and family dynamics, we restrict access to people 
desperate for change and reuniﬁcation with their children. 
I am urging you all today to vote in favor of this bill. I am available to answer any questions you may 
have and thank you For your time today. 
Sincerely, 
John Clark, CADC
