Krystal Woods
Bangor 
LD 1116
Good afternoon I am glad to be here speaking on LD 1116 I am honored to be invited 
to provide testimony on behalf of mothers recovering from addiction, breaking cycles 
of trauma, abuse, adversity, and oppression- lacking the services, and supports to be 
successful. For too long services and supports have been structured for the individual, 
and overwhelmingly the recovery houses across the state are catered to men- none of 
which allow children.
I come before you as a woman in long-term recovery a mom of five children, a mental
health professional who has worked and served countless women and families 
through the reunification process in multiple homes in the state of Maine. I know we 
are specifically here talking about recovery homes that are geared towards mothers 
who are affected by addiction , but I want to take a moment and shine a light on the 
glaringly deficient services and supports for at risk mothers and children across the 
state. Saint Andreas. Stepping stones. Sweetser reunification home. All programs in 
the state of Maine supporting parents, though overwhelmingly and most often 
mothers, in reunifying with her children, that all closed in short order. 
Most often and unsurprisingly these parents, these mothers, are impacted by 
addiction. Their root? Trauma. We have one family shelter in the state of Maine the 
Emmaus center in Ellsworth. The only place that a family can go and not have to be 
separated during one of the most harrowing and traumatic experiences of their life. 
I am 36 years old and I come before you to both humbly ask and also beg that the 
state of Maine prioritizes the needs of services and supports, recovery homes and 
treatment options for the most vulnerable, the children and their mothers trying to 
break the cycle’s to heal the pain and save all of them- in a society that has already 
cast out on them.
As a professional I have watched the systematic failure of formally structured 
programming to support the recovery and reunification of mothers with addiction and 
conquering mental health. Often we stack the deck, give them unreasonable 
expectations and guidelines, provide minimal sustainable supports, and we give them 
six months to recover and reunite. We have watched these programs fail for years. 
When the waitlist and cost are a barrier,  the insurance is up for political debate, the 
service itself gets defunded and closed, the efficacy of the program ends. It is time to 
position the lived experience, the community, peer support, and connection of 
recovery homes, as as necessary service- and fund them to support our most 
vulnerable, the children- by creating inherently undeniable access to community and 
connection. 

