LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERSQ 
. £3? P»/E Al lslifi 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: February 6, 2023 
RE: LD 237 - An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. 
My name is Gina Coppens. I'm a resident of Belgrade. I am here today as a volunteer on behalf of the 
League of Women Voters of Maine. I am testifying in opposition to LD 237. 
The League has been celebrating and protecting the right to vote for 100 years. Improving voter turnout 
and removing barriers to voting are goals that we work towards, as well as for efficiency in government. 
Two recently implemented administrative developments make LD 237 unnecessary and a duplicative 
burden for voters and election officials. 
Maine hasjoined the Electronic Voter Registration for Member States (ERIC) service whose purpose is to 
assist states to insure the accuracy of their voter registration lists. Thirty-three states subscribe to ERIC. 
The voter lists are compared for duplicate entries, alerting their members to possible address changes of 
voters. These lists are processed every 60 days. 
Maine is also in the process of implementing Automatic Voter Registration (AVR) which allows voters to 
automatically register during their motor vehicle transactions. Drivers must renew their licenses every6 
years or earlier if they change their names, their corrective lens status, or their addresses. Address 
changes must be made to the BMV within 30 days after changing addresses. These changes must be 
made with proof of residency and proof of identity. Those under 21 must renew their driver's licenses 
every two years. 
These administrative processes preclude the need for individual voters to renew their voter registrations 
every four years, which is placing an undue and redundant burden on voters and on election officials. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.org
