Written Testimony of Jess Maurer on Behalf of  
the Maine Council on Aging  
to the Joint Standing Committee on  
                         Veterans and Legal Affairs   
In Opposition to  LD 237 – An Act to An Act to Require a 
Registered Voter to Update the Registration    
Submitted via Testimony Portal on February 6 , 202 3 
 
 
Greetings Senator  Hickman & Representative Supica and members of the Joint 
Standing  Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs.  
My name is Jess Maurer and I’m the Executive Director of the Maine Council on Aging 
(MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged, and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in opposition to LD 237, An A ct to Re quire a 
Registered Voter to Update the Registration because we are concerned about the negative 
impact of this legislation on tens of thousands of older Maine citizens who are already 
experiencing challenges in exercising their constitutional right to vote.  
 
It is unclear what process would be involved with ‘updating’ the voter registration, but especially 
if a physical visit to a town hall or other location is needed, this update would negatively and 
disproportionately impact older Mainers.   
 
More than 193,000 people in Maine are age 70 or older; more than 66,000 of these people are 
over 80.  Although 93% of people in Maine age 65 and older have a driver’s license, that number 
drops to only 72% for people over 80.  This means that more than a quarter of people over 80 are 
entirely reliant on someone else for all of their transportation needs.   
 
There can be no question that older people value their independence above all else. In most of  
Maine, the ability to drive is inexorably linked to one’ s independence, so most people hold onto  
their driver’s licenses as long as possible. Still, thousands of older Mainers stop driving each  
year due to age or illness, either voluntarily or otherwise. In 2019, the Insurance Institute for  
Highway Safety estim ated that about 17% of people 70 and older did not have a driver’s license.  
In Maine, this translates to about 33,000 people age 70 and older who do not hold a current  
driver’s license. And this estimate was made before COVID!  
 
Older people who don’t drive  or have access to public transportation have to rely on others to get  
to medical appointments, church, the grocery store, the bank, and to the hairdresser. They also  
have to arrange a ride to the polls to vote. If they don’t live with a spouse or adult re lative, they  
have to rely on family, friends, and neighbors to meet their basic transportation needs.  
 
Here’s the rub – none of us like to ask for help. We ask when we have to, but we only ask when  
we have no other options and we try hard not to burden others. Many of us independent Mainers  

would rather go without before putting someone else out. So, while many of us will be  
compelled to ask for rides to medical appointments and to get groceries when  we can no longer  
drive, most of us won’t likely ask for rides that aren’t completely necessary.  
 
If a person no longer drives, updating their voter registration could be a significant  
hardship. If it is required to update the registration in person, then the person would need to get a 
ride to a town office or other designated location to do that. For some, health issues prevent this 
kind of travel; others may still be reluctant to be in busy public places, others simply will not find 
someone willing to dri ve them for that purpose; and still others may not be able to reimburse a 
driver for gas. Most simply won’t want to put someone else out for the time this trip might take, 
just to gain update a registration whose only purpose is to allow voting.  
 
Even if t he updating process does not require an in -person visit, this process is a significant 
barrier to voting for older people who are accustomed to voting without having to go through the 
additional process and paperwork of updating.   
 
If this law takes effec t, we’re concerned that thousands of older adults won’t take the steps 
necessary to update their registration before voting. Many may not realize there is this new 
requirement until they try to cast their ballot and discover they needed to update and haven ’t— 
and they’ve never had to before. If they go to the polls without an updated registration, it is not 
clear that they would be able to get their registration updated within 3 days of casting a 
provisional ballot.  Even if that is theoretically possible, it could require arranging one or more 
additional trips to make their vote count.   
 
Many older Mainers consider their right to vote as a highly prized privilege and obligation.  
Imagine their distress to discover when they go to vote that they can’t (or c an only do a 
provisional ballot) because they haven’t updated their registration or updated it within the last 4 
years!  Many older Mainers in nursing homes or assisted living facilities or living at home vote 
by absentee.  How many absentee ballots will b e rejected or sent back because the registration 
wasn’t updated. And how much distress, anxiety, and additional process all around will that 
cause!  
  
Maine has one of the highest percentages of older voters in the country. We should be proud  
about this level of voter engagement and should be doing everything possible to ensure that older  
Mainers continue to have access to this precious right.  It makes no sense to enact a law that 
would significantly interfere with the ability of thousands of older voters to exercise this 
constitutional right. We urge you to vote in opposition to this bill.  If these bills are intended to 
avoid voter fraud, we urge the Committee to find a more surgical way to address specific 
incidents of voter fraud than to im pose a requirement that will impact a significant number of 
older people who have every right to cast their ballot.  
Thank you.  
Jessica Maurer   
207-592-9972  
