PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 7745444 
wwwaclumaine org 
AMERICAN GIVE! LIBERTIES UNEQN 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not To Pass — LD 237 
An Act to Require a Registered Voter 
to Update the Registration 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
February 6, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine,a 
statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge 
you to reject LD 237. 
If enacted, LD 237 would require registered voters to re-register to vote every four 
years. This bill would solve nothing. Instead, it would throw obstacles in the way of 
people seeking to exercise a fundamental right, create a needless hassle for election 
clerks, and possibly violate the National Voter Registration Act (“NVRA”). See 52 
U.S.C.A. § 20507(a)(3)-(4). 
The right to vote is fundamental because it is protective of all other rights. The 
right to vote is protected by more constitutional amendments -— the First, 
Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Nineteenth, Twenty-Fourth and Twenty-Sixth — than any 
other right we enjoy as Americans. That is because voting is the cornerstone of our 
democracy. Your committee has the critical responsibility of overseeing the statutes 
by which our elections are administered in Maine. We urge you in all of your 
deliberations to seek ways in which the right to vote can be expanded, to promote 
rather than restrict participation, and to ensure that the integrity of our elections is 
protected, so that the elections reﬂect the will of the citizenry, rather than the 
power of a few. 
Because Maine has election-day registration, the effect of this bill would be mostly 
to create hassles for Maine’s election clerks, longer lines at polling places, and 
potentially deter people Waiting in line from sticking around to cast their votes. If 
this bill were to pass and someday Maine eliminated election-day voter registration, 
the bill would have even more serious repercussions, leading to voter 
disenfranchisement.
1
Moreover, this bill might violate the NVRA. Under that federal voter protection law, 
a state may only remove the names of registered voters from the official list of 
eligible voters for five reasons: 
(a) at the request of the registrant; 
(b) for violating criminal laws; 
(0) for mental incapacity; 
(d) because of the registrant ’s death; 
(e) or a change in the residence of the registrant. 
See 52 U.S.C.A. § 20507(a)(3)-(4). LD 237 does not specify what would happen to 
voters who do not reregister, but to the extent that it would remove voters from the 
official list of eligible voters, it would likely be found to violate the NVRA. See id. 
For none of the NVRA’s permissible reasons for removing names from the official 
list of eligible voters includes, or arguably includes, “failure to re-register to vote 
every four years.” See id. Thus, passage of this bill would likely find Maine in 
violation of federal voter rights law. 
Maine has long been a national leader in its voting rights. We are only one of two 
states that allow incarcerated people to vote. We are among a minority of states 
with election-day voter-registration. The Maine legislature has repeatedly rejected 
efforts to restrict access to the ballot. We ask you to do the same. This bill would 
dilute a fundamental right without solving any known problem. We urge you to vot 
ought not to pass.
2G
