5 \§¢»‘ow~& . . , .. 
\ Mame Town & Clly Clerks Association 
1- ; Local Government Center ¢ 60 Community Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486 
o\ 1-800-452-8786 (In Maine) O 207-623-8428 
55° Fax 207-626-5947 
Date: January 31, 2023 
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee 
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
Re: LD 237- An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration 
Position: Neither For Nor Against 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is neither for nor against LD 237 and we thank 
you for the opportunity to outline our points for your committee. 
Although municipal clerks and registrars share in the goal of keeping voter lists up to date, 
members questioned the need for this requirement due to the fact that two programs have 
recently been implemented and are expected to signiﬁcantly help in this effort. 
The State of Maine began participation in the ERIC (Electronic Registration Information 
Center) system last year, which is a robust data-sharing program that is used by 31 states 
and the District of Columbia. This program has resulted in deactivation of several thousand 
voters and will remove them after nonparticipation in two election cycles. The addition of 
automatic voter registration in partnership with the Bureau of Motor vehicles will notify 
municipal clerks and registrars when citizens update their residence address. Both of these 
programs will produce more accuracy in the voter rolls across the state. 
Should this bill gain support, members expressed concern about how this reporting will be 
tracked, and what, if any, ramiﬁcations voters will experience from not providing timely 
ﬁling. Further, members were concerned about the volume of paper and how it will be ﬁled 
and retained, with records storage space always being a challenge. Finally, concern was 
expressed that this requirement has the potential to disenfranchise some voters. 
Finally, members pointed out that voters must conﬁrm their residence address when voting, 
and, if their residence address has changed, are required to update it before voting. 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its 
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact me at 
207)6804210 or by email: pdubois@waterville-me.gov . 
Representing Over 400 Municipalities
