 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 237, An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration 
 
February 6, 2023  
 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica  and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert,  and I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 
237 on behalf of the M aine M unicipal A ssociation ’s (MMA)  70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee  (LPC).   
Maine allows for voter registration on election day , while already  having multiple ways 
to register to vote, such as at the town office or the Bureau of Motor Vehicles. The requirement 
to update a resident’s voter registration every four years would create additional unnecessary work for our already strapped town and city clerks  and further , could potentially deter someone  
from voting altogether  who does not have the proper information needed with them to update 
their registration.  
Maine election volunteers and town and city clerks  conduct sedulous work year-round to 
be sure elections are employed appropriately , and that votes are cast and counted properly. In 
recent years, these same individuals have been subjected to absurd allegations and abuse at the polls to the extent that LD 1821, An Act To Make Interfering with an Election Official a Class C Crime , was introduced and passed during the 130
th Legislature. To require another hurdle to the 
voting process seems unnecessary and akin to solving a problem that is simply not there.  
Furthermore , this task is well beyond the already arduous work  that lead s up to the 
election and  will create additional  burdens to address those who need to reregister every four 
years , rather than just as changes occur. T his bill constitutes a mandate on local governm ent, 
and, a s such , will require a mandate preamble added to bill, should the committee choose to 
move forward.  
For these reasons, MMA’s LPC is opposed to this bill. Thank you for your time and 
considering the municipal perspective on this issue. 
 
 
 

