122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to:  
LD 237: An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Monday, February 6, 2023  Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Pu blic Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communit ies, and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is in opposition to LD 237: “An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration.” This  bill 
aims to change Maine voting law by requiring who people who have registered to vote to submit a v oter 
registration update form every 4 years . 
 At MPHA, we support making voting accessible, secure, and equitable for all eligible voters in Maine. We believe ensuring that all eligible voters can cast their ballots fairly , easily, and equitably is a public health 
priority, given associations with health equity and health outcomes . We are concerned the provisions in this bill 
will contribute to voter suppression and will limit voting access for eligible voters in Maine.  For exa mple, it 
would be easy for people to forget to renew their regist ration . Others  may experience barriers to renewing their 
registration , including persons experiencing homelessness, people with low -income, older adults, people  
without reliable transportation  or internet access , and persons with disabilities . It is unclear what the process 
would be for re newing ( in-person, online?) and any  repercussions for failing to r enew.  
 In 1988, the Institute of Medicine published a landmark report , The Future of Public Health
, which 
acknowledges that voting is a public health issue because it helps shape “ the conditions in which people can be 
healthy. ” The American Public Health Association  considers voting to be  a public health issue  because it 
impacts civic policies ranging from budgets to carrying firearms to insurance and LGBTQ rights. The Health 
and Democracy Index  analysis also demonstrates that “communities with high voter participation enjoy greater 
social cohesion and belonging and better health.”  
 According to Dr. Edward Ehlinger
, past -president of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials 
(ASTHO), voting directly impacts health: “Research conducted in 44 countries showed that ci vic participation, 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  specifically voter participation, wa s associated with better self -reported health —while another study showed 
that those who did not vote reported poorer health outcomes. Historically, we can see this trend play out via 
suffrage and voting rights. While other factors were of course at play, it was after women got the right to vote in 1920 that the maternal and infant mortality rates dropped dramatically. This can be attributed to the passage of the Sheppard Towner Act of 1921, which set up maternal and child health units in every state health department, expanded collection of birth and death data, and began federal funding of state health programs. Similarly, when the Voting Rights Act of 1965 passed, infant mortality rates dropped and the Black/white dispar ity in those rates narrowed, again because of legislation that was passed in response to new voter 
enfranchisement.”  
 We respect wanting to ensure election security  and accurate voter registration information . However, we believe 
we can ensur e both these priorities  while also ensuring all  eligible Maine voters are able to cast their ballots  
easily, fairly , and equitably. We believe accessible  elections are essential to protecting and promoting public 
health. Currently, Maine is a national leader in voter accessibility. W e are proud of that leadersh ip. We 
respectfully request you vote LD 237 “ought not to pass.” Thank you for considering our testimony . 
 
