Representative Katrina Smith
District 62
LD 237
Thank you Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Committee.
My name is Representative Katrina Smith and I am here today to testify in support of 
LD 237 "An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration".
This bill is extremely important to our democracy and to ensuring that the will of the 
people is heard. Passing this bill will mean that no voter finds their vote to be 
disenfranchised because of something as simple as a needed update to their signature.
I relay the following account to you to highlight the importance of this bill.   As many
of you know the process of getting on the ballot to run for the State House requires a 
candidate to collect 25 signatures of voters registered within the candidate's party.  In 
February of last year, I went out and collected the 25 signatures needed to place my 
name on the ballot.  These signatures all came from my hometown of Palermo and 
were well-known acquaintances from my town.
Upon arriving at my town office, I presented my signature sheet to the town clerk 
who was gracious enough to immediately look through my list and determine the 
validity of the 25 signatures.  As a reminder of the process, the clerk takes your sheet 
and reviews the names and signatures against the voter rolls and then confirms their 
presence on your list as a valid registered voter of your specific party.  If any voter 
cannot be verified they are crossed off of your sheet with a red pen.
When my town clerk came back out to me at the counter and returned my list she had 
crossed off 7 names.  These 7 people were people I knew personally and that I knew 
were registered Republicans. The reasons these voters were crossed off my form will 
highlight why we MUST have voters redo their registration every 4 years.
-One voter had no signature on file because he had been registered since 1970 and a 
signature was not required at that time.
-2 voters had had strokes which made their signatures look vastly different than on 
their original voter registration.
-3 voters had gotten married (each over 10 years ago) and had never come in and 
updated and re-signed their paperwork with their new married name.
-And 1 voter was my OWN DAUGHTER, who though only 21, had decided to make 
her signature fancy between the age of 18 and 21, and now her original signature was 
invalid.
For me it was not particularly a big deal, I went out and gathered more signatures, but 
I ask, what about the candidate who might not be able to do that?  What about the 
voter who wanted their will to be done, but because of a lack of record upkeep had 
their will disregarded?
We all go to the town office and pay our taxes, register our car, or vote on a town 
budget and I think we all agree VOTING is an even more important task.  I ask you to
unanimously pass this bill to require a voter to update their voter registration. 
Thank you for your time.                     
Representative Katrina Smith 

