g Department of the Secretary of State 
\.-~ / 25 
Bureau of Corporatzons, Electrons and Commlsszons 
\q@I 
Shenna Bellows Julie L’ Flym 
Secrelmy ofsme Depuiy Secretary of Slate 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
February 6, 2023 
Testifying In Opposition to 
L.D. 237 “An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration" 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows, and I am the Secretary of State and the state’s chief 
elections officer. I am speaking today in opposition to L.D. 237, which would bring ﬁnancial and 
logistical challenges for our ofﬁce and municipalities. 
First and foremost, Maine should be very proud that we lead the nation in voter participation. Key to 
voter participation is making it as convenient, accessible, and secure as possible to vote. Forcing voters 
to remember to re-register every four years would reduce convenience and accessibility and almost 
certainly decrease voter participation in our elections for no good reason. 
Our Elections Division currently supplies each municipality, of which there are 500, with voter 
registration applications at no cost to the municipalities, and a reasonable cost to the Elections 
Division, based on the number of new voter registrations and changes that typically occur in each 
election year (about 100,000). This cost would increase drastically for our office as we would need to 
print and deliver about 10 times as many (i.e., 1,000,000) voter registration cards to the towns every4 
years so that each voter would be able to complete a new card to comply with this law. In the past two 
years, we have seen an increased cost in statewide elections of about 25% due to supply chain issues 
and increased cost of materials and delivery. This bill would only exacerbate this problem. 
Moreover, in order to track that each voter made the required update to their voter registration, we 
would need to add a ﬂag in the central voter registration (CVR) system database. This would meana 
new technological change to the CVR system. Deputy Julie Flynn and her team have been working 
diligently, spending hundreds of hours, for over a year with our new vendor to implement a new CVR 
application software and database to replace our current system, which is over 16 years old and 
overdue for an upgrade. This bill would require us to make the appropriate programing changes in the 
current system and ultimately, delay the new CVR roll out that is so needed. .
_ 
In addition to these additional costs and delays to technology modernization, there are also logistical 
changes. Since the bill is not written in a way to grandfather any active voter, or to require the 4-year 
I01 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-010]' 
www. Maine. gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
updates on a rolling basis, that would mean all 934,00 active voters will need to update their voter 
registration with their. registrar at the same time. This will likely overwhelm their local registrars and clerks who will encounter increased trafﬁc to their ofﬁces and need to spend the time to process all 
those updates. 
The bill does not seem to address the potential issue of duplicate applications that may arise. If 
everyone is required to register to vote every four years, despite no changes (i.e., name or address 
changes), this would result in tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of duplicate records. Asa 
note, our elections division is legally required to submit a biennial report to the U.S. Elections 
Administration Commission on the number of duplicate applications so we would be reporting inﬂated numbers to the government.A 
Lastly, we have concerns over what would happen if someone did not re-register to vote every four 
years as the bill directs. While the bill does not address the consequences, I want to make clear that 
erroneously removing a voter from the voter list or making them inactive without a request from the 
voter, a conﬁrmed record of death of the voter, or the voter’s failure to respond to the mailing ofa 
legally required address conﬁrmation notice and a subsequent failure to vote for a period of two federal 
general elections before the voter’s record is cancelled is in violation of federal law (i.e., the National Voter Registration Act or NVRA). 
For the above reasons, we oppose L.D. 237. I thank you and would be happy to answer any questions that the committee may have. 
10] State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-010] 
www. Maine. gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
