PUBLIC HEARING: Monday, February 6, 2023, 10:00 AM, State House Room 437 
(L.D. 237) Bill ”An Act to Require a Registered Voter to Update the Registration ” (HPO158) 
(Presented by GRIFFIN, A. of Levant) (cosponsored by Representative SMITH, K. 
of Palermo, Representative HENDERSON, R. of Rumford) 
Written Testimony submitted by: Suzette H. Furrow, Bangor, Maine 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica and distinguished members of the 
Veterans and Legal affairs committee. 
My name is Suzette Furrow, I live in Bangor, Maine. I was a candidate for Senate District 9 
(Hermon & Bangor) this last election November 2022 
I would like to provide some additional background information. I am the daughter of the late 
Representative Arthur Verow from Brewer. My father was the City Clerk of Brewer for over 40 
years. I was an election poll worker in Brewer from the time I was 18 until I moved to California 
for my husband's military career. In California I worked for the Sacramento County Department 
of Voter Registrations and Elections. I was raised knowing how important voting is and 
ensuring that election laws and regulations are followed. I worked as an election worker in the 
primary election in Bangor in 2022. I was later nominated as a replacement candidate for the 
Senate race in late July 2022. As a candidate, I campaigned door to door in both Hermon and 
Bangor. I had the list of registered voters in both towns. When I sorted the lists according to 
street address, I noticed when I went to the addresses, many times there were multiple people 
living at houses who no longer lived there. I then began checking the property tax rolls and 
compared them with the voter rolls. I found that there were numerous residences which had 
been sold and both the former owners and current owners were listed as registered voters 
despite some former homeowners having moved (sold their homes) years ago. I recognized 
some of the names as people whom I know who moved out of state years ago. 
Some names and addresses on the voter rolls were for an address which no longer existed, the 
home had been demolished. 
It was rare to find one street in Bangor with an accurate listing of residents compared to the 
property tax map. I am referring to homeowners, not rental homes or apartments. 
Cities and towns should be provided with technology (fractal technology) that can take 
government data, property tax records which are always current and compare them with voter 
rolls, this would show whether the two lists reconcile and eliminate an inflated voter lists and 
confusion for future political candidates and potential voter fraud. Elections could be kept 
secure by reconciling one government database with another and make them match ona 
constant basis.
This Bill (LD 237) Requiring a Registered Voter to Update the Registration (HPO158) would help 
keep the voter rolls current and prevent an artificially inflated registered voter list. It would 
help candidates from both parties have an accurate accounting of who the voters are who live 
in their districts and ensure that there could not be voter fraud taking place. This bill would be 
a way to clean the voter rolls and require updating information. Dirty voter rolls are a gateway 
for voter fraud. 
Maine has joined ERIC the Electronic Registration Information Center which is supposed to 
clean up voter rolls. Instead of cleaning the voter rolls, ERIC generates a list of people who are 
not registered to vote. ERIC does not require member states to clean up their voting rolls which 
seems counterproductive. The membership fee for ERIC is from $25,000 and up. ERIC is a Non- 
Governmental Organization (NGO) based in Washington, DC. This organization has access to 
citizens ’ private data including partial Social Security numbers (the last 4), Driver's license 
numbers (including minors who are close to voting age), ID information issued by the 
Department of Motor Vehicles, contact information. Despite receiving all this information, it 
does not cross reference property tax information with voter rolls to update address 
information and clean the voter rolls. The states of Louisiana and Alabama have terminated 
their contract with ERIC in the past year. The State of Maine should terminate their contract 
with ERIC and instead invest in programs to clean voter rolls and secure our elections and not 
allow ERIC to gain access to private information of Maine citizens. The citizens of Maine should 
have been made aware that their private information was being given to ERIC. I would urge all 
the legislators present to ensure that Maine citizens private information is not shared and 
promote the termination of the contract with ERIC. 
I would urge all legislators to consider the following for future legislation to restore faith in our 
voting system: 
Eliminate drop boxes, especially if you pass legislation providing prepaid return envelopes. 
These drop boxes are not monitored and are not well regulated 
Pass Legislation that does not allow 3"’ party donations to assist in technological and 
operational administration for elections. The Zuckerburg Chan Center for Technology and Civic 
Life (CTCL) donated funds to Maine for the 2020 election ($270K to Bangor) and also to other 
Maine municipalities. This money was distributed disproportionately to democrat voting 
jurisdictions. There is another organization which has formed called the US Alliance for Election 
Excellence which is attempting to donate private funds to elections just as the CTCL did in the 
2020 election. Local officials do not need financial assistance to administer elections. Maine 
should join the over 24 states that have passed legislation banning outside spending to include 
”scholarships and membership schemes" in elections. 
Same day voter registration: town/city clerks should send address conﬁrmation notices to 
registered voters to ensure that they live at the address they used when they registered to 
vote.
Address confirmation notices should be sent to all registered voters to provide an accurate 
accounting for the voting rolls. Ineligible voters need to be removed from the voter rolls. 
Thank you for your time and l hope that you will all be able to agree that elections need to be 
secure. Secure elections are the cornerstone of our constitutional republic.
