 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1311  (Opposed)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1311 , An Act to Provide That the L egal Use or Possession of Cannabis Is Not a 
Violation of Probation, Parole or Pretrial Release  
 
DA: April 10, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1311 .   
 
 CLAC members view  the proposal as inappropriat ely limiting the discretion of the court  by 
abrogating the judge ’s authority to set conditions related to the charge or crime of conviction .  
Conditions of release and supervision  often include restrictio ns of otherwise legal conduct when 
related to the underlying offense  (e.g., weapons possession, alcohol  use, Internet access, attendance 
at certain events or locations, contact with certain persons).    
 
 CLAC members also noted that the chang e is not currently needed.   In the experience of 
CLAC members, judges are increasingly aware that legal marijuana use  should not be prohibited  
unless rel ated to the offense , bail commissioners are trained to impose subst ance restrictions only as 
related to the case before  them , defense attorneys are raising the issue , and prosecutors are not 
insisting on such conditions when not related to the underlying conduct.   
 
 CLAC noted the following drafting issu es: corres ponding amendment s would be required to 
the Bail Code  and probation statutes ; other sentencing alternatives include a release component tha t 
may be subject to conditions , but have been omitted ; parole is not a current sentencing alternative; 
and it is not clear whether the required finding is to be made at the time the condition is imposed or 
at the time of adjudication of the alleged violation .  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney Gene ral.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practit ioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as  liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
