PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
" 
www.aclumaine org 
AMERICAN Glllll. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
t TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass As Amended - LD 1311 
An Act to Provide That the Legal Use or Possession of Cannabis 
Is Not a Violation of Probation, Parole or Pretrial Release 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY‘ 
April 10, 2023 
' 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support this bill. 
Under our bail code, judicial officers can and do order people who are released on bail to 
refrain from using, possessing, or cultivating cannabis, and to submit to search for cannabis 
while they are out on bail. See 15 MRS §lO26(3)(9), (9-A). Maine is one of only seven states 
where a violation of a bail condition other than a failure to appear in court is in and of itselfa 
new crime.‘ In other states, if a person violates a bail condition and the district attorney feels the 
violation was egregious, they can ﬁle a motion to revoke bail and address the violation, without 
adding an additional criminal charge to a person’s record. Here, we not only make violations a 
new crime in and of itself, but some violations are felony crimes. This makes us an extreme 
outlier compared to other states. This bill would improve our bail system by prohibiting the 
imposition of a restriction on camiabis possession, use, and cultivation as a permissible bail 
condition unless there is a finding that camabis creates a risk of danger to the individual or 
another person. Indeed, in 2016, the people of Maine decided to join the growing number of 
1 
See National Conference of State Legislatures, Pretrial Release Violations & Bail Forfeiture 
Criminal Oﬂenses, available at https://www.ncsl.org/research/civi1-and-criminal-justice/baib 
forfeiture-procedures.aspx.
1.
states where cannabis is legal.2 By merely acknowledging and systematizing what was already 
going on all over the state,3 We have allowed Mainers to generate employmentf ‘ tourist revenue,5 
and economic beneﬁt.‘ Yet because it remains illegal under federal law, and because violating 
conditions of release are a crime in Maine, cannabis use and possession remains criminalized for 
those accused of a crime. This bill is a welcome effort to continue severing the state’s criminal 
legal system from its legal, regulated approach to cannabis. We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
2 See An Act to Legalize Marijuana, I.B. 6 - L.D. 1701 (eff. Jan. 30, 2017) (codiﬁed as amended 
at 28-B M.R.S.A. § 101 et seq.).’ 
3 
See National Estimates of Marijuana Use and Related Indicators — National Survey on Drug 
Use and Health, United States, 2002-2014, CTR. FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION, (Sept 
2, 2016) at Figure 5 (noting that about 9% of people in the northeast used marijuana during the 
studied period). Available at, 
littps:1/www.cdc.gov/mmwrfvolumes/65/ss/ss65 l lal. .htm#T3down. 
4 Maine Has 400 Legal Cannabis Industry Jobs, Study Finds, CTR. SQUARE (Jun. l, 2020), 
https:/fwww.thecentersquare.com/maine/maine-has-400-legal-cannabis-industr}/;jobs-study; 
ﬁnds/article_690ecd7c-9aa8-l lea-8b47-0l7b_d38668f8.html. 
5 
Sam Wood, Maine ’s Tourist Attractions Include Lobster, Quaint Towns, Blueberries and Now, 
for Some, Weed, PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER, https://WWW.inquirencom/business/weed/marijuana 
maine-=new=-jerseyaeciprocity-medical»-card-201907 l6.html. 
6 
See Patrick Whittle, Maine Marijuana Shops Report Brisk Business Despite Pandemic, ABC 
NEWS (Jan. 9, 2021), https://abcnews.g0.com/US/wireStory/maine-marijuana-shops-report-brisle 
business-pandemic-75 M9065.
2
