 
  
 
 
 
LD 1311, An Act to Provide That the Legal Use or Possession of Cannabis Is Not a Violation of 
Probation, Parole or Pretrial Release 
 
April 10, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 1311. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Background.  By way of background,  Maine voters voted in favor of a referendum to permit the use of medical 
cannabis in 1999, and in 2016, Maine voters similarly approved the sale of adult-use recreational cannabis in 
Maine. Subsequently, the Legislature passed, and Governor Janet Mills signed, legislation establishing the 
framework for adult-use cannabis sales in Maine, and recreational cannabis sales began throughout the State in 
2020. 
 
What does LD 1311 do?  LD 1311 prohibits an individual’s legal cultivation, possession, or use of cannabis or 
testing positive for cannabis from being a violation of probation, parole, or release pending trial unless the court 
finds that such cultivation, possession, or use of cannabis by the individual creates a risk of danger to the 
individual or others. We support this proposal. 
 
LD 1311 reduces unnecessary county jail costs.  As this Committee knows, county jails currently house 
inmates for pre-trial and probation violations and pretrial release. We take this responsibility seriously, but it is 
important to recognize that incarceration in county jails comes with a cost, about 80% of which is borne by local 
property taxpayers. Hence, it is prudent for the State to consider whether incarceration for certain activities is 
warranted. LD 1311 seeks to align statutory provisions related to violations of probation and pretrial with recent 
changes in State law regarding adult-use cannabis cultivation, possession, and use. These changes are consistent 
with the policies set by Maine voters, and if adopted, will reduce the frequency of incarceration of individuals 
for cannabis-related activities – and reduce unnecessary costs of operating county jails. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1311 
April 10, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
