TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 271  
"An Act Requiring the University of Maine System and the Maine Community College System to Offer a For -credit 
Course on Hunting, Fishing, Recreational Shooting and Trapp ing”  
Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
March 6 , 202 3 
 
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative  Bren nan, and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in opposition  to L.D. 271 "An Act Requiring the University of Maine System and the 
Maine Community College System to Offer a For -credit Course on Hunting, Fishing, Recreational Shooting and Trapping .” 
 
Overall, I question  what role, if any, the  Maine legislature  should play in regulat ing educational curriculum ?  If we 
open this door , where does it end? Shouldn’t these decisions be left up to our educators  and academics ? 
 
More specifically, hunting, trapping, fishing,  and shooting are all recreational ac tivities  and should be treated as such  
by the educational system .  To my knowledge, o ur state college /university  system  does not offer  for-credit courses for other 
extra -curricular activities , such as wildlife  and bird watching, camping , hiking,  sailing,  or canoeing .   Why would h unting, 
fishing, trapping,  and shooting be classified any differently?  Additionally , the historical use of these activities  (recreatio nal 
shooting excluded)  as wildlife management tools is already  included as part of wildlife  biolog y and ecology scien ces in 
Maine  universities . 
 
While I suspect this bill was submi tted to counter the continuing decrease  in these specific  outdoor recreational activities 
(hunting, trapping, fishing), there are more reasonable and  appropriate  approaches  available  to enable student participation . 
 
The Main e Department  of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife offers a w ide variety  of outdoor activity courses , many of 
which are free,  and are open to anyone including Maine college students . A few  classes currently  posted on the 
Department  website include Wildlife tracking, Firearm  safety, Target shooting , Ice fishing, Hunting, Trapping, Fur  handling, 
and Compass / map reading .  There is no lack  of learning opportunities  available for these activities in Ma ine. 
  
Additionally, m ost higher learning institutions  encourage the formation of student clubs that allow individuals to connect with 
each other  and engage in recreational activit ies of interest. If there are Maine university  and college  students interested  in 
learning about the  outdoor activities  named  in this bill , I su gges t the establishment  of a student hunting/ trapping /fishing  and 
shoot ing club that can coordinate  participation  in the many related learning opportunities  offered by the  Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife . 
 
Finally, I stron gly oppose  the use  of public tax dollars  to fund a for-credit course to learn about and participate in  
any extra-curricular activit y, including  (but not limited to) hunting, trappi ng, fishing,  and recreational shooting.  
 
Please vo te “Ought not to pass ” on L.D. 271.  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer   
Portland, ME  
 
 
Sources : 
 
https://www.maine.gov/ifw/programs -resources/educational -programs/outdoor -programs/index.html  
 
https://nsfa.umaine.edu/  
 
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 271
Thank you for considering my testimony regarding L.D. 271 "An Act Requiring the 
University of Maine System and the Maine Community College System to Offer a 
For-credit Course on Hunting, Fishing, Recreational Shooting and Trapping” 
