MAINE 2*. rt. iii 
CHAZE/IB ER 
{T1 ti;a»ii M ma iii: 
1‘‘ 
.120 voitrc Q/i -At~it’1i:zt* f:>zr.2*i1z¢z.@',2~' 
March 215‘ , 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
l00 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: MSCC Testimony in SUPPORT of L.D. 924: Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern 
Maine Transmission Infrastructure 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee: 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in support of L.D. 924. We want to thank Senator 
Jackson for bringing this legislation forward, and the group of bipartisan cosponsors. 
The Maine State Chamber of Commerce strongly supports these projects in northern Maine. Both the King Pine 
wind farm and LS Power transmission line, we were very pleased when the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
gave approval to both projects, and due to recently enacted laws in Maine that now require legislative approval 
for projects like this, we are hopeful that the legislature and this committee will do so as well. 
There is little doubt that Maine’s business community has been hard hit by the pricing spikes we have all seen 
due to geopolitical forces abroad. But as “The Voice of Maine Business ” we have been hearing similar 
concerns regarding energy prices for many decades. Passing L.D. 924 will help protect our employers from 
pricing unpredictability through long-term contracts with Maine-based renewable energy. Together, these two 
projects will benefit Maine ratepayers and the business community for long term cost reductions that are 
competitive and unlocking thousands of megawatts of clean energy. For years we have been hearing about the 
potential to generate energy in Northern Maine, and it appears that we are closer now than ever before. 
Additionally, the State Chamber supports these projects because it is impossible to ignore the considerable 
economic benefits in the form of job creation, taxable value, and new investment. There will be millions of 
dollars of investment made, thousands of jobs created, and potentially millions of new taxable values along the 
route and in the host communities in Aroostook County and in many other places across the state. The Chamber 
has long said that we must create a positive business climate to help secure a strong state economy, and I can 
think of no better opportunity to do so than these projects. 
gi
- 
l'20 State Street, Suite l0l ' 
Augusta, Maine 04330-5030 ' 
tel (207) 6234568 * 
fax (207) 622-7723 ' 
website; l‘\’W\l’.11liliTi €Cl1ill11l)t?YMg ~ <2-mail;info@n1aineclimnbct.btg
Additionally, if Maine is to be seen as a reliable regional partner to the other New England states, the state must 
demonstrate that when it passes a law, creates an RFP to solicit bids, and the PUC selects winners it must stand 
by those commitments and provide the needed legislative approval to allow companies to continue investing. 
When you look at the economic, environmental, and energy benefits that come from this project, it will bea 
positive for the State of Maine, and we would encourage this committee to give their approval of L.D. 924. 
Thank you and I will be happy to answer any questions and bring back additional information if needed at the 
work session. 
Sincerely, 
Benjamin R. Lucas 
Senior Government Relations Specialist 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Email: b1ucas@mainechamber.org
