ST.-»’i.'FE or M.t:?-;r. 
0FF1('i~i or THE GOVERE\’()R 
8 !S'r.u‘E H()iYSE1 ST.-\'T‘l():\’ 
At‘Gl?STA, MAINE 
04533-090: 
JA;\’E'l' MILLS D»; BURGESS 
G0‘/ER;\’(}R DIRECTOR or G(>vERNOR ‘s 
E?\‘ERGY OFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine Transmission infrastructure 
L.D. 924 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and l am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 924. 
ln 2021, the Legislature established the Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development Program (35-A 
§ 3210-I) through bipartisan legislation signed by Governor Mills. Pursuant to this legislation, the Public 
Utilities Commission selected two projects through a competitive bidding process to promote renewable 
energy development in northern Maine, finding them in the public interest and necessary to meet 
Maine's climate and greenhouse gas reduction goals. 
As was highlighted in the GEO’s Renewable Energy Goals Market Assessment Report from 2021, 
developing renewable resources and associated transmission in northern Maine is a significant 
opportunity to meet Maine, and the region's, clean energy goals. Northern Maine possesses some of the 
highest quality renewable energy potential in the region, but has been unable to unlock that potential 
and the signiﬁcant economic and community benefits that accompany it. These projects are poised to 
address these longstanding challenges and bring jobs, tax revenue, and economic opportunities to 
northern Maine. 
In addition, the projects represent a key step toward achievement of our state's emissions reduction 
and renewable energy requirements. Maine households and businesses continue to confront volatile 
energy costs resulting from New England's longstanding overreliance on expensive, imported fossil fuels 
to heat our homes and businesses and generate our electricity. By bringing substantial new clean energy 
resources to Maine and our neighbors, these projects will not only help reduce energy costs over the 
long-term by placing downward pressure on regional electricity prices but will also help confront 
challenges from climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
When testifying in support of the original legislation in 2021, the GEO specifically mentioned the need to 
ensure regional coordination. Throughout the legislative and procurement process, the GEO has worked 
to support regional coordination, which is paramount to the success of these efforts. 
We commend the Commission in its work to coordinate with our neighbors in Massachusetts to advance 
this project and provide substantial regional benefits across the New England electricity grid.
1
With innovative and bold initiatives like this, Maine can continue to demonstrate our leadership and 
commitment to a clean, affordable, reliable energy future. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
CB‘-£&'\¢-CQQQ-0'\~ 
Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor ’ s Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
