Posted by  Dan McKay  on March 12, 2023 at 1:11pm
View BlogSenator Jackson and His Totalitarian Co-Sponsors
Reject Constitutional Law.
1:00 pm Public Hearing   
LD 924, SP0395Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine TransmissionInfrastructure
 - President. Troy Jackson of Aroostook
 
                                                              SUMMARY 
This resolve provides that, pursuant to the requirements of the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35-A, section
3132, subsection 6-C, the Legislature approves the construction and operation of a high-impact electric
transmission line and appurtenant facilities to interconnect renewable energy resources in northern Maine with
the electric grid operated by the New England independent system operator.  
 
What the hell. Are we in a totalitarian  state now!
 
Even before being deliberated by the PUC as this project is subject be examined for a certificate of finding of
public convenience & necessity. A process that can take up to 3 years to decide.
 
Even before being reviewed by the DEP  for environmental issues. This project must apply for approval from the
DEP 
 
Even before brought before the Army Corps of Engineers for approval
 
Even before ISO-NE transmission approval
 
Even before approval by FERC.
 
THIS IS HOW THE PUC LISTED THE APPROVALS NEEDED TO MAKE THIS PROJECT
POSSIBLE. NOTE, LEGISLATIVE APPROVAL IS LISTED LAST
 
                          5.2.2 Required Approvals and Related Obligations 
 Proposals should identify all required permits and approvals necessary for the development, construction, and
operation of the proposed project. The proposal must include a description of the process, timing, and current
status with respect to obtaining each required permit or approval. At a minimum, proposals should address the
following areas:
 A. Approvals required by ISO-NE;
 B. Approvals required by the FERC; 
C. Commission jurisdictional approvals including certificates of public convenience and necessity (CPCN);
 D. Other siting or environmental approvals including but not necessarily limited to the Department of
Environmental Protection  Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development Program (DEP), Land Use Planning
Commission (LUPC), Army Corp of Engineers (ACOE), other local or municipal permits or approvals; and 
E. Approval by the Maine Legislature for a proposed project that meets the definition of a “high impact
transmission line” set forth in 35-A M.R.S. § 3131(4-A), pursuant to the results of the referendum election held
on November 2, 2021, with respect to Question 1: Citizen’s Initiative F. Any other required approvals, including
any approvals necessary in other jurisdictions.  
Only in a totalitarian state does one government branch override
established protocol of another government branch, especially
when the one branch was the branch establishing the laws forthe other branch to uphold. 
Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 924
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT Committee
Senator Jackson and His Totalitarian Co-Sponsors Reject Constitutional Law.
Posted by Dan McKay on March 12, 2023 at 1:11pm
View Blog
1:00 pm Public Hearing   
LD 924, SP0395
Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine Transmission Infrastructure - 
President. Troy Jackson of Aroostook
 
                                                              SUMMARY 
This resolve provides that, pursuant to the requirements of the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 
35-A, section 3132, subsection 6-C, the Legislature approves the construction and operation 
of a high-impact electric transmission line and appurtenant facilities to interconnect renewable
energy resources in northern Maine with the electric grid operated by the New England 
independent system operator.  
 
What the hell. Are we in a totalitarian state now!
 
Even before being deliberated by the PUC as this project is subject be examined for a 
certificate of finding of public convenience & necessity. A process that can take up to 3 years 
to decide.
 
Even before being reviewed by the DEP  for environmental issues. This project must apply for
approval from the DEP 
 
Even before brought before the Army Corps of Engineers for approval
 
Even before ISO-NE transmission approval
 
Even before approval by FERC.
 
THIS IS HOW THE PUC LISTED THE APPROVALS NEEDED TO MAKE THIS PROJECT 
POSSIBLE. NOTE, LEGISLATIVE APPROVAL IS LISTED LAST
 
                          5.2.2 Required Approvals and Related Obligations 
 Proposals should identify all required permits and approvals necessary for the development, 
construction, and operation of the proposed project. The proposal must include a description 
of the process, timing, and current status with respect to obtaining each required permit or 
approval. At a minimum, proposals should address the following areas:
 A. Approvals required by ISO-NE;
 B. Approvals required by the FERC; 
C. Commission jurisdictional approvals including certificates of public convenience and 
necessity (CPCN);
 D. Other siting or environmental approvals including but not necessarily limited to the 
Department of Environmental Protection  Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development 
Program (DEP), Land Use Planning Commission (LUPC), Army Corp of Engineers (ACOE), 
other local or municipal permits or approvals; and 
E. Approval by the Maine Legislature for a proposed project that meets the definition of a 
“high impact transmission line” set forth in 35-A M.R.S. § 3131(4-A), pursuant to the results of
the referendum election held on November 2, 2021, with respect to Question 1: Citizen’s 
Initiative F. Any other required approvals, including any approvals necessary in other 
jurisdictions.  
Only in a totalitarian state does one government branch override established protocol of 
another government branch, especially when the one branch was the branch establishing the 
laws for the other branch to uphold. 
Yours Truly    Dan McKay
