March 21, 2023 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Chair 
Representative Paige Ziegler, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in support of LD 924, “Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of 
Northern Maine Transmission Infrastructure ” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Doug Mulvey and I am a Vice President with LS Power. Thank you for the 
opportunity to be here today. 
I am a professional engineer and have worked for LS Power for approximately 17 years. In that 
time, I have developed several high voltage transmission projects totaling over 350 miles that 
were successfully energized and are operating today. We have developed and own 
approximately 700 miles of 345 and 500 kV transmission facilities across the country. LS Power 
is excited to support the sponsor’s amendment to LD 924. 
LS Power was founded in 1990 and has raised just under $50 billion in debt and equity ﬁnancing 
to invest in energy infrastructure across the United States. We have constructed hundreds of 
miles of transmission lines, including in Nevada, Texas, Indiana, Kentucky, New Jersey, 
Delaware, and New York. We have been a strong advocate for competition in the transmission 
development marketplace. We are a leading developer of transmission facilities similar to those 
contemplated in Aroostook County through some unique solutions proposed in these competitive 
solicitations, including cost contaimnent and fixed prices. 
I want to be clear: LS Power is in Maine looking to invest approximately $1 billion because of 
the bipartisan leadership demonstrated by Senate President Troy Jackson and Senate Republican 
Leader Trey Stewart in the spring of 2021. This transmission line was selected by the Maine 
Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) in furtherance of the legislature ’s objectives set out in the 
Northern Maine Renewable Energy Program passed in that year. We believe we have the skills, 
technical expertise, and — most importantly — the ability to listen and learn from the important 
feedback of the people of Maine. 
Late last year we were honored to have been selected by the PUC to build a new 345 kV 
transmission solution capable of delivering 1,200 MW from Aroostook County. The PUC found 
that our transmission line — and the unaffiliated generation project — are signiﬁcantly less 
expensive ‘ than any of the other bids. This cost-effective approach is exactly what has set apart 
LS Power from many of its competitors. Importantly, the PUC’s approval to purchase up to 60% 
1 
PUC Docket 2021-00369
of the project costs was paired with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts ’ decision to participate 
in funding the remaining 40%. Both states decided to approve these projects because of their 
ability to help each cost effectively meet their clean energy goals while also delivering new 
investment and creating hundreds of high—paying construction job opportunities over a multiple 
year period. 
We know We have lots of Work ahead of us including local, state and federal pennitting — in 
particular, the PUC’s Certiﬁcate of Public Convenience and Necessity determination — and we 
look forward to ﬁnalizing project details in the coming months. To assist us in these efforts we 
have retained a number of Maine companies that are experts in public outreach, environmental 
studies and permitting, design engineering, and legal counsel. Those ﬁrms are actively working 
to advance this project. We also understand how important it is to go into communities and 
listen, learn, and modify our plans to limit impacts where possible. We expect to begin our 
public engagement process this spring and continue that for multiple years throughout our 
permitting, development and construction process. Our near-term plan includes holding 
approximately eight (8) meetings in the routing study areas in the coming months where we will 
notify the local residents about the opportunity to look closely at our alternative routes and then 
solicit their feedback.' 
We are and will continue to expend considerable ﬁnancial resources to advancethis important 
project. This is why we believe passing LD 924 now is such an important signal to allow 
companies like ours to continue investing in the state. 
This committee has undoubtedly heard all of the ﬁnancial hardships Mainers are enduring now 
through high electricity prices. The Aroostook projects are an important step toward addressing 
that problem for Maine ratepayers. The PUC has recognized that the inﬂux of renewable energy 
into the regional grid will also place downward pressure on electricity prices, beneﬁting 
consumers in Maine. Being able to intercom1ectMaine-made, ﬁxed price, long-term contracted 
clean energy will help shield consumers from price swings while growing the economy and 
reducing emissions. 
I along with the rest of our team look forward to continued engagement with all stakeholders — 
community members, elected ofﬁcials, municipalities, environmental and conservation 
organizations, regulators, business leaders, and many others — to ensure we deliver the most 
beneﬁcial project While minimizing community and environmental impacts. 
We appreciate the leadership and support of the sponsor and all of the co-sponsors and look 
forward to being able to answer any questions. We respectfully urge this committee to vote 
ought to pass. 
Thank you.
