March 21 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
RE: LD 924 – Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine Transmission 
Infrastructure  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Energy, Utilities and Technology , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the 
Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of LD 924 – Resolve, to Provide Legislative 
Approval of Northern Maine Transmission Infrastructure.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leadi ng conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groun dfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
Transmission capacity is an important prerequisite to unlocking clean energy resources 
in much of Maine, including northern Maine. TNC has been engaged in the legislation 
and PUC processes that have led us to this step in the process – a resolve to approve  
Northern Maine Transmission Infrastructure. We have consistently emphasized the 
importance of comparing the environmental, land -use and community impacts of 
proposed transmission and generation projects. We encouraged the Maine PUC to give 
strong preferen ce to transmission projects co -located with existing linear 
infrastructure, while considering the potential impacts of these projects on 
overburdened and underserved communities.  
 
The Maine PUC selected LS Power Grid  Maine, LLC in October 2022 to build a  new 
transmission solution that will deliver renewable energy from Aroostook County, 
Maine into the existing New England Grid. TNC has had the opportunity to meet with 
the team developing this project and we support the general process for siting of the 
transmission route that has been outlined for us thus far. LS Power has described their 
intentions to avoid or minimize impacts to a variety of important natural resources and 
habitats  and work collaboratively with interested stakeholders and communities on 
parcel -level siting decisions before securing title, right, or interest (TRI) to the selected 
route. This process – engaging interested stakeholders before securing TRI – is likely to 
result in better environmental and community outcomes. That said, the re remains a lot 
of work to be done and such outcomes are contingent on a variety of factors, including 
the specific route proposed by the developers and the extent  to which the selected 
route is co -located with existing linear infrastructure  and avoids or minimizes impacts 
to high -value wildlife habitat and communities that are already burdened with 
environmental impacts. We appreciate LS Power’s intentions in this regard, and we will 
continue to provide input on the proposed project . Please note that we are not 
specifically endorsing  the project itself  at this time ; rather, we are supportive of  the 
process to gain legislative approval so that the project may  proceed to  the 
environmental permitting stage  where it will be reviewed in more detail by state and 
federal regulators and interested stakeholders.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 924. TNC supports this next 
step in unlocking clean energy resources and helping Maine meet our climate and 
energy goals.  
