 
                                                                                                                                                              www. aroostookpartnership.org  
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551-6601 , Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  
 
 
March 20 , 2023  
 
The Honorable Senator  Lawrence, Chair  
The Honorable Representative Zeigler , Chair  
And esteemed members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 924, ‘Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine Transmission 
Infrastr ucture ’. 
 
Dear Members of the Committee on Energy Utilities and Technology , 
 
I represent the Aroostook Partnership (AP), a unique private/public partnership of over 80  businesses, 
the Northern Maine Development Commission and the three  colleges in Aroostook County.  The mission 
of the Partnership is to speak with one voice to en gage the private sector leadership, talents and 
resources to ensure the economic survival and growth of Aroostook County  
 
In alignment with our mission, I am writing to you in full support of  this resolve to move forward  with  
developing  and procuring  Northern Maine  renewable energy .  Longroad  Energy ’s King P ine wind project  
and LS Power ’s development of a n electrical transmission line to deliver the energy to the ISO -NE 
market are welcomed in Northern Maine . 
 
AP’s primary mission is to drive economic development in Aroostook County and a great deal of our  
focus is centered around using our abundant natural resources.  Along with forest ry and agriculture, we 
also have another significant n atural resource, and that is our potential for generating renewable wind 
energy.  AP has been supportive of  affordable renewable energy  in Northern Maine over the past 
several years and continue s to support the prospect of this project being built in our region.  
 
AP suppor ts further develop ment of  wind  generation  in our region , provid ed a County TIF district can be 
established to ensure tax revenues largely remain in Aroostook County to  support economic 
development within  our rural region.  
 
Renewable ene rgy development  like this project  is good for Maine and Aroostook’s economy for several 
reasons:  
1. The construction phase of t his multimillion -dollar project  will support many local and statewide 
construction companies  and contractors . 
2. Those companies  will spend a great deal of that revenue on local services such as food, lo dging, 
fuel, parts and repair of their equipment , further benefiting Aroostook and other rural Maine 
areas where the transmission line will be built . 
3. This project will  generate millions in tax dollars which, through well -planned TIFs, can benefit 
the rural  counties in which th is project  will be  built.  
4. This project would create  much -needed alternative revenue sources for forest and agricultural 
landowners through long -term lease agreements.  
                                                                      www. aroostookpartnership .org 
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551 -6601, Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  5. This project would create  skilled  permanent  jobs with above  average sa laries and benefits which 
are exactly the kind of jobs we hope to grow in rural Maine.  
6. Nearby Northern Maine Community College offers a Wind Power Technology program to meet 
the increased demands expected in Aroostook for wind power skilled employees.  
7. This project will offer tremendous local benefits negotiated with the areas around the project 
sites.    
 
Additionally, our Governor has set aggressive goals for generating clean energy in the coming years and, 
with little hope of hydro development in Maine,  wind, solar and biomass remain our best options to 
achieve these goals.  The challenge is locating the projects in  regions where the residents need and 
welcome the economic benefit s, but also has the land available for the developer to build or u pgrade 
merchant transmission lines to deliver the power to consumers .  AP believes that this 20 -year PUC 
award , in combination with a supportive wind development region in the Unorganized Territories of 
Aroostook, presents a great opportunity for Maine t o move closer to achieving its renewable generation 
goals.  
 
From a Maine ratepayer perspective, we believe Massachusetts agreeing to procure 40% of the project 
makes this a  much more appealing and rate -beneficial contract for Maine ratepayers.  From an  
economic development perspective, this is a win -win for the County and the state of Maine . 
 
Aroostook Partnership  fully  supports  the development of this renewable infrastructure project in our 
region  and sincerely hopes the your committee  will consider the many advantages of moving forward  
and vote s ought to pass for  this much -needed transmission project . 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Paul Towle  
President & CEO  
ptowle@aroostookpartnership.org  
Direct:  207 -551-6601  

