 
 
Testimony before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology in support of President Jackson’s proposed amendment to LD 924: Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine Transmission Infrastructure  March 21, 2023   Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Phelps Turner, and I am a senior attorney at Conservation Law Foundation (CLF). I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of President Jackson’s amendment to LD 924: Resolve, to Provide Legislative Approval of Northern Maine Transmission Infrastructure.  CLF is a public interest advocacy group that works to solve the environmental challenges threatening the people, natural resources and communities in Maine and across New England. In Maine for almost four decades, CLF is a member-supported organization that works to ensure that laws and policies are developed, implemented and enforced that protect and restore our natural resources; are good for Maine’s economy and environment; and equitably address the climate crisis.  CLF supports President Jackson’s proposed amendment to LD 924 because it approves the construction and operation of the transmission facilities associated with Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development Program, which was designed and enacted by the Legislature to promote the development of the substantial renewable energy resources in northern Maine.1 In the law establishing the program, the Legislature expressly recognized that, “in advancing the renewable energy and climate policies and goals of the State, the near-term development of the transmission and other infrastructure necessary to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is in the public interest.”2  Transmission is the key to unlocking renewable energy resources in northern Maine and doing so affordably: “[M]any lower-cost pathways to meet Maine’s [Renewable Portfolio Standard] requirements in the next decade are achievable through the development of high-quality wind resources in western and northern Maine, which in turn require new transmission investment.”3 Likewise, a recent report of the Maine Utility/Regulatory Reform and Decarbonization Initiative (MURRDI) recognized the importance of transmission development in northern Maine to helping the state achieve its climate and renewable energy goals.4  The Legislature has directed the state to procure renewable energy generation and transmission infrastructure. As amended, LD 924 helps ensure that the state fulfills these statutory obligations.  1 Whether legislative approval is required for the transmission facilities outlined in LD 924 is an open question. CLF’s testimony in support of LD 924 is not intended to signify agreement that legislative approval is required. 2 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-I, https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/35-A/title35-Asec3210-I.html.  3  Maine Governor’s Energy Office, “Renewable Energy Goals Market Assessment,” prepared by Energy and Environmental Economics and Applied Economics Clinic, March 2021, https://www.maine.gov/energy/studies-reports-working-groups/current-studies-working-groups/renewable-energy-market-assessment at 2. 4 Maine Utility/Regulatory Reform and Decarbonization Initiative, “Stakeholder recommendations to plan, build, and operate the electric grid that is needed to meet Maine’s climate and energy requirements,” April 2021, https://www.betterenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/MURRDI-Stakeholder-Process-Summary.pdf, at 26. 
