STATE OF MAINE
  
GOVERNOR ’S OFFICE OF POLICY INNOVATION AND THE FUTURE  
181  STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  
04333 -0181  
GORDON SMITH  
DIRECTOR , OPIOID RESPONSE  
PHONE 207

624

7458    WWW .MAINE .GOV /FUTURE   
 
 
April 3, 2023 
 Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Rep. Michele Meyer, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine State Legislature  
 Re:  L.D. 973, An Act to Create the Recovery Friendly Workplace Program  
Dear Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee:  
 
I am Gordon Smith, of East Winthrop and I serve as the State’s Director of Opioid Response in the 
office of Governor Janet T. Mills.  On behalf of Governor Mills, I submit this testimony today in 
opposition to L.D. 973.  Our sole opposition to this well -intended legislation is based upon the on-
going efforts we are making to establish a robust Recovery Friendly Workplace Program which is called for in our current Opioid Response Strategic Plan.  While it has taken some time to get to this 
point, we are now well on our way as evidenced by the following:  
 
• Within the next 30 days, the Office of Behavioral Health will publish a competitive Request for Proposals asking interested organizations to apply to establish and operate for a two -year 
initial period a Recovery Friendly Workplace (RFW) program similar to the program that 
currently exists in our neighboring state of New Hampshire.  Funds have been set aside in 
the Opioid Preve ntion and Treatment Fund to support the program for this initial two -year 
period.  The RFP has been drafted and is in the hands of the DHHS Division of Contract 
Management.  While some of the elements of the program could vary depending upon the 
awardee, i t is my expectation that all of the five elements described as program requirements 
in the L.D. will be part of the program.  
 
• Through our advocacy and relationships, a pilot RFW program has been launched in 
Washington County, financed through private phila nthropy (specifically, the Maine 
Community Foundation).  We hope to learn from this pilot of some of the barriers the 
statewide program may need to overcome . 
 
• In three of the past four Annual Opioid Response Summits, a breakout session has been held 
on thi s topic with presenters from New Hampshire and from employers in Maine known to 
be recovery friendly, such as Kennebunk Savings Bank.  This bank also participates in the 
NH program as it has six branches in southern New Hampshire.  
 
 
• The Maine Department of Labor in June will conclude its very successful Connecting with 
Opportunities grant which assisted over 800 individuals with a history (personally or 
impacted by) of substance use disorder.  But a similar program called QUEST continues to 
be available to assist person in recovery with job training and employment opportunities. 
 
• We intend to put together an advisory committee, including officials from the Department of 
Labor, to advise our RFW project.  We have already invited six individuals and are simply waiting for the RFP and the response to it to put the Advisory Committee in place.  
 We very much appreciate Rep. Crafts submitting the bill and we will keep her and the co -sponsors 
well briefed on our RFW program.  We are very excited to see it launch this  Spring.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with this information and I will make every effort to 
attend the work session on this bill.  
 Sincerely,  
 
Gordon Smith, J.D. 
Director of Opioid Response  
Email: Gordon.Smith@maine.gov  
Cell: 207 -592-0859 

