May 1, 2023  
Chairman Baldacci, Chairwoman Meyer, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am 
testifying FOR LD 1666 , An Act to Modernize the 
State Supplement to Supplemental Security 
Income by Updating the State Supplement and 
Removing Marriage Disincenti ves. 
I have two young adult sons, one of whom has 
autism, who needs significant services and 
supports, and who has received SSI since turning 
19. 
My son receives a state SSI supplement. It is 
$10—a paltry sum on top of his already modest 
$914 federal month ly SSI benefit.  
This $10 is far below the $65.52 average monthly 
payment to single SSI recipients among the 22 
states that provide such assistance  (see Figure 1).  
The $10 arrives on an EBT card. It is such a small 
amount that he has to either wait months t o use 
it or track the amount left on the card very 
carefully. And he does not have the skills to track 
the amount left very carefully.  
Maine has set as a goal increasing the 
independence of people with disabilities. It has 
begun implementation through adop ting state 
rules in alignment with the federal Home and 
Community Based Services settings rule. And it 
seems poised for further implementation through 
development of a lifespan waiver, which at least 
holds the promise of tailoring supports to the 
level of need.  
Yet having such a pitiful state SSI supplement to 
single people living independently and couples 
living independently flies in the face of the goals of independence, as Maine’s state SSI 
supplement is substantially higher for people not living indepe ndently.  
Maine’s low SSI supplement hardly incentivizes independent living.  
LD 1666 would modernize Maine’s SSI supplements for people on SSI living independently by:  
Figure 1. State monthly SSI supplement to couples and 
individuals living independently. An arrow points to 
Maine's.  
• Raising the monthly payment to individuals on SSI living independently $65 (essentially 
at the mean among the 22 states that provide the benefit to single people in this 
population) , 
• Raising the monthly payment to couples on SSI living independently to $ 130 (essentially 
at the mean among the 22 states that provide the benefit to couples in thi s population),  
• Indexing the state supplement to cost of living in essentially the same manner as the 
federal benefit is indexed (so we don’t go another 50 years without an adjustment),  
• Setting the payment to married couple both of whom receive SSI at doubl e the payment 
for a single person (to stop disincentivizing marriage and start promoting marriage 
equality for people with disabilities), and  
• Updating the existing statutory set of priorities for any increased expenditure to reflect 
the state’s goals of pr omoting independent living.  
 
 
