Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 1, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1666 , An Act to Modernize the State Supplement to Supplemental Security Income by 
Updating the State Supplement and Removing Marriage Disincentives  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information regarding LD 1666, An Act to Modernize the 
State Supplement to Supplemental Security Income by Updating the State Supplement and 
Removing Marriage Disincentives . Given the general fund impact of this bill, the Department is 
opposed to its passage. Below is additional information for your consideration.  
This bill would increase the minimum monthly state supplement payment from $8 per month for 
an ind ividual and $12 per month for a couple to $65 per month for an individual and $130 per 
month for a couple.  It also requires that the state supplemental income benefit must be indexed by 
the cost -of-living adjustment to the federal payment standard starting  October 1, 2023.   
This bill also  establishes that, in determining any increase according to the US Consumer Price 
Index, consideration must be given to the goal of reaching, within a reasonable time, a benefit 
level equal to or consistent with the current  budget at the lower level of living for an individual, 
rather than a retired couple, established by the US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, for Portland, Maine.  
Finally, it requires the Department of Health and Human Services to ensure tha t eligible 
individuals residing in nursing homes have a monthly amount for personal needs equal to at least 3 
times the amount of the state supplemental income benefit.  
State Supplement benefits are cash payments provided to individuals who are receiving 
Supplement Security Income (SSI), or who would receive SSI but for excess income.  They are 
meant to complement SSI and increase the income available to meet an individual’s need s. States 
are required to provide  minimum mandatory payments to maintain their eligibility for federal 
Medicaid matching funds. In order to maintain the federal Medicaid funding, states must  continue 
making such payments and they must pass along the cost-of-living  increase to the federal benefit 
rate. There are two methods by which a state can choose to ensure the cost -of-living increases are 
passed on to recipients : the payment level method or the total expenditure method. Maine uses the 
payment level meth od. State Supplement payments must be approved by the Social Security 
 
 Administration  (SSA) . The methodology  used to de termine the payments by living arrangement 
must also be approved the  SSA. State Supplement payments are c onsidered countable income for 
other programs , such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ). Increasing these 
payments m ay reduce the amount of be nefits received by other programs. It may also be counted 
as income against program  benefits  not administered by the Departme nt. 
The State Supplement payment is also used in calculating the member’s cost of care in nursing or 
residential care facilities. Increasing this payment would increase the  income  available  to the 
individual and as a result increase the amount they are expected to pay to the facility  for their care . 
While this bill proposes to increase the personal needs allowance for individuals residing in 
nursing homes , which would reduce the cost of care, th e personal needs allowance portion of this 
proposal contradict s the personal needs allowance methodology  proposed  in LD 587 , Resolve, to 
Automatically I ncrease a Residential Care or Nursing Facility Resident’s Personal Needs 
Allowance Under the MaineCare Program When the Consumer Price Index Increa se. 
The Department further notes that currently when an SSI recipient moves into a nursing facility, 
their Federal SSI amount decreases to $30 per month.  This, in addition to the current $10 State 
Supplement benefit provides them $40 per month as a personal needs allowance. This is the same 
allowance for all MaineCare members residing in a nursing facility. The proposed bill would 
provide a State Supplement of at least $195 per month.  This increase, if the benefit is unspent, 
may have the unintended consequence of putting the individual over the federal asset limit in order 
to continue receipt of SSI . 
Changes to the State Supplement payment may also increase payments under  Maine law that 
provides  Supplement al Security Income  to all Maine immigrants l awfully residing in the United  
States who would be eligible for assistance under the federal Supplemental Security Income  
program, except for the provisions of Sections 401, 402 and 403 of the Personal Responsibility 
and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996. This is a State Supplement payment that is 
equal to the amount the individual would be eligible to receive under the federal Supplement 
Security Income program , plus the State Supplemental income payment .  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input to the Committee. Should you have any questions 
we will  gladly be of assistance.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte  
Director  
Office for Family Independence  

