April 27, 2023 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony in support of LD 1666 "An Act to Modernize the State Supplement to Supplemental Security Income by 
Updating the State Supplement and Removing Marriage Disincentives" 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee: 
My name is Kile Pelletier and I live in Fort Kent, Maine. I am a self-advocate, and I am a Program Associate with Speaking 
Up For Us. I am testifying in support of LD 1666 because it is important for a person with a disability to be able to get 
married to another person with a disability and not lose their benefits. 
If this bill is passed it will help us a lot by keeping our benefits and increasing the amount of the state income that we get 
from Social Security. The amount of $8 is not enough for people with disabilities or other people that are on Social 
Security. A single person cannot live on $8 and if you grant up to S65 it will give a single person a better opportunity to 
pay their bills and to actually benefit from their Social Security. 
Making the change to $130 per month for a couple will offer some breathing room to live on Social Security. Social 
Security benefits are our lifeline. We need to keep up with the times as the costs of living go up, food prices go up, gas 
prices go up, and people with disabilities have a hard time living with the same amount of money. The Social Security 
rates for the state are not right and it's time to raise it to give us some breathing room. 
This bill is important to me because l'm a person with a disability and my wife also has a disability and we depend on 
Social Security benefits. When my wife and I got married she lost her benefits, and it made her feel useless and poor. It 
caused me a lot of frustration because I had all ofthe income responsibility on my shoulders. I know there are things my 
wife could do like get a job, but she has barriers because of he disability. She doesn't have a car, a license, or the right 
supports available to her to get working. She isn't currently able to bring in income so we can live like a married couple 
like everyone else. 
The burden of income falls completely on me. I have to pay the bills, go to the grocery store. I have to buy her hygiene 
products and clothes. She doesn't have income to call her own so she can make money decisions for herself. She always 
has to ask me. She has to rely on me. The system makes it so that there is a power struggle in our marriage. I believe my 
wife could be more independent from me, but she can't because she doesn't have any money. 
It is a big stressor because I am also working on saving for our future and trying to make sure we can afford a place to live 
together. I feel at times we fall back instead of moving forward. I see married people without a disability able to go on 
vacation, go out to eat and the movies, or save and buy a house, and start a family. I have the burden of making sure we 
have enough food, electricity is paid and gas is in the car. At times, I feel like there is so much and we can't do it. It makes 
me feel like I should be doing more, but if I do more I will lose more of my benefits. I could lose the only lifeline I have to 
keep stability. There are times I can’t sleep because I am thinking of this issue. I think of all the goals we could reach if 
only she had been able to keep her benefits and have her own income. I feel like we would be able to finally get ahead. 
When we first got married, we thought she would keep some income. When we found out she would only get $8, and 
then eventually none, we were shocked. My Mother In Law helped us to advocate. We even contacted a lawyer and he 
told us we should just get a divorce and live together. It was a slap in the face. Why do people with disabilities have to 
hide and keep their love secret from the social security administration so they can keep their benefits? If we want to get 
married we should be able to, just like anyone else. If we have religious beliefs or personal values, we shouldn't have to 
break them just so one of us doesn't lose their entire income. It just doesn't make any sense why simply getting married 
automatically changes something. When we get a certain amount of money, we always have to show proof of what it is. 
When we go over, it is sad and it is taken away. We are told it is a privilege. This doesn't feel like a privilege. Social 
Security income is our lifeline.
I have been a self-advocate for a long time and the marriage penalty issue is something I am passionate about 
eliminating. I understand that most of this work needs to be done on a federal level and I have been busy working on 
that front as well. If Maine chooses to pass this bill, we can be an example to other states to join the forces and eliminate 
the marriage penalty. It will be an example to Congress to make the change. This will help every person iiving in the 
United States to be able to get married if they choose and keep their benefits. They won't have to be afraid to havea 
family, work as much as they are able to, and make the same amounts of money as everyone else. 
There have been several bills on a federal level dealing with Social Security reform that I have urged Congressional 
Delegates from Maine to co-sponsor. I have taken the opportunity to talk to them when they come to Fort Kent for the 
sled dog races. I even printed out papers and track down Rep. Jared Golden at the First Mile Brewery. Most recently, I 
met with an aide from Senator Susan Collins office and the Senator agreed to sign on to the SSI Savings Penalty 
Elimination Act which will raise asset limits for people. I have participated in a national webinar through The 
Administration for Community Living (ACL) to talk more about the issues people with disability face when they want to 
get married. I will not stop advocating for this to change because I know what this can do for my life, and for the life of 
other self-advocates. 
Many people with disabilities live in poverty and want out. The system to help support us also holds us back because 
every time we start to get ahead another thing in our life goes up. Many self-advocates live in shared living or group 
homes. Whenever there is an income increase, their rent goes up. For once it would be great for us to get the supports 
we need, keep the benefits necessary, and be able to make plans for our futures. 
Thank you for your time and effort. Please keep in mind this bill affects people who live with disabilities and if we don't 
change the rules of Social Security and eliminate the marriage penalty, people with disabilities will continue to struggle 
and feel that they can't get married, can't go to work, and can't save for their future because they would lose their 
benefits. 
Thank You for your time, the opportunity to testify, and your consideration of LD 1666. I am happy to answer any of your 
questions. 
Sincerely, 
Kile Pelletier 
Fort Kent, ME 
Ig;~_§Iletier@sufumaine.org
