 
 
 
 
 
160 Capitol Street , Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
May 1, 2023  
 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
 
 Re:   Testimony in Support of LD 1666, An Act to Modernize the State 
Supplement to Supplemental  Security Income by Updating the State 
Supplement and Removing  Marriage Disincentives  
 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint St anding 
Committee on Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Lauren Wille and I am a managing attorney at Disability Rights Maine.  
DRM is Maine’s designated Protection and Advocacy agency, and our mission is to 
advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding opportunities for people 
with disabilities in Maine.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony  
supporting LD 1666.  
 
Individuals who receive Social Security Income (SSI) based on disability receive a 
maximum of $914 per month.   Under current Maine, the state supplements SSI at a rate 
of $8 per month.  This is less than the cost of a value meal at McDonald’s.  It equals 
about $11,000 in yearly income.  It is well below the poverty level.  
 
It gets worse for married couple s who bo th receive SSI .  For individuals currently 
receiving SSI benefits who choose to marry, benefits will be cut so that they collectively 
will only receive 150% of what they were receiving as individuals.  Two unmarried 
individuals who each receive $922 per mo nth (SSI plus the state supplement) , would 
have a collective household income of $1,844 per month.  However, if they chose to 
marry, they same couple would instead receive only $1,383 per month.  This reduction is 
commonly referred to as the “marriage pena lty.”  It is time to remove this disincentive to 
marry, and this bill is a good place to start . 
 
Individuals with disabilities  have historically faced many barriers to marriage, both 
large and small.  Many of these barriers are rooted in the ableist notion  that disabled 
people couldn’t, or shouldn’t, engage in romantic relationships.  This notion is incorrect.  
People with disabilities can and should have the same opportunities to engage in 
relationships, and that includes marriage for those who wish to pur sue it.  We should be 
working to eliminate systemic barriers that prevent people with disabilities from being 
able to marry, and that includes removing financial disincentives .  Single individuals 
who are already relegated to poverty -level income should not fac e further cuts should 
they choose to marry.  
 
LD 1666 will certainly not solve the issue, but it is a step in the right direction.  It will 
modernize the state supplement to SSI by increasing it for individuals, but it also 
removes the marriage penalty by e liminating the cut that a couple will take should they 
choose to marry.  
 
For the foregoing reasons, DRM supports LD 1666, and we urge this Committee to vote 
ought to pass .  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Lauren Wille, Esq.  
Managing  Attorney  
Disability Rights Maine  

