£1 :5'.?-‘ 
I ‘l it 
nu : '* » 
,1 -' 
5 é 7 
%tts=@‘ 
Mlkg Tipping THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 8 l3 l st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Mike Tipping. I represent Senate District 8 in Penobscot County and I'm proud 
to present LD 1666, An Act to Moclernize the State Supplement to Supplemental Security 
Income by Updating the State Supplement and Removing Marriage Disincentives. 
Supplemental Security Income (SS1) is a federal means-tested program that provides cash 
payments to children with disabilities, adults with disabilities, and people age 65 and up 
who are US citizens or US. SSI was created by the federal Social Security Amendments of 
1972 and began operation in 1974. 
In 1974 the federal monthly SSI payment was $140 for an individual. In 2023 it's $914 for 
an individual (more than 6% times higher) because of almost 50 years of annual cost of 
living adjustments. 
About half of states, including Maine, supplement SSI payments. The minimum state 
supplemental in Maine law is $8 a month. Maine currently just barely exceeds that 
minimum - paying $10 a month for individuals living on their own. This doesn’t increase 
with the cost of living. 
The $10 hasn't changed in many years. Existing statute says that Maine Committee on Aging 
and Maine Human Services Council should make recommendations about payments. But 
those bodies (or their successors) haven't existed since they were repealed more than 30 
years ago (in 1991). 
LD 1666 is a modest bill that would raise the state SSI supplement to $65 per month for an 
individual —bringing it back to where it was in 1974 as a proportion of the federal , 
contribution. 
It would also remove the penalty for marriage for people receiving the state supplement. 
When both members of a married couple receive SS1, their payments are not the sum of the 
two individuals ’ payments. Instead of being double a single person's SSI payment, the SSI 
payment for the couple is just 11/z times a single person's payment. That's a 25% reduction 
in what is already a very modest federal SSI payment. It's also just one example ofa 
provision in law that discriminates against people with disabilities who want to get 
married—as an expression of their love, sometimes to secure the future of themselves any 
children, and frequently as an expression of their faith. 
Maine doesn't have the power to change federal law to remove the marriage penalty for 
people with disabilities. But Maine does have the power to change the state SSI supplement 
to take a step toward marriage equality for people with disabilities. LD 1666 would achieve 
Chair, Labor and Homing Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 2874585 * Toll Free: l»<S’()()-423~69()0 * TTI’: 71] 
Michael. Tipp§ng@legi.slm ‘are. mainegov * legl.slc1Im'e.maine.govAve11aIe
that by setting the state SSI payment for a married couple (when both receive SSI) at double 
the level for an individual person ($130 a month for a married couple). 
LD 1666 wouldn't make Maine a leader. lt would move Maine from the back of the pack to 
the middle of the pack—making Maine's state supplement SS1 payments about in the 
middle of the states that provide such payments. And it would index state SS1 supplement 
to increase with cost of living in the same way that federal SSI payments are indexed. 
Another portion of the bill would also increase the state supplement and thus the personal 
needs allowance for some people in institutional care. I understand the Committee is 
considering other legislation on this subject and would be happy to remove or modify this 
portion of the bill to bring this legislation into alignment with the legislature's priorities. 
Thank you for your consideration and I'm happy to take any questions.
