April 27, 2023 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony in support of LD 1666 “An Act to Modernize the State Supplement to Supplemental 
Security Income by Updating the State Supplement and Removing Marriage Disincentives” 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee: 
My name is Regina Bowie and I live in Presque Isle, Maine. I am a self-advocate and currently the 
Treasure on the Board of Directors for Speaking Up For Us. I am testifying in support of LD 1666 because 
it is important to update Supplemental Security Income according to the current economic standards. 
It adds a little bit of income and gives an update according to the current standard.  It will help me deal 
with the rising cost of daily expenses and a bit of extra income will ease the burden.  If I chose to get 
married in the future, I will know that I or my spouse will not lose our entire income. 
I have a fiancé who has really special needs and because of that we are not living together. We tried to 
have a ceremony because we want to get married. Because of his needs, we were not able to get 
married the way we wanted to. It has been a negative impact on the both of us. We have tried to do this 
in a way that works for the both of us. Because of these reasons, we had a commitment ceremony. If we 
had married like we wanted to, we would have both lost our benefits. This has taken a toll on us both 
emotionally and physically and we just don’t think it is fair. This situation has negatively impacted our 
lives because we don’t even live together like a normal couple.  
This bill will help others ease the burden of the expense of living as well as help them make a choice 
when they plan to get married. 
It will hurt if rent is increased all at once and it will feel more like a burden than help.  It will be the same 
for others if their rent is increased all at once, taking the entire income increase.    
They need to look at increasing the rent slowly because the added benefits will affect the amount of 
rent that I will be responsible for paying, therefore we will not really benefit from the increase to help 
with daily expenses. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit my testimony. I will be available to answer questions by email.  
Sincerely, 
Regina Bowie 
Presque Isle, ME 
reginabowie@myfairpoint.net  
