Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, my name is April Duval. I live in New Sharon, Maine. I'm here 
today in strong support of LD 616 and asking you to vote ought to pass, because the health 
care professionals in Maine bravely choosing to provide the most stigmatized and politicized 
medical care in this country desen/e protections under the law.As someone who has trusted 
these healthcare providers through the most vulnerable experience in my life, I know they 
deserve these protections proposed in LD 616, and so much more. But l acknowledge that we 
are discussing whether you will enact legal protections to support undeniably important work of 
abortion care that they have been trained to safely provide. So that is where l meet you today. 
l will take a moment, however, and ask you to think about the absurd reality that in 2023 asa 
state, we are pushed to enshrine in law specific protections for the ability of any healthcare 
professionals to practice the safest and most effective form of medicine they have been 
tirelessly trained and educated to provide. Imagine the social climate that would require this kind 
of legislation for the treatment of heart attacks, stroke, diabetes or cancer. Imagine that multiple 
other states have outlawed the treatment of these conditions, and created political refugees in 
the form of healthcare patients seeking treatment, and that as Mainers we choose to force our 
strong, capable and effective healthcare professionals to balance their Hippocratic oath with the 
ideological legal threats that come with providing that medical care. 
When you strip away the propaganda, the stigma, the ideology, that is what we are discussing 
today. We are talking about political refugees from within our own country, coming to Maine to 
access healthcare that has been outlawed in their state, and asking our healthcare 
professionals to treat them. This is where we are, and we have seen it coming. Our providers 
have seen it coming. They deserve to know, fundamentally and constitutionally, that Mainers 
have their back, in every way possible. And it is ourjob today to show them that we do, and 
pass this legislation. Thank you for your time.
