April 30, 2023  
 
Dear Honorable Members of the Maine Legislature,  
I wish to voice my opinion and concerns regarding:  
LD 616 -An Act to Protect Health Care Professionals Providing Reproductive Health Care Services  
LD 616 is simply a sham  alleging discrimination  based solely on provision of reproductive health care 
services against health care providers by their malpracti ce insurer.  The definition of discrimination is 
“Treatment or consideration based on class or category, such as race or gender, rather than individual 
merit; partiality or prejudice” (American Heritage Dictionary).  
If a provider does not does not like th e terms of their malpractice insurer, they can purchase another 
plan.  This is a preemptive, legalese loophole playing on a divisive term like discrimination , when no such 
violation is occurring. This is preposterous and this Pandoras Box should not be all owed to open. It is one 
more erosion against the live s of the unborn.  
James Dux,  
Searsport, Maine  
James Dux
Searport
LD 616
April 30, 2023
Dear Honorable Members of the Maine Legislature,
I wish to voice my opinion and concerns regarding:
LD 616 -An Act to Protect Health Care Professionals Providing Reproductive Health 
Care Services 
LD 616 is simply a sham alleging discrimination based solely on provision of 
reproductive health care services against health care providers by their malpractice 
insurer.  The definition of discrimination is “Treatment or consideration based on 
class or category, such as race or gender, rather than individual merit; partiality or 
prejudice” (American Heritage Dictionary). 
If a provider does not does not like the terms of their malpractice insurer, they can 
purchase another plan.  This is a preemptive, legalese loophole playing on a divisive 
term like discrimination, when no such violation is occurring. This is preposterous 
and this Pandora's Box should not be allowed to open. It is one more erosion against 
the lives of the unborn.
James Dux,
Searsport, Maine

