Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
 
I am James Swan and I live in Waldoboro, in Lincoln County and I urge you to 
vote Ought to Pass on LD 616.  
 
My support of this pieces of legislation, LD 616 (An Act to Protect Healthcare 
Professionals Providing Reproductive Health Care), sponsored by Representative 
Amy Kuhn, stems from challenges my sisters, cousins and niece have experienced 
in securing reproductive healthcare over the years.  
 
I believe healthcare, even specific care for reproductive concerns, should be readily 
available for everyone, certainly every Mainer. Both bills would protect 
reproductive healthcare professionals and expand access to abortion care for all 
individuals.  
 
One in four people who can be pregnant will have an abortion in their lifetime. It is 
important to remember that abortion is a safe and normal procedure that can be 
done both in-clinic and with medication.  
 
LD 616 would protect out of state abortion providers from legal repercussions that 
could result in raised insurance rates, fines, and license revocations. By ensuring 
that healthcare professionals providing reproductive health care are not penalized 
for doing their job, LD 616 would protect access to vital healthcare services and 
ensure that patients have access to the care they need.  
 
It is important to me that we remember reproductive healthcare is not just a 
women's issue. Trans, nonbinary, and intersex individuals who have a uterus and 
can become pregnant. They too need access to reproductive healthcare services.  
 
I believe we must come to grips with the reality that a person's ability to access 
abortions is impacted by their identity. The access of Black, Indigenous, and 
people of color to preventative care, insurance coverage, sex ed, etc. is 
disproportionately impacted by medical racism and systemic discrimination. This 
legislation is an important step toward ensuring that all individuals have access to 
the care they need, regardless of their identity. 
 
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 616. 
 
Sincerely, 
James Swan 
Waldoboro, Maine 04572  
