Good afternoon.  My name is Jana Gerardi and I am from Dexter, Maine.  I am here to ask you to vote against LD 1619 and legislate in favor of life.  We all say that we value life and that we need to care for the children. We hate to see children go hungry, and we are angry when children are abused. We grieve when children’s lives are lost in a tragedy or a disaster. Save the children! is our cry.  Abortion violently rips out the most delicate, fragile, and vulnerable of all children and human life from what should be the safest and most loving place in all the world, and murders it. I am pleading with you to save the littlest children: the unborn ones living in the womb.  Life starts at conception. Once an egg is fertilized, it takes only three days for that one cell to have multiplied into sixteen cells. Heartbeat is first able to be detected by six weeks. By nine weeks, it is undeniable what “it” was all along and will continue to be: a little person!  In the name of saving lives and safety, you shut down the state of Maine for COVID-19. You say your hearts are broken over the school shootings, and you legislate in an attempt to stop them. If someone else were to attempt to end your life, you would rightly be outraged and seek legal recourse and justice.  You tell suicidal people, “Don’t kill yourself; your life matters!” You even try to save the environment, protect endangered species, and find justice for pets. Yet you subsidize and even promote abortion: the murder of innocent, defenseless children. Don’t their lives matter? This an inconsistent, mixed message to say the least, and hypocrisy at its finest.  When God created man, He took special care that He didn’t have for the other living things: He formed him from the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul. In fact, God loved man so much that He Himself became a man to save mankind from the evil that is within each and every one of their hearts. God’s intent all along was a relationship with man, and every person who trusts in Him will spend all of eternity with Him.  God values life. We should value life as well, and that includes and begins with the unborn baby.  Please vote against LD 1619 in favor of life. 
