An Act to Protect Health Care Professionals Providing Reproductive 
Health Care Services 
Oppose 
Senator Bailey Representative Perry, and members ofthe Health 
Coverage, Insurance & Financial Committee. My name is Karen Vachon 
I am the Executive Director of Maine Right To Life in Auburn. I come 
before you today to speak in Opposition An Act to Protect 
Health Care Professionals Providing Reproductive Health Care 
Services 
This bill shouts — abortion first; woman's safety second. The'Pro~ V‘ 
Abortion industry likes to tell us that Abortion is Reproductive 
Healthcare. It isn't. For starters, there is nothing reproductive about it. 
But, specifically, in addressing this bill, if you call abortion healthcare, 
then abortion should be held to the same licensing, health and safety 
standards as every other medical facility and medical procedure. Out- 
of- State providers that come here to perform abortions should be held 
accountable. This bill doesn't do that. lvlaine may as well be the wild, 
wild, west — anything goes, no accountability, and who cares about 
women. 
This bill is dangerous. Women deserve better. Not only does Maine 
have some of the most permissive laws in the country, the safety of 
women is something every Mainer should be concerned about. 
Unlike most states, which require that abortions only be performed by 
a licensed physician, Maine allows lower level health practitioners to 
perform them as well. While they are "allowed" to perform an 
abortion, there is no guarantee that these lower level health providers 
has the specialized knowledge and experience to perform an abortion 
or render medical aid during a complication. That's scary!
if tie??? ass; 1 ‘t r1 Further — this bill creates a special exception allowing and encouraging 
abortion providers in other states who break their state's abortion 
laws. It forbidds medical malpractice insurance providers to consider 
any licensing or other infraction related to abortion when providing 
coverage in Maine. Thus creating a sanctuary state for abortion 
activists to come to l\/laine. 
The very nature of insurance is to mitigate risk. The lower the risk, the 
lower the cost of insurance. lnsurance is all about protection. This bill 
ask insurer's to ignore the law. Unscrupulous abortion practices 
performed in other states by a doctor who comes to Maine are 
completely ignored. 
Abortion at any cost with no accountability is what this bill is about. 
Please vote Ought not to pass. Women deserve so much better. 
Karen VachonI 
Maine Right to Life
