Christian Civic League of Maine 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Maine Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services, l am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic 
League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom ﬂourishes, families thrive, 
and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 616 An Act to Protect Health Care Professionals Providing Reproductive 
Health Care Senrices - Rep. Amy Kuhn of Falmouth 
This bill prohibits an insurer that provides medical malpractice insurance in this State from taking any adverse 
action against a health care professional that provides abortion or other reproductive health care services on the 
sole basis that a health care professional is acting in violation of another state's law or a revocation or other 
adverse action against a health care professional ‘s license in another state. As an aside, abortion buildings are 
blocked from health care inspections so it would be incorrect to call abortion in Maine healthcare. 
This bill would make Maine a sanctuary state for activist abortion providers. The bill creates a special exception to 
encourage and support abortion providers in other states to break that state's law related to abortion. lt requires 
that medical malpractice insurance providers do not consider any licensing or other infraction related to abortion 
when providing coverage in Maine. Break abortion law in OH? Don't worry, you can come to Maine and havea 
completely clean slate. Seems like a strange economic development focus. 
This bill would make women more unsafe. The bill provides no allowance for discretion and doesn't acknowledge 
that some of these providers may have aborted babies even beyond the scope of Maine's law or that they may 
have provided abortion services in an unsafe or unsanitary way. lt eliminates accountability of any kind for 
abortion providers by requiring insurers to look the other way no matter what the abortion-related infraction was- 
opening the door to dangerous or reckless providers in addition to activist providers. Again, Maine does not ask 
abortion buildings to do what healthcare organizations do...show they are safe and clean. This bill would support 
that strategy or perhaps religion of on demand regardless of safety. 
This bill would require insurers to ignore the law. As an insurer considers risk related to any insurance policy, they 
must consider whether an applicant is willing to brazenly break another state's law. An auto liability insurer would 
never ignore all infractions a driver may have incurred while in another state--the infractions indicate a level of 
negligence and risky behavior that must be considered before providing a policy. Again, why would you give 
abortion buildings special treatment over health care operations, a rhetorical question. 
Please vote against LD 616 and thus against big money, corporate interests. Or perhaps just support safety for 
women? 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. 
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless. 
70 Sevvaii Street, Augusta, iviz1in<:(.¥i33ii Phone: (207) 329/6148 
p0i.icy(%4 ‘1ccln'iair1r:.0rg WWW.cclmaine.org
