  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Regina Rooney on behal f of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In support of LD 616: “An Act to Protect Health Care Professionals Providing Reproductive 
Health Care Services ” 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Monday , May 1 , 2023  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services , I am writing on behalf of the Maine 
Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 616, “An Act To Protect 
Health Care Professionals Providin g Reproductive Health Care Services.”   
 
MCEDV recognizes the important role that reproductive health care generally, and abortion 
care specifically, plays for survivors of domestic abuse and violence.  In most cases, having  a 
child binds two people togethe r for the long term, even if their relationship end s; sharing 
custody and co -parenting is a long -term project that is overseen and enforced  by the courts . 
People who perpetrate abuse understand  this and frequently use pregnancy as a way of 
inducing long -term connection , dependence, and compliance .  They may coerce pregnancy 
by damaging contraceptives or refusing to use them, they may commit sexual assault 
without using protection, or they may simply wait to show their true abusive colors until 
after their p artner has had a child , only then revealing overtly controlling and violent 
behavior . Pregnancy itself is dangerous for survivors; pregnant patients are more likely to 
die from homicide than any other pregnancy related conditions2, and the homicide rate 
among pregnant a nd postpartum women in 2020 increased 33% from 20193. Given this 
reality , contraceptive care and abortion must be understood as  key tools of safety planning 
for survivors  of domestic abuse and violence .   
 
MCEDV supports legislation that will increase Mainers’ access to these critical services, 
which LD 616 does . Since the overturn of Roe v. Wade returned abortion regulation to the 
states, we have already seen how much harder getting an abortion is for count less 
Americans. Being forced  to navigate th e confusing, quickly shifting landscape is bad for 
anyone who needs an abortion. For a survivor who needs an abortion in a state where it is 
prohibited, and who is trying to plan while also dealing with ongoing su rveillance , control , 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, including court ad vocacy services in the civil and criminal courts.  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
and violence from an abusive partner, the stakes are high, indeed.  
 
We must ensure that Maine remains willing, able and ready to provide this critical health 
care and safety planning option  for people . By protecting Maine providers fr om potential 
malpractice consequences of serving people from out of state, we make sure that the 
people who can get here will find the care they need.  
 
As Mainers, we pride ourselves on pulling together for the good of all in times of crisis. Make 
no mist ake: these are times of crisis regarding abortion access. We must do everything we 
can to be sure that Maine does our part. We therefore encourage you to vote “ought to 
pass” on LD 616. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on this important bill.  
 
Contact Information:    
Regina Rooney  
Education & Communications Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334   
Email:  regina@mcedv.org    
 
 
 
