Cary Nash, Owner / Operator Nash Farms, Inc 
LD 24, An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and Regulate Recreational 
Campﬁres 
Thank you, Co-Chairs Senator Ingwersen and Representative Pluecker and members of the 
Committee, for this opportunity to speak today. 
I am Cary Nash. I live in Camden and own and manage Nash Farms, Inc., based in Appleton. I 
have been on wild blueberry ﬁelds since before I was a year old, when my mother ran a harvest 
crew on my grandfather ’ s land. I worked on wild blueberry ﬁelds through high school and 
college and started my own company in 1983. At one time, Nash Farms grew and harvested 
wild blueberries on over 1000 acres ofland. 
I began growing and harvesting certiﬁed organic wild blueberries with the 2010 crop, and since 
the 2019 crop, all of the land that I grow and han/est has been certiﬁed organic. Now, I'm 
farming something over 500 acres, with about half of that being harvested each year and about 
half of the land being burned each year. 
Most of the wild blueberry land that I work on is in Knox County but I also work ﬁelds in Lincoln 
and Waldo Counties. Before the industry used flail mowing, which is an alternative to pruning 
with ﬁre, all wild blueberry ﬁelds were burned. After ﬂail mowing became the preferred 
pruning method, I only burned areas that were too rough or rocky to flail mow. I now burn 
almost all of my certiﬁed organic land. The reason I burn certiﬁed organic wild blueberry land is 
to sanitize the fields. By burning thoroughly, I prune the plants and I also burn up the mummy 
berries that cause Monilinia Blight, a devastating disease that can destroy an entire crop. No 
organic fungicide has been found to control Monilinia Blight, even though Dr. Seanna Annis,a 
research scientist at the University of Maine, has been screening and ﬁeld testing for one for 
many years. 
The hot burning will also control Valdesenia Disease and several other diseases. Some insect 
infestations, such as spanworm and flea beetle, are controlled by burning the wild blueberry 
plants and the leaf litter on top of the soil. The burning will also help with some weed control 
by burning weed seeds and the above ground growth of weeds and bushes. Organic wild 
blueberry growers must burn because we cannot use the pesticides available to conventional 
growers. 
I have been burning, both in the fall and spring, a total of 40 to 50 days per crop. Over the 
years, I have learned to burn safely and what, where, and when I can burn while minimizing the 
use of straw and fuel oil. I have worked to build a reputation with the town ﬁre chiefs and ﬁre 
wardens and I work with them to ﬁgure out the best way I can get my ﬁelds burned.
Sometimes the best way to burn a ﬁeld may be on a "red fIag" day. Fire chiefs have told me 
that the ﬁre danger rating from the Forest Service for the day doesn't come out until about9 
AM. Most good spring days, we are in the ﬁeld and burning before 9 AM. 
I like being able to talk to the ﬁre chief or warden and ﬁgure out the best way forward. If the 
person writing burn permits doesn't agree with me, at least I can invite them out to see whatI 
am doing and educate them a bit about how wild blueberries are burned. Most local ﬁre chiefs 
will allow wild blueberry burns when other ﬁres are not allowed. 
Please don't make blanket restrictions that will not allow local ofﬁcials to make decisions based 
on their own observations, experience, and unique circumstances.
