Senator lngwersen 
Representative Pluecker 
Members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee 
Re: LD 24, AN ACT to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and 
Regulate Recreational Campfires 
My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine. I own Hart 
Public Policy and appear before you today on behalf of my client, the Maine 
Campground Owners’ Association (MECOA). MECOA represents over 185 of 
Maine's licensed campgrounds and they are the premier resource for 
supporting campground owners and promoting camping in Maine. Camping 
has a rich history in the State as a wholesome recreational activity where 
people get outside and enjoy all that our State has to offer with its’ natural 
beauty, rugged coastline, pristine ponds and lakes, forests and so much more. 
During the recent pandemic this industry boomed and that has not slowed 
down ~~ they see a bright future for camping for both Maine families and 
those from away. 
LD 24 is an important piece of legislation to the camping industry since a State 
without all this natural beauty would be devastating. For these reasons, 
campgrounds take their responsibility very seriously from where fires in 
campsites can be located, the perimeters of width and height at campsites, and 
special attention to ‘community fire pits’ where the fire can be larger but 
within a contained setting and with constant supervision. As an industry, 
MECOA puts best practices along with prevention and education on fire safety 
at the forefront. 
Recently, we had an opportunity to talk to the Fire Service about this bill and 
how MECOA, and their licensed campgrounds, could enhance educational 
opportunities and still provide our visitors with a Maine experience when 
camping in Maine. As we understand the amendment, we believe this 
approach will serve our organization well, and we look forward to working 
with the Committee and the Forest Service to see this amended Red Flag
legislation passed. As an aside, as a testament to their commitment, we have 
asked the Fire Service to come to their annual meeting in March to put an 
emphasis on fire safety at campgrounds along with best practices to protect 
everyone in a camping environment. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or bring back any information that 
you feel would be helpful in the Committee deliberations. 
Thank you for your time and attention.
