WILDA 
atuzasnnv c o M M l s s l 0 N o F .0 
mu NE 
Eric Venturini, Executive Director ofythe Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
Testifying Neither For Nor Against iQ 
LD 24, An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and Regulate Recreational 
Campfirest 
»~ 
Senator Henry lngwersen, Representative Bill Pluecker, and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Eric Venturini and l am the Executive Director of*'the 
Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine. r' 
V -» 
The Wild Blueberry Commission works on behalf of Maine's 485‘ wild blueberry farmers and businesses 
who grow wild blueberries on approximately 42,0002 acres across the state and on Passamaquoddy 
tribal land. Ongoing partnership and collaboration with the University of Maine, and business-led 
innovations have helped to increase the production of Maine wild blueberries "’500% over the last 50 
years. Concurrent with those advances, traditional practices are still employed to great effectiveness. l 
am referencing speciﬁcally the practice of burning wildblueberry fields.' 
The Practiceof Burn Pruning“ A QQ 
M' 
Wild blueberries can only be grown in sufficient quantities to justify commercial harvest when grown on 
an every-other-year cycle. Producers manage on this cycle by pruning fields on the off-cycle, or the non- 
fruiting year. Producers prune in two ways, mowing, or burning. Producers burn less frequently today 
than in the past. However, 8.6% of producers still rely exclusively on burning, and 27.6% employ both 
burning and mowing to prune fields? In total, over 36% of wild blueberry producers employ burn 
pruning. my 
Unlike mowing, burning a field fresets' it, killing pests both insect and pathogenic, that have built up in 
the field since the last burn. In fact, this is one of the most relied upon and effective non-chemical 
means of controlling pests in this crop, and one of the reasons that wild blueberry production requires 
an estimated 1/10*“ of the inputs that cultivated (highbush) blueberries require. ‘ In fact, burning is such 
1 National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2017. Berries: 2017. K 
https:[/www.nass.usda.gov/Publications[AgCensus/2017/Full Report/Volume 1, Chapter 2 County Level/Maine/st23 2 003 
3 0033.gdf ‘ ~ ‘ ‘ 
»' 
2 Based on 2021 harvested acreage (appx. half of total acreage in any given year). *' 
https:[/extension.umaine.edu/blueberries/factsheets/statistics-2/crorgproduction-statistics-2019[ 
3 Calderwood, L. 2018. Unpublished Data. University of Maine Extension. Based on a survey distributed to producers in 2018 
(n=58i yA
A 
D s ‘' 
4 Drummond, Frank. Professor Emeritus at the University of Maine of entomology, specialized in wild blueberries. Personal 
communication.
an effective non-chemical control that an estimated 80% of organically certified wild blU€b8i‘l'Y 
prod ucers5 burn their ﬁelds at least once every 4-6 years. 
Considering the importance of burn pruning to Maine's iconic and economically vital wild blueberry 
industry, we have some concerns with the proposed bill as drafted. 
Impacts of Proposed Legislation on Ability to Employ Traditional ManagementA 
In the past 5 years, the State has declared 9 red flag days. Those warnings typically occur during the 
months of April and May. April and May are also the months when wild blueberry producers 
traditionally burn their ﬁelds. Restricting burning activities on up to 2 days each spring would impact our 
industry for the following reasons:_ 
1. Prior to burning, producers must obtain permits from their local fire department. In rural areas 
with low personnel capacity, it is not unheard of for permits to be given only on weekends, or 
only after 5 pm, when firefighers are available to be on call, or on site. This quickly reduces the 
number of days available for a producer to burn.l
; 
2. To burn responsibly and effectively, producers need to burn when conditions are just right. The V 
burn needs to be hot enough to be effective, but wind speeds must be low enough to conduct a 
burn safely. These ideal conditions are not infrequently, red flag days. Producers estimate that 
in total, there are typically only 4 to 6 good burn days in the spring. This bill could reduce the 
number of days available for burn pruning wild blueberries by 33-50% in any given year. 
3. If unable to burn prune a field, growers that rely on this practice will not have a crop in the 
following cycle._ 
4. . The practice of burning wild blueberry fields was first used by the Wabanaki thousands of years 
ago. Today, the Passamaquoddy Wild Blueberry Company employs traditional burn pruning on 
more than 50 acres each year. .
1 
Burn pruning is an effective integrated Pest Management Practice 'A 
1. Mummy berry is a fungal pathogen of blueberry. If left unmanaged in a blueberry field, this 
pathogen has the potential to reduce yields by up to 100%.“ The best non-chemical 
management strategy of mummy berry is burning. Burns reduce the presence of the pathogen 
by an estimated 50% per burn. Organic producers —who today manage over 3,000 acres of wild 
blueberry in Maine—rely on their ability to burn as the only effective non-chemical 
management strategy for this pathogen.A 
2. Burning also controls insect pests such as flea beetles, thrips, spanworm7 and is the best non- 
chemical management strategy available. 
3. For burning to be effective as a pest management tool, burns must be hot and consistent. Such 
burns are achieved on dry days — the same conditions that may help to trigger a red flag 
warning.‘
‘ 
5 7.1% (3,015 acres in 2022) of wild blueberry acreage is certified organic, according to 2022 data provided by the Maine 
Organic Farmers and Gardenefs Association._ 
5 Annis, S. 2011. improving the Control of Mummy Berry Disease while Decreasing the use of Fungicides in Wild Berry 
Production of Northern New England. Non Technical Summary, National Institute of Food and Agriculture 3D grant if 2009- 
41530-15657. 
7 D’Appo|lonio, J., D. E. Yarborough, P. Fanning, and J. Collins. 2020. insect Management Guide. Fact Sheet No. 209. UMaine 
Extension No. 2001. 
WI Lot. 
sues.-12* 
l’1AlilE‘¥?"', 
5784 York ComplexSuite 52 ' 
Orono, ME 04469-5784 - 
207-581-1475 - 
wbcm@maine.edu
The Existing Permit System 
Producers planning to employ the traditional practice of burning are required to obtain burn permits 
from their local ﬁre department. Producers and ﬁre marshals have built up relationships over the years, 
and ﬁre marshals know when, where, to whom, and under what conditions it is safe to issue burn 
permits in their area. I suggest that the existing system has been working effectively for years, and 
respectfully ask that the Department, and this Committee, consider carefully the impacts of this 
legislation as drafted on Maine's wild blueberry farmers. 
Conclusion 
I would not want to hamper the growth of Organic wild blueberry production through this legislation, 
which has more than tripled in acreage over the last 8 years, and as mentioned, relies heavily on burn 
pruning. I would not want to hinder the ability of this industry to manage their ﬁelds according to 
traditional practices. 
I respectfully ask that commercial wild blueberry production is exempted from the requirements ofthis 
legislation. . 
I am committed to working with this Committee, Chief Gross, and the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry towards a solution that allows Chief Gross to minimize fire risk while also 
maintaining wild blueberry producers ’ rights to burn their ﬁelds safely. 
I would be happy to try and answer any questions that you may have. Thank you for granting me this 
time. 
HAINE ’t 
5784 York ComplexSuite 52 - 
Orono, ME 044695784 - 
207-581-1475 - 
wbcm@maine.edu
