\NG F0 
or 
,» 
1c 
I / 
Maine Farm Bureau MAINE FARM BUREAU . . 
Association 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
LD AN ACT TO PROHIBIT OPEN BURNING UNDER A RED FLAG WARNING AND REGULATE 
RECREATIONAL CAMPFIRES 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry: 
My name is Julie Ann Smith and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Farm Bureau 
Association, the state’s largest farmer-run advocacy organization. We have represented the voice 
of all agriculture in Maine since 1951 and I am grateful to have the opportunity to serve as the 
voice of our farmers today. 
As farmers, we are deeply concerned and mindful of how We interact with our land. Maintaining 
the delicate balance between food production and healthy soils is of utmost concern to us. While 
We understand the concerns raised around open burning during a red ﬂag warning, our farmers 
are concerned that there may be unintended consequences for agricultural production. 
Fire is used in agricultural production as an organic Way to clear fields or manage pests and 
Weeds. Controlled ﬁeld burns are less expensive than the use of pesticides, fungicides, or 
herbicides and are done thoughtfully and carefully by many farmers, especially those producing 
wild blueberries and potatoes. For certiﬁed organic wild blueberry producers, controlled burns 
are the only option for preventing blight. Performing a controlled burn exposes a farmer to 
signiﬁcant liability and is therefore done cautiously. 
Frequently, burns are done during the spring. On average, there are only 5 days of the right 
condition for a controlled burn. Sometimes, the ideal time is a short period during the middle of 
the day that may have a red ﬂag designation that Was determined by wind levels early in the 
morning, which are nonexistent at noon. Farmers are concerned that the opportunity for permits 
that could be issued to them in coordination with the town ﬁre Warden or local forest ranger ona 
red ﬂag day would be lost. 
The farmers of Maine respectfully ask that the bill be amended to exempt commercial 
agriculture. 
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have. 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite 1, Augusta, Maine 043 30 
(207) 622-4111 // www.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureau.com
