Maine Summer Camps 
Real Kids. Real Camps. Real Maine! 
Testimony of Newell Augur, on behalf of the Maine Youth Camp Association 
Presented to the 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Neither for Nor Against LD 24, An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning 
and Regulate Recreational Campﬁres 
Sponsored by Senator Chip Curry 
January 30, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Newell Augur. I ama 
resident of Yarmouth and a partner at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate the opportunity to 
submit this testimony on behalf of the Maine Youth Camp Association (“MYCA”), the State 
wide non-proﬁt organization of Maine camps, neither for nor against LD 24, An Act to Prohibit 
Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and Regulate Recreational Campﬁres. 
Children ’s camps are an important part of the fabric of our state, providing an outdoor 
educational experience for children from Maine, from across the country and around the world. 
Maine is the leader for children ’s camping. The ﬁrst camps were established here more than 100 
years ago. Today, children ’s camps in Maine serve an estimated 40,000 children annually, and 
about half of all camper days are ﬁlled by Maine children. 
The member camps of the MYCA employ approximately 1,170 year-round employees and 
13,500 seasonal employees at a combined payroll of over $50 million. They pay nearly $10 
million in income, sales and property taxes each year. In a normal season, Maine youth camps 
are responsible for approximately $5 00 million of economic activity. 
Camps provide an outdoor living experience for children that builds social skills and accentuates 
the importance of our natural resources. This learning is experiential, in that campers learn by 
doing. Camps offer this in a setting Where children learn how to get along with peers, develop 
habits of self-actualization and discipline, experience success and learn how to overcome failure. 
And all this, perhaps for the ﬁrst time, Without the presence of their parents. 
15705587 1
We are fully supportive of the broader goals of this legislation. As stewards of Maine’s 
environment, Maine Youth Camps want to make sure that our campers - and our environment — 
are safe. Our success is dependent upon that. 
The operations of licensed Maine Youth Camps are regulated by Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS) and governed by Rule 208. Section 8 of that Rule speciﬁcally 
addresses issues of safety and ﬁre prevention. Further, as pait of its oversight, members of 
DHHS’ Health Inspector Program (HIP) make regular inspection visits of Maine Youth Camps 
to ensure that they are in compliance with these safety codes. At the discretion of the inspector, 
this licensing inspection can include an examination of any campﬁre site and the presence of 
safety equipment and other appropriate safety precautions. 
For as long as Maine youth camps have been in existence, we have held campﬁres. They take 
place in designated, safe areas and under appropriate supervision. Most camps use weekly 
recreational campﬁres chiefly as a demarcation point to build a strong camp community. Youth 
camps also use campﬁres for in order to build outdoor living skills, increase safety awareness, 
teach wood splitting, among a l1ost of other purposes. An unscienti ﬁc survey of our members 
suggests that many of these recreational campﬁres are taller or wider than 3 feet. 
Our understanding is that the sponsor and the Maine Forest Service are interested in addressing 
the improper use of recreational ﬁres as a way to circumvent the requirements for obtaining a 
burn permit, and do not want to negatively affect or add any administrative burdens to Maine 
Youth Camps. In that vein, we would support an exemption from the language regarding the 
height and width restrictions in the bill for recreational ﬁres for Maine Youth Camps licensed by 
DHHS. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I’d be happy to answer any questions.
2 
15705587 1
