Nicolas Lindholm
Penobscot
LD 24
I am a certified organic wild blueberry farmer with 27 years experience producing 
fresh and frozen fruit, as well as currently serving as a commissioner on the Wild 
Blueberry Commission, and work as a service provider for MOFGA.  In all three of 
these capacities, I would like to advocate for a wild blueberry exemption to be 
included in LD 24.  The vast majority of organic wild blueberry growers burn at least 
some acreage each year, as it's an essential tool for pest and disease control.  In 
practical terms, burning is the only tool for organic growers to control mummy berry 
disease and insect pests including flea beetles and thrips, all significant, economically 
damaging pests.  From my perspective, I tried cutting back on burning (for economic 
as well as ecological reasons) from about 2016-2020, and found sudden eruption of 
issues including mummy berry and flea beetles, so have moved back to burning more 
than half the time (my goal, at this moment, is to prune my fields with a burn two out 
of every three cycles).  So with seven fields in my farm operation, every spring, I'm 
aiming to burn at least two, sometimes three, fields (average total of 20 acres each 
spring), thereby needing at least 2 if not 3 good burning days in April (and a good 
burning day is by my definition low wind and low humidity, which may or may not 
be a red flag day).  This situation requires the prudence in having the option to burn 
even on a red flag day, and I want to emphasize the importance for a grower to have a
good relationship with their local burn permitting person.  The understanding would 
be that burning when the wind is above 10 mph would still remain non permissible, 
but otherwise low humidity and dry red flag days would be permissible.  Again, 
having a good relationship with your local fire permit person is key, particularly 
having them know and trust your burning skills.  And thereby having the possible 
exemption from any ban on open burning on red flag days.
