STATE or MAINE 
ti? “ill DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FoREsTRY W» ‘t . OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
A 
22 STATE HoUsE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS ‘ ' ' ’ " ‘ ‘ AMANDAE BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 24 
An Act to Ban Open Fires on Red Flag Days and to Deﬁne Recreational Fires 
January 30, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Robby Gross; I am the Chief Forest Ranger of the 
Maine Forest Service (MFS) at the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF). 
Thank you, Senator Curry, for sponsoring this Department Bill. 
As climate change and variable weather patterns inﬂuence Maine’s environment, we have seena 
noticeable upward trend in wildﬁre occurrence over the last ﬁve years. Additionally, Maine continues to 
set records for outdoor recreation, which also correlates with some of the uptick we have observed in 
wildﬁre increases, and we don’t see this trend reversing. 
In 2020, 1,154 wildﬁres burned in Maine, the second-highest annual total since 1900. During the 
two decades prior, the median average was 522 Wildﬁres annually. The increase in wildﬁre 
occurrence stresses Maine’s forest rangers, town wardens, ﬁre chiefs, and community ﬁrst responders. 
This impacts our time spent implementing effective wildﬁre preparedness and suppression programs by 
increasing the already high demand placed on Maine’s ﬁre service. While we cannot always control what 
happens during the response to a wildﬁre, what we can control is our ability to be prepared and reduce 
opportunities for consequential events, which leads us to the legislation before us today. 
RED FLAG WARNING DAYS 
A red ﬂag warning day is when the Maine Forest Service issues a warning that there is an extreme risk of 
wildﬁre due to weather conditions. A red ﬂag warning of dry conditions can lead to a threat to life and 
property and can have adverse impacts on ﬁreﬁghters and the ability to contain and control wildﬁres. 
Currently, the National Weather Service issues red ﬂag warning days in conjunction with the Maine 
Forest Service upon critical weather components developing, which can lead to extreme wildﬁre behavior 
or numerous wildfre starts. While Maine has an effective open burn permit program, we do not have the 
absolute ability to limit open burning during red ﬂag warning days. LD 24 eliminates the legal ability to 
conduct open burning on red ﬂag warning days and directs the Maine Forest Service not to issue burn 
permits for red ﬂag waming conditions. Make no mistake; wildfres will still occur on red ﬂag warning 
days due to natural events or careless acts by people, but a heightened proactive approach to restricting 
open burning on these days protects Maine residents, homes, and forest resources. The Maine Forest 
/“W HARLOW BUILDING re PHONE: (207) 287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE Conservation _ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 8‘ Forestry FAX. (207) 287-2400 
V}!
Service has a heightened staff level on red ﬂag warning days to respond to wildﬁres expeditiously. Our 
staff level does not impact whether a red ﬂag warning is issued. 
The critical weather elements affecting red ﬂag warnings include strong gusty winds and low relative 
humidity that can lead to very high or extreme ﬁre danger. Red ﬂag warnings typically encompass a 12 to 
24-hour period. Over the last ﬁve years, Maine has witnessed a total of 9 red ﬂag warning days. 
Cumulatively, this is a small amount of time, and asking Maine to refrain from open buming on these 
days is a modest measure to prevent large consequential ﬁres from occurring. 
The Department has been in dialogue with the Maine Wild Blueberry Commission and growers, and we 
understand that there are some concerns that this bill could impact a wild blueberry grower’s ability to 
burn as a ﬁeld management tool. Given that red ﬂag waming days occur approximately twice a year and 
for a short period (under a 24/hour period), we don’t anticipate this proposal as overly burdensome. 
RECREATIONAL FIRES 
Maine Forest Rangers and Maine’s ﬁre service have found through education and enforcement that 
residential campﬁres sometimes exceed their original intent and size. In these cases, people utilize the 
residential campﬁre exemption to burn debris, have large bonfires, or bum prohibited materials; they do 
not obtain an open burn permit. These instances can limit enforcement when needed to hold people 
accountable for their actions or help collect suppression restitution upon a wildﬁre response. With LD 24, 
we deﬁne a recreational campﬁre and restrict ﬁre size to 3 feet in height and 3 feet in width. The ability of 
Maine’s Forest Rangers and Maine’s ﬁre service to have complete situational awareness of the degree of 
open burning on any given day is the backbone to being prepared and responding appropriately to wildﬁre 
risk. 
Residential campﬁres do not require an open burn permit if used for cooking, warming, or aesthetic 
purposes. This is true for Maine's organized and unorganized territories if you have a campﬁre on your 
property. Maine does require an open burn permit if you kindle a recreational campﬁre on a property you 
do not own unless the ground is covered by snow. 
It is our experience that larger ﬁres have more opportunity to escape one’s control and hence should have 
oversight through the open burn permit system. Over the last five years, Maine has witnessed over 400 
wildﬁre occurrences caused by campﬁres. Open bum permits are free and can be obtained on the 
State’s online burn permit system through a Maine Forest Ranger, town warden, ﬁre chief, or municipal 
ﬁre department. 
Lastly, we’ve spoken to the sponsor, the Bureau of Parks and Lands, and the Maine Campground 
Association about a possible amendment that would mirror the authority that the Governor already has 
during extreme ﬁre conditions under Title l2. The language would give the Director of the Bureau of 
Forestry the authority to exempt certain public campsites or licensed camping facilities during red flag 
waming days, as referenced in T12 S9001-B. 
This amendment is consistent with sound current practice. It allows licensed camping facilities and DACF 
campsites to continue following Maine Forest Service’s ﬁre safety campsite rules in heightened states of 
ﬁre danger. By following Maine Forest Service rules, these facilities have been effective at preventing 
wildﬁres from occuning and allow for the continued regular operation of these campsites. 
The Department urges your support for LD 24. It strengthens Maine’s open burning system and helps 
reduce wildﬁre risk daily. Being prepared and able to protect Maine’s residents and property is at the 
heart of Maine’s ﬁre service. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to answer any questions.
