 
131st Legislature   
Senate of  
Maine  
Senate District 11  
 
    
 
Senator Chip Curry  
Senate Majority Office  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333 -0003  
(207) 287 -1515  
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov  
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 24 , "An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a 
Red Flag Warning and Regulate Recreational Campfires ." 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
January 30, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , I am Senator Chip Curry, and I represent 
the 26 rural, coastal, and island communities of Waldo County. Today, I am pleased to present  
LD 24, "An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and Regulate Recreational 
Campfires."  This bill was br ought to me by the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry  (DACF) . 
 
LD 24 aims to protect our st ate from the dangers of wild fires during red flag warn ings.  As a 
member of the Maine Fire Protection Services Commission  and the Maine Fire Service Institute 
Advisory Committee , I can tell you that there has been an upward trend in wildfires over the last 
five years.  
 
Red flag warnings are issued by the National Weather Service and the Maine Forest Service 
when weather cond itions are ideal for wildfires to spread rapidly . These warnings indicate that 
the temperature is warm, the humidity is very low, and strong winds are expected, creating an 
increased risk of fire danger.  
 
This bill, if passed, would prohibit open burning, including recreational campfires, during 
periods in which a red flag warning is in effect. This would help to reduce the risk of wildland 
fires and protect our communities and natural resour ces from the potentially devastating impacts  
of these fires.  
 
In collaboration with DACF, the Bureau of Parks and Lands, and the Maine Campground 
Association, we are working on a potential amendment that would enable the Director of the 
Bureau of Forestry to exempt certain  public campsites or licensed  camping facilities during red 
flag warning days.  
 
I urge you to support this bill, as it would help to keep our state safe and protect our natural 
resources. This bill is an important step in the right direction , and I look forward to working with 
this committee to ensure it s passage . 
 
I am happy to answer any questions ; however , I know Chief Forest Ranger Gross is here to share  
testimony  and answer specific questions . Thank you for your time and consideration.  
