Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Meirose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8 Mulliken Court PO Box B36 % Augusta, ME 04332-0836 Telephone: 2074326-0005 Email: info@malnewoodlandowners.org it Website:wwwmainewoodlandowners org \/\.AlNE 
>@Dt./no COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Favor of 
LD 24 
"An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and Regulate 
Recreational Campﬁres" 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Tom 
Doak, I am the Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in 
favor of LD 24, "An Act to Prohibit Open Burning Under a Red Flag Warning and 
Regulate Recreational Campﬁres." 
This bill as drafted prohibits the Director of the Forest Service from issuing a pennit 
or other permission for open burning when a “red flag Warning” is in effect. The bill 
deﬁnes a red ﬂag warning as a forecast Warning “that informs the public, ﬁreﬁghters 
and land management agencies that conditions are ideal for wildland ﬁre combustion 
and rapid spread.” 
While the intent of the legislation is clearly to limit the number of ﬁres occurring on 
our most vulnerable days, we believe rather than an outright prohibition on the 
issuance of a permit by the Director of the Forest Service on red ﬂag warning days, the 
bill should be amended to provide the Director of the Forest Service with the 
discretionary authority to deny a permit as she deems necessary on red ﬂag Warning 
days. 
This discretionary authority would ensure that the Director can make a decision based 
on all of the information available for that day. 
This bill adds a much needed deﬁnition of “recreational campﬁre” to the statutes that 
limits the size of a recreational campﬁre to one that does not exceed 3 feet in diameter 
and 3 feet in height. Whether those are the right dimensions to deﬁne a recreational 
campﬁre, I would defer to the expertise of the Forest Service. 
Over 95% of all wildﬁres in Maine are caused by people and are preventable. 
Escaped debris burning continues to be the number one cause of ﬁres in Maine. This 
added deﬁnition of recreational campﬁre will help enforcement efforts by the Forest 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
Service by preventing claims that bonﬁres and other large ﬁres, which are essentially debris 
buming ﬁres, are recreational campﬁres. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in favor of this bill. I’d he happy to answer any 
questions now or at the work session.‘
