MA|NE MUN |c|pA|_ 1-soo-452-s1se(m state) 
(T) 207-623-8428 
, 2 ASSOCIATION S3NCE was (F) 207_62A_0m 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-9Li86 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1802- An Act to Add Certain Volunteer Fireﬁghters to the Deﬁnition of "ldalunteer Fireﬁghter" 
May 5, 2023 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing placeholder testimony neither for nor 
against LD 1802, An Act to Add Certain I/olunteer Fireﬁghters to the Deﬁnition of ”V0lunteer Firefighter" 
on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government 
before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative 
Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of 
Maine’s 35 Senate districts and they have not had the opportunity to review the language of this bill yet. 
However, it is important for the committee to understand that this section of law is referred to 
under the workers compensation statutes to deﬁne employees who are ﬁre ﬁghters. As draﬂed, the 
language will eliminate volunteer ﬁre ﬁghters who are true volunteers, and potentially those who receive 
annual or quarterly payments for their volunteerism based on calls, meetings and training. 
Under 39-A §l02, sub-l 1(2) The deﬁnitions of employee for the purposes of eligibility to 
workers compensation beneﬁts provides an exemption speciﬁc to cover unpaid or stipend ﬁreﬁghters. 
“Fireﬁghters, including volunteer ﬁreﬁghters who are active members of a volunteer ﬁre 
association as deﬁned in Htle 3 0-A section 3151 ' 
volunteer emergency medical services persons as 
deﬁned in Title 32, section 83. subsection 12;” . .. 
For these reasons, the committee should careful consider amending this section in balance with 
the desired outcome by the sponsor and make sure that the outcome does not unfairly strip ﬁreﬁghters of 
current or future beneﬁts for their service to their communities in all forms.
