- iii 
1. f. 
. iii‘-“~?¢*“"""5‘»'
i 
Eric Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1052, An Act to Expand Good Samaritan Protections for 
Naloxone Hydrochloride Administration 
Before the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Monday, March 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe~Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, l am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the 
people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. l am before you today to present L.D. 
1052, An Act to Expand Good Samaritan Protections for Naloxone Hydrochloride 
Administration. p 
l am sponsoring this legislation at the request of a municipal official in my district. After speaking 
with the city's insurance provider to prepare for potential emergency situations, he became of 
the opinion that current Good Samaritan protections for the administration of Naloxone 
Hydrochloride (commonly known as “Narcan") do not extend far enough. 
Current law provides that: 
A person, acting in good faith and with reasonable care, is immune from 
criminal and civil liability and is not subject to professional disciplinary 
action for possessing or providing to another person naloxone 
hydrochloride in accordance with this section or for administering 
naloxone hydrochloride in accordance with this section to an individual 
whom the person believes in good faith is experiencing an opioid-related 
drug overdose or for any outcome resulting from such actions. 
As for municipal employees, however, there is concern this protection would not apply. Since 
the City of Auburn employs emergency responders, however, l am told it is the opinion of the 
Maine Municipal Association that this protection would not apply to a non-emergency staff. 
Imagine working in the municipal clerk’s office and discovering someone passed out from an 
opiate overdose in the public restroom. Narcan is readily available, but you hesitate because 
you lack certainty over whether you or the city could be sued for rendering aid. In moments like 
these, when seconds count, a lack of certainty in the law can be potentially deadly. 
The aim of this legislation is to remove any remaining uncertainty. This legislation continues in 
the spirit of existing Good Samaritan provisions in the law — which l believe were already 
intended to cover everyone —— to ensure explicitly those protections apply to everyone. 
Narcan is regularly administered today as a nasal spray. According to Healthline, “Narcan won’t 
have any effect on someone who doesn’t need it (someone who does not have opioids in their
body). So it‘s safe to give someone Narcan if you think they may have overdosed on opioids but 
aren’t sure.” As such, the danger with Narcan is not that it could be administered at the wrong 
time, but that it won’t be administered at the right time. 
Extending Good Samaritan protections to everyone will help ensure — in moments when 
seconds mean the difference between life and death for someone experiencing an overdose - 
there is one less reason to hesitate in rendering assistance. 
Thank you for your time and consideration for this matter today.
