 
 
May 8, 2023  
 
Testimony re: LD 1769: “An Act Concerning Students Who Experience Educational Disruption due to Temporary or 
Permanent Changes Where They Live ” – OUGHT TO PASS   
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural Affairs  Committee : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide  these  comment s in support of  LD 1769. My name is Chris McLaughlin, and I am 
a licensed clinical social worker with over 2 2 years of experience providing behavioral health services to children and 
families across a variety of treatment settings  here in Maine . I am also humbed to be  the Executive Director of the Maine 
Chapter of th e National Association of Social Workers (NASW -ME). A large part of my job at NASW -ME is to represent 
the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor to meet the behavioral health needs of Maine people across all 
settings and ages from Fort Kent t o York and all places in between . On behalf of our over 1000 members here in Maine, 
I’m honored to share thoughts on this important proposed legislation.   
 
I am in favor of LD 1769: An Act Concerning Students Who Experience Educational Disruption due to Temporary or 
Permanent Changes Where They Live.  The Keeping Maine’s Children Connected (KMCC) Liaison Network was 
instrumental in supporting students who experienced educational disruption due to in -patient psychiatric placement, foster 
care placement, kinship care placement, correctional -facility placement and/or high mobility because of economic 
instability .   
 
I personally saw the benefit of the program as the Day Treatment Services Coordinator for a pu blic school system in 
central Maine and then as the  Associate VP of Pediatric and Communi ty Care Servic es at Northern Light Acadia Hospital.  
The Keeping Mai ne’s Children Liaison network meant there was a single point of contact. As a school clinician, I was able 
to use the Keeping Maine’s Children Connected Liaison network to connect with school districts across the state, which 
was critical when a student mo ved from southern Maine. As the KMCC Liaison for the hospital, the liaison network 
enabled hospital staff to connect with key school staff who could support students as they transitioned from an in -patient 
psychiatric hospital stay.  It meant students were  better supported when they returned to their school and community.  
 
The KMCC Liaison network and training promotes active dialogue and collaboration.  Youth in transition are often 
involved with multiple systems, yet the individual Departments, school districts, and agencies too frequently work in 
isolation. The Keeping Maine’s Children Connected network didn’t create more work, it saved time.  It resulted in staff 
from sc hools, agencies, and hospitals being  more effective and efficient in accessing support for youth  and their families.  
 
For these reasons, I strongly encourage you to support this bill, LD 1769  An Act Concerning Students Who Experience 
Educational Disruption due to Temporary o r Permanent Changes Where They Live . I want to  thank you all for your work 
on this issue . Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW ME for any support we can offer , including any social work  
representation and participation in any future work sessions for LD 1769 . 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  

