Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs, thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony in support of LD 1769:  
An Act Concerning Students Who Experience Educational Disruption due to Temporary or 
Permanent Changes Where They Live. My name is Denise Hamlin, I am the Licensed Clinical 
Social Worker at RSU 39 in Caribou Maine.   I have served many students in relation to 
educational disruption and homelessness for over 23 years. Each year the district works hard on 
improving the lives of approximately 1200 students and families as we attempt to connect with 
shelters, reach out for crisis services, counseling, and outreach services. 
 
I am in Favor of LD 1769: 
  
Many youths in our school district struggle with educational disruption due to homelessness, 
housing instability and mental health crises.  Residing in Aroostook County has some 
limitations, public transportation is minimal, housing is limited and we experience difficulty 
accessing residential/hospital treatment facilities for those experiencing mental health crisis.  
Many of our students are referred to the southern part of the state for inpatient treatment.  
Students and families often lack the continuity of care.  Many of these students experience 
educational disruption and they face multiple barriers to remaining invested in their education.  
Upon return to the community, it creates more stress and it is difficult to identify key external 
supports.  As a school district, we are not always informed when a student is returning to our 
area.  They show up on our doorstep with no plan, struggling to reintegrate and fall behind 
academically.  With LD 1769 it would enable the school staff to help families connect with 
supports without spending hours attempting to figure out who the correct contact is and increase 
collaboration to aid families during this stressful time.  The end result is that more students will 
have access to services and learning opportunities to be successful.    
 
LD1769 has the ability to assist a consistent communication structure that allows schools to 
collaborate, access existing resources and provide consistent support to students and families.  
They will have the knowledge to develop a transition plan and be able to focus on addressing the 
issues that may have attributed to the crisis.  When students return to the same environment that 
created the issues, it sets them up for future difficulties. Planning and removing barriers are a 
must and is the key to prevention.  This was a successful program in the past and was eliminated 
during the last administration.  I found it less difficult to make contact with providers when I was 
aware of who the liaison was.  With one staff member managing the liaison network, they have 
the ability to provide professional development and opportunities for regional network meetings 
and collaboration. This ensures a more effective way to work together, have seamless transitions 
and better outcome for students.   A local liaison who has the skills and capacity to carry out the 
position is key to ensuring that all children and youth receive all protections and services 
necessary for them to succeed. 
For these reasons, I ask you to vote yes on LD 1769, to support our youth and our state.  It is 
time to support the future of Maine! Thank you for taking the time to read my testimony and 
your commitment to Maine’s children.   
Denise Hamlin   dhamlin@rsu39.org   207-493-4260  
 
