 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY REGARDING  
 
L.D. 1769  
 
AN ACT CONCERNING STUDENTS WHO EXPERIENCE EDUCATIONAL DISRUPTION DUE TO 
TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT CHANGES WHERE THEY LIVE  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey , executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School  Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association . MSS A’s legislative committee voted neither for nor against  L.D. 1769 and MSBA’s legislative 
committee voted to suppor t L.D. 1769 . 
 
We completely support the need to help children experiencing education disruption due to homelessness, 
foster care placement,  youth detention or the other circumstances that disrupt a student’s life. These are our 
most vulnerable childre n, and they need su pport . 
 
We are understandin g more about the intended purpose of this bil l. It would create and  provid e a position that 
had at one time been in the Department of Educatio n. L.D. 1769  creates a DOE position to oversee 
disengaged, homeless yout h and mostly  provide s alternatives for our most disengaged student s. It would  
provid e a contact person for schools to call and to whom they could seek connecting services for students who 
may be experiencing frequent school mobility.  MSSA is concerned about the effecti veness of one person to be 
this contact person for the entire stat e, and the cost associated with the creation of the position . There had 
been one person at the state level and one person per county at one tim e, and that level of funding and staffing 
may be n ecessary  in order fo r this effort to have the  level of success that is desire d. MSBA supports this effor t 
as a starting point and is in favor of having a person at the state level with whom  school  staff can connect 
directly and not be lost trying to reac h someone in DHHS or MDOE who may or may not know  important 
information and resources that can be of assistance to school staff working to help  these students who have 
had significant disruption.  
 
The person hired at the Department of Education should cr eate and  maintai n connections wit h the Department 
of Health and Human Service s and the Department of Corrections and  other s and use these  liaisons with the 
various departmen ts mentioned in this bil l to assis t these student s. Their respective department he ads or their 
assistants most certainly should be talking to each other and if not, we suggest this bill be amended to make 
that happen. We further suggest the bill call for a date certain when a plan will  emerg e, and out of that plan 
could come enabling le gislation to require the various agencies to cooperate in support of our  children . 
 
While MSSA restates its position neither for nor against , MSBA urges you to vote OT P on L.D. 1769 . 
