 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621-0087   Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org   
 
May 12, 2023 
 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in support of 
L.D. 1763 An Act Regarding Trustee Duties to Beneficiaries  before the  Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Judiciary 
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer some comments in 
support of LD 1763. Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal 
services organization, and our mission is to provide free legal assistance to Maine’s 
older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. Some of the most 
difficult matters that we encounter involve the financial exploitation of older 
adults. In many cases the exploitation involves a family member or someone who 
is known to the victim. We welcome these proposed changes to the Maine Uniform 
Trust Code. 
 
LSE comments regarding LD1763:   
   
SecƟon 1. We believe that the current Uniform Trust Code language is suﬃcient 
and support dele Ɵng SecƟon 1. 
 
SecƟon 2.  “Selling real property and dwellings belonging to trust”.  
 
The current Uniform Trust Code does not speciﬁcally require the trustee to get an 
appraisal before selling real property from the estate. Given the recent changes in 
the housing market and the unusual increases in values for Maine homes, it seems 
prudent to introduce this requirement to the Code. We agree that a licensed 
appraiser would be best, but we also think that adding a independent licensed 
2 
 real estate broker as another op Ɵon would be helpful. A sale using a broker would 
result in a determina Ɵon of fair market value since the sale process itself is 
designed to result in the highest current price. However, if a private sale or sale 
without a real estate broker is contemplated, a licensed appraiser must be 
engaged. We suggest that the appraisal may be relied upon for 270 days -- a 
period longer than that set forth in LD 1763. That will be m ore than enough Ɵme 
to complete a sale but not enough Ɵme for a professional es Ɵmate to become 
stale. We also suggest adding an opƟon that if neither of those op Ɵons seem 
useful, the  trustee may ask the court for  permission  to sell the property. Our ﬁnal 
suggesƟon is the addi Ɵon of an op Ɵon allowing the trustee to rely on the 
language of the trust document if it contains the authority to sell real estate in any 
other way or grants sole discre Ɵon of the method and price to the trustee.  
 
This secƟon addiƟonally provides speciﬁc guidance regarding the trustee’s duty 
when selling a home occupied by the beneﬁciary. This is also missing from the 
Uniform Trust Code. Because the beneﬁciary or beneﬁciaries are o Ōen the ones 
who have placed their home in trust and s Ɵll live there, it seems fair that they 
must agree with a trustee’s decision to sell their home. Reloca Ɵng may not be an 
opƟon that is either desirable or economically feasible . More to the point, the use 
of a trust to hold the property may have been an a Ʃempt to secure it s use so they 
could age in place for the rest of their lives. There is no guarantee that the trustee 
will use the trust assets to maintain them in their home if they are willing to 
assume more risk in their living arrangement than the trustee is willing to support. 
More oŌen that we care to realize, children who are worried about aging parents 
will “encourage” them into facility care rather than keep them living in their own 
homes. Especially if the home has been placed in an irrevocable trust 60 months 
before the parent needs long term care, a child who is also trustee of the trust 
may be tempted to do exactly that since the parent will qualify for MaineCare 
payment for nursing facility care.  
 
Our amended language recognizes that if a trust provides for the sale of a home 
without the consent of the qualiﬁed beneﬁciary who occupies the dwelling, the 
appraisal or independent broker requirement does not apply. It also recognizes 
that if the beneﬁciary does not have the capacity to give consent, their agent, 
3 
 guardian or conservator may make that decision. If none of those ﬁduciaries exist, 
the court may give the trustee authority to sell the home.  
 
Finally, an added sub- secƟon makes the Sec Ɵon eﬀecƟve July 1, 2024 to give 
pracƟƟoners and exis Ɵng trustees the Ɵme to accommodate to these changes.       
                                    
We present the per Ɵnent Uniform Trust Code language in green and our proposals 
amending the language of the bill as wri Ʃen in red.    
 
Uniform Trust Code 
Title 18-B, Chapter 8: DUTIES AND POWERS OF TRUSTEE 
§815. General powers of trustee  
1.  General powers.  A trustee , without authoriza Ɵon by the court , may exercise :   
A. Powers conferred by the terms of the trust; and    
B. Except as limited by the terms of the trust:   
(1) All powers over the trust property that an unmarried competent owner has over 
individually owned property;   
(2) Any other powers appropriate to achieve the proper investment, management and 
distribuƟon of the trust property; and   
(3) Any other powers conferred by this Code.    
2.  Subject to ﬁduciary du Ɵes.  The exerc ise of a power is subject to the ﬁduciary du Ɵes 
prescribed by this chapter.   
 
Title 18-B §816. Speciﬁc powers of trustee 
2.  Acquire or sell property.  Acquire or sell property, for cash or on credit, at public or private 
sale;   
 
LD1763 Changes with suggested amendments in red  
Sec. 2.  18-B MRSA §818  is enacted to read: 
§818.  Selling real property and dwellings belonging to trustor  
1. Current appraisal.   Unless otherwise provided in the terms of the trust, permitted by a 
court order or unless the trustee engages an impartial, Maine licensed real estate broker to 
publicly list and sell real property or a dwelling held in the trust, a  trustee may not sell or 
otherwise convey real property or a dwelling belonging to a trust such property in for an 
amount not supported by an appraisal conducted by an impartial appraiser certified under 
Title 32, chapter 124 within 90 270 days of the sale or conveyance . by an impartial appraiser 
certified under Title 32, chapter 124. 
4 
 2. Alternative housing for beneficiary.  Selling a beneficiary’s home . Unless otherwise 
provided in the terms of the trust ,  A trustee may not sell or otherwise convey real property 
that is the primary residence or a dwelling that is the primary residence of a qualified 
beneficiary without their consent  or the consent of their agent pursuant to  a power of 
attorney,  their guardian or conservator,  of the beneficiary unless the trustee arranges for 
alternative housing of the same or similar quality and accommodations as the real property 
or dwelling being sold or conveyed . or unless the trustee obtains a court order permitting the 
sale.  
  
3. Effective Date: This section is effective June 30, 2024   
 
SecƟon 3.  “Beneﬁciaries with physical or mental  
disabiliƟes”. 
 
The Uniform Trust Code contains speciﬁc direc Ɵons regarding to whom payments 
or distribu Ɵons from the trust may be made on behalf of a beneﬁciary with 
special needs. However, it does not provide guidance to the trustee about making 
reasonable accommoda Ɵons for the beneﬁciary with respect to the opera Ɵon of 
the trust. The proposed amended language requires a trustee who knows that a 
qualiﬁed beneﬁciary has physical or mental impairments or who receives a 
request from that beneﬁciary, must take acƟon to meet those special needs. For 
example, the trustee should provide payment for hearing aids so the beneﬁciary 
may hear telephone calls from the trustee or make home visits to the beneﬁciary 
for trust related business if the beneﬁciary has mobility issues.  
 
The Uniform Trust Code does not ensure that the trustee will have due regard for 
the special needs of a qualiﬁed beneﬁciary not speciﬁcally related to trust 
business. Unless the trust provides otherwise, we suggest adding language that 
requires the trustee to be aware of the qualiﬁed beneﬁciary’s special needs 
related to their physical and mental disabili Ɵes and respond to those needs by 
paying for necessary goods or services to the extent trust funds are available.   
 
The bill language also gives the beneﬁciary the right to bring a suit against the 
trustee for failing to meet those obliga Ɵons. The court is required to make 
decisions in those cases in the “best interest” of the beneﬁciary. We suggest 
parƟcularly describing the deﬁniƟon of best interest to ensure that if the 
5 
 beneﬁciary has the capacity to express their choice, they will have the opportunity 
to do so and if the beneﬁciary does not do so, the court will examine their prior 
decisions,  preferences, opinions, values and ac Ɵons to the extent known or 
brought to the court’s a ƩenƟon. This simply carries forward the same concern and 
respect for preserving an individual’s dignity and autonomy as previously 
evidenced in the Uniform Health Care Decisions Act and the Guardianship and 
Conservator sec Ɵons of the Maine Probate Code as well as decisions of the Maine 
Supreme Court.                       
  
Finally, we propose a sub- secƟon making the SecƟon eﬀecƟve July 1, 2024 to give 
pracƟƟoners and exis Ɵng trustees the Ɵme to accommodate to these changes.       
 
Uniform Trust Code 
Title 18-B, Chapter 8: DUTIES AND POWERS OF TRUSTEE 
§816. Specific powers of trustee 
 
21.  Beneﬁciary under legal disability or incapacitated.  Pay an amount distributable to a 
beneﬁciary who is under a legal disability or who the trustee reasonably believes is 
incapacitated, by paying it directly to the beneﬁciary or applying it for the beneﬁciary's beneﬁt, 
or by:   
A. Paying it to the beneﬁciary's conservator or, if the beneﬁciary does not have a conservator, 
the beneﬁciary's guardian;    
B. Paying it to the beneﬁciary's custodian under Title 33, chapter 32, which is the Maine 
Uniform Transfers to Minors Act, or to a custodial trustee under the laws of another state, and, 
for that purpose, crea Ɵng a custodianship or custodial trust;    
C. If the trustee does not know of a conservator, guardian, custodian or custodial trustee, paying 
it to an adult rela Ɵve or other person having legal or physical care or custody of the beneﬁciary, 
to be expended on the beneﬁciary's behalf; or    
D. Managing it as a separate fund on the beneﬁciary's behalf, subject to the beneﬁciary's 
conƟnuing right to withdraw the distribu Ɵon;    
 
LD1763 suggested amendments.  
 
Sec. 3.  18-B MRSA §819  is enacted to read: 
 
§819.  Beneﬁciaries with physical or mental disabiliƟes 
 
1. Accommoda Ɵons for a beneﬁciary with physical or mental disability . 
6 
  A trustee for a qualiﬁed beneﬁciary who has a physical or mental condiƟon disability shall make 
appropriate reasonable accommoda Ɵons with respect to the operaƟon of the trust  as 
requested by or for a that beneﬁciary with a physical or mental disability. Unless otherwise 
provided by the terms of the trust, if the trustee becomes aware of other special needs relaƟng 
to that beneﬁciar y’s physical or mental disabili Ɵes the trustee must respond to those needs by 
paying for necessary goods or services within the resources of the trust. The trustee shall 
provide that beneﬁciary with  supported by documenta Ɵon to ensure that describing how the 
trustee and the administra Ɵon of the trust will meet the special needs of that beneﬁciary. A 
qualiﬁed beneﬁciary may bring an ac Ɵon against a trustee who violates this subsec Ɵon.  For 
purposes of this sec Ɵon, "physical or mental disability impairment " has the same meaning as in 
the Maine Human Rights Act,  Title 5, sec Ɵon 4553 A.  
 
2. Court review.   In reviewing any ma Ʃer involving a trust with a qualiﬁed beneﬁciary who has 
with a physical or mental disability, the court shall make any decision in the best interests of the 
special needs of the that beneﬁciary. 
In determining the qualiﬁed beneﬁciary’s best interests, the court shall consider their special 
needs and their wishes if that beneﬁciary has the capacity to make them known. Otherwise, the 
court shall consider the qualiﬁed beneﬁciary’s prior direc Ɵons, preferences, opinions, values 
and acƟons to the extent known or  brought to the court ’s aƩenƟon. 
 
3. EﬀecƟve Date: this sec Ɵon becomes eﬀec Ɵve on July 1, 2024   
SecƟon 4 AƩorney’s Fees and Costs .  
We agree with this amendment. 
The exisƟng Trust Code applies to any lawsuit involving the administra Ɵon of the 
trust against any party. It allows the court to “award” costs and expenses including 
aƩorney fees to any party and allows the court to determine whether another 
party or the trust must pay the award. These are decisions that the Court makes 
aŌer it determines who wins the case.  
The proposed language applies only to lawsuits between the trustee and the 
beneﬁciary of the trust and it applies before the court ac Ɵon is ﬁled . It adds 
speciﬁc language explaining that if a trustee or a beneﬁciary decides to bring a 
lawsuit against the other, they must get the court’s approval before they can use 
funds or assets from the trust to pay the costs and expenses of the lawsuit. The 
trustee must show the court that they have a “reasonable likelihood of prevailing” 
in a court ac Ɵon against a beneﬁciary . The beneﬁciary must show that they have a 
“colorable claim” against the trustee. In plain English, the reasonable likelihood 
7 
 standard means no more than a 50/50 chance. The colorable claim standard 
means a chance that could be much less than 50/50 but a chance nonetheless.  
This diﬀerence allows a beneﬁciary to more easily convince the court to let them 
use trust money to defend themselves against the trustee or to sue the trustee if 
they believe that the trustee is not doing what they are required to do according 
to their ﬁduciary du Ɵes. However,  if a court tells a beneﬁciary that they do not 
have a chance of winning, they may decide not to risk the loss of funds that they 
would otherwise be paid.  
The trustee, on the other hand, is asking for permission to not risk their own 
money but to use trust funds that would otherwise be paid to the beneﬁciary. If 
the court tells the trustee that they don’t have an “even chance of winning”, they 
may not risk suing the beneﬁciary or defending a weak argument with their own 
money.    
In either case, the court will have the opportunity to inform the parƟes about the 
strength of their arguments before a lawsuit begins. The court may also refer the 
parƟes to media Ɵon or suggest how their dispute might be se Ʃled. If the trustee 
is violaƟng their du Ɵes to the beneﬁciary, the court could take immediate 
remedial acƟon. Because the lawsuit may be brought in the Probate Court instead 
of the Superior Court, the current civil case backlog in the Judicial Branch will not 
be a concern. This amendment to the Trust Code will stop lawsuits between the 
trustee and the beneﬁciary at the front end and thus eliminate the need for an 
award at the end of a case.  
Finally, an added sub- secƟon makes the Sec Ɵon eﬀecƟve July 1, 2024 to give 
pracƟƟoners and exis Ɵng trustees the Ɵme to accommodate to these changes.    
 
       Title 18-B: TRUSTS  
 Part 1: MAINE UNIFORM TRUST CODE 
 Chapter 10: LIABILITY OF TRUSTEES AND RIGHTS OF PERSONS DEALING WITH 
 TRUSTEE 
  §1004. Attorney's fees and costs 
Sec. 4.  18-B MRSA §1004,  as enacted by PL 2003, c. 618, Pt. A, §1 and affected 
by §2, is amended to read: 
§1004.  Attorney's fees and costs  
In a judicial proceeding involving the administration of a trust, the court, as justice and 
equity may require, may award costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's 
8 
 fees, to any party, to be paid by another party or from the trust that is the subject of 
the controversy. A trustee may not expend funds or assets of the trust in any 
controversy against a beneficiary without the prior approval of the court upon a 
showing of a reasonable likelihood of prevailing in the controversy.  The court may 
allow a beneficiary to expend funds or assets of the trust in a controversy against the 
trustee upon a showing of a colorable claim against the trustee.  
 
 
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to make these comments and we hope 
that you vote ought to pass as a mended with the addi Ɵon of our sugges Ɵons.   
