POSITION STATEMENT IN FAVOR 
LD 1224, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Seek Federal 
Approval for Reimbursement of Community-based Mobile Crisis Intervention Services 
Presented to Maine's Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of LD 1224 to ensure that Maine access any and all available federal funds to support the behavioral 
health crisis systemin Maine. 
NAMI Maine clinical staff have worked in behavioral health including community-based mobile crisis 
since 1995. We have never seen a period of time when a robust, active crisis system is needed more! 
The stresses and needs of the pandemic and the ongoing opioid use crisis have both exacerbated the 
need for mental health services in recent years as depression, anxiety and substance use rates climbed. 
One bright side to the pandemic was a lowering of the stigma associated with acknowledging a mental 
health need. But as we have all experienced, there is a bottleneck in access to services driven by severe 
staffing shortages that are concurrent to the rapidly climbing requests for services across the continuum 
of care. During much of this period, the l\/laine's Mobile Crisis system has been the one service available 
in times of extreme need. 
During this period of long wait lists for all services, NAMI Maine speaks regularly to individuals, family 
members, schools, businesses and others as they seek to navigate the mental health support system 
seeking treatment. At times they are relying on the expanded follow-up services available through the 
crisis system to maintain safety and stability when nothing long term is available. 
NAMI Maine supports all efforts to maintain and bolster funding across our crisis system and urges 
passage of this resolve. 
Greg Marley, LCSW 
ABOUT NAM! MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state's largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
(207)622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.org
