  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 21, 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1224 – Resolve, Directing the Department of Health  and Human Services to Seek 
Federal Approval for Reimbursement of Community -based Mobile Crisis Intervention Services  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1224, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health 
and Human Services to Seek Federal Approval for Reimbursement of Community -based Mobile 
Crisis Intervention Services . This resolve directs the Department to submi t to the Center for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services (C MS) any waivers or state plan amendments determined 
necessary in order to reimburse community -based mobile crisis intervention services.  
 
MaineCare is already well into the process of doing this work. The State Plan Amendment  (SPA) 
hasn’t been submitted yet, but the Depar tment  received a CMS planning grant and have been 
working with stakeholders over the last  year to develop this service. The Department is already 
mid-way through the  process to determine rates for the new community -based  mobile crisis 
intervention services . The goal is for the service to be effective fall 2023 and the SPA to be 
submitt ed this fiscal year . 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you cons ider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

