Written Testimony of Debra Rothenberg, MD, PhD 
In Support of LD 599, An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing Program 
for Homeless Persons 
April 13, 2023 
Chair Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services: 
 My name is Dr. Debra Rothenberg, I am a medical provider and educator in Portland. I am 
writing today in strong support LD599, titled An Act to Provide Support Services for a 
Transitional Housing Program for Homeless Persons. 
Having provided care for people experiencing homelessness for many years, I have witnessed 
the remarkable transformation that occurs when someone who has been unhoused finally gets 
to stay in a supportive, wellness-focused, trauma-informed shelter setting.  
The data show what those of us working with people experiencing homelessness witness on a 
daily basis:  Our patients have much higher rates of physical health issues, mental health 
conditions, and substance use disorder; they are unable to overcome system barriers to 
accessing outpatient health care due to symptoms of the very conditions for which they need 
treatment; they are over-reliant on emergency departments and law enforcement/EMS for 
crisis intervention and are often “lost to follow-up” at critical care transitions from emergency 
departments, or crisis stabilization units.  Living in this kind of chaos has a quantifiable impact 
on lives:  A recent study in the Journal of American Medicine Association comparing people 
experiencing unsheltered homelessness who were displaced in routine police sweeps to people 
who did not experience recurrent displacement showed a 50% increase in hospitalizations, an 
11% decrease in life expectancy and a 151% increase in overdose mortality associated with 
frequent displacement. 1  
A transitional housing program as proposed by LD 599 would make a huge difference and help 
prevent these types of outcomes by providing comprehensive case management and daily 
supportive living, helping individuals access the care they so desperately need.  I know this 
because I have seen it happen.  Patients I have seen transition from unsheltered homelessness 
to Elena’s Way in Portland, have established relationships with a Primary Care Physician and 
been more consistent in taking medications for chronic conditions. They have consistently 
appeared to be happier and healthier than when they were trying to access day space to rest 
and shower while unsheltered.  A program like this needs to be supported and have its 
outcomes studied. I am certain the outcomes will show significant improvement in individual 
lives and marked decreases in cost to healthcare, social services, and law enforcement 
agencies.  I therefore urge you to support LD 599.  Thank you. 
 
1 Barocas JA, Nall SK, Axelrath S, et al. Population-Level Health Effects of Involuntary Displacement of People Experiencing 
Unsheltered Homelessness Who Inject Drugs in US Cities. JAMA. Published online April 10, 2023. doi:10.1001/jama.2023.4800 
