 
 
    
 
 
Communities working together to build shared and sustainable prosperity  
970 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 201 ● Portland, Maine, 04103 ● Telephone (207) 774 -9891 ● www.gpcog.org  
April 14 , 2023  
Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Support of LD 599, An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing Program for 
Homeless Persons  
 
Dear Sen. Baldacci , Rep. Meyer , and Committee members , 
 
Please accept this letter as the testimony of the Greater Portland Council of Governments (GPCOG) in 
support of  LD 599,  An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing Program for Homeless 
Persons . Transitional housing programs need the additional support LD 599 proposes.  
 
GPCOG serves 25 municipal members in Cumberland County, from Sebago Lake to Casco Bay, as well as 
Saco, Biddeford, Arundel, and Old Orchard Beach through the Portland Area Comprehensive 
Transportation System (PACTS). We deliver transportation, land use, sustainability, and economic 
development services to our members and their communities.   
 
At the request of our members GPCOG has been directly engaged in supporting transiti onal housing 
issues in our region since 2019. We have seen first -hand how complex service delivery becomes for 
people suffering homelessness, as well as for municipal staff and nonprofit organizations delivering a 
wide array of food, health care, housing, transportation, and translation services to the unhoused.  
 
Many of our members have struggled to afford the services needed by unhoused people in our region – 
LD 599 offers them help that they certainly need.  
 
LD 599 proposes additional state funding to contract for services  delivered at temporary shelter 
facilities . We encourage you to approve this approach, and to extend it as far as possible to ease the 
burdens facing non -profit organizations and municipalities who continue to struggle to fi nd the funds 
needed to support our unhoused population.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our views, and please let me know if GPCOG  can provide 
anything more to support your work on this important issue . 
 
Sincerely , 
 
 
Kristina Egan  
Executive Direct or 
Greater Portland Council of Governments  

