Hello Chair Baldacci, Chair Meyer, and honorable members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, 
My name is Lisa Franklin, and l am an Advocate with Homeless Voices for Justice. l am here today to ask 
that you please vote in favor of LD599: An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing 
Program for Homeless Persons. 
When l was homeless, I stayed at both the Oxford Street Shelter and Florence House. I didn't have any 
terrible illnesses, but if you do, there is nowhere to rest for the day. For folks who are in a difficult 
position, having a place to rest is incredibly important. Being able to lay down for a full day when you are 
sick and healing is necessary, and not many shelters are able to provide that. At Oxford Street, l was 
sleeping on a mat on the ground and was very close to everyone else. We all had to be awake and out of 
the shelter by 7:00 in the morning. l had a friend that l made while I was homeless who was seventy 
years old. She had a chronic condition that was acting up while we were at the shelter and couldn't heal 
while in that environment. Luckily, l was able to help her get her medications, but without consistent 
support and rest, she had a very dlfﬁcult time. 
The importance of shelter that provides a secure, consistent, and respectful environment cannot be 
overstated. When individuals can have their daily needs met in one space, without having to worry 
about where their next meal will come from or whether their belongings will be safe, they are able to 
focus on improving other elements of their lives. Shelters like Elena's Way provide space for folks to heal, 
both mentally and physically, from the experiences that they may have had prior to moving into the 
shelter. If my friend had been able to access a shelter like Elena's Way while we were homeless, she may 
have been able to receive more consistent care for her illness. The model of Elena's Way also allows for 
the creation of strong relationships between providers and residents, forming bonds that help to 
strengthen the whole community. Funding for programs like this is vital. Without qualiﬁed and trained 
social work staff, these programs cannot function. To ensure that staff can meet the needs of the shelter 
residents, funding must be provided to ensure that they are adequately compensated and can continue 
to do this important work. 
As the population of unsheltered folks in Maine, and particularly in the Portland area, continues to rise, 
we must be able to address this crisis in a compassionate and thoughtful way. By funding Elena's Way, we 
are ensuring that individuals with incredibly high levels of need can access shelter. This is vital to keeping 
our communities safe and healthy. I urge you to invest in the most vulnerable of our neighbors by voting 
to pass LD599. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Lisa Franklin 
Advocate 
Homeless Voices for Justice
