295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 599 
" An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing 
Program for Homeless Persons " 
Sponsored by Representative Brennan  
April 14, 2023  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  
members of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory 
Shaughnessy  and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing 
the majority of Maine’s community based mental health and substance use 
treatment providers , providing service s to over 80,000 Maine men, women, 
and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
I am here on behalf of t he Alliance in support of LD 599, An Act to Provide 
Support Services for a Transitional Housing Program for Homeless Persons.  
As you are hearing, LD 599 proposes additional state funding to contract for 
services delivered at temporary shelter facilities.  Provides ongoing funding for 
the department to contract for support services for a transitional housing 
program in Portland that provides low -barrier, 24 -hour, 7 -day-a week shelter, 
comprehensive case management and daily living support services to indivi duals 
experiencing homelessness who also have medical, mental health or substance 
use-related needs.  
Poverty, unemployment, and lack of affordable housing are commonly recognized 
causes of homelessness. These risk factors can be exacerbated by personal 
vulnerabilities such as  mental and substanc e use disorders1, trauma and 
violence2, domestic violence3, justice -system involvement, sudden serious illness, 
divorce, death of a partner, and disabilities.  
 
Supportive housing programs can help address the root causes of 
homelessness  through a range of essential  recovery support  services, including 
mental and substance use disorder treatment,  and employment  assistance .  
 
For all these reasons, the Alliance members urge you to vote ought to pass on     
LD 599. 
 
 
                                                           
1 https://www.samhsa.gov/disorders  
2 https://www.samhsa.gov/trauma -violence  
3 https://www.samhsa.gov/homelessness -programs -resources/hpr -resources/domestic -violence -
homelessness  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCl uskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Cente r 
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

