Mary Cook
The Opportunity Alliance
LD 599
Greetings Chair Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Mary Cook, LCSW and I am the Program Director for the ERA and 
PATH programs at the Opportunity Alliance.  I am writing you today to ask that you 
support the passage of LD599: An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional 
Housing Program for Homeless Persons. 
The PATH program works with those that are experiencing unsheltered homelessness.
Since the pandemic, we have seen a consistent increase in unsheltered homelessness. 
Currently, the City of Portland reports there are over 100 encampments, and we see 
no sign of these numbers decreasing. This is also not unique to Portland as the rise in 
unsheltered homelessness increases across the State. We as a Community and State 
are in desperate need of Shelter and Housing.  
The implementation of Elena’s Way is extremely exciting as a provider in the 
community, who has been doing this work for 12+ years.   Elena’s Way has already 
had an enormous impact on the community in providing trauma informed shelter for 
40 individuals, who have experienced chronic unsheltered homelessness. Elena’s Way
has been able to provide shelter to those that may be restricted or unable to access 
other area shelters.  A person who doesn’t access shelter may make this choice for a 
variety of reasons.  Typically, this decision is around how the standard shelter 
negatively impacts their mental health and doesn’t support them in navigating their 
substance use and treatment.  Preble Street has considered all these factors when 
developing and implementing Elena’s Way as a shelter. 
We as a PATH team have witnessed the incredible outcome of this work, as our 
program participants have transitioned from their encampment into Elena’s Way.  We
are seeing folks getting meaningful rest and care that they were not receiving being 
unsheltered.  This has shown to be impactful as we are seeing folks being able to start 
long term planning around their housing, that they were not able to while unsheltered 
in a constant state of survival. I believe that Elena’s way will continue to bring 
impactful change to those most harmed by the trauma of homelessness and strengthen
our communities.
I strongly encourage you all to pass this bill to fund Elena’s Way.  Elena’s Way is a 
great example and model of how our State can move towards trauma and 
person-centered shelter options.  
Thank you for time and consideration, 
Mary Cook, LCSW 
Senior Director – PATH/ERA
The Opportunity Alliance
207-604-8045
mary.cook@opportunityalliance.org 

