HQUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-00024 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brennan@legislature.maine.gov 
April 14, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Michael Brennan introducing 
LD 599, An Act to Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing 
Program for Homeless Persons 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. I am Michael Brennan, and I represent House 
District 115, which includes a portion of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 599, An Act to 
Provide Support Services for a Transitional Housing Program for Homeless Persons for 
your consideration. 
Last Friday, I toured the recently-opened facility in Portland called Elena’s Way. The facility has 
been operational since last fall and serves up to 40 people who are chronically homeless. The 
program is the ﬁrst of its type in the state and will serve as a pilot project for the entire state. 
Unlike other shelters, Elena’s Way provides a more home-like enviromnent, regular access to 
food and beds in a trauma-informed space with sleeping areas for men, women and couples, and 
a comprehensive array of services including intensive case management and MaineCare Section 
17 Community Rehabilitation Services. All of the residents had been living outside unsheltered 
or in tents prior to their stay here. The uniqueness of Elena's Way is that it targets people who are 
restricted from or unable to access other conventional shelters and that these individuals have 
complex medical needs, histories of trauma, untreated substance use and/or severe and persistent 
behavioral health issues. 
In 1987, Preble Street opened its ﬁrst emergency shelter in the basement of a church. I toured 
that facility and it was simply two rows of cots on a concrete ﬂoor. One blanket was at the foot 
of each cot. Since 1987, we have learned a great deal more about how to support people who 
struggle with major physical and mental health issues. 
More speciﬁcally, the bill calls for $1.2 million a year in funding for the necessary stafﬁng and 
support services required at Elena’s Way. With the appropriate support and care, many of the 
residents will be able to transition to anticipated “Housing First” initiatives. 
At the end of my visit to Elena’s Way, I was standing outside speaking with a staff person whena 
man in his 50s put on a pair of pants over the pair he was already wearing. He then put on 
District 115: Part of Portland
another coat over the one he was wearing. The staff person told me he was preparing to spend the 
night outside because Elena’s Way was full. Let’s give him a place to stay. 
I hope you will give ﬁill consideration to this legislation. 
District 115: Part of Portland
