      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 19, 2023  
 
Re: LD 16 12, An Act to Address Food Insecurity and Support Local Agriculture  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Agriculture, Conservation, 
and Forestry Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of 
Community Housing of Maine or CHOM .  CHOM’s  small staff  works collaboratively to 
houses Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocates on their behalf .  I serve on  the 
Statewide Homeless Council and also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine 
Continuum of Care Board of Directors, and the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee.   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1612, An Act to Address Food Insecurity and Support Local 
Agriculture.  This bill would provide one -time funding for the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry to contract with the Preble Street Food Security Hub to help address food insecurity throughout the State.   
Preble Street’s Food Security Hub’s unique, inclusive approach will assist in ending hunger in 
Maine.  Phase 1 of this Food Security Hib is already underway and making a large difference in the lives of people and the community.  Though Preble Street’s Food Program se rves more 
than 1 million meals each year, the need far exceeds the current capacity.  Due to this, the new Food Security Hub was launched, and will be “ a sustainable, comprehensive, and collaborative 
approach dedicated to ending hunger in Maine. The Preble  Street Food Security Hub, the first 
food hub in Maine focused on food insecurity, is located at 75 Darling Avenue in South Portland. When completed, this 30,000 square foot mixed- use space will function as an 
industrial kitchen, food processing center, educational/vocational site, office space, and 
conference center dedicated to collective advocacy work and efforts to end hunger. ” (Source:  
https://www.preblestreet.org/what -we-do/food- programs/foodsecurityhub/
).   
 Funding through this bill would allow Preble Street to continue to expand its Food Security 
Hub and fulfill its vision of working to end food in security in Maine, foster robust community 
partnerships, and strengthen local agriculture in an environmentally friendly and sustainable 
fashion.  
 
Please support LD 1612 so that Maine can work to end and prevent food insecurity.  No one 
does well without food.    
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
