   
 
 
 
 
 
April 19, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Joint Standing   
Committee of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, 
 
 
We are pleased and honored to provide written testimony to express the YMCA of Southern 
Maine’s full support of LD1612, An Act to Address Food Insecurity and Support Local 
Agriculture. 
 
We strongly and proudly endorse the buildout of the Preble Street Food Security Hub 
because it will transform the Food Program's capacity to meet food-security-related needs in 
a variety of ways, dramatically improving the health and wellbeing of Mainers across the 
state. LD 1612 and the Food Security Hub will: 
 
• Make a significant contribution to reducing hunger and a vital role in emergency 
preparedness for Maine. 
• Expand the Food Security Hub’s capacity to produce 10,000 meals daily.  
• Promote long-term, sustainable solutions to improve food security and achieve food 
justice while supporting local agriculture. Based on current estimates, 75% of the 
products preserved at the Food Security Hub will be Maine-grown.  
• Preserve approximately 180,000 pounds of product within the first 18 months and 
steadily increase to support the community's needs. Fully realized, the Food Security 
Hub will be able to process up to 5000 pounds of local produce daily, up from the 
current 5000 pounds each week.  
• Allow for increased food access and community capacity through dedicated  
collaborative space and initiatives. 
 
We fully support Preble Street’s vision to expand this vital program to more communities 
throughout Maine.   The Y has experienced the tremendous impact of the food program 
first-hand.   
 
It has been an invaluable resource for the people we serve in our Men’s Dormitory Program, 
many of whom are transitioning out of homelessness.  The flexibility and responsiveness of 
the food program has enabled us to meet the most urgent and critical needs.   
 
In 2020, when the pandemic hit, the Y needed to provide safe, secure space for the 88 men 
in our dormitory program. This included ensuring participants would stay at the Y and not 
go out into the community during lockdown, for their and other’s safety.  Consistent and 
reliable access to nutritious meals played a key role in ensuring this happened. When Preble 
Street heard of our need, and without hesitation, began delivering three healthy meals each 
day for every person in the dorm.  We are fortunate that this service has continued. It has 
become a vital resource for the men to support their health and wellbeing.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
More recently, the Y has had the honor of stepping in to support new immigrant families 
arriving in our community through partnerships with the Salvation Army, Maine Immigrant 
Rights Coalition, Greater Portland Family Promise, Amistad and the City of Portland.  We 
were able to provide the space and community at the Y.  Again, Preble Street has 
responded quickly, providing healthy nutritious meals for the families. Many of these 
families arrived at the YMCA hungry, cold, and with young children. The meals provided by 
Preble Street provide nourishment beyond the physical, bringing a sense of safety, care and 
welcome to our new neighbors.  
 
 
We deeply value our partnership with Preble Street and the work they are doing with the 
community. LD 1612 will ensure more Mainers are fed, supporting their health and the 
strength of our communities. We strongly urge you to support LD 1612 for the wellbeing of 
all.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Helen L. Breña 
President & CEO 
YMCA of Southern Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
