 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  TESTIMONY OF MAINE IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS COALITION   
SUPPORTING L.D. 1612:  
An Act to Address Food Insecurity and Support Local Agriculture  
Sponsor: Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross of Portland  
Public  Hearing: Tuesday, April 19th, 2023, at 9 :00 am 
 
Dear Members of the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry : 
 
We are writing  on behalf of the board and members of the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition  in support 
of L.D. 1612 : An Act to Address Food Insecurity and Support Local Agriculture . MIRC  is a coalition of 
almost 100 organizatio ns from across the state committed to advancing and defending the rights of 
Maine’s immigrant communities.  We (Tobin and Ruben) are MIRC ’s Advocacy and Policy team.   
 
MIRC ’s mission is to improve the legal, social, and economic conditions experienced by immigrants, 
therefore improving the state as a whole.  To do so, we partner with allies working toward similar goals.  
We have s een firsthand the devastating impact of food insecurity on our communities. Many of the 
individuals and families we serve at MIRC  struggle to access healthy and nutritious food, which can have 
serious consequences for their health, well -being, and overall quality of life.   
 
This is why our organization partners with the Preble Street Food Sec urity Hub  to provide food to hotels 
in Cumberland and York Counties, where many asylum -seekin g immigrants are currently residing  in 
hotels and temporary shelters . The Hub has been an invaluable resource in joining MIRC in this  effort, 
helpin g us to distribute food to those who need it most and ensuring that  people without permanent 
housing still have access to the nutritious meals they need to stay healthy.  We are especiall y grateful that 
Preble Street is inte ntional in their work of el iminating racial disparities when it comes to hung er. They 
are cognizant that almost 30% of Mainers of color are food insecure (compared to less than 2% of the 
entire population).  
 
The much -needed one -time f unding from L.D. 1612 would allow Preble Street to finish renovations that 
would allow the Food Secu rity Hub to provide up to 10,000 meals per day  throughout the state . An added 
benef it of this legislation would be distribution of  the Feeding Maine  network ’s products  into food 
pantries around the state , supporting local agric ulture while mitigating hunger . This legi slation  would be  a 
win-win, not just for Maine people but also Maine businesses like Liberation Farms  and Jordan ’s Farm .  
 
By passing  L.D. 1612 , you can improve the  health and well -being of Maine's residents, particularly those  
most vulnerable to food insecurity, such as low -income families and individuals  of all backgrounds . By 
ensuring that more Mainers have access to healthy food, w e can reduce rates of chronic diseases like 
obesity, diabetes, and heart disease . Furthermore, investing in food security programs can strengthen our 
communities and our economy ; when people have access to healthy food, they are better able to work, 
learn, and c ontribute to our society . This can translate into improved productivity, increased economic 
activity, and reduced healthcare costs. An investment in this n ow can pay bi g returns in the future.  
 
Moreover, supporting local agriculture and food systems can create jobs, boost economic development, 
and reduce our re liance on imported food, which in turn can support a more resilient and sustainable food 
system.  L.D. 1612 is an important step in addressing food insecurity throughout  Maine, and we strongly 
urge the Committee to pass it . Thank you for your consideration of this important issue.  
 
Tobin Williamson  and Ruben Torres  
Maine Immigrants ’ Rights Coalition  
 
### 
