 
PO Box 5321, Portland, ME 04101   |    795 Congress Street, Portland, ME 04101 Committee on State and Local Government c/o Legislative Information Office 100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333 March 13, 2023  RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings  Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:  My name is Addy Smith-Reiman, and I am the Executive Director of Portland Society for Architecture (PSA). We are a member-based organization founded in 2006 that works with architects, engineers, landscape architects, design professionals, and individuals committed to the protection and enhancement of all aspects of urban design which contribute greatly to Portland’s economic activity and cultural identity.  We are pleased to speak today in support of LD 670, An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings. PSA has been involved with the bird-safe buildings initiative since 2017, and was a co-founder of BirdSafe Maine with Maine Audubon and the University of Southern Maine in 2020. We’ve since then to raise awareness among our base about the problem of bird collisions and the growing body of creative strategies in order to address the threat. We have held educational webinars featuring the country’s leading experts, consulted with representatives of the building and design community from across the state, and convened representatives from the Portland area to discuss municipal responses to the issue.  PSA is pleased to see this issue getting recognition at the state level. Our work has focused on Portland because we are a Portland-based organization, but this is a state-wide, and nationwide, problem. The approach taken by LD 670 is a smart one – developing guidelines will give the state and the legislature the time to understand how this issue impacts state buildings and come up with tailored solutions. PSA has gained considerable expertise in bird-safe architecture and has connected with other experts across the state and country, and we would available to help participate in drafting state guidance or recommend others who can bring their expertise to bear.  Thank you for your consideration. Sincerely, Addy Smith-Reiman, AICP  
