Alan Hull & Susan Kepes  
120 Pheasant Hill Drive, Portland, Maine  04103  
 
 
Committee on State and Local Government  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
March 13, 2023  
 
 
RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of 
Public Buildings  
 
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:  
 
I am writing to ask all of the Commit tee Members to support LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds 
and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings . 
 
As a resident of Portland for over thirty years I have see the pac e of development  accel erate.  
The trend see ms to be the cr eation  of large, ma inly glass -sided, struct ures, especially along  the 
waterfront.  This style of structure is particular ly prone to injuring migrating birds.  
 
I have had t he privilege  of participating in the “Bird Sa fe” study wa lks where w e walk the city in 
the early morning l ooking for bir ds that have impacted into buildings.  Unfortunately, we find 
too much evidence of bird strikes.  Even if the birds found a re still a live, man y succumb t o the ir 
injuri es, or are victims  of predation .  It is estimated that 40,000 -50,000 birds colli de with 
Portl and bui ldings each year. 
 
This is not just a Portland problem  as evidenced by reports fro m Maine Audubon of bird strikes 
all over the state .  Any building , especially those with la rge expanses  of glass such as p icture 
windows and glass facades claim vict ims. 
 
The US Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that between 365 million and 988 million birds 
strike buildings each year, making it one of the leading causes of human -caused bird mortality in 
the nation.  
 
This proposed legislatio n is a vital ste p in saving  our birds and other wildli fe.   
 
Preserving  wildlife a lso h elps the Maine economy . 
 
Pollinators  are vital  to agr icultu re.  Several s tudies have sh own that i mproper lighting can 
confuse pollinators  such as moths.  This proposed legislation will  hopefull y set standards th e 
preserve th is agricultural resource.  
 
 
Tourism  is a large portion of the Maine economy.  In the last two ye ars a Steller’s Sea Eagle was 
resident in the Midcoast  for a few weeks.  Many visitors  came to seek this bird causing a 
welco me boo st to the lo cal economy  during the slow winter season .  The Acadian Birding 
Festi val brin gs se veral hu ndred people to the Mt. Des ert area in early Ju ne to kick off the 
summer season.   
 
Our birds and othe r wild a nimals are living attractions that people come to  see.  We must 
preserve th em. 
 
The guidelines proposed by the legislation need not be int rusive , and simple des ign changes in 
projects can se rve multiple purposes .  Examples:  
 
• On demand li ghting that will cons erve en ergy and less en wildlife harm.  
 
• Lighting that focuses  on the ground rather than the sky.  This will help pollinators , bats, 
and birds.   If done pro perly, this will al so save on costs.   We may even be able to see the 
stars better. 
 
• Establishment of well-designed, low-mainta ince, green spaces where possible .  
Green spaces obviously  help w ildlife, but a lso improve the environment for peo ple who 
live and work in the area.  
 
• Utilization of architectural  elemen ts such as awnings to break up lar ge expanses  of glass.  
Properly placed, these c an shield  the bu ilding f rom so lar gain , reduc e cooling costs , and 
protect birds .   
 
Thank you for your consideration.   I would appreciate y our support of this legis lation.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Alan Hull 
 
                                         
Golden -crowned Kinglet     White -breasted Nuthatch                       
Found stunned after hitting glass.  
Hope fully re covered.  

