Committee on State and Local Government c/o Legislative Information Office 100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333  March 31, 2023  RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings  As a licensed architect and landscape architect, I have practiced in Maine for the last 28 years. My office has completed over 32 library projects from the Turner Library in Presque Isle to the Rice Library in Kittery.  Our focus is primarily on institutional and civic buildings that benefit a larger community.  I am proud and humbled to say my practice has received over 28 Maine and New England design awards.  As you can imagine glass and glazing play a large role in our designs.  Everyone understands glass provides views, natural daylighting, and transparency and it is often a client-driven demand.    In the last eight years or so I have become acutely aware of bird strikes.  I have received feedback from clients and also witnessed the bird strikes myself.  This is a significant problem.  In addition to my personal recognition of this issue.  This is a subject more and more clients are aware of.  In the last year, three clients have insisted on bird-safe measures.  Many more have inquired about it and asked about how to make it happen.  Glass manufacturers have also raised this issue.  Just last week my office was visited by a product representative for Guardian Glass.  The purpose was to share the three methods their product use to provide bird-safe glazing.  Walker Glass, the other major supplier to window manufacturers, has similar offerings.  The fact that these industries have made this shift confirms it is a major concern.  My practice has often used European windows such as Unilux from Germany and Schuco windows from Poland for their high thermal performance.  When ordering these units it is a simple matter of checking a box for bird-safe glazing.   If this practice has worked smoothly in Europe, I think it will be accepted in Maine as well.  I have mentioned bird-safe glass but there are many other methods to achieve bird safety, some as simple as an exterior insect screening.   As architects, we consider ourselves problem solvers.  There are certainly many more ways to assure bird safety while minimizing construction cost increases.  I urge you to support LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings.  Austin K. Smith, AIA, PLA, LEED ap Partner + Principal Maine Licensed Architect Maine Licensed Landscape Architect  Simons Architects 75 York Street Portland, Maine   04103 
