March 13, 2023
RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for your service to our great state of Maine. I am writing today in support of LD670. Considering the storm we are about to experience, I thought it wise to write instead of testify in person.
After my husband and I built an addition to our house that includes a sliding glass door opening to our back yard, I observed an odd presence of injured or dead birds in our backyard. After doing a little research, I discovered that the glass door was the cause of the birds injuries. I looked into preventive measures to prevent these bird collisions and installed a simple acopian bird saver. The bird collisions stopped immediately. I recently discovered a new, more durable product from a company called Feather Friendly and will install these simple window markers when the weather is warmer, replacing the acopian bird saver I initially installed. I wish I had known the impact glass windows have on our beloved bird population.
The US Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that between 365 million and 988 million birds strike buildings each year, making it one of the leading causes of human-caused bird mortality in the nation. Domestic cats are the second threat to birds. “Every year in the United States, cats kill well over 1 billion birds. This stunning level of predation is unsustainable for many already-declining species like Least Tern and Wood Thrush” according to the American Bird Conservancy.
We must take action both personally and through legislation to mitigate the risk to our bird population. LD670 is a good start to help educate people about the devastating impact buildings have on birds. By focusing on state buildings ﬁrst, Maine can develop guidelines for future and existing buildings across the state. We could become national leaders in this area so that other state can follow of eﬀorts. The coast of Maine is the last piece of land many birds encounter before their migration, and conversely, the ﬁrst place they land when they return after wintering elsewhere. Let’s make is a safe place for them so that they might thrive. We must do this.
This legislation was developed using real data collected from Maine Audubon over the past few years on both ends of the migration. It’s not based on anecdotes like mine at the start of this testimony, although anecdotes are useful. It is estimated that between 40,000 – 50,000 individual birds collide with windows each year in Portland alone. We don’t see them as often as one would think because predators come in quickly and remove their bodies in the dawn hours.
I urge you to support this bill and then go a step further and mitigate the threat of bird 
strikes in your own homes. It is easy to do and a much needed step to take in saving our declining bird population. Tell your neighbors, tell your fellow legislators.
For more information, visit the American Bird Conservancy’s website and look at their “Threats” and “Solutions” tabs. The technology exists to prevent bird strikes. Let’s put LD670 in action to develop useful guidelines going forward. We cannot wait another day.
Thank you kindly for your consideration,
Barbara A. Fiore
Portland, ME
Barbara Fiore
Portland, ME
LD 670
March 13, 2023
RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and 
Maintenance of Public Buildings
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for your service to our great state of Maine. I am writing today in support 
of LD670. Considering the storm we are about to experience, I thought it wise to 
write instead of testify in person.
After my husband and I built an addition to our house that includes a sliding glass 
door opening to our back yard, I observed an odd presence of injured or dead birds in 
our backyard. After doing a little research, I discovered that the glass door was the 
cause of the birds injuries. I looked into preventive measures to prevent these bird 
collisions and installed a simple acopian bird saver. The bird collisions stopped 
immediately. I recently discovered a new, more durable product from a company 
called Feather Friendly and will install these simple window markers when the 
weather is warmer, replacing the acopian bird saver I initially installed. I wish I had 
known the impact glass windows have on our beloved bird population.
The US Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that between 365 million and 988 million
birds strike buildings each year, making it one of the leading causes of human-caused 
bird mortality in the nation. Domestic cats are the second threat to birds. “Every year 
in the United States, cats kill well over 1 billion birds. This stunning level of 
predation is unsustainable for many already-declining species like Least Tern and 
Wood Thrush” according to the American Bird Conservancy.
We must take action both personally and through legislation to mitigate the risk to our
bird population. LD670 is a good start to help educate people about the devastating 
impact buildings have on birds. By focusing on state buildings first, Maine can 
develop guidelines for future and existing buildings across the state. We could 
become national leaders in this area so that other state can follow of efforts. The coast
of Maine is the last piece of land many birds encounter before their migration, and 
conversely, the first place they land when they return after wintering elsewhere. Let’s 
make is a safe place for them so that they might thrive. We must do this.
This legislation was developed using real data collected from Maine Audubon over 
the past few years on both ends of the migration. It’s not based on anecdotes like mine
at the start of this testimony, although anecdotes are useful. It is estimated that 
between 40,000 – 50,000 individual birds collide with windows each year in Portland 
alone. We don’t see them as often as one would think because predators come in 
quickly and remove their bodies in the dawn hours.
I urge you to support this bill and then go a step further and mitigate the threat of bird 
strikes in your own homes. It is easy to do and a much needed step to take in saving 
our declining bird population. Tell your neighbors, tell your fellow legislators.
For more information, visit the American Bird Conservancy’s website and look at 
their “Threats” and “Solutions” tabs. The technology exists to prevent bird strikes. 
Let’s put LD670 in action to develop useful guidelines going forward. We cannot 
wait another day.
Thank you kindly for your consideration,
Barbara A. Fiore
Portland, ME
