Committee on State and Local Government  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
13 March 2023  
 
RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public 
Buildings  
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:  
 
I am writing in support of LD 670, which would require the State of Maine to work collaboratively to 
develop guidelines to mitigate risks of bird collisions at state buildings. Collision s with buildings are one 
of the leading causes of bird mortality, with researchers and federal agencies estimating that 365 -988 
million birds strike buildings in the U .S. each  year.  
 
I am a Biology professor at the University of Southern Maine and  a membe r of BirdSafe Maine . This 
group of volunteer community scientists has been investigating the extent of bird -building collisions in 
Maine, with a focus on downtown Portland as it undergoes significant (re)development . Beginning in 
September 2020, we  have systematically surveyed buildings along a 2 -mile route during fall and spring 
migrations. We have completed three fall seasons and will soon launch our third spring season. As we 
walk the route, we look for dead or stunned birds that have struck buildings, a nd we document the 
species and which buildings they strike.  
 
Since beginning  our work, we have found nearly 400 birds from 56 different species. Most birds (56%) 
are dead; others (36%) are stunned, although some stunned birds probably die later from inter nal 
injuries. Warblers and sparrows are the most vulnerable groups, making up 30% of the birds that we 
have found. Furthermore, the buildings  that account for the vast majority of bird strikes share several 
features: large amounts of glass that reflect sur rounding areas, design elements such as courtyards 
that trap birds, and favorable habitat such as trees and shrubs adjacent to the buildings that ironically 
attracts birds to those locations.  
 
Sadly, t hese results are  not surprising , and Portland is not u nique.  Our research  align s with what  other 
researchers have found : migrating songbirds are particularly vulnerable to strikes against windows with 
large quantities of glass. Moreover , this problem does not exist only in Portland  or only during 
migration. Based on records submitted  from across the state, birds hit windows on commercial and 
residential buildings in cities, towns, and rural areas throughout the year. Nonetheless, we estimate that 
40,000 -50,000 birds strike buildings  in Portland alone, every year. Countless other birds must fall victim 
across the state, too.  
 
Through legislation such as LD 670, Maine can assume a leadership role and make progress toward 
addressing a devastating source of mortality for the millions of  birds that migrate through or inhabit our 
state. Once guidelines are developed, we hope that the State takes the next step, applying them to 
public buildings across Maine .  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Christine R. Maher, Ph.D.  
Profess or of Biology  

