4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 451  Washington, D.C. 20008
Tel: 202-234-7181  Fax: 202-234-7182  info@abcbirds.org  abcbirds.org
I’m Doctor Christine Sheppard, American Bird Conservancy, in favor of HB43. I’ve been 
working on this issue for over 20 years. People have been designing bird-friendly 
buildings as long as they have been building structures – it is only recently that the 
expanded use of glass has begun to threaten the existence of birds, with hundreds of 
millions of fatal collisions every year. Luckily, it is possible to retain the advantages of 
glass, providing clarity of view, insulation and structure, while significantly reducing the 
risk of collisions by birds. For humans, this is self-serving – birds provide billions of 
dollars to us in services we often don’t notice, bringing seeds so that habitat can regrow 
after fires, eating insects that can spread diseases, or ruin our crops and forests. Bird-
friendly design should not be considered and extra or an add on. It uses the same 
strategies and materials used to control heat and glare, so there is usually no 
incremental cost, if considered from the initial design phase.  Almost any style of 
architecture can be safe for birds, using well tested techniques. Two examples are shown 
below. New York City Local Law 15, in effect as of January 11,2021, requires bird-
friendly design for all new structures and major retrofits in all five boroughs.  I hope 
that Maryland will become only the second state to pass legislation requiring bird-
friendly design.
 
Statue of Liberty Museum, NYC                                Museum glass close up, with vertical lines
 Intuit Headquarters, Mountainview, CA                         Interior view of glass with horizontal stripes
ABC is a 501(c)(3), non-profit organization dedicated to the conservation of wild native birds and their 
habitats throughout the Americas.  Founded in 1994, ABC has long been a leader in Partners in Flight and 
the North American Bird Conservation Initiative, and is the only U.S.-based group dedicated solely to 
overcoming the greatest threats facing native birds in the Western Hemisphere. ABC is also the leading 
force in ongoing efforts to protect birds from collisions with the only national bird collisions program.
Left: Intuit Headquarters, Mountainview, CA       Right: glass close up 
