Committee on State and Local Government
c/o Legislative Information Office
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
March 12, 2023
RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public 
Buildings
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:
Please support LD 670 which would require the state to work collaboratively to develop guidelines for 
mitigating the risk of bird collisions in state buildings. Once developed, guidelines can be integrated in public 
building design statewide, help protect and restore struggling populations of our beautiful native birds, and offer 
a template for others who want to utilize BirdSafe construction designs. 
Here's the problem , documented from a local to a national scale: 
Studies coordinated by Maine Audubon and University of Southern Maine in Portland have confirmed what 
other studies have documented around the world. Birds die after hitting buildings, particularly those with large 
expanses of glass windows.  Sadly, the results of disregarding BirdSafe design have been clearly documented in 
buildings recently constructed along Portland's waterfront, where large glass windows have become a major 
hazard to birds. This past fall, for example, more than 200 dead or stunned birds that struck glass windows were 
identified by volunteers walking a short one-mile loop in Portland every morning for two months during fall 
migration. Ecologists estimate that 40,000 – 50,000 birds collide with windows each year in Portland alone.  But
the problem is much bigger than Portland. Maine Audubon receives bird strike reports from homes and 
businesses all over the state, in all seasons. And the problem is also much bigger than Maine.  Tragically, the US 
Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that between 385 million and 988 million birds are killed annually in the 
United States by striking large glass windows where BirdSafe design principles have been ignored. That's a 
leading cause of human-caused bird mortality of mortality for North American birds whose populations have 
already plummeted nearly 70% in the last three decades.
Windows are worse than an invisible barrier.  Windows reflect clouds and trees, and birds unwittingly slam into 
windows, thinking that the windows' reflections are simply a continuation of the sky or a sheltering haven of 
trees for food and shelter.  Once birds hit windows, they may be killed outright -- or they may be stunned, and 
then picked off by nearby gulls -- especially in early morning, before most people even encounter the birds.  In 
short, buildings that don't integrate BirdSafe design can become significant killing fields for already struggling 
populations of native birds. 
There is a solution:
Planned in advance, BirdSafe principles can be successfully integrated into designing buildings, even those with 
large glass windows. In addition, existing buildings can be retrofitted to incorporate BirdSafe design, The Maine 
Legislature's support of LD 670  would establish Maine as a national leader in recognizing and beginning to 
mitigate the serious damage caused by birds colliding with buildings.
Thank you for your support of LD 670.        
Sincerely,
Lois Winter, conservation biologist (retired)
50 Alden Circle,  Portland, ME   04102  
207-518-7793 (cell)
