Committee on State and Local Government  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
March 25, 2023  
 
RE: LD 670: An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public 
Buildings  
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Committee:  
 
I am writing  today as a Maine resident  and conservation  biologist in support of LD 670 . For several 
years, I have been involved with BirdSafe Maine, a collaborati on involving volunteers, Maine 
Audubon, University of Southern Maine, and the Portland Society for Arc hitecture.  Our research  
efforts are  centered i n Port land and estimate that around 40,000-50,000 individual bird s collide with 
building windows each year in the city alone. S tudies have show n that most collision s are fatal  to 
birds . Indeed, window colli sions are the second lead ing cause of bird mortality after feral cats.   
  
BirdSafe Maine has  also collated records of bird -window collisions from across the state showing that 
this problem is widespread . These records are interesting because they come from hundreds of 
concern ed com munity members who report injured or dead birds from collis ions at their homes, 
schools, and businesses. This shows that m any people in our state care about this issue.  
 
Unlike many of the wildlife conserva tion cha llenges at hand, t his issue is one with  straightforward 
solution s, and  these are gaining traction across Maine . Businesses such as  L.L.Bean and Saddleback 
Mountain are inco rporatin g bird-safe components into their building designs. I helped lead  an 
educational initiative  for BirdSafe Maine at Yarmouth E lementary S chool during the 2022 Fall 
migration  season . More than 120 4th grade  students  created temporary window murals to cut down 
on the reflectiveness of the school ’s glass , lessen ing the collision risk for migrating birds.  Exit surveys 
from this program show t hat kids care about th is issue and 75% want ed their school  to create  a 
permanent solution to prevent bird-window collisions.  
 
LD 670  is therefore timely as this issue is on the minds of many (including kids ) in Maine . Integrati ng 
bird and wildlife risk management into  the improveme nt of state buildings  is an encouraging step in 
the right direction for bird conservation and one that would also position our state  as a national 
leader on  the bird -window collision issue.  I en courage  representatives to pass this bill.   
  
Thank you for your consideration.         
 Sincerely,  
  
Sonya Kahlenberg, Ph.D.  
Yarmouth, Maine  
 

