March 30, 2023 Testimony of Representative Sophie Warren Presenting LD 670, An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government Good morning Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the State and Local Government Committee. My name is Sophie Warren, and I represent House district 124, which includes coastal Scarborough. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 670, An Act to Protect Birds and Wildlife in the Construction and Maintenance of Public Buildings. I also come today to present a sponsor’s amendment to this bill, which updates the language to improve and simplify its text. LD 670 is a bill designed to start the process of addressing one of the deadliest – but most easily avoidable – threats to birds: building collisions. Buildings with glass windows are a relatively new feature on the landscape in the scheme of things and birds are having a difficult time adjusting. To birds, glass windows are a trick: they can reflect sky or habitat, or can appear invisible when lit from within. Birds don’t understand what glass is and accidentally fly into it believing they are flying into open sky or dense vegetation. Light-weight, fast-flying birds do not know to protect themselves from the glass and often strike windows with such force that they die instantly or experience severe internal injuries.  The problem is widespread but often hidden. The vast majority of bird strikes go unseen, occurring near unattended windows, and their bodies hidden are in shrubs or lawns. Bird strikes are most evident in cities during spring and fall migration, when billions of birds move between breeding grounds in the north and wintering grounds in the south. As birds stop over at cities along their migration route they are faced with landscapes with few trees and lots of glass. Early morning commuters may find the bodies of dead or dying birds on sidewalks across the city before they are eaten by rodents or gulls.  However, bird strikes are not nearly just a city problem: they are possible at buildings anywhere in the state. Outside of cities, birds strike in all seasons. For example, in forested areas, the problem may peak in the summer, when adult and fledgling birds navigate flying around their breeding grounds. In winter, birds are attracted to vegetation bearing fruit or berries, and collide with windows near these trees at a high rate.  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 2 STATE HOUSE STATION AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 (207) 287-1400 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  Sophie Warren P.O. Box 1 Scarborough, ME 04070 Phone: (207) 450-0765 Sophia.Warren@legislature.maine.
District 124: Part of Scarborough 
In just the past decade or so, scientists are working to better understand this mostly hidden problem. Studies from cities across North America have contributed to an understanding that building collisions pose one of the greatest human-caused threats to birds. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that between 365 and 988 million birds strike buildings each year, or more than 4,000 times the number that strike wind turbines.  Glass is a major threat to birds across the country, as well as in Maine. Three years of volunteer study in the city of Portland has found dead and injured birds on the streets in exactly the numbers the science told them to expect, and most often against the types of buildings that pose the biggest risk, that is, buildings with large amounts of glass. The Portland surveys have been supplemented with bird strike information submitted from homes and businesses in all sixteen counties and accounting for more than 50 different species, representing warblers, sparrows, woodpeckers, hummingbirds, flycatchers, chickadees, thrushes, doves, cuckoos, and more.  Thankfully, unlike many of the problems that face our wildlife, there are straightforward solutions to the bird collision problem. Problem windows can be treated with a wide variety of applications to make them visible to birds, and new products and strategies are coming on the market all the time. However, the best way to build a bird-safe building is to start during the design process and incorporate simple guidelines and principles into the design. When done in this way, it’s been shown that producing a building that is safe for birds can be done without any extra cost. LD 670 would require the State of Maine to develop these guidelines, so that these principles can be incorporated into state improvements efficiently and cost-effectively. LD 670 joins a rapidly-growing body of bird-safe legislation, though it has a number of key differences from most other strategies. Most of the nation’s bird-safe regulation occurs at the municipal level, and requires new buildings to use bird safe technologies by a certain date. Ordinances in New York City, Washington, D.C., San Francisco, Toronto, Oakland, CA, Portland, OR, and other cities proscribe compliance with bird safe principles by a certain date, and leaves it up to local architects and builders to learn about and comply with bird-safe principles. Just two states, Illinois and Minnesota, have statewide legislation about bird safe buildings, both of which apply to state buildings. LD 670 takes a slightly more deliberate approach, simply requiring the Department of Administrative and Financial Services’ Bureau of General Services to develop guidance regarding the integration of bird collision risk management into public improvements. This approach will permit the state the time to work with experts to understand the bird safe problem in Maine, and tailor specific solutions. When completed, this guidance will be submitted to this Committee for potential next steps. Upon further consideration with those in Maine with experience in bird safe legislation and ordinances, I have updated the original language in LD 670, and present those changes as a sponsor’s amendment. I wanted to take a moment now to explain the changes between the amendment and the original language, though they do not in any way change the intent or thrust of the bill. 1.I have clarified that the guidance should focus only on birds, and not “other wildlife,” a broad term that greatly and unnecessarily expands the scope of this act; 2.I have introduced collaboration into the development of the guidance, which is to include District 124: Part of Scarborough 
state or federal natural resource agencies with expertise in bird conservation; non-governmental organizations with expertise in bird conservation; representatives from the building and design community; and representatives of green building or bird safe building certification programs. There are a number of architectural and design firms in Maine with experience in bird safe practices, and their knowledge and practical insights will be valuable to this guidance; 3.Finally, I have altered the language to state that the guidance will return to this Committee once completed and that decisions about applicability of the guidance to future state improvements be required only after subsequent legislation is passed. Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. Sincerely, Sophie Warren 
District 124: Part of Scarborough 
