STATE OF MAii\\'E 
OFFKIE or THE GOVERNOR 
Y2 ISTATE House S'm'r:0a~= 
AUG!_?STA, MAiNE 
,; @4333-0001 
J ANET MILLS DAN BURGESS 
Govarmoa DIRECTOR or G()\’ERNOR’S 
ENERGY QFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act Requiring the Installation of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in New Commercial and 
Multifamily Parking Lot Construction 
L.D. 524 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies neither for nor against L.D. 524. 
This legislation requires new parking facilities with 10 or more parking spaces or a parking facility with 
20 or more spaces that is being enlarged by at least 30 percent to obtain a permit from the Department 
of Environmental Protection to certify it will be equipped with ”charger-ready" spaces. 
The GEO is generally supportive of expanding charging infrastructure in a way that is equitable and 
affordable, however as written, the requirements proposed by this legislation may prove to be too 
broad and potentially cost-prohibitive. The GEO recommends putting in place a higher threshold for 
covered development and clarifying rules, reexamining the definition used for multi-family dwellings, 
and considering other options for program administration. 
Transportation is responsible for 54 percent of Maine's annual greenhouse gas emissions. To meet our 
emissions reductions goals by 2030 and 2050, our state must pivot to the future by pursuing aggressive 
transition strategies and innovative solutions within this sector. The state's climate action plan, Maine 
Won't Wait, proposes several actions to accelerate Maine's transition to electric vehicles (EV), including 
setting a goal of 41,000 light-duty EVs on the road in Maine by 2025 and more than 200,000 by 2030. 
Additionally, it identified the need to develop a statewide EV Roadmap to identify necessary policies, 
programs, and regulatory changes needed to meet the state's EV and transportation emissions 
reduction goals. 
ln 2021, the GEO in collaboration with GOPIF and other agencies, completed the Maine Clean 
Transportation Roadmap. It offered recommendations to enhance the EV market in Maine, expand 
charging infrastructure, evaluate effects on electric utilities and the grid, and ensure an equitable and 
affordable transition to clean transportation for all people in Maine. One recommendation of the report 
to expand Maine's EV charging network is to adopt EV-ready and EV-capable building codes to reduce 
the cost of future charging installation on the customer side. The report additionally notes substantial 
savings if parking spaces are made EV-ready during construction rather than after construction.
1
The GEO worked closely with the Efficiency Maine Trust, MaineDOT, and GOPIF to submit a plan 
required to receive approximately $19 million in federal funding from the National Electric Vehicle 
Infrastructure (NEVI) program in late 2021 to build a network of EV chargers across the state. The Plan 
for Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Deployment outlines how the state plans to use NEVI funds to expand 
public charging between 2022-2026 with a focus on Level 2 charging to serve multi-unit dwelling (MUD) 
and other community-based charging in rural areas. Governor Mills, with support of the Legislature, has 
additionally allocated $8 million from the Maine Jobs & Recover Plan (MJRP) for a series of EV charging 
infrastructure investments not covered by the NEVI funds. Furthermore, the Maine State Housing 
Authority currently requires EV-readiness at their new construction projects as part of their Qualified 
Allocation Plan or QAP. As of December 2022, 389 public EV charging stations have been installed in the 
state, up from 184 in 2019. 
The GEO is committed to continuing its collaborative planning efforts with other state agencies to 
expand public EV charging infrastructure in the state and to engaging with the Maine Uniform Building 
and Energy Code (MUBEC) on evolving codes that may facilitate future EV-readiness. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Cwa~_Ca4a.\ Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor ’ s Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
