93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • 
Westbrook
Testimony in Opposition to LD 524-An Act Requiring the Installation of Electric Vehicle Charging 
Stations in New Commercial and Multifamily Parking Lot Construction
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology
March 8, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology,
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional Chamber of 
Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 Mainers. We are 
submitting this written testimony today to express our organization's opposition to LD 524. While the goals 
of decarbonization and electrification are noble, in its simplest form this bill represents a tax on new housing 
at a time when we need to be doing everything possible as a state to incentivize new housing. 
In preparation of this testimony, we spoke with several members in the construction and development 
industries and the response of all of them was that this legislation will undoubtedly represent an additional 
burden of time and cost on the development of new housing. 
First, in municipalities with delegated authority for Site Location of Development permits like Portland, 
this added step for developers to go to DEP who would otherwise not need to interact with the agency could 
add six months of time to the typical entitlement process for new housing developments. In this time of 
intense demand for new housing and highly volatile construction and financing costs, that added step and 
associated delay is unacceptable and could lead to developers losing their window to advance a specific 
project. 
Second, while on its own this requirement would not likely sink the typical pro forma of a housing 
development, it still represents an added cost to housing developers that will be passed on in the form of 
higher sale prices or rents. For affordable housing developments, this added cost is especially difficult to 
absorb while staying within their strict financing parameters and the cost caps put in place by 
MaineHousing. Additionally, while the discreet costs of conduit and associated infrastructure are not that 
substantial in the scheme of a new development, the power supply needed for these chargers will increase 
the level of service required for a project which can necessitate huge costs to the developer for CMP design 
fees and transformer upgrades to achieve an adequate level of service. Again, while the goals accomplished 
are noble, this will be a tax on new housing. 
While we are urging this committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on this legislation, we do have suggested 
amendments that will lessen its impacts should the committee decide to move something forward:
1. First, we urge you to remove the requirement for the issuance of a permit from DEP for the reasons 
mentioned above. There is no reason this EV requirement would necessitate a lengthy permit 
process through the DEP. 
2. Second, 10% seems quite high for the current number of EVs we see on the road today and in the 
foreseeable future. We recommend that this either be lowered, or there is a phased in approach to 
reach the 10% over the next decade plus. 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • 
Westbrook
3. Third, the requirement for the “cabinet, box or enclosure” component of this legislation seems 
unnecessary. While it is true that it is a much higher cost to go in and retrofit an existing parking 
lot with EV chargers, we feel it should be sufficient for a developer to provide conduit stubbed out 
beneath the pavement as that represents the largest cost and most intrusive step in installing more 
chargers down the road. The “cabinet, box, or enclosure” requirement would be a cost with no 
purpose and could potentially cause problems with ADA accessibility, snow clearance, etc. 
4. Finally, we request there be an exemption for affordable housing developments from this 
requirement. Not only is the cost issue most burdensome for these developments, but the logistical 
and operational issues are also much different for affordable housing developments that typically 
do not see nearly as many personal automobiles owned by residents, and certainly don’t see many 
new and expensive electric vehicles owned by residents. 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask that the committee votes Ought 
Not to Pass on LD 524.  
