19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 524 
(“An Act Requiring the Installation of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in New 
Commercial and Multifamily Parking Lot Construction”)  
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 8, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Andy Cashman.  I am the 
Founder of Resolve Government Relations, and we represent the Maine Association of 
REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 
members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine 
communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential 
and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry 
affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, 
surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of 
REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® is neither for nor against LD 524. The printed 
bill is a concept draft, so we await the final proposal. However, the concept draft 
notes that the bill will require “electric vehicle charging stations in new construction” 
for multifamily housing of more than 5 units and all new construction except single-
family homes and retailers with fewer than 25 parking spots. 
We support the voluntary use of alternative energy sources to reduce dependency on non-
renewable forms of energy and the voluntary design, construction, and management of 
buildings in an environmentally conscious, sustainable, and energy-efficient manner.  As 
drafted, without additional information, we cannot support or oppose this bill. We have 
concerns that may be helpful for the Committee to consider in your deliberations.  First, the 
bill does not specify what electric vehicle charging stations would be required, such as trickle 
chargers, fast chargers, prewiring only, or conduit only (for wiring to be run later). We support 
the voluntary installation of conduit because this prepares the property owner for electric 
vehicle-ready capacity. We also support voluntary energy conservation measures including 
favorable performance-based incentives and financing for costs incurred to reduce energy 
consumption. However, we oppose mandatory requirements which would add to the cost of 
new construction, development, and ownership of residential and commercial property, 
especially when the property owner may never personally use or see a return on their 
mandated investment.  We support incentives for voluntary adoption, not mandates. 
Second, the bill does not specify who would pay for the electricity used by a charger. 
Would it be acceptable to install a charger that allows the person using the charger to 
Page 2
12781773.1be billed for the power consumed during that charge? We believe the property owner 
should have the ability to choose whether they would want to provide electricity at no 
cost to those plugging into the charger rather than be required to do so. 
We respectfully urge you to consider these matters during your deliberation on LD 
524. Thank you for your time and consideration.
