VERSANT A POWER 
Testimony in Neither for Nor Against LD 524 
An Act Requiring the Installation of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in 
New Commercial and Multifamily Parking Lot Construction 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I am here 
today neither for nor against LD 524. 
Versant Power supports and understand that it has a critical role to play in Maine’s transition to beneﬁcial 
electriﬁcation and the associated need to build out essential infrastructure that can facilitate that transition. LD 
524 proposes a strategy to help move our electric vehicle infrastructure forward by requiring the installation of 
charging stations in various forms of new parking lot construction. Such solutions will become increasingly 
important as electric vehicle adoption increases, including among Mainers who do not have easy or regular access 
to home charging technologies. 
As you know, Maine’s electric grid does encounter constraints in various locations and circumstances and 
upgrades may be necessary to accommodate additional loads or generation. In situations where a developer or 
facility owner is required to build charging infrastructure and grid upgrades are necessary, the current legal and 
regulatory framework requires the cost-causer, i.e. the developer or facility owner, to pay for upgrades and make- 
ready costs speciﬁc to their project. Such a construct is designed to ensure that other ratepayers are not required to 
pay for project costs ﬁ‘om which they do not beneﬁt. 
This framework may be valuable for the committee to understand as it decides how it wants to proceed with this 
legislation. Developers and facility owners should also understand clearly that grid upgrades and make-ready 
work, along with the associated costs and time requirements, may be required in certain cases in order to comply 
with this proposed requirement. 
Thank you for your consideration, and we would be pleased to bring additional information to the work session at 
your request. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District - PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
