R Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street v Augusta, Maine 04330 - (207) 622-3101 - Fax: (207) 622-4343 ~ www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 524, An Act Requiring the Installation of Electric Vehicle 
Charging Stations in New Commercial and Multifamily Parking Lot Construction 
To the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator _ 
March 8, @2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Josh Caldwell. l am the Climate & Clean Energy Outreach 
Coordinator at the Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more than 
60 years to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s enviromnent, on behalf of our 25,000 
members and supporters. I’m here today to testify in support of LD 524, An Act Requiring the 
Installation of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations in New'Commercial and Multifamily Parking 
Lot Construction. 
Decarbonization of the transportation sector is a top priority in Maine’s Climate Action Plan. 
There are several important strategies to achieve this aim, but deployment of electric vehicles 
(EVs) is the most important, technologically ready strategy to meet our near- and long-term 
climate goals. Transitioning to EVs at the level called for in Maine’s Climate Action Plan is 
possible. Electric vehicles come with lower fuel and maintenance costs, and the auto industry is 
decisively moving toward electriﬁcation, with more new models available every year. But this 
transition will require a statewide network of charging infrastructure along our highways, in our 
village centers, and at our workplaces that can support an exponentially expanding population of 
EVs. _- 
This bill is a smart way to ensure that certain new buildings incorporate those needs as they are 
designed and built. Estimates show that electric vehicle supply equipment installation costs 
increase by two to six times if a parking space is made EV-ready after construction compared to 
during construction. ‘ EV-ready building codes are a key recommendation in Maine’s Clean 
Transportation Roadmap as EV-ready and EV-capable building codes are critical for reducing 
the cost of future charging installation on the customer side. 
Availability of charging for multi-unit dwellings (MUDs) is also a key recommendation in the 
Clean Transportation Roadmap. Providing charging for residents of MUDs unlocks latent 
1 https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/fi|es/inline- 
files/Maine%20Clean%20Transportation%2ORoadmap.pclf
demand for EVs as 21% of Maine households are in MUDs (buildings with 2+ households)? 
NRCM’s 2022 survey of Maine EV drivers found that, while EV owners are overwhelmingly 
happy driving EVs and saving money, the top two concerns they hold are about range and the 
availability of chargers.3 This legislation would directly address both of those concerns and 
encourage EV uptake amongst Maine consumers. Further, our survey found that 73% of EV 
drivers are more likely to frequent a business if charging is available at that location. 
The provisions outlined in this legislation would reduce the cost of EV charger installation for 
Mainers, accelerate the adoption of EVs throughout the state, and stimulate local economies. Our 
approach to climate change must be oriented around least-cost proactive solutions, and EV 
charger-ready spaces are a good illustration of that approach. V 
For these reasons, we urge the committee to vote Ought to Pass on this bill. Thank you for your 
time. I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
2 
https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/ ﬁles/inline- 
files/Maine%20CIean%2OTransportation%2ORoadmap.pdf 
3 
https://www.nrcm.org/programs/climate/cleaner-transportation/2022-maine-electric-vehic|e-survey/
