Testimony of Nate Cloutier
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
March 8, 2023
In Opposition to LD 524, “An Act Requiring the Installation of Electric Vehicle Charging 
Stations in New Commercial and Multifamily Parking Lot Construction”  
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the Committee on the Energy 
Utilities and Technology: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine 
representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state.
LD 524 would require parking facility developers to equip a certain number of parking spaces as “charger-
ready” for new and expanded construction. It proposes to require 10 percent of parking spaces at a “lodging 
facility” to be charger-ready when there is new construction of 10 or more spaces, or if an existing 20 spot 
lot is expanded by 30% or more. 
We thank Representative Runte for bringing legislation forward that continues the conversation of clean 
energy as it relates to EVs and chargers. Our members are proactive within the industry and often share 
ideas and strategies that have boosted energy efficiency at their businesses. We have spoken at length 
internally about the hospitality industry’s role in moving toward carbon neutrality, and we continue to be a 
partner at the table, however requiring lodging operators to shoulder the costs and logistics of preparing 
these spaces to be charger-ready isn’t the right path. As we continue to navigate our way toward a clean 
energy climate, we urge the Committee to consider ways to incentivize energy efficiency instead of 
mandating costs to our businesses. Many of our members have taken steps toward energy efficiency 
through several means and at personal costs. The morale is high, too, because they are proud of the steps 
they’ve taken and feel they are continuing to do their part. However, another mandate would only simmer 
that. 
The costs of increased level of service upgrades that would potentially be needed to allow for EV charging 
on the site is especially concerning. Following COVID-19, our industry is still enduring a workforce crisis. 
Most employers large and small operate on slim margins namely because they pay competitive wages to 
attract and retain workers, and because they are paying considerably more for supplies. Our members take 
every measure to ensure that costs aren’t passed on to consumers, however financial mandates, such as 
what is proposed in this legislation, would likely lead to that. 
We urge the Committee to vote ought not to pass on this legislation. Thank you for your consideration.  

