 
1050 K Street, NW  | Suite 650  | Washington, DC 20001  | AutosInnovate.org  
March 8 , 2023  
 
Hon. Mark Lawrence,  Senate Chair  
Hon. Stanley Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE:  Legislative Docket 524  – EV Charging Infrastructure  
 
Dear Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler, and Members of the Committee:  
 
On behalf of the Alliance for Automotive Innovation1 (Auto Innovators), thank you for the opportunity to 
provide our strong support for Legislative Doc ket 524 –  as amended , needed legislation that seeks to 
establish expanded electric vehicle infrastructure obligations on the construction /major renovation of 
parking facilities.   
 
Auto Innovators’ members are committed to the decarbonization of the transportation sector and are 
working diligently to expand motor vehicle offerings of battery electric vehicles, plug -in hybrid electric 
vehicles, and fuel cell electric vehicles with ran ges, price points, and vehicle types to satisfy all customers’ 
needs.  IHS Markit predicts there will be 130 zero emission vehicles (ZEV)  models for sale in the U.S. market 
by 2026, up from roughly  50 models today2.  This growing marketplace is the result of many years of 
research and development across the automotive industry.  In fact, it is estimated that automakers will 
have invested $330 billion on vehicle electrification between 2018 and 2025, a truly staggering amount of money – all focused on making an electric vehicle future a reality.  
 
But our members  cannot do it alone.  
 
Government entities clearly have a role to play to help transition the driving public to ZEV – among other 
things: leading by example and putting ZEV in the state’s vehicle fleet; institut ing well- funded point -of-sale 
incentives to support purchas ing ZEV and charging stations; provid ing beneficial utility rates for charging 
of ZEV ; and expanding public recharging/refue ling infrastructure.  It is on this last point that LD 524  
rightfully focuses.  
 
Many studies rightly point out that 80 -90% of EV charging occurs at home3.  The remaining 10 -20%  is 
largely comprised of residents who live in Multi- Unit Dwellings (MUD) and those drivers who need  
additional charging while away from home.  The lack of viable public , fast-charging options to address both 
of these use -cases stands as a serious impediment to EV -adoption.    
 
1 From the manufacturers producing most vehicles sold in the U.S. to autonomous vehicle innovators to equipment suppliers, batt ery 
producers and semiconductor makers –  Alliance for Automotive Innovation represents th e full auto industry, a sector supporting 10 
million American jobs and five percent of the economy. Active in Washington, D.C. and all 50 states, the association is commi tted to 
a cleaner, safer , and smarter personal transportation future. www.autosinnovate.org.  
 
2Stephanie Brinkley, IHS Markit Forecasts EV Sales to Reach US Market Share of 7.6% in 2026, IHS Markit, 
https://ihsmarkit.com/research -analysis/ --ihs -markit -forecasts- ev-sales -us.html (May 28, 2019).  
 
3 For example, see: (1) Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Assessment: Analyzing Charging Needs to Support Zero -Emission 
Vehicles in 2030 . California Energy Commission. Publication  - National Plug -In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Analysis, National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory  
 
  
   
 
This legislation would require all newly constructed parking lots, as well as existing parking areas that undergo major renovation, to build into their construction plans the ability for a specific number of parking 
spaces  – based on overall parking lot size  – to be supported by electric vehicle charging stations.  Making 
such accommodations at time of construction is  dramatically cheaper than retrofitting existing parking 
structures with chargers outside a major renovation.   Passing LD 524  will help grant  MUD residents and 
other drivers who need augmented charging more options to charge and will remove a considerable impediment to EV adoption.   The tangible changes contained in LD 524  are exactly the type needed to help 
achieve a decarbonized transportation future.  
 
While we share the sponsor’s intent and support the underlying legislation, we do think the bill could be 
moderately improved by shifting from only requiring the rough -in service to be built, to actually requiring a 
minimum number of installed electric vehi cle supply equipment for both MUD and commercial settings.   
This is unquestionably a step in the right direction, but the key is not only getting infrastructure -ready but 
seeing consumers have working infrastructure available to them across the state.  
 
With that said, we believe strongly in the intent behind this bill  and passing this legislation would put Maine 
among the  leader s in this space , and something every state will need to also address if we are to 
successfully work together to build a viable  EV marketplace for all!  
 
Thank you in advance for your consideration of our views .  If I can answer any questions or provide any 
further information, please do not hesitate to contact me at 202 -326-5550 or wweikel@autosinnovate.org .  
 Sincerely,  
 
 
Wayne Weikel  
Vice President , State Government Affairs  
 
 
cc:  Members, Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 

