   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in opposition to LD 1636,  An Act to Ensure the Right to Work Without 
Payment of Dues or Fees to a Labor Union, and LD 1707, An Act to Allow Workers to 
Work Without Having to Pay Labor Organization Service Fees  
 
Arthur Phillips, Maine Center for Economic Policy   
May 2 , 2023   
 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee 
on Labor and Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine Center 
for Economic Policy. I am here to testify in opposition to two bills, LD 1636 and  LD 1707, 
which seek to undermine  the ability of labor unions to represent all workers they 
represent . 
 
The Maine Center for Economic Policy is dedicated to improving the economic wellbeing of 
Maine’s working and low -income people.  As an overwhelming body of research has 
demonstrated, collective bargaining is  critical to workers’ ability to secure decent wages, 
benefits,  and safe conditions on the job . Union ized workers have been found to earn 
significantly better wages than comparable non-union workers . Meanwhile, a greater 
presence of unionized  workplaces  in a given sector and geography  also raise s standards 
for workers not covered by a collective bargaining agreement , as other employers compete 
to attract workers .i Collective bargaining also reduces racial and gender inequalities,  with 
one analysis finding that Black workers have gotten a 13.1% wa ge boost from collective 
bargaining , compared to a 10.2% wage boost for unionized workers overall.  Much of the 
wage stagnation we have experienced in recent decades correlates to  a concurrent decline 
in union membership.  Anti-union legislation like the bills before you are partially 
responsible for the  decades -long  erosion of good standards for working people . 
Under federal labor law, unions are held to a duty of fair representation, which means that 
all workers, whether members of the union or not, must  be treated equally in bargaining, 
grievances and other union functions.ii The other side of this, though, is a recognition that 
all workers should share in funding the activities of the union that has yielded the benefits 
of collective bargaining. Outlawi ng this standard, as these bills seek to do, would create 
significant “free riders” and undermine unions’ ability to advocate for all workers they 
represent.  
Wages in so -called “right to work" states are significantly lower than in states with strong 
collective bargaining rights, even in manufacturing jobs that were traditionally well paid. A 
detailed study by the Economic Policy Institute found that the declin e in union membership 
has resulted in a payroll cut of 5%, or the equivalent of $2,700 annually for a full -time 
 
   
 worker. For workers with a high school level of education, the cost of declining union power 
is 9%, or $3,200 a year .iii 
 
It should be noted that  no other state in the northeastern United States has so -called “right 
to work” laws , with Virginia being the nearest  state to have such a provision . While several 
midwestern states passed right to work laws in the 2010s, none have done so in the past 
six years, and last month, Michigan successfully rep ealed the law 10 years after it took 
effect.iv Recent polling has shown public approval for unions in the US is at its highest point 
in nearly 60 years.v 
 
Labor unions are democrati c institutions  – from electing leadership to ratifying contracts 
that set the conditions of their work , unionized workers deci de how their organizations are 
run. This includes the question of whether to negotiate  union security agreements  with  
their employers,  which require  all members to pay dues.  To not only take away this right 
but to criminalize it, as would LD 1636 , with a punishment of up to a year of incarceration,vi 
undermines workers’ rights to self -determination.  
 
For these reasons, we urge you to oppose LD 1636 and LD 1707.  
 
 
 
 
i “Unions help reduce disparities and strengthen our democracy,” Economic Policy Institute, April 2021, 
https://www.epi.org/publication/unions -help -reduce -disparities -and-strengthen -our-democracy/  
ii National Labor Relations Board, https://www.nlrb.gov/about -nlrb/rights -we-protect/whats -law 
iii Jake Rosenfeld, Patrick Denice, and Jennifer Laird, “Union decline lowers wages of nonunion workers,” Economic 
Policy Institute, August 2016, https://www.epi.org/publication/union -decline -lowers -wages -of-nonunion -workers -
the-overlooked -reason -why -wages -are-stuck -and-inequality -is-growing/  
iv https://apnews.com/article/right -to-work -repeal -michigan -democrats -b4304a2780909d37e76f211c7b070a6b  
v http s://news.gallup.com/poll/398303/approval -labor -unions -highest -point -1965.aspx  
vi Office of the Maine Attorney General, Criminal Justice System, 
https://www.maine.gov/ag/crime/criminal_justice_system.shtml  
