Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
In Opposition to LD 1636, An Act to Ensure the Right to Work Without Payment of Dues or Fees toa 
Labor Union 
in Opposition to LD 1707, An Act to Allow Workers to Work Without Having to Pay Labor Organization 
Service Fees 
May 2, 2023, 
Cross Office Room 202 and Electronically 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, l'm Jeff 
McCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, Local 1989 of 
the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees Association represents over 
13,000 workers across the state. 
We are here to oppose LDs 1636 and 1707. Similar anti-worker bills have been introduced frequently 
over the years. They have been repeatedly rejected in bipartisan votes at our urging. Now more than 
ever, workers need more rights, not fewer. Attached is past testimony on similar anti—worker bills. 
Please oppose LDs 1636 and 1707. 
When it comes to contract negotiations, grievances, arbitration and so on, unions are required by 
federal law to represent all workers equally and fairly in the bargaining unit, regardless of whether they 
are union members and regardless of whether they pay dues. Unions are legally required to represent 
all workers in a bargaining unit equally, even if they are not members. Unions can be sued if they don't 
follow the duty of fair representation. 
What is a so—called "right to work" law? 
So-called "right to work” laws weaken the best job-security protections workers have - the union 
contract. Despite its misleading name, this type of law does not guarantee anyone a job and it does not 
protect against unfair firing. 
The National Right to Work Committee was formed in the early 1970s by a group of Southern 
businessmen with the express purpose of fighting unions. Their efforts began with the addition of a few 
workers for the purpose of public relations and have been supported by groups like the American 
Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) and the Koch Brothers. "Right to work" bills are here for one reason 
only — to diminish the power of the labor movement. Since the Supreme Court's decision in Citizens 
United, corporations have had the luxury of spending hundreds of millions of dollars to influence 
elections and policy. This spending is focused on policies that limit the power of working families. 
Thank you.
TESTIMONY OF ROBERT RUHLIN 
MEMBER, MSEA-SEIU LOCAL 1989 / 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
LA COMMERCE, RESEARCH AND ECONOMIC DEVE PMENT 
MAY 8, 2017 /6 9:00 AM KOSS OFFICE BUILDINWOM 208
N IN OPPOSITION TO LD 65, THE-SOOAKLLED “AN ACT TO ENSURE THE RIGHT TO WORK WITHOUT PAYMENT OF DUES Oli FEES TO A LABOR UNION ASA 
CONDITION oF‘yjMPLoY1viENT ”
/ My name is Robert Ruhlin and I'm froin Hudson, Maine. I am a lifelong Republican jr 
and retired state transportation worker, and I subinitting written testimony i_11
:, 
opposition to LD 65. /F 
Ljoined state service in 1965 and retired in 2003 witlﬂalmost 39 years of service with the2-
, ,—
L 
Department of Transportation, wgirldng for 13 plus years as a draftsman for Highway 
and Bridge Projects and for 25 pfus years in the state's jConcrete and Structural Testing 
Lab in Bangor. I was in state service prior to the passage of Maine's collective bargaining 
laws in 1974, and I vividly reigiember how issues were handled — or maybe I should say 
not handled — back then. Weihad no consistency on crucial everyday issues such as 
workplace safety between agencies for example. In cases, we had no consistency 
from workplace to workplace even within the sarné agency. 
When Maine's collective bargaining law passed back in 1974, the Maine Labor 
Relations Board held an election to see whiclj/f organizations the employees wanted to 
represent them. Everygone who wanted to vote voted. We got to choose from a list of ,
/ 
organizations or no representation at all, a"'nd a majority of workers voted to unite /’ 
together for a strongvoice at work through a union. Maine's then new law also 
provided that any organization elec/téd by a majority of workers had to represent 
every member of tlie bargainingunit -- whether they had voted in favor of the union 
or not. ,//I 
.‘\.s/’ , . . .. Over the 39 years since then, we ve proven that collective bargaining benefits everyone 
involved — including the state, the state employees, and the public they serve every dag
2
