MAINE ASSOCIATION OF POLICE 
 
 
 
 
President: 
Kevin Riordan 
Vice Presidents: 
Chris Todd 
Shane Stephenson 
Jonathan Barnes  
Steve Borst 
Secretary/Treasurer: 
Jason Burke 
Executive Director: 
Paul Gaspar  
 
Post Office Box 2263 South 
Portland, ME  04106 
 
 
 
 Legal Counsel: 
 
 Troubh, Heisler, P.A. 
          William K. McKinley 
 Daniel R. Felkel 
 Jonathan M. Goodman 
  
 Kelly & Chapman 
 John W. Chapman 
  
 (207) 767-2558 
 
     “In Valor There Is Hope” 
 
Labor And Housing Committee Hearing Testimony  
By Paul Gaspar, Maine Association of Police 
May 2nd, 2023 
 
 LD’s 1636 and 1707, Respectively - "An Act to Ensure the Right to Work Without Payment 
of Dues or Fees to a Labor Union” / “An Act to Allow Workers to Work Without Having to 
Pay Labor Organization Service Fees” 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is Paul Gaspar and I am from South Portland. I am proud to be before 
you on behalf of the Maine Association of Police.  Our organization represents approximately 900 
municipal law enforcement officers and public safety dispatchers throughout Maine and we are proud to 
support the efforts and the testimony of the Maine Law Enforcement Coalition as well in this effort. 
 
On behalf of the Coalition, its partner organizations and combined memberships throughout the state of 
Maine, I am here today to oppose both LD 1636 and LD 1707, "An Act to Ensure the Right to Work 
Without Payment of Dues or Fees to a Labor Union” / “An Act to Allow Workers to Work Without Having 
to Pay Labor Organization Service Fees”  
 
Both proposed bills represent a political and basest intrusion into the sovereignty of statutorily recognized 
service providers having their own internal structure, memberships and business structures. They serve to 
muddle definitions of accepted, as well as prohibited practices, and in that statutory confusion, asks for 
criminal penalties based on them. They are duplicative and only serve to bolster an anti-union animus 
among individual members, service providers and employers. 
 
Both bills cover “plowed ground”, already addressed by federal, state and supreme court law. This 
includes both the right of an individual to either be forced to join, or be prevented from joining a union or 
association, as well as employers being prohibited from coercing, or hindering a group from forming a 
union or association. These are clearly enumerated in Maine labor relations statutes and already provides 
for action or penalties for both employers and unions who engage in these prohibited acts. Acts including 
what these bills engender, which is tantamount to anti-union animus in its ability and right to protect the 
interests of its members and ensure that Maine labor relations laws and regulations are followed in a fair 
workplace. 
 
The term, “service fee” as used in these bills, are deliberately vague, although all encompassing. Their 
definitions and descriptions cast a wide net, and seek to eliminate any ability of service providers to 
address the costs and resources involved in protecting a contracts authority for non-members who benefit 
from all benefits and protections provided by the paying members’ collective bargaining agreement. 
Unions and associations are already prohibited from charging an automatic and reoccurring fee, or “Fair 
Share” from nonmember employees as struck down by the US Supreme Court and stands as the law of the 
land. With this case law, any standing or automatic fee cannot be assessed to those practicing their 
statutory right to not join a member of a union or association. 
 
 
Website:  www.maineassociationofpolice.com 

 
 
 
With the Supreme Court’s ruling, the issue of a mandatory service fee is eliminated. This further protects 
an individual’s standing as an individual who chooses not to join a union or association. It does not, 
however, eliminate any rights, enumerations or protections under the collective bargaining agreement 
and exists because of the collective time resources and funding provided through dues paid by active 
members. This creates a fundamental unfairness in deference to dues paying members has characterized 
the non-member by national unions such as Teamsters, as “freeloaders”. Or getting a free ride. 
 
As registered bargaining agents, we are imbued with sole statutory authority to enforce the collective 
bargaining agreements we negotiate and create. It requires members of individual units, or locals to 
involve the bargaining agent in all aspects of the bargaining, enforcement and mid term agreements with 
their employers. Nonmembers, not being bound by this present a clear danger to this process by engaging 
in personal, self-interested bargaining (wages, working conditions, disciplinary), without the knowledge 
or consent of the local, unit or bargaining agent, creating a situation in which the entirety of the 
membership is affected by a potentially precedential erosion of the majority’s rights and protections under 
the contract. This flies in the face of the very basis and reason for the Maine Labor Relations Law’s 
existence. 
 
As sole bargaining agents have the right to be involved in any process that involves the execution of the 
collective bargaining agreement, the right to ensure that this does not occur becomes important. It is in 
this example that the bargaining agent have knowledge and input in any process, member or nonmember 
that impacts the global health and welfare of the entire membership from being co-opted by a single 
nonmember acting in only their self-interest. Yet after all this, there are times when a nonmember is 
involved in a process that requires the specific skills and authority required by the bargaining agent to act 
on the nonmember’s behalf. In speaking for the Maine Association of Police, we have provided for a 
singular, hourly service fee; not for the enrichment of the organization, but the address solely, the hourly 
cost of an either an attorney or labor specialist. 
 
This type of “Service Fee”, goes directly to the actual provider to cover their employment cost and is not 
used for any other purpose. This ultimately protects the funds raised through dues and the expectation 
from active members that their needs will be met as part of their membership and support. To use active 
members’ dues for non-members is akin to allowing those who choose not to pay taxes, to receive the 
same benefits provided by the payment of taxes. This type of directed cost to nonmembers is neither a fee 
enriching the union nor is prohibited by the Supreme Court’s ruling on fair share. 
 
Both LD1636 and 1707 seek to eliminate any ability to accomplish the important work provided in the 
interest of a union or association’s membership to protect all; including nonmembers in achieving a fair 
and equitable workplace under the law. These bills are tantamount to what an employer would be held 
accountable for by the Maine Labor Relations Board as anti-union animus, or union busting as it seeks to 
eliminate the ability for a union to financially exist by removing all considerations as to whether a person 
joins, or refrains from joining, a union or association. We urge you to vote ought not to pass on these bills 
to protect worker’s rights and the sovereignty of their advocates. Thank you and I’m happy to answer any 
questions you might have. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Paul Gaspar 
Executive Director 
Maine Association of Police 
 
