Andrew Fitzp atric k 
16 Pr outy Dr  
Veazie , Maine 04401  
 
LD 379  
March 22, 2023  
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and esteemed members of the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife standing committee. I’m writing testimony against LD 379, An Act to Responsibly Regulate 
Recreational Boats on Maine Lakes.  
LD 379 w ould  restric t wake boating wh ich is a sport enjoyed  by Mainers and other season al residen ts 
across the S tate of Maine. This up-and-coming sp ort supports the economy with boat  sales and attracts  
sports e nthusiasts who spend mo ney on ancillary services a nd related goods. My job is dependent to a 
certain e xtent on wake boati ng as I sell these boats and t he income  helps my family . Taking wake  boating 
away  without a ful l study , or even consi dering limiti ng w ake boating to limited area s, is an em otional 
reaction , not a common -sense reaction.  
Wake boating is an industry that creates tens of millions in economic impact in Maine, and this bill and 
other bills that limit wake boats will push much of tha t business out of Maine.  For lakes that allow 
motorized boats, wake boats should be allowed along with all the ski boats and pontoon boats.  
 
 Sincerely,  
 
Andrew Fitzpatrick  
Andrew Fitzpatrick
veazie
LD 379
Andrew Fitzpatrick
16 Prouty Dr
Veazie, Maine 04401
LD 379 
March 22, 2023 
Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and esteemed members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife standing committee. I’m writing testimony against LD 379, An Act to 
Responsibly Regulate Recreational Boats on Maine Lakes.
LD 379 would restrict wake boating which is a sport enjoyed by Mainers and other seasonal 
residents across the State of Maine. This up-and-coming sport supports the economy with 
boat sales and attracts sports enthusiasts who spend money on ancillary services and related
goods. My job is dependent to a certain extent on wake boating as I sell these boats and the 
income helps my family. Taking wake boating away without a full study, or even considering 
limiting wake boating to limited areas, is an emotional reaction, not a common-sense reaction.
Wake boating is an industry that creates tens of millions in economic impact in Maine, and 
this bill and other bills that limit wake boats will push much of that business out of Maine. For 
lakes that allow motorized boats, wake boats should be allowed along with all the ski boats 
and pontoon boats.
 Sincerely,
Andrew Fitzpatrick 

