MAINE, 
AUDUBON 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
% Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
March 22, 2023 
RE: LD 379, Resolve, Directing the Comrnimoner of Inland Firherzes and I/Vildlzfe to Study the Eﬁctr of 
Wake Boats on Shoreline Property 
Dear Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee: 
My name is Francesca Gundrum and I am Maine Audubon’ s Policy Advocate. Maine Audubon is 
the state’ s oldest and largest wildlife conservation non-proﬁt. Thank you for the opportunity to submit 
testimony in opposition to LD 379, Resolved, Directing the Cornmimoner of Inland Fisherzes and I/Wlcllz ﬁ 
to Study the Eﬂects of I/Va/ee Boats on Shoreline Property. 
While we appreciate the intent behind this legislation, the time and resources dedicated to studying 
the effects of wake boats on shoreline property and the use of a “wake safety zone” are duplicative of 
existing research and collaboration. The Maine Boating Impacts Coalition (MBIC) includes representatives 
from staffed and volunteer lake associations around the state and perspectives from lakefront landowners, 
wake boat owners, engineers, lawyers, scientists, and others. This coalition has been established for several 
years, employs a science and community-based approach to addressing the many impacts of wake boats, and 
has sought guidance from staff at the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. MBIC’s 
collaborative work informed LD 693, An Act to Protect Inland Vlézter Quality, Shorelines, I/Vildlzfe and 
Public Safety by Prohz'hz'tz' ng Operation of a I/W2/ee Boat to Create an Enhanced I/Va/ee Close to Shore or in 
Shallow I/Water, which Maine Audubon supported and that our organization believes is a well-reasoned and 
researched approach to mitigating the impacts of wake boats. 
Additionally, focusing solely on impacts to shoreline property is too narrow in scope for this issue. 
Effects on bottom sediment resuspension, invasive aquatic species, wildlife habitat, etc. are just a handful of 
variables that must be considered when addressing the impacts of wake boats. The MBIC includes these 
impacts and others in their approach to education, outreach, and advocacy. Inclusive and comprehensive 
work to address wake boat impacts on lake, wildlife, and public health is happening already. We believe that 
this bill would only delay this urgent and important work. Thank you for your time and I am happy to 
answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
%wW0&4t 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrum 
Policy Advocate 
Z0 ('}ilsl;11 ‘1dFarm Road, l3ali‘r1<>uth. Maine (H103 ' (Z07) 78l~233O ' maineaudubon.org
