Martina Witts
Maine Boating Impacts Coalition
LD 379
March 22, 2023
RE: Opposition for LD 379: "Resolved, Directing the Commissioner of inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife to Study the Effects of Wake Boats on Shoreline Property  "
Dear Inland Fisheries & Wildlife Committee Members, 
My name is Martina Witts, I live in Naples, ME on Trickey Pond. I volunteer as  
President of our lake association, Trickey Pond Environmental Protection 
Association, serve as a board member for the Lakes Environmental Association and 
for the past 18 months have chaired the collaborative meetings of the Maine Boating 
Impacts Coalition (MBIC). I am writing in opposition to bill LD 379. 
The threat presented to Maine lakes, wildlife and public safety by wake boats is 
ongoing and growing. The volumes of scientific and peer reviewed studies conducted 
across the United States and Canada over the last few years is clear; enhanced wakes 
generated by these boats do present a threat to the environment and to public safety. 
Operated too close to shore and in shallow water, wake boats erode shorelines, scour 
lake bottoms, resuspend sediment and nutrients in the water column contributing to 
decreased water clarity and fuel algae blooms, transport invasisve species, cause 
damage to boats and docks, and create a hazardous condition for swimmers, paddlers 
and smaller craft. 
For nearly two years MBIC has worked collaboratively with all manner of stake 
holders to address the threat of enhanced wakes and develop a reasonable path 
forward, so that all who recreate on Maine lakes can do so safely and compatibly, LD 
693 (another bill related to wake surfing before this committee) is the result of that 
work and collaboration. This bill, LD 379, will halt the progress scores of volunteers, 
professional environmental staff and scientists across Maine have made in developing
a solution. I urge you to not waste valuable time by approving a bill that is merely a 
delay tactic. I respectively urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 379. 
Sincerely, 
Martina Witts
Naples, ME

