TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
SUPPORT L.D. 379 
”An Act to Responsibly Regulate Recreational Boats on Maine Lakes" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Landry of Farmington 
DATE OF HEARING: March 22, Z023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
support L.D. 379. 
This bill was originally a concept draft but has been amended. The amendment isa 
resolve directing our commissioner to study the effects of wake boats and their impact 
on shoreline property. It also requires the Commissioner to report back to the 
committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife no later than January 15, 2024. 
The Department supports the focus ofthe resolve as interest in wakeboarding in Maine 
is increasing and gathering information now can help with policy making going forward. 
At the moment most of the wake boating activity is limited to southern, and parts of 
central Maine. 
That said, the Department requests that the "study" be limited to gathering and 
consolidating/summarizing information and studies that are already available in Maine 
and across the United States. For example, in 2020 the State of New Hampshire 
published a ”FinaI Report of the Commission to Study Wake Boats” , this report was the 
result of a stakeholder group that was enacted in New Hampshire law in 2019. In 2022 
the University of Minnesota conducted a study on wake boat use. Additionally, The 
National Association of Boating Law Administrators has information related to wake 
boarding and other towed watersports. 
The Department feels that a comprehensive new study of all aspects of this activity 
would be time consuming, costly, and not provide value to what is already available. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
