295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1792 
“Resolve, to Establish the Rural Health Services Task Force” 
Sponsored by President Jackson 
May 8, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy, and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community-based 
mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1792, “Resolve, to 
Establish the Rural Health Services Task Force.” This resolve establishes the Rural Health 
Services Task Force to study rural health care delivery in the State. 
 
COVID-19 exposed the cracks in the foundation of America’s rural community health 
system. These cracks include increased risk of facility closures, loss of services, low 
investment in public health, maldistribution of health professionals, and payment 
policies ill-suited to low-volume rural providers. To deal with these issues, we need to 
study what all of the underlying causes are. As we can all agree, these issues existed 
before COVID-19. But the pandemic laid them bare. The Alliance applauds Senate 
President Jackson for bringing this proposal forward.  
 
I would ask the committee however to add an amendment to change the wording of 
this line "One member who is a provider of behavioral health services in a rural part of 
the State" to "One member from a statewide organization that represents providers of 
behavioral health services." 
 
Effective planning and regionalization require local and state-level input on the 
distribution of rural populations, needs, and services. States can play an important role 
in encouraging regional health planning. 
 
According to the Maine Rural Health Research Center, “rural America has an exceptional 
history of resilience, innovation, and collaboration. Recovery from COVID-19 requires 
new strategies to rebuild the crumbling rural health foundation. The four cornerstones – 
payment and delivery system reform, community engagement, local health planning, 
and regionalization – can provide the base for strong and vibrant health systems serving 
rural America. Tools and resources are needed to support rural communities in taking 
responsibility for their health systems … We further recommend that states explore 
opportunities to create regional planning systems to improve the delivery of essential 
and specialty services in rural areas.”1 
 
I urge committee members to support the proposal with the amendment referenced 
above.  
 
1 John A. Gale MS, University of Southern Maine, Maine Rural Health Research Center. Rebuilding the Foundation of Rural Community Health 
after COVID-19. https://digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/health_system_reform/12/   ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Brighter Heights Maine 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties Mental Health
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Concepts, Inc. 
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
KidsPeace Maine
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Pathways of Maine
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Rumford Group Homes
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

