¢';.§ HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER 
ALLIANCE 
Q;7/ OF MAINE 
Testimony of Trevor Putnoky 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 1792, Resolve, to Establish the Rural Health Services Task Force 
May 8, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Trevor Putnoky and I'm the Director of Membership and Communications at the Healthcare 
Purchaser Alliance of Maine. The HPA is a nonprofit that represents the purchasers of healthcare in 
Maine. Our mission is to advance healthcare value and to support and incentivize high-quality, 
affordable care. We have over 60 members, including some of the largest public and private employers 
and health trusts in Maine. Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually providing 
health care for nearly one quarter of the commercially insured population in the state, including many 
who live and work in rural Maine communities. 
We share the bill sponsor's goal of ensuring that our state has a sustainable rural health delivery system 
that provides high-quality and affordable care to the many Mainers who live in our rural communities, 
and we believe that the task force established in LD 1792 would provide an excellent opportunity for 
stakeholders to come together to develop strategies to preserve care and encourage coordination of 
rural healthcare resources. 
As the committee considers LD 1792, we would urge you to add to the proposed task forcea 
representative of rural Maine employers. In Maine, 49 percent of our population is covered by 
employer —sponsored insurance —more than those insured by Medicare and MaineCare combined} 
Maine businesses and health trusts invest billions of dollars annually to ensure that their employees and 
their employees ’ families have access to high-quality and affordable care. Those dollars, in turn, help 
support the healthcare infrastructure that cares for Mainers from Kittery to Fort Kent. And in parts of 
the state with significant Medicaid and Medicare populations, commercial reimbursement rates are 
often essential in covering shortfalls from public pay reimbursement rates. If the Legislature creates a 
task force on how to sustain affordable access to health care in rural Maine, we believe it should include 
a representative of Maine employers, who contribute more financial resources than any other payer to 
the state's healthcare system, and who have a long-standing commitment to preserving affordable and 
accessible care for their employees throughout the state. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide HPA's feedback on LD 1792. I'd be happy to answer any 
questions. 
1 
State Health Facts, “Health insurance Coverage of the Total Population; Timeframe: 2021," Kaiser Family 
Foundation. Available at: https://www.kff.0rg/other/state-indicator/total- 
population/?currentTimeframe=O&s0rtM0del=%7B%22c0lld%22:%22Locati0n%22,%22s0rt%22:%22asc%22%7D. 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine | 11 Bowdoin Mill Island, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086 
P: (207)844-8106 I E: inf0@purchaseralliance.org | www.purchaseralliance.org
