Ann Hanna
Gerald E Talbot Community School
LD 1527
Testimony of Ann Hanna, Gerald E. Talbot Community School in support of LD 
1527
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Ann Hanna. I am
a resident of Portland and the principal of the Gerald E. Talbot Community School in 
Portland. 
Today I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1527 “An Act to Promote the 
Community School Program”. This bill is important to me because as the principal of 
a community school, I know first hand how impactful the community school 
strategies are to a child’s success. Community Schools are an effective and efficient 
strategy for improving education and  ensuring that ALL students, no matter who they
are or where they live, have the tools and opportunities they need to thrive.
Talbot Community School has been implementing community school strategies for 
just about two years. 
A significant focus of our implementation plan has been to increase opportunities for 
students to engage in after school activities. We have successfully developed 
partnerships with several community organizations to provide over 200 hours of 
afterschool programming for more than 160 students or over 44% of our population. 
These programs promote a wide variety of academic and social-emotional skills and 
have helped to support positive peer and adult relationships as well as a deeper sense 
of student belonging to our school and community. Our after school tutoring program 
has been incredibly successful. On average, students who have participated in after 
school tutoring have shown growth of over 10 points from fall to winter in academic 
assessment data, and anecdotally, staff are noticing increased confidence, engagement
and willingness to take on new academic challenges in class. 
Another successful strategy of our community school model has been to increase 
family engagement as we welcomed families and the community back into school 
after the pandemic. These efforts include bringing back welcoming events such as the 
back-to-school popsicle party, Parent Information Nights, and community resource 
fairs, as well as the initiation of two new event series; Coffee with the Principal and 
Homework Diners. In addition, we have created a comprehensive resource inventory 
on our website where parents can find information about many different types of  
available resources within our community. These activities, events and resources have
all helped students and families increase their access to staff, school supports and 
community resources,  and solidifies our identity as a community hub. 
Gerald E Talbot Community School’s  adoption of the community school model has 
been  made possible through grants from United Way and Department of Education, 
which funds key positions such as our Community School Coordinator, After School 
Coordinator and pays for our after school and family engagement activities. 
Community Schools are an investment in children, families, and our shared 
future.Quality Community Schools support higher student achievement and 
graduation rates
and lead our children  to become contributing members of society. Although funds 
like those from United Way have supported our model so far, they will eventually run
out –the funding provided by LD 1527 will help ensure Gerald E Talbot Talbot 
Community School  and districts across Maine can continue to serve “the whole 
child” and improve both academic outcomes and the well-being of the students and 
families in their communities.
Thank you for your commitment to LD 1527 and to Maine’s children. Please feel free
to contact me if you have any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Ann Hanna
Principal
Gerald E Talbot Community School 
Portland, ME
04103

