Elizabeth Tracy
New Sharon
LD 1527
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education Cultural Affairs. My name is Elizabeth Tracy and I
am a resident of New Sharon. I am an Ed tech teacher, After School Care Coordinator
and a parent to students ranging from pre k to third grade that attend Cape Cod Hill 
School. 
Today, I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1527 “An Act To Promote The 
Community School Program.”
As a working parent to three, doctors and dentist appointments can be difficult to find 
time for. With our school being a community school we have established the 
opportunity to have a dental clinic come to our building along with a health care 
coalition that provided students with vaccines. We also had Snap-Ed come in to teach 
our students about nutrition and have plans to start a community garden for fresh food
options for families.
Our After School Program has been such a great accommodation for working parents.
In our rural town there are no longer any daycare providers forcing parents to shorten 
their work day, find alternative care or even seek principals agreements to have their 
students attend other schools. Not only do we offer after care but have been able to 
offer many enrichment programs during these hours including; Girl Scouts, 4H, late 
day learning, planting groups and sports. 
Over the past few years many families have been forced to make life altering choices 
for their students. Many in our area have chosen to homeschool or attend smaller 
private schools. With Cape Cod Hill becoming a community school it has allowed all 
children to be able to attend our community events and feel as though they are part of 
the whole. We have hosted events such as a community dance, Touch-A-Truck, 
Trunk or Treats and a holiday walk. Hosting these events has helped to bring the 
community to our school and to unite our community together. 
In closing, I would like to recap the major points that have affected my family on a 
personal level. The benefit and convenience of having outside entities come into our 
building to support our students' health and well being, the opportunity for after 
school care and the many enrichments that it has offered of students, and finally the 
most important bringing our community together as a whole. 
Thank you all so much for the time and commitment that you put in for the children 
of Maine and our future to come. 
Sincerely,
Elizabeth Tracy
New Sharon, ME

