 
 
 
Date: April 28 , 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Education and Cultural Affairs:  
The Coalition for Community Schools is an alliance of national, state, and local partners across 
education, youth development, health, civil rights, and other sectors that unite around the vision of 
school as centers of communities where everyone belongs a nd thrives. On behalf of the Coalition as its 
National Director, I submit this letter to state our support for L.D. 1527, An Act to Promote the 
Community School Program.  
Our staff collaborated with Maine community schools advocates starting in 2014 to con vene key state 
partners to learn about community schools, and there was strong interest and leadership at the time led 
by then Senator and now Representative Rebecca J. Millett.  
We are excited about the progress since then in Maine toward community school s, and the opportunity 
to deepen that progress, with this bill and funding, to bring this evidence -based, effective approach to 
more schools across Maine.  
We see a similar demand and interest at the national level. Earlier this month, 159 organizations fro m 
the national to local levels signed onto our letter to Congress in support of $500 million for the Full -
Service Community Schools program for FY 2024, a strong showing of the deep support for the strategy 
at the national level. Funding for the federal pr ogram has been steadily increasing over the years, 
including a doubling of funding last year (from $75 million in FY 2022 to $150 million in FY 2023), 
demonstrating the support in Congress for this effective strategy.  And it was referenced in the American 
Rescue Plan Act as a strategy for states and districts to consider implementing , and many more districts 
and states have since invested in it . 
Community schools are both an evidence -based strategy with core research -based elements, as well as 
a hyper -local strategy that is customized to each unique school community. Through collaborative 
leadership, community schools unite students, families, school staff, and the broader community for 
student success.  
I urge you to pass this legislation and provide funding  for this legislation so more Maine students and 
families can benefit from this effective strategy.  
Thank you for your service and your consideration.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Jose Munoz  
Director, Coalition for Community Schools  
Institute for Educational Leadership  

