Sara Abbott Pinkham 
New Sharon 
LD 1527
Testimony of Sara Abbott Pinkham, 
Parent from Cape Cod Hill School
In Support of LD 1527
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Sara Abbott 
Pinkham. I am a resident of New Sharon and Parent at Cape Cod Hill School.
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 1527 “An Act To Promote the 
Community School Program”
The community school program has been very beneficial to the Cape Cod Hill School
Community. As a parent, pto member and school volunteer I have been able to 
witness first hand the benefits this program has provided to families in our small 
community. 
As a parent, I have been able to watch my children take part in after school 
programming which was made possible by our community school. Activities have 
ranged from girl scouts, plant club, basketball skills and drills, 4H and much more. 
Child care in our area is very limited. The after school programming has been a 
blessing for many families in the community by alleviating  the stressors that come 
with finding care as well as providing new  experiences for many of our students that 
they may not have had otherwise. For example, our local Girl Scout troop had 6 active
members at the beginning of the school year and now has a full troop of 16 girls. This 
is due to Girl Scouts now being offered in our afterschool programming which 
allowed the local troop to easily access the school building for meetings.
As a member of the PTO and a school volunteer, I have participated in the planning/ 
hosting of many community events ranging from touch a truck, our annual ziti dinner,
family holiday night, You & Me Dance and our upcoming annual community BBQ. 
Our Cape Cod Hill Community participation is always astounding; with numbers well
surpassing enrollment. The community is made up of a handful of small towns, with 
limited resources. Therefore the PTO and community volunteers have  worked hard to
provide experiences and community building opportunities that larger towns are able 
to offer their residents more freely. In turn we have created a tight knit community 
that revolves around Cape Cod Hill School. 
The creation of the Cape Cod Hill Community School, has been an important 
investment in our school community for all involved. The investment into our small 
community school will continue to help our children thrive moving forward. Cape 
Cod Hill Community School is now the local hub of our community due to this 
funding. Please consider continuing to fund our State’s community school programs. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sara Abbott Pinkham 
New Sharon 
