¢£=§?»5~%" 
‘l;,n,$$‘,;§~ 
Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Benjamin Hawkins, Director of Public Affairs 
Maine Health Care Association 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
February 7, 2023 at 1:00 pm 
Neither for Nor Against LD 99, An Act to Clarify the Allowable Temperature Range in Certain 
Long-term Care Facilities 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Ben Hawkins, and I serve as the Director 
of Public Affairs for the Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 
nursing homes, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical 
lnstitutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
I am here today to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 99. Per the Medicare State 
Operations Manual (Appendix PP), CMS requirements for temperature in nursing facilities 
already exists: 
F584 
§483.10(i) Safe Environment. 
The resident has a right to a safe, clean, comfortable and homelike environment, 
including but not limited to receiving treatment and supports for daily living safely. 
The facility must pr0vide— ......
§483.10(i)(6) Comfortable and safe temperature levels. Facilities initially certiﬁed 
after October 1, 1990 must maintain a temperature range of 71 to 81°F; and ...”1 
DEFINITIONS §483.10(i) from page 43 of the State Operations Manual and procedures for 
Surveyors: 
“Comfortable and safe temperature levels” means that the ambient temperature should be ina 
relatively narrow range that minimizes residents ’ susceptibility to loss of body heat and risk of 
hypothermia, or hyperthermia, or and is comfortable for the residents. 
While facilities certified after October l, I990, are required to maintain an air temperature range 
of 7l-81°F, there may be brief periods of time where that temperature falls outside of that range 
only during rare, brief periods of unseasonable weather. This interpretation would apply in cases 
where it does not adversely affect resident health and safety, and facility staff took appropriate 
steps to ensure resident comfort. This would enable facilities in areas of the country with 
relatively cold or hot climates to avoid the expense of installing equipment that would only be 
needed infrequently. 
PROCEDURES §483.l0(i) 
Verify the air temperature above ﬂoor level in resident rooms, dining areas, and common areas. 
If the temperature is out of the 71-81° F range, then ask staff what actions they take when 
residents complain of heat or cold, such as, providing extra ﬂuids during heat waves and extra 
blankets and sweaters in cold. 
Right now, every resident already has the right to a safe, clean, comfortable and homelike 
environment. The comfort and temperature of their living environment is critical to physical, 
mental, and emotional well-being. We absolutely appreciate and agree with the intent to 
ensure resident health, safety, and comfort. However, the bill does not address residents ’ 
preference for temperature- some may wish to be warmer or cooler than the specific 
temperature range designated in this language. What if a resident wishes to have his/ her room 
at 68 degrees during the summer? It also does not address the challenge of shared living space 
when one resident prefers a room to be warmer or colder than his/her roommate. I go back to 
1 
State Operations Manual: https:[/www.cmsgov/Regulations-and~ 
Guidance/Guidance/Manuals/downloads/som107ap pp guidelines ltcfpdf. Accessed February 4, 2023.
the current State Operations Manual's definition of "comfortable and safe temperature" — 
defined as protecting residents from loss of body heat, risk of hypothermia, or hyperthermia, 
and keeping them comfortable. 
Many long term care facilities buildings were built a considerable time ago. Some facilities may 
not have windows that are wide enough to accommodate air conditioning units or the electrical 
bandwidth to deal with all the power needs, possible power surges, etc. If the facility was 
certified before October 1, 1990, they may be exempt from the specific temperature range 
requirement, but it never exempts them from ensuring the safety, comfort, and well-being of 
the residents. lt would, however, mean that additional building renovation/modifications would 
be necessary if this bill were to pass. 
The bill as drafted does not include any specific language on an appropriation of funding to 
support cooling units or HVAC system installation, just a reference to possible sources of 
funding. HVAC system installation and upgrades are very expensive. Without researching 
specific program criteria, it is unclear how many long term care facilities would qualify for 
funding to address these new costs. Within the last two years, the American Health Care 
Association roughly estimated it would cost at least $2.8 Billion nationwide for HVAC upgrades 
for just nursing facilities. Residential Care facilities would be additional. 
Finally, the proposed legislation also does not contemplate MaineCare reimbursement for 
increased energy costs. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today.
3
