  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greetings Senator Baldacci , Representative Myer , and members of the Committee  on Health and 
Human Services . 
 
My name is Jena Jones  and I’m the Policy & Advocacy Director  of the Maine Council on Aging  
(MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations,  
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live  
healthy, engaged, and secure lives with choices and o pportunities as we age at home and in  
community settings. I am testifying neither for nor against LD 99 . 
 
The intentions of LD 99, to safeguard the comfort of all residents within Maine’s long -term care 
facilities, are some we should all agree on. Just as we wou ld wish for our own homes, it should  
the right of all residents living in long -term care facilities to feel comfortable  and protected from 
the extreme temperatures Maine’s weather produces. Though we support the aim of LD 99, we 
also know  that our systems care for older people both at home and  in long-term care  facilities  are 
fraying at the seams  and nearing collapse .  
 
In addition to the Federal mandate ( Title 38, Chapter I, Part 51, Subpart D, § 51.100 ) to maintain 
long-term care facilities between 71 -81 degrees Fahrenheit, LD 99 adds additional facility -staff-
lead mitigation measures aimed at keeping residents comfortable during breakdo wns of heating 
or cooling equipment. Many of Maine’s long -term care facilities are of older construction; many 
facilities lack central heating  or cooling options, some have windows that will not support 
cooling units, and all are facing unprecedented chall enges  with staffing  wrought by pre -existing 
difficulties that were further compounded by a  multi -year global pandemic.  
 
Instead  of allocating funding for facilities to purchase the systems and equipment needed to 
comply with the terms of LD 99, this bill directs facilities  to source the funding needed for the 
updates LD 99 would require. The mitigation efforts proposed by LD 99 would be delegated to 
direct care workers, the very same group of workers most l ikely to be short -staffed1 in a long -
term care facility . Within a national crisis of care worker availability, Maine is ra nked 3rd in 
states facing the greatest shortages2, reporting that 59% of facilities  in Maine  are unable to fill 
staffing needs.  
 
                                                     
1 https://www.kff.org/coronavirus -covid -19/issue -brief/nursing -facility -staffing -shortages -during -the-covid -19-
pandemic/   
2 Ibid.  Written  Testimony  of Jena  Jones  on Behalf  of 
the Maine  Council  on Aging  
to the Committee  on Health  and Human  
Services  
Neither  For nor Against  LD 99 – An Act to Clarify  
the Allowable  Temperature  Range  in Certain  
Long -term  Care  Facilities  
 
Submitted  via Testimony  Portal  on February  6, 2023  
 

A new unfunded mandate will serve only to stress an already deeply stressed  system. Over the 
past few years, several long term care facilities have closed due to staffing shortages and other 
financial challenges, resulting in hundreds of residents nee ding to mov e far from family, 
community supports, and their primary care staff .  Simply put, the MCOA  would like to ensure 
that not one more residential care home for older people closes.  That ’s why we ’re working 
tirelessly to grow Maine ’s direct care staff and ensure that all parts of the continuum of care, 
including nursing homes, are appropriately compensated for the care they provide.  Requiring 
long-term care facilities that support MaineCare residents to source their own funding not only 
adds additional tasks and stress to an over -burdened system but also disregards the lack of 
workers available to maintain the mitigation techniques required in LD 99.  
  
Every resident in each of Maine’s long -term care facilities is deserving of a livable sp ace where 
they are comfortable  and receiving quality care . The MCOA ardently agrees with the impetus for 
LD 99 but cannot support the lack of funding available to implement its requirements. I urge the 
Committee to consider appropriating funds to realize the neces sary guarantees of comfort LD 99 
would provide. Without this appropriation, this mandate will further impede needed progress in 
stabilizing and growing supports to maintain long -term care facility operations.  
 
 
 
 
