 
 
Jessica Browne  
15 Primrose St, Apt A  
Belfast, ME 04915  
(207) 322 -5716  
Jessica.S.Browne@gmail.com  
 
Testimony for LD 99          January 10, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Chair  Baldacci , House Chair  Meyer , and esteemed members of the Health and Human Services Committee:  
 
My name is Jessica Browne and I live in Belfast.  I a m writi ng to testify in support of LD 99.  
Whether or not a skilled nursing facility was initially certified before October 1, 1990 should be irrelevant when it comes 
to requiring  a reasonable ambient  temperature for residents .  Climate control is a key component in ensuring that 
residents are comfortable , healthy, and able to enjoy a certain quality of life.  If it is not explicitly clarified in State 
regulations, there is nothing to prevent the temperature inside these facilities from skyrocketing , which seriously  
compromises the safety and well -being of the residents.  
For example, when I visited my mother this summer at a long -term care facility, the  thermostat in the common area  
would often read in the mid -80s. The residents that could speak did, and I overheard one begging  a nurse to do 
something , saying that the conditions were “inhumane.”   Many sat  in the common areas or laid in bed , helpless and  
sweating, uncomfortable  but unable to do anything to escape  the heat . I was fortunate to be able to purchase and install 
a window AC unit in my mom’s room, but most of the other residents  were not as lucky . 
I couldn’t help but notice the impact that the heat was having on the staff as well.  Some were visibly sweating through 
their scrubs  while working long , phys ically demanding shifts . These dedicated , hard -working  people doing the critical 
work of caring for Main e’s aging population simply deserve better . There is also a widesp read staffi ng shortage in this 
field, so an y impro vement in working conditions could  be beneficial on that front as well.  
With climate change upon is, it is getting to a point , even here  in Maine , where keeping cool in the summ er is just as  
critical  as keeping warm in the winter.  It is becoming a necessity, not a luxury, and especially so for the vulnerable and 
medically compromised  residents  in our skilled nursing facilities , as well as the devoted staff  doing this crucial work.  
 
Thank you,  
 
 
Jessica Browne  
Belfast  
(207) 322 -5716  
Jessica.S.Browne@gmail.com  
