§ 61 \/\linthrop Street - Augusta, ME O433O ““\ 1-800-4990229 ~ Fax 207-621 0509 ' 
’ l\/lLTCOP@lVtaineOrnbudsman og 
Q 1:; .. ﬁre '1 1; 
oft/ll§'ri5§lvi;t;~ 
Pl"<1f-.5 mm 
LD 99; “An Act to Clarify the Allowable Temperature Range in Certain Long Term Care 
Facilities“ 
ln Support 
February 7, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laura Harper and l am a Senior 
Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today to provide testimony in support of this 
legislation on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program. 
This legislation proposes that both nursing homes and residential care homes be required to 
maintain a temperature that is not less than 71 degrees Fahrenheit and not more than 81 
degrees Fahrenheit in all areas ofthe facility where residents are present. It requires that the 
Department adopt rules to implement this requirement. 
Safe temperature levels in nursing homes and residential care are necessary to presen/e the 
health, safety and comfort of the older and disabled residents who live in these homes. Nursing 
home regulations require that facilities certified after October 1, 1990, must maintain a 
temperature range of 71-81 degrees Fahrenheit. Most, if not all of Maine’s nursing homes were 
certified before 1990 so that they are exempt from this requirement. At the same time, nursing 
home regulations require that the resident has a right to a safe, clean, comfortable, and 
homelike environment, including but not limited to receiving treatment and supports for daily 
living (F584 §483.10(i) Safe Environment and §483.10(i)(6) Comfortable and safe temperature 
levels). Nursing homes are required to take action when temperatures fall outside the range of 
71 -81 degrees Fahrenheit responding to residents ’ complaints of heat or cold, such as 
providing extra fluids during heat waves, and extra blankets and sweaters in cold (Sun/eyor 
Guidelines; PROCEDURES §483. 10(1)). 
The regulations for residential care homes require that resident areas of the facility shall be 
maintained at a temperature of at least, 70 degrees Fahrenheit or higher as necessary to 
ensure the comfort of the residents. Thermometers shall be placed in all resident areas. This
does not apply to bedrooms where residents control the temperature. This regulation is 
important in ensuring that residents will not be exposed to cold. However, there is no upper limit 
temperature guideline in the regulations that would protect residents from high temperatures 
(10-144 Chapter 113 16.4 Temperature). 
We support this legislation because we believe it is an important protection for the older and 
disabled residents of both nursing homes and residential care homes. 
Thank you for your consideration.
