Janet T. Mills Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Govemm. L Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
11 State House Station 
41 Anthony Avenue ;1 
Je“““‘ M Lambmv’ P“ D Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 C°""“i“i°““"A 
Tel.: (201) 237-9300; Toll Free: (800) 791-4080 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay); Fax: (207) 287 5815 
Testimony of Director William Montejo, RN 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation, Maine DHHS 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Providing information re: LD 99, An Act to Clariﬁl the Allowable Temperature 
Range in Certain Long-term Care Facilities 
Sponsor: Rep. Jan Dodge 
February 7, 2023 
1 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, honorable members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is William Montej o, I am the Director of the Division of Licensing and 
Certiﬁcation (“DLC”) for the Department of Health and Human Services. The Department is 
neither for nor against LD 99, An Act to Clarijjz the Allowable Temperature Range in Certain 
Long—term Care Facilities, and we offer the Committee the following information for your 
consideration. 
This bill requires certain long-term care facilities to maintain a temperature of not less than 71 
degrees and not more than 81 degrees Fahrenheit. DLC expects this bill would impact over 1,000 
facilities presently operating in Maine (87 nursing facilities and 1,108 Residential Care). 
Currently, we have a varied set of Department rules regarding temperature and heating systems 
that reﬂects the diversity of our long-tenn care settings. Regarding heating, nursing facilities, 
larger residential care facilities, and private non-medical institutions (PMNIs) are required to have 
central heating systems that can maintain a temperature of 75 degrees, ‘ While other smaller 
residential care facilities, PMNIs, and assisted living facilities do not have a central heating 
requirement? Residential care facilities and PMNIs must, however, maintain a minimum 
temperature requirement of 70 degrees Fahrenheit. Assisted living is required to have temperature 
adjustment within the resident room. 
1 
For example, current rules under 10-144 CMR Ch. 110, Regulations Governing The Licensing And Functioning Of Skilled 
Nursing Facilities And Nursing Facilities, require a nursing facility to be "equipped with a central heating plant connected toa 
radiator, convector, or register in each room or area used by residents or stajf The heating system must be capable of maintaining 
a temperature of 75 degrees Fahrenheit throughout the residents ’ section of the building. Alternate heating systems may be 
approved by the Department if a uniform temperature of 75 degrees Fahrenheit can be safely maintained in the home.” 
2 For example, under cmrent rules Chapter 113: Regulations Governing the Licensing and Functioning of Assisted Housing 
Programs both PNMls and Residential Care Facilities (Level IVs) “there shall be a central heating plant connected to each room 
or area used by residents or staﬂby means of a radiator, convector or register. The heating system must be capable of maintaining 
a temperature of seventy- ﬁve degrees (75 °) Fahrenheit throughout resident areas of the facility. Alternate types of heating systems 
may be approved by the Department, ifa uniform temperature of seventy- ﬁve degrees (75 ") Fahrenheit can be maintained Systems 
other than electric heating shall have an annual inspection and the heating source shall be tagged as being inspected. " Level III 
and below of both PNMIs and Residential Care Facilities do not address central heating. Assisted Living Program rules provide 
that heat needs to be available and individually controlled in each apartment.'
Regarding cooling, the Department does not have cooling system requirements in rule for long- 
tenn care facilities. Many facilities lower the facility temperature in the warmer months through 
personal air conditioning systems in the common area or within the resident ’s room, (or with a box 
fan, desk fan, or other similar personal air device). Newer facilities might have central air systems, 
however, with the age of many of these buildings and the costs associated, there is likelya 
signiﬁcant barrier for some in installing centralized systems. 
A facility that fails to maintain safe temperatures could be found to be in violation of current rules, 
such as those rules applying to the physical plant, or under rules regarding resident rights (such as 
the right of residents to be free from abuse and neglect) and DLC (along with the Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman Program) does receive complaints about the temperature of long-term care facilities. 
In 2022, We received multiple complaints about temperature in facilities, however, we cannot offer 
the speciﬁc number of complaints as these are not tracked based on “temperature ” , rather become 
part of a broader category of complaints based on the physical plant. 
A complicating factor is that certain nursing facilities have been exempt because federal CMS 
regulations at 42 CFR §483.lO(i)(6) state, “Comfortable and safe temperature levels. Facilities 
initially certiﬁed after October 1, 1990 must maintain a temperature range of 71 to 81°F.” All 
Maine nursing homes were initially CMS certiﬁed prior to October 1, 1990. 
We also want to point out that resident choice could make a speciﬁc temperature range, such as 
the one presented in this bill, complicated. There could be residents who prefer a temperature lower 
than 71 degrees, for example, which could mean a facility could be cited for following a resident- 
preferred cooler temperature. The Committee could consider adding a provision to acknowledge 
the importance of resident choice. 
We thank you for your attention to this matter, and again, the Department does not take a position 
on this bill. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and make myself available 
for questions at the work session should you request.
