 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members include 
lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural and 
historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually 
produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs,   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Support Of 
 
LD 1198,  Resolve, Directing the Department of Economic and Community Development to Convene a Working 
Group to Improve the State’s 10-year Economic Development Strategy 
 
 
 
April 4, 2023 
 
Senator  Curry, Representative  Roberts,  and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
 
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  Affairs  for the Maine  
Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association  is the state’s  largest  tourism  organization  and the only one 
supporting  members  in every  type of tourism  business  such  as lodging,  restaurants,  campgrounds,  retail,  outdoor  
recreation,  guides,  tour operators,  amusements,  and historical  and cultural  attractions.  For over 100 years,  we’ve  
been  promoting  Maine  and our nearly  1500  members.  We also operate,  on behalf  of the state,  seven  State  Visitor  
Information  Centers  from  Kittery  to Calais.  I present  this testimony  in favor  of LD 1198.  
 
The Resolve  states  that the working  group  should  focus  on creating  and retaining  “jobs  that add economic  value  
or bring  in money  from  outside  the State.”  Clearly  the tourism  industry  is key to this. Not only does  tourism  
support  jobs in Maine  and bring  in visitors,  tourism  is critical  to introducing  people  to the state —people  who 
then want  to relocate  here,  start a business,  and further  contribute  to our community  and economy.  As the Maine  
Office  of Tourism’s  recently  released  2022  data shows:  
 
• Tourism  supports  151,000  jobs in Maine  
• Every  102 visitors  support  a new job in Maine  
• Tourists  spend  more  than $8.6 billion  in Maine  
• Total  economic  impact  of tourism  in Maine  is $15.8  billion  
 
We believe  that a working  group  representing  top industries  such  as tourism  (one of largest  private  industries  in 
the state)  can provide  valuable  information  and feedback  on the goals  and implementation  of the 10-year  plan.   
 
The Maine  Tourism  Association  has had a Workforce  Development  department  for over 5 years  and has created  
an industry-wide  career  center  with other  tourism  partners.  We are also coordinating  with educational  providers--  
high schools,  the Maine  Community  College  System,  other  higher  educational  institutions,  JMG,  and others--to  
raise  awareness  and connect  our young  people  with careers  opportunities  in Maine.  We do this through  school  
visits,  field  trips to tourism  businesses,  internships,  and career  pathways  information  for all segments  of the 
tourism  industry.  
 
By establishing  a working  group  our efforts,  and those  of other  businesses  and organizations,  can better  be 
coordinated  with the state’s  efforts  in these  areas  to ensure  the most  effective  use of resources.  I respectfully  ask 
that you vote in favor  of LD 1198.  Thank  you for your  time and consideration  of our testimony.  

