 
 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1198, “Resolve, Directing the Department 
of Economic and Community Development to Convene a 
Working Group to Improve the State's 10-year Economic 
Development Strategy” 
Tuesday, April 4, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business, I am Sarah Calder, Senior Government 
Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in support of LD 
1198, “Resolve, Directing the Department of Economic and Community 
Development to Convene a Working Group to Improve the State's 10-year 
Economic Development Strategy.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides 
the full continuum of health care services to the residents of eleven 
counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire. MaineHealth is also the 
state’s largest private employer with over 22,000 care team members, but, 
we are facing a workforce crisis that is significantly impacting access to 
care. We are currently recruiting for over 2,900 positions, in addition to 
over 55 physicians and 70 advanced practice providers.  
In an effort to address the crisis, we have invested heavily in retaining our 
current workforce, but also in creative and innovative solutions to “grow 
our own,” including developing entry level employees in front line 
positions from Environmental Services to training tomorrow’s physicians. 
It’s clear, however, that legislative action is needed if we’re going to be 
successful in meeting the increased workforce demands of our state.  
In 2019 when the 10-year Economic Development Strategy for Maine was 
released, we were disappointed to find that health care was only 
mentioned twice in the report, despite the fact that the health care sector is 
one of the fastest growing industries in Maine and across the country. And 
as the oldest state in the nation, Maine’s health care needs are only going 
to continue to grow. Moreover, the report identified that “Hubs of 
Excellence” need to have access to “first class hospitals and health care 
services” in order to be competitive – which we strongly agree with. But 
in order to have access to high-quality health care, particularly in rural 
areas, we need to significantly grow our health care workforce. 
With that said, we applaud Rep. Sawin Millett for his leadership and sponsorship of this critical 
legislation before you today. We look forward to working with the Commissioner and working 
group to improve the State’s 10-year economic development strategy by ensuring the state’s 
health care workforce needs and opportunities to grow the workforce are considered.  
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
