ates 
e STATE or MAINE 
i-'
. §4v"=\._' DEPARTMENT OF ECQNOMIC 
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT i 
IANET T. MILLS HEATI IERIOHNSON 
GOVERNOR COMMfS5IONl-IR 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Victoria Foley 
Neither for nor against LD 1198 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Economic and Community Development to Convene 
a Working Group to Improve the State’s 10-year Economic Development Strategy 
Good afternoon, Sen. Curry, Rep. Roberts, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. l am Victoria Foley, 
legislative liaison for the Department of Economic and Community Development, and I am 
testifying neither for nor against LD 1 198. 
As you likely know, the process of developing Maine’s 10-year economic development strategy 
was extensive. The resulting plan was released in 2019 and includes the contributions of more 
than 1,300 Maine people. It is a roadmap designed to foster collaboration among the public, 
private, nonprofit and education sectors to create a diverse and sustainable economy. 
An implementation working group has been meeting since the plan’s release to support reaching 
three main goals set out in the plan: growing the average annual wage by 10%, increasing the 
value of what we sell per worker by 10%, and attracting 75,000 people to Maine’s talent pool. 
Since the plan was released in 2019, we have made great strides. Our department is finalizing a 
report to share details of the progress we have made as people across the state — not just state 
government - have worked toward these shared goals. The progress has been good, and we look 
forward to sharing the report. We expect it will be ready in time for your work session. We also 
recognize that there is more to be done, and our shared work is far from finished. 
The Department is open to adding additional members to the working group that is currently 
tasked with the implementation and evolution of the plan. Creating a separate, parallel working 
group is not ideal, as we hope to ensure all are working together with a shared vision. We do also 
recognize that good strategic plans leave room to continue to adapt to meet the state’s needs, and 
we believe our implementation working group is well positioned to help facilitate those shifts. 
Thank you for your time today. I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional 
information for your work session. 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION‘ AUGUSTA ' MAINE '04-333-0059 
PHONE: (207) 6249800 ' FACSIMILE: (207) 287-2681 
l/VWW.MAIl\iE.GOV/DECD
