Amy Frankel 
P.O. Box 905 
Rockport, Maine 04856 
 
April 20, 2023 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, 
 
As a resident of Knox County and a licensed master of social work (LMSW) in the state of 
Maine, I am requesting your consideration and support for LD 1633 - An Act to Establish a 
Community-based Reentry Program in All Department of Corrections Facilities. I am a PhD 
student and part-time faculty at the University of Maine, Orono, where I have spent the last three 
years focusing on policy and services related to reentry. 
 
The Maine Department of Corrections take seriously their role in the management of correctional 
facilities, and their responsibility to support incarcerated citizens as they return to Maine cities, 
towns and neighborhoods following their release. LD 1633 is an important step toward helping 
them do that by addressing reentry challenges with competence and care in order to improve 
outcomes for returning Mainers. 
 
Incarcerated citizens preparing for return to communities in Maine need access to support with 
multiple dimensions of sustainable life, including employment, housing, family engagement, 
access to healthcare and mental health resources, and treatment for substance use. LD 1633 
wisely places knowledgeable, supportive individuals within the correctional landscape both in 
facilities and after release. This approach has the potential to provide significant improvement in 
the arc of a citizen’s reentry journey. This legislation will allow returning citizens to receive the 
support and structure they need in their reentry process which will improve their chances of 
making successful transitions back into our communities.  
 
Recidivism rates are unacceptably high in Maine. This bill provides the first example of a 
comprehensive safety net for returning citizens during a crucial phase of their return. The 
intervention with individuals who will opt into these services well before their release is an 
essential element of this programming. The support of the Department of Corrections gives us a 
reason to believe that a program like this can have a demonstrable effect on recidivism outcomes 
in Maine. Supporting LD 1633 will make successful reentry a priority and perhaps even save 
some money in the MDOC’s budget in the process. Thanks for your dedication and for all of the 
work you continue to do to make our communities stronger.  
 
Thank you for reviewing my letter to support LD 1633.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Amy Frankel 
(207)-236-6058 
