Dv' 101 Western Ave. 
W P 0 Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
‘E0 Eﬂd D(}ﬂ'18S‘lilC Vl0l¢E!hC& 207_43o_8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1633: “An Act to Establish a Community-based Reentry Program 
in All Department of Corrections Facilities ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Tuesday, April 25, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ to raise issues for your consideration 
regarding LD 1633, “An Act to Establish a Community-based Reentry Program in All 
Department of Corrections Facilities, ” and to suggest some minor language modifications 
consistent with the intent of this bill. 
Building a transparent reentry planning structure that will help support incarcerated 
individuals successfully re-integrate into the community, with the input and collaboration of 
a wide range of community partners, will be a net positive to the safety of crime victims and 
our communities. We see this as also likely to enhance the State's ability to meaningfully 
support any increase in residents released under Maine's Supervised Community 
Confinement Program as that program continues to grow and evolve. 
Our network appreciates that this bill would require an individualized plan for each 
resident who will be released and includes attempting to address housing needs, 
employment opportunities, connections to pro-social activities, peer support and substance 
use recovery. These are all critical components to help any person be successful upon their 
release from a correctional facility. However, there are several other important risk-related 
issues that require attention and planning, and we would urge you to explicitly name them 
as requirements in both the pre-release planning and the post-release follow-up in order to 
support reintegration. These include: 
0 identifying possible access to firearms by a participant who will leave the facility 
as a prohibited person and helping the participant ’s primary community supports 
understand those prohibitions; 
‘ MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 sun/ivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
0 identifying and reviewing any protection from abuse or other victim-related court 
orders in place and ensuring the participant's release plan supports compliance 
with those; and 
0 connecting the resident to any violence intervention program that might be 
appropriate to supporting behavior change. 
Without these things properly accounted for, particularly for those incarcerated for crimes 
involving domestic violence, the release plan fails to pay actual attention to some of the 
most significant risks that person poses. To that end, we would ask you to consider the 
following amendments: 
In Section 2 of the bill, adding two subsections to Section 1(3)(C)(2): 
(f) identification of any anticipated access to firearms when the participant will be 
legally prohibited from possession of firearms upon their release and coordination of 
information sharing with the participant's primary community-based supports 
regarding this prohibition; and 
(g) plans for compliance with any protection from abuse or other court orders that 
may be related to any victim of the crime for which the participant is incarcerated, as 
well as connection to any community-based domestic violence intervention program 
where appropriate. ” 
In Section 2 of the bill, adding a subsection to Section 4(A): 
(5) where the participant is prohibited from possession of firearms, identify any 
known access to firearms and confirm the participant's primary community-based 
supports are informed regarding the participant's prohibition on possession of 
firearms. 
Section 3 of the bill creates a Peer Reentry Review Board, comprised of a cross 
section of interested parties, tasked with oversight, advising and evaluation around this 
community-based reentry program. MCEDV appreciates that the bill explicitly names two 
representatives from statewide victim advocacy organizations to serve on the proposed 
board. To the extent that the intention is to permit these representatives to be appointed 
from different advocacy organizations, we would suggest modifying the language to read: 
“Two members representing statewide organizations providing victim advocacy services, 
appointed by the President of the Senate.” 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our perspective on LD1633. MCEDV and our 
member programs are happy to provide any additional information that might be helpful to 
the Committee as you continue your work on this bill. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: andrea@m.cedy_..Qrg
