 
 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.org 
 
 
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to 
homelessness and hunger
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety,
My name is Devon Stockmayer. I am the Advocacy Supervisor at Preble Street in 
Portland. I am writing to ask for your support in the passage of LD1633: An Act to 
Establish a Community-Based Reentry Program in all Department of Corrections 
Facilities. 
Maine’s recidivism rate has been on the rise in recent years. We cannot accept this 
as the standard. A rising or high recidivism rate only illuminates the glaring lack of 
wraparound support for individuals being released from correctional facilities. In 
Maine, nearly 1/3 of individuals released from prison return within three years.
 
LD1633 is innovative in its approach to reentry services because it establishes a 
program of peer-support, which can be tailored to each person’s situation. In the 
challenging and vulnerable moment of re-entry, it is imperative that a person is 
offered a comprehensive safety net. In relying on a peer-run model in collaboration 
with the Department of Corrections (DOC), this program will draw meaningfully 
on shared lived experiences of incarcerated individuals, who may support each 
other in their return to lives beyond bars. 
With backing from the DOC, the reentry program proposed in the bill could have a 
transformative impact on the lives of individuals leaving prison across the state. No 
matter the level of support, reentry is challenging. Yet LD1633 will ensure that we 
have done our part as a state to offer these individuals support and meaningful 
stepping stones to reintegrating into society. 
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Devon Stockmayer
 
  
 
