Elizabeth Simoni
Augusta
LD 1633
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice
and Public Safety Committee:
 My name is Elizabeth Simoni and I reside in Augusta.  I am writing to express my 
strong support for LD 1633, An Act to Establish a Community-Based Reentry 
Program in All Department of Corrections Facilities. 
I have worked in Maine’s criminal justice arena since 1989.  The struggles of 
individuals re-entering into the community following any period of incarceration have
been deeply researched and well documented. I personally have seen the revolving 
door of re-incarceration when individuals being released were only given “fifty 
dollars and bus ticket”.  I have worked with people who have fatally overdosed within
days of a release.  
Conversely, I have seen the positive impact of second chances on individuals and 
their families when care and thoughtful planning are applied to a release opportunity. 
I have been impressed with the work that the Maine Department of Corrections has 
undertaken in terms of release planning and case management and am equally 
impressed with the “in-reach” that happens regularly through the work of fine 
organizations like the Maine Prisoner Reentry Network. Community, connection, and 
compassion make all the difference. 
Establishing a community-based reentry program that coordinates directly with the 
Maine Department of Corrections will benefit those re-entering into the community, 
and Maine communities at large. The innumerable barriers and risks faced by 
individuals re-entering the community after a period of incarceration can be 
identified, addressed, and mitigated through this type of coordination.  Housing, 
employment, transportation, relationships, health care, and substance use, and mental 
health treatment are ever-present impediments that can be addressed through the dual 
approach of trained, supervised individuals with lived experience working both in and
out of facilities, whose efforts will naturally compliment the work and mission of the 
Maine Department of Corrections.
I respectfully request that the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
consider my testimony and pass LD 1633. This model will prove essential in 
providing the guidance and support needed for individuals to successfully reintegrate 
into society and reduce recidivism. It will also afford an opportunity to collect data on
outcomes and can potentially save money that can be reallocated to other areas of 
need and investment.  
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Elizabeth A. Simoni
 
