Jeff Taylor (JT)
Maine State Prison (MSP) NAACP
LD 1633
To the Criminal Justice & Public Safety Committee:
My name is Jeff Taylor & I am the Maine State Prison (MSP) NAACP 
Vice-President. I am speaking in favor of LD 1633; An Act To Establish A 
Community-Based Reentry Program In All Department of Corrections Facilities.  
First & foremost, criminal justice reform has been at the forefront of this committee 
for the past approximately 10 years! For the past 13 years I have been providing peer 
support here at the MSP.  After growing up in a household where my mother, brother 
& I were beaten practically every single day for some reason my dad deemed it was 
necessary for!  For my entire life, I had no one I could share those nightmares with.  
Why? In fear of being laughed at.  I was hanging out with an adult man; he drove a 
small pick-up truck with a cap on it and it had an alarm system company logo on the 
door.  We were at his parents’ house, and he was showing me the alarm system he 
installed.  We then were hanging out in a tag a long camper and he attempted to 
molest me!  I pushed from him and landed on the camper bed and felt a gun under the 
pillow.  I pointed the gun at him, mind you, I am about 10-11 years old.  He froze and
I told him I would shoot him if he moved.  I backed out of the trailer and ran as fast as
I could all the way home.  It was a long way from my house!  I finally got home, and 
both my mother 7 father was there, I told them both and my mother hugged me while 
my father told me to stop lying, I could get someone in serious trouble for that! I was 
really shocked to hear him say that.  This is the person who is supposed to be 
protecting me!  I literally had no one I could go to.  I thought, if my own family 
would not support me, who would?  Shortly after, I was introduced to smoking Pot & 
drinking Alcohol!  It made me laugh; I was happy.  It ridden my “nightmares” that I 
constantly had almost every waking night & day!  That was it!  I found a way to feel 
better about myself, Pott & Alcohol!  Is this the way a 10–11-year-old should be 
thinking?  Fast forward from 1990 to 1997, now living in Maine, I was in a serious 
ATV accident.  I was in a coma for 28 days & suffered a Traumatic Brain Injury 
(TBI) & one of the results of being in a coma was I did not dream.  At the time, it was
a blessing!  The other result was not remembering much of my childhood. My time of
incarceration in prison began December of 1999.  Since then, I have been in & out of 
prison consistently with the objective of succeeding all three times I was released 
from prison!  The Maine Department of Corrections (MDOC) has every intention to 
help us succeed in life when we are released.  Nearly all of them cannot relate to what
an individual needs in order to be a better version of who they were when they came 
to prison.  Everyone seems to have their own idea on how to help someone.  The 
MDOC caseworkers will ask an individual a series of questions that comes from a 
Level of Service Inventory -Revised (LSI-R) tool designed to score our risk of 
re-offending.  This tool is not the right one.  The one used focus on if an individual is 
in the community versus the individual specifically!  Please, I encourage you all to 
check out the difference between MDOC & the one the Federal Government uses 
under the (First Step Act).  Also, it’s only use is upon intake due to the fee requested 
for every use!  In my opinion, to be SURE decisions are being made accurately, the 
tool NEEDS to be used when re-classified!  Since when does a footnote dictate public
safety.  By not accurately scoring someone, it can be a risk to public safety.  This bill 
provides an opportunity for individuals like my-self to pay it forward!  Someone who 
understands the hidden or not easily recognized dangers or difficulties of MDOC, as 
well as our own!  We call them (Pitfalls).  Peer Support with lived experience can 
identify the pitfalls on all sides as well as the (Stinking Thinking) that is a thought 
process everyone incarcerated can relate to!  Having approximately 25 years’ of lived 
experience of incarceration as well as recidivating gave me the knowledge in this field
as a professional.  It was no easy task to figure out that I am responsible for my 
mistakes.  It took about 12 years of recidivating, in & out of prison to get it.  Not 
everyone does get it!  The question I continually ask myself is why did it take so long 
for me to get it?  There isn’t enough space on this paper or time to explain it properly 
to you all.  With that said, Restorative Justice (RJ) which is who I learned about from a
magazine in 2010!  I still have the magazine today.  RJ helped me to see through my 
excuses used to behave in the way I was.  I had to figure it out the hard way!  It is the 
only way to figure it out because simply put, MDOC has NOONE to help who has 
lived experience.  The day I owned my behavior is the day my life changed forever.  
The emotionless person I was became a very emotional person; I cry all the time!  I 
am not embarrassed to express myself.  This bill will provide a vehicle for everyone 
who is incarcerated to be able to address the behavior(s) that caused the crime(s) to 
happen.  Addressing the crime first is wrong! How do I know this, because I could 
never understand truly why I behaved the way I did.  Most everyone who becomes 
incarcerated is in some type of denial!  There are hidden feelings pushed down with 
substance use period.  How do I know, I did it! Lived experience.  If you want to truly
help us, you will take the couple of minutes to think about this important subject and 
help us help others!  March of this year the NAACP Executive Board took the 
Certified Intensive Peer Support Specialist (CIPSS) training, passed the test and we 
are currently helping our peers to help themselves!  The only way a person can be 
better is to first understand themselves!  It is not an easy task to complete.  We 
understand how to help each other.  This bill will provide the opportunity for others 
who are willing to take the step towards finding who they truly are!  This bill will 
truthfully reduce the likeliness of a person returning to prison.  Developing a working 
relationship with someone who can relate to our struggles in life will help motivate 
me to change verses being asked a series of questions from a book by a stranger who 
may not care whether I change my life for the better.  I don’t mean to keep repeating 
myself, but it is very important to understand that someone who can relate to my 
struggles, someone with lived experience is invested in helping me and at the same 
time, it helps them!  For these reasons, I hope you will provide a vehicle for us to help
each other! 

