John Clark 
—, Lewiston Maine 04240 
Good afternoon Be-be Center Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the 
criminal justice and public safety committee. 
My name is Johnny Clark, and im in support of LD1633 
l'm a constituent of Lewiston Maine a licensed Clinician as alcohol and drug counselor, MHRT- 
C, PBHP, Intentional peer support, State Registered recovery coach and re—entry /re-integration 
specialist, the reason I list all ofthese credentials is not for pride but because l too was formally 
incarcerated and suffered from substance use disorder. 
l come to you today in long-term recovery l am the owner of two recovery homes one of which 
we are opening for women on the 15"‘ of may l work as the program director of Maine prisoner 
re-entry network l'm also the owner of A Hand Up recovery and re-entry housing and the owner 
executive director of second chances family ﬁrst recovery homes which will be opening 
September created to help families as a whole in recovery and work through the reuniﬁcation 
process. 
None of this means much here today but what does is that l was one that fell through the 
cracks, I was seen for the ﬁrst time about a month out from release after serving several years 
in Maine state prison system told l would be able to ﬁnalize my re-entry into society the 
following week unfortunately this never happened nothing was ironed out and I was released 
with no real plan a plastic bag and 50 bucks gate money. l had plans to change and advocate for 
a better system from the second l left the prison, unfortunately this would not happen! The 
stress of ﬁnding work and permanent shelter was also on my mind and obviously my ﬁrst 
challenge what l did not put into the plan was the mental health challenges that would occur 
from the isolation and violence I had endured while incarcerated while I thrived in prison, l 
found things much more difﬁcult in society things unraveled quickly and the stress of everything 
pushed me into relapse. Had there been a better plan I may have been able to start this work 
much sooner and given just a little more help before being released. Well after being re- 
incarcerated because of my own actions dictated by a disease that does not discriminate, l 
received those services through the very same organization l now work for. The help I received 
came from Maine prisoner re-entry network. They helped me with a plan and peer support, 
something I never had on the previous bid. 
The point to this story is justice involved individuals don't normally choose to break the law 
especially after serving a prison sentence they just need a little help and a plan. My plan came 
in the form of Bruce Noddin and his organization MPRN. The peer support they provided gotme
over the hump and gave me a chance to truly rehabilitate today l have the opportunity and the 
honor of working in this ﬁeld. 
l have a purpose and determination to make this state a better one by helping those in their re- 
entry and those who suffer from substance use disorder, all it took for me was just a little 
empathetic ear and a plan please support LD1633 and Thank you for allowing me to tell my 
story!
