, ,1."
1 
‘z5’£lTt?3@’\ 
Pinny Beebe-Center THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 12 l3 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Pinny Beebe-Center introducing 
LD 1633, “An Act to Establish a Community-based Reentry Program in All Department of 
Corrections Facilities ”' 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 25, 2023 
Good afternoon, Representative Salisbury and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Senator Pinny Beebe-Center, and I represent all of Knox 
County, except for Isle Au Haut and the town of Washington. Today I am pleased to present LD 1633, 
“An Act to Establish a Community-based Reentry Program in All Department of Corrections Facilities. ” 
Reentry into the community after incarceration can be an intimidating process. Providing the necessary 
support to those preparing to reenter our communities is essential for the well-being of the community as 
a whole, as well as the individual. By crafting a peer-supported program, we can connect individuals who 
are preparing to reenter with those who have lived experience who can walk them through the process and 
better prepare them for the road ahead. This approach and support network will set up those returning 
with success and help reduce the chances of reoffending, keeping the individual and the community safer 
in the long run. 
The bill works in two major parts. First, the bill creates a community-based reentry program administered 
by a community-based organization at each correctional facility operated by the Department of 
Corrections. The program is a peer-supported program that provides individualized reentry plans for 
incarcerated individuals starting two years prior to their release. These plans involve multiple meetings 
discussing the needs of the individual, including determining the individual ’s education, job training, 
substance sue disorder treatment, housing needs, etc. The second part is the creation of the Peer Reentry 
Review Board. The Board will oversee, advise, review data, and make recommendations to the' 
Community Based Reentry Program and report to the Commissioner of Corrections as well as to this 
committee. 
I thank you for your timeand consideration. Please direct all your .questions to Bruce Noddin of the 
Maine Prisoner Reentry Network.‘ ~ I "I
I 
. I
~ 
.~ 
Chair, Criminal Justice and Public Srgfery Committee * Marine Resources Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTI’: 711 
Pinny.Beebe-Center@legislalz1re. maine. gov * legislature. maine.g0v/senate _
