t 
,\ j 
ma 
LD1633,T0dd's.-..Wilson . 
1 message , 
Lfocld Wilson <newtew2476@gmail.eom> Tue, Apr 25, 2023 at 1:50 AM 
To: john clark <johnnyclark7777@gmail.com> 
Todd A.Wilsori~~ 
207-376-5507 
87Barlle11 St. 
Lewistown,G4240 
April25,2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, 
Hello my name is Todd Wilson, l am a registered recovery coach and manager at A Hand Up Recovery House, in 
Lewiston,Maine. A1; one point my drug use brought me into prisons, jails along with institutions and death. For myselfI 
think having e peer support would have been beneﬁcial for me, but this is not about me. 
I am here today to express my support for LD1 633. I am in support of this Act to establish a community based reentry 
program in all departments of correctional facilities. l‘m here to tell you with ﬁrst-hand experiences from my time here at 
A Hand Up.l-lere at A Hand Up,we are reentry home. A hand Up is e recovery residence created to provide safe housing 
for those who want to work a serious recovery programjor those who are re-integrating back into society from prisons. 
Again,l can only speak from my experiences l can honestly say at least here at A Hand Up,every person that comes 
here from prison seem like they are ready to live a life of integrity, honesty, humility, patience and understanding. My 
personal experience, with the residents that have been incarcerated, or that come into our program they have always 
been a pleasure to be around,very interestingpositive conversations an plenty of smiles 
They also seem like they are the ﬁrst ones to volunteer and give back to the community like are have done in the past 
at our local church, Trinity, in Lewiston.r 
I also have recoveries here at the house, have been responsible for saving lives and reversing deaths in the 
community They werealso incarcerated prior to coming to A Hand Up, So with myexperience and with everything -l've 
seen it's been nothing but a beneﬁt to have people come to the house out of Prisonsjt really doa seem like the 
recoveries out of prison already have a ﬁrm founclatiomwhen they come here they already want to work a Serious 
Program achieve sobriety and be of service to our community. _ 
ln conclusion l am for LD 1633, l am forthe reintegration of prisoners in all Department of Corrections facilities. lt's 
a beneﬁt to society, our community,an a beneﬁt to the sober house. Recoveries out of prison deserve A Hand Up,in life' 
and support with not iust peer support or recovezyacoeches but support of a family, thatthey will surely make with their' 
recovery family. 
Sincerely, 
Todd Awilson
