Testimony of the Paige Atkinson in Support of LD 143, An Act to Support Rural Service 
Programming and Promote Volunteerism  
January 31, 2023  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, my name is Paige Atkinson and I live in Eastport, Maine. Currently I am serving 
as an Island Fellow with the City of Eastport, working on projects related to energy and 
community resiliency. I support LD 143 because it would bring additional capacity to rural 
communities and provide people with an opportunity to serve.  
I have seen the benefits of having an extra pair of hands in a small community. Fellows are able 
to support communities with limited staff. While Eastport has an office staff of 6, everyone wears 
multiple hats: our city clerk is also the Tax Collector, Registrar of Voters, Vital Records 
manager, a DMV representative, and snack provider extraordinaire. It is through the unmatched 
dedication of individuals like Ella that municipalities function; but they are limited by the 
additional projects they are able to take on. By hosting a Fellow, communities can engage in 
projects that they otherwise wouldn't have the bandwidth to take on.  
 
For example, Eastport joined the Community Resilience Partnership (CRP) during my service 
because I was able to dedicate time to ensure the necessary steps were completed. Eastport 
had considered applying before, but did not have the staff time to dedicate to doing so. I was 
able to step in and facilitate this process, connecting Eastport to a larger network of like-minded 
communities and grants that they otherwise wouldn’t have had access to. Eastport’s already 
successfully applied and received funding through the CRP to assist us with a home 
weatherization campaign, having a direct impact addressing a great need as identified members 
of our community  
 
This is just one example of the work being done and Island Fellow; I have colleagues that are 
doing extraordinary work across Maine’s island and coastal communities. Melanie on Long 
Island helped update the town’s Comprehensive Plan; Kalyn is working on Vinalhaven on 
expanding technology use in their schools; Liv on Isleboro is working with the sea level rise 
committee and on the preservation of the Grindle Point Lighthouse. The Island Fellows program 
has shown how impactful this type of work can be in communities across the state. By 
increasing the number of fellows serving in Maine, imagine what can be accomplished.  
 
Communities are not the only ones benefiting from participating in these programs. Since 
graduating, I have pursued multiple pathways of service; from Peace Corps in the Philippines, to 
a rural nonprofit with Washington State’s Service Corps, and now the Island Fellowship. I have 
a passion for service. I have been lucky to participate in each of these programs and have 
learned a lot along the way. Because of this service, I have been able to live and work in this 
great state. I have been welcomed into a community that has helped me grow both personally 
and professionally.  
 
My time with the City of Eastport has given me a front row set to the challenges faced by rural 
municipalities. Every day they are struggling on how to provide the best services to their 
residents given the limited resources they have. It takes people with a passion for their 
communities to fill these roles. The dedication these people have for their communities is 
inspiration. Through funding the State Service Fellows program you are allowing others to come 
and learn about what makes Maine so great. They can learn from the folks who make this state 
what it is and share new skills. From how to drive in the snow to how to crack open a lobster, 
there is so much that Maine has to offer. My service has allowed me to explore ways that I can 
best utilize my skills and passions to serve others. As I look towards the future and what my 
next step is, I know that I will take so much from this fellowship forward.  
 
I urge you to vote in favor of LD 143 and to expand the Maine State Fellows program. I strongly 
believe that it would bring additional capacity to rural communities and provide people with an 
opportunity to serve. Thank you again for allowing me to speak before you today.  
 
Paige Atkinson 
Eastport, Maine 
patkinson@islandinstitute.org   
