122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health As sociation in Support of  
LD 143: An Act to Support Rural Service Programming and Promote Volunteerism  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Room 208, Cross State Office Building  
Tuesday , January  31, 2023 
 Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland 
and executive director of Maine Public Health Association. MPHA support s LD 143: “ An Act to Support Rural 
Service Programming and Promote Volunteerism ,” which provides funding for the Maine Service Fellows 
Program . 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit associati on, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities , and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA serve s as co -lead of the Maine Climate Council’s Community Resilience Planning, Public Health , and 
Emergency Management Working Group. The recommendation to establish a Maine Climate Corps came out of one of  our public stakeholder meetings and is included in the public health sub- group’s recommendations report
 
to the Maine Climate Cou ncil. Specifically, our sub- group supported subsidized education and/or job training 
for new “green” jobs, as well as the development of a “ MaineCorps ” (similar to AmeriCorps or Civilian 
Conservation Corps), which would focus on climate -related projects.  Our working group was pleased to see the 
final recommendation in the Maine Climate Council’ s Climate A ction P lan, which is for the state to “Partner 
with service -learning organizations and nonprofit organizations to launch a Maine Climate Corps program by 
2023.”  The Maine Ser vice Fellows Program  works across public health areas , including climate  action , as well 
as mental health and housing. Notably, there is an intentional focus on supporting rural  and unders erved 
communities . 
 
We have seen the breadth of impact that climate change has already had on Maine’s economy. I ndustries have 
already started – and will continue to need – to evolve to meet the changing demands placed on the state by climate change. There is no area of our economy that is insulated from the impacts of climate change  – from  
real estate markets and h ousing to community resilience and design, renewable energy, waste management, 
natural resource management, sustainable farming practices, emergency preparedness , and many more . Climate 
change is a public health emergency that acts as a threat multiplier, exacerbating existing health inequities, including poverty, environmental degradation, and political instability. Like health inequities, climate change is 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  a problem rooted in the structures, system s, and values of our society and economy. Eliminating health 
inequities and mitigating  climate change threats requires an intersectoral and transformational approach.1 
 
The Maine Service Fellows  Program represents  such a transformational  investment in  bettering health and 
economic security in  rural and underserved communities . Funding this program  will improve Maine’s 
workforce readiness  and skills training , economy, and resilience to climate change , and is particularly timely  as 
the state, nation and world rebound from the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 This is a promising and worthwhile investment in Maine’s public health workforce and climate resilience  
efforts. O n behalf of Maine Public Health Association, I respectfully request  you vote LD 143 “Ought to Pass.”  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
1 Rudolph L, Harrison C, Buckley L & North S. (2018). Climate Change, Health, and Equity: A Guide for Local Health Departments . 
Oakland, CA and Washington D.C., Public Health Institute and American Public Health Association.  
