 
Testimony of the Island Institute in Support of LD 143, An Act to Support Rural Service 
Programming and Promote Volunteerism  
January 31, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, my name is Stephanie Welch, and I am offering this testimony on behalf of the 
Island Institute in support of LD 143.    
 
The Island Institute is a 40-year-old nonprofit organization based in Rockland, Maine. We work 
to sustain Maine’s island and coastal communities and are committed to a just, resilient, and 
vibrant future for the coast of Maine. We work in partnership with leaders in these 
communities to support resiliency in the face of a changing world. The Island Institute’s 
community development work focuses on the marine economy, climate and energy solutions, 
small business, education, and leadership. 
 
Seventy-five percent of Maine’s coastal communities have fewer than 3,500 people, and 25 
percent of coastal communities have fewer than 800 people. Further, as the Maine Won’t Wait 
climate action plan from the Maine Climate Council notes, only 11 percent of Maine 
communities have a town planner on staff, and 72 percent have no local planner and 
insufficient or no regional planning support. Throughout our state, rural communities face 
significant capacity challenges to building community and economic resilience.  
 
As an organization that supports community and economic development work in some of the 
state’s most remote communities, we regularly see the difference an extra set of hands can 
make. In the last 22 years, we have placed 143 Island Fellows in 27 rural communities. 
Collectively, these fellows have contributed about 370,750 hours of direct technical assistance 
to community identified projects.   
 
We have seen the impact that comes from much-needed support and a fresh perspective. In 
communities where every leader wears multiple hats, having a fellow could mean that the extra 
capacity is there for a crucial planning or implementation piece that could not have been 
achieved otherwise. The benefits of a fellow also extend into the fabric of the larger 
community. We’ve heard from many fellows that there is work that is written into their project 
and then “work” that is not. From helping to plan potlucks or coaching sports teams to being a 
member of the town’s EMS, most fellows really do become community members. 
 
Growing the Maine Service Fellows program would enable that extra capacity rural 
communities require for specific, time-bound projects.  I strongly encourage you to expand this 
program in support of Maine’s rural communities in close calibration with the necessary staff 
required to support a larger cohort. 
