1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 819,  
An Act to Reduce the Penalty for Operating a Motor Vehicle Under a 
Suspended License in Certain Situations
April 20, 2023
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Transportation. My name is Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of 
the Cumberland Police Department, and President of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police 
Association in support of LD 819.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
Current  law  provides  that  a  person  commits  a  traffic  infraction  
when  that  person operates  a  motor  vehicle  after  suspension  or  
revocation  and  the  person  has  not  been convicted or adjudicated of 
a prior operating after suspension offense and the sole basis for the 
suspension is either failure to pay a fine, failure to pay a license 
reinstatement fee or suspension for a dishonored check. 
This bill makes the default penalty for operating while license 
suspended or revoked a traffic infraction unless the person's license was 
suspended as a result of an OUI. 
The Maine Chiefs support LD 819 because although we support statutes that 
deter individuals from engaging in risky behaviors, like operating under the 
influence, we also recognize that we need to prioritize our limited resources so 
that we can prioritize the crimes that affect the safety of victims and the public 
every day.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 We appreciate the work of the stakeholders who reviewed all the operating after 
suspension laws to determine which could be downgraded to civil and which 
should stay criminal. There are a few bills this session that have done this 
important work, and we have supported all of them because our criminal justice 
system is backlogged, and we need to be an active participant in trying to 
stabilize it.  
We want to thank the sponsor for bringing forward this bill. And we would ask 
you to support LD 819 and vote ought to pass on this bill. On behalf of the 
Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank the committee members 
for your work on this Committee.  
