HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
,. _ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Daniel J. Ankeles TTY5 MAINE RELAY 711 
7 Beech Drive 
Brunswick, ME 04011 
Danlel.Ankeles@legislature.maine. gov 
Cell Phone: (207) 756-3793 
Thursday, April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Dan Ankeles 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Presenting LD 819, An Act to Reduce the Penalty for Operating a Motor Vehicle Undera 
Suspended License in Certain Situations 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and honorable colleagues on the Transportation Committee, thank you 
for the opportunity to testify today. I am Representative Dan Ankeles, and I serve House District 100, a central slice 
of Brunswick that includes our downtown, Bowdoin College, the former naval airbase and Mere Point. It’s an honor 
to be with you to present LD 819, An Act to Reduce the Penalty for Operating a Motor Vehicle Undera 
Suspended License in Certain Situations. 
I submitted a fairly healthy number of bills this year, but of all of them, this is by far the one that would provide the 
greatest immediate positive impact on the lives of some of our constituents. 
Right now, our laws around Operating After Suspension (OAS) don’t do a good enough job distinguishing between 
those who lost their license because they chose to drink and drive, and those with an accumulation of more minor 
infractions that might well be related to the circumstances of their life. Under current law, these different 
circumstances are all treated as the same Class E crime. 
And so, what you end up with is the driving inﬁaction equivalent of doing surgery with a sledgehammer. We’re 
sending people into the criminal justice system who should not be there. And once they get there, it is a lot harder 
for them to get their license back, keep their job, ﬁnd a job or take care of their family. We do no favors to our 
communities by putting folks in these difﬁcult positions. 
This has been a longstanding problem, and it is placing a burden on our prosecutors, our judges and our courtroom 
staff. All have acknowledged that processing these types of cases do not make good use of public resources, and that 
brings us to why I’m here before you today. 
LD 819 makes the default penalty for operating while one’s license is suspended or revoked a trafﬁc infraction and 
not a Class E crime - unless the person's license was suspended as a result of an OUI. 
What that means in practice is that fewer people who don’t belong there are stumbling their way into the criminal 
justice system. So, if someone missed a hearing date because they couldn’t get time off work or they couldn’t get 
childcare - or someone failed to pay a fne because they just did.n’t have the money, they’re not stuck in some 
endless cycle of criminality as they try to get to work or bring their kids to daycare. 
Government should not be in the business of stacking the deck against people of limited means, and we deﬁnitely 
shouldn’t be building slippery ﬁne slopes that take away the hope of our constituents. But even if you took that line 
of reasoning completely out of the equation, we still have a situation where the punishment doesn’t ﬁt the crime. 
District 100: Brunswick (part)
I’m not the only one asserting today that this little corner of Title 29-A isn’t serving the public as it should. You 
have a unique moment here where the Maine Prosecutors Association, the Maine Association of Criminal Defense 
Lawyers, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, the State Police and the administration are all on the same page. I think you 
will ﬁnd that they make a compelling case. 
One note: You will be seeing a ﬁ'iendly amendment ﬁ'om the Secretary of State’s ofﬁce that ensures we don’t 
inadvertently stop holding drivers accountable when they cause physical harm to others. I hope that we will adopt it 
in the work session. 
So just to wrap up: Our committee has a great opportunity this year to improve the speciﬁcity of our OAS laws, 
bring greater fairness and efficiency to the enforcement process and build a legitimate and durable pathway that our 
constituents can use to get themselves back into good standing. 
I am happy to answer questions, and I also invite you to take advantage of some of the experts that have joined us 
today. 
District E00: Brunswick (part)
