SAJW-ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@,samotinaine.org 
Www.samila.or 
Testimony in Opposition, LD 1696 
An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Action for Persons Suffering Damages Arising 
from the Sale of Abnormally Dangerous Firearms 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM-Institute for 
Legislative Action 
Wednesday, May l7, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Rep. Moonen, members of the Judiciary 
Committee, my name is David Trahan, representing the Sportsman ’s Alliance of 
Maine, Institute for Legislative Action and I am testifying in opposition to LD 
1696, An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Action for Persons Suffering Damages 
Arising from the Sale of Abnormally Dangerous Firearms.
This legislation is the Holy Grail for gun control advocates, it uses lower standards 
of proof in civil courts to sue ﬁrearm and related part manufacturers out of 
existence. This is a lavvyer’s dream come true, it establishes the premise that 
ﬁrearms by the very deﬁnition are dangerous, not the individuals using them. 
Apply the same premise to fast cars and dangerous power tools. Reckless 
individuals using tools that may harm another are not at fault, no matter how 
irresponsible, it is the tool manufacturer that must be sued. The gun made them do 
it. 
I once saw a carpenter in New Harbor using a framing gun to assemble a wall. He 
was hurrying and accidentally ﬁred the nail-gun and it deﬂected off the side ofa 
two by four and traveled across the work site burying two inches into the ann ofa 
coworker. Was the accident the fault of the nail gun operator or should the 
manufacturer of the nail- gun be sued? 
I know of another family friend that was sitting on the front hood of a John Deere 
skidder while his coworker drove the machine into the woods, the rider had his feet 
behind the blade of the machine and when the operator noticed a blowdown in the 
road, he dropped the blade crushing the man’s feet. Who screwed up, John Deere 
or the machine operator? 
Call this legislation what it is, an attempt to pass a law that allows lawyers to sue 
ﬁrearm manufacturers out of existence. The sponsors of LD 1696 appear have an 
inherent bias against some types of guns and it is reﬂected in this bill. Finally, 
supporters of LD 1696 show their lack of ﬁrearm safety protocols when they label 
some guns more dangerous than others. Used inappropriately, just like any power 
tool, all guns can be dangerous. I am reminded of a statement made by my late 
father-law when he said, you can lean a ﬁrearm in the corner of the house and if 
left alone for an eternity, it will never harm a soul. Please oppose LD 1696.
