 
 
1 
 Jonathan W. Cuneo 
 
4725 Wisconsin Avenue, NW 
Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20016 
(202) 789-3960 
 
May 16, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney 
Representa Ɵve MaƩhew Moonen  
CommiƩee on the Judiciary  
100 State House Sta Ɵon 
Room 438 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
Re: TesƟmony of Jonathan Cuneo concerning H.P 1085, An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Ac Ɵon 
for Persons Suﬀering Damages Arising from the Sale of Abnormally Dangerous Firearms 
 
Good morning, Senator Carney, Representa Ɵve Moonen and members of the Judic iary 
CommiƩee.  
 
 My name is Jonathan Cuneo.  I appear before you today to discuss the par Ɵcular 
provisions of Representa Ɵve Millet’s proposed legisla Ɵon relaƟng to the marke Ɵng of ﬁrearms  
targeƟng minors or others who are legally prohibited from a ccessing ﬁrearms. 
 
 There is a simple reason why our laws set age limits for purchasing some legal products, 
such as alcohol, tobacco and ﬁrearms:  Before a certain age the decision to use these products 
is not the decision of a consen Ɵng adult, but the  decision of a child. 
 
I was a member of the legal team that brought the ﬁrst case against the Joe Camel 
adverƟsing campaign.  Our case predated the FTC case and the A Ʃorney General cases.  It was a 
private ac Ɵon brought by an individual under California law.   The theory of our private case was 
that it induced young people to violate California law to purchase cigare Ʃes underage.  
 
 The theory of this civil case was that the marke Ɵng campaign for Joe Camel spoke to 
vulnerable children in a language that grownups did not understand.   Joe Camel was if nothing 
else an ugly guy, a misﬁt, but he a lways had a cool car and one or more a ƩracƟve women 
around him. That was a powerful and striking image. 
 
In the few short years a Ōer Joe Camel was introduced  in 1988, he was as recognizable to 
young children as Mickey Mouse or Ronald McDonald.  Adolescence can be a trying a Ɵme of 
vulnerability and adolescent males can be suscep Ɵble to campaigns that prey on their perceived 
weakness.  That is exactly what happened in the Joe Camel campaign. 
 
 
 
2 
   The tobacco industry studied children and concluded that so me were very suscep Ɵble 
to adverƟsing. Within a short period of Ɵme, Camel was transformed as a brand.   Before Joe, 
Camel was mostly a brand of unﬁltered cigareƩes that competed with Lucky Strike and 
Chesterﬁeld. As a result of the campaign, Camel’s sales exploded over 30-fold.  In fact, it was so 
successful it brieﬂy spiked an increase in cigare Ʃe smoking in America.  
 
 The FTC and the States A Ʃorney General came later.  As part of the se Ʃlement and in 
conjuncƟon with a Congressman, our team released documents that directly showed youth 
targeƟng.  This was na Ɵonwide news.  As a result of our case and that of the A Ʃorney General 
cases, the tobacco industry put Joe Camel behind it and voluntarily agreed to cease and desist 
this type of youth targ eƟng. 
 
 What’s happening with guns almost appears like “deja vu all over again.”   No maƩer 
your opinion about guns everyone is horriﬁed when a youngster as young as six shoots his 
teacher or an adolescent commits a mass murder, or a maniac opens ﬁre in a mall or market.   
 
 Even conserva Ɵves recognize that there is a problem.  Las t Saturday’s  Wall Street 
Journal featured an ar Ɵcle by Holman Jenkins, a conserva Ɵve that stated, “Who among those 
responsible (gun) owners really doubts as Scien Ɵﬁc American put it that for parts of America 
guns have gone from `u Ɵlitarian tools for hun Ɵng and self defense to a form of psychological 
solace’.”  His answer, “Law abiding gun enthusiast, dealers and law enforcement would support 
a well targeted campaign that could sƟgmaƟze gun ownership as a form of compensa Ɵon for 
personal inadequacy or total of deranged iden Ɵty poliƟcs.”   
 
The Violence Policy Center (disclosure: I once served on their board) published a study, 
“Start them Young - Following the Tobacco Industry’s Path: The Search for Replacement 
Shooters.”  Link a Ʃached.  https://vpc.org/publications/start-them-young/ .  Because of the decline 
in hunƟng, some weapons marketers have changed their focus from bolt ac Ɵon riﬂes to military  
assault style riﬂes.  Under federal law an individual must be 18 to purchase a riﬂe, 21 to 
purchase a handgun.   
 
MarkeƟng deadly  products to youth is a danger and a black mark on our society.  The 
modest provision in this bill would provide a civil remedy to any vic Ɵms who could proximately 
show that he or she was injured by improper marke Ɵng of ﬁrearms to youth.  
 
 Th e cause of ac Ɵon in this bill provides signiﬁcant limita Ɵons on liability.  The cause must 
be proximate. There are no puni Ɵve damages.    It narrowly merely provides a limited civil 
remedy for those who are directly and proximately injured by improper marke Ɵng.   
 
That private remedy has salutary beneﬁts.  I t saƟsﬁes the need for compensa Ɵon in 
circumstances when compensa Ɵon is due.  The plain Ɵﬀ must show that the marketer caused 
the injury.  It is also a deterrent to false marketers.  Any marketer must know it faces civil 
liability for decep Ɵve or improper ads.    
 
 
 
3 
 Also, as the Joe Camel case demonstrates, a private ac Ɵon can be a springboard for 
posiƟve change.  Government resources are limited, and the government cannot be depended 
on to act in all circumstances.   
 
 Mr. Jenkins argues that the way to curb gun violence is changing public a ƫtudes. 
AcƟons by courts and legislatures can help alter public opinion. In my life Ɵme, public a ƫtudes 
have changed in civil rights, against drunk driving and towards marriage equality.  Let’s not 
forget that Brown v. Board of Educa Ɵon began as a private ac Ɵon to gain access to schools.  
State legislators changed public a ƫtudes about drunk driving by toughening the laws in 
response in part to a campaign by Mothers Against Drunk Driving (“MADD”).  Ethnic slurs, once 
acceptable if not fashionable, now may be acƟonable in the workplace.  C ivil jusƟce, legislaƟon 
and changed a ƫtudes go hand in hand.  
 
 I urge the Commi Ʃee to look favorably on this provision of the Bill. 
 
 
