lb llvila 
Jonathan W. Cuneo 
4725 Wisconsin Avenue, NW 
Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20016 
(202) 789-3960 
May 16, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on the Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Room 438 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: Testimony of Jonathan Cuneo concerning H.P 1085, An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Action 
for Persons Suffering Damages Arising from the Sale of Abnormally Dangerous Firearms 
Good morning, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. 
My name is Jonathan Cuneo. I appear before you today to discuss the particular 
provisions of Representative Millet’s proposed legislation relating to the marketing of ﬁrearms 
targeting minors or others who are legally prohibited from accessing ﬁrearms. 
There is a simple reason why our laws set age limits for purchasing some legal products, 
such as alcohol, tobacco and ﬁrearms: Before a certain age the decision to use these products 
is not the decision of a consenting adult, but the decision of a child. 
l was a member of the legal team that brought the ﬁrst case against the Joe Camel 
advertising campaign. Our case predated the FTC case and the Attorney General cases. It wasa 
private action brought by an individual under California law. The theory of our private case was 
that it induced young people to violate California law to purchase cigarettes underage. 
The theory of this civil case was that the marketing campaign for Joe Camel spoke to 
vulnerable children in a language that grownups did not understand. Joe Camel was if nothing 
else an ugly guy, a misﬁt, but he always had a cool car and one or more attractive women 
around him. That was a powerful and striking image. 
in the few short years after Joe Camel was introduced in 1988, he was as recognizable to 
young children as Mickey Mouse or Ronald McDonald. Adolescence can be a trying a time of 
vulnerability and adolescent males can be susceptible to campaigns that prey on their perceived 
weakness. That is exactly what happened in the Joe Camel campaign.
1
The tobacco industry studied children and concluded that some were very susceptible 
to advertising. Within a short period of time, Camel was transformed as a brand. Before Joe, 
Camel was mostly a brand of unﬁltered cigarettes that competed with Lucky Strike and 
Chesterfield. As a result of the campaign, Camel’s sales exploded over 30-fold. In fact, it was so 
successful it brieﬂy spiked an increase in cigarette smoking in America. 
The FTC and the States Attorney General came later. As part of the settlement and in 
conjunction with a Congressman, our team released documents that directly showed youth 
targeting. This was nationwide news. As a result of our case and that of the Attorney General 
cases, the tobacco industry put Joe Camel behind it and voluntarily agreed to cease and desist 
this type of youth targeting. 
What's happening with guns almost appears like ”deja vu all over again." No matter 
your opinion about guns everyone is horriﬁed when a youngster as young as six shoots his 
teacher or an adolescent commits a mass murder, or a maniac opens ﬁre in a mall or market. 
Even conservatives recognize that there is a problem. Last Saturday's Wall Street 
Journal featured an article by Holman Jenkins, a conservative that stated, ”Who among those 
responsible (gun) owners really doubts as Scientiﬁc American put it that for parts of America 
guns have gone from ‘utilitarian tools for hunting and self defense to a form of psychological 
solace'." His answer, "Law abiding gun enthusiast, dealers and law enforcement would support 
a well targeted campaign that could stigmatize gun ownership as a form of compensation for 
personal inadequacy or total of deranged identity politics." 
The Violence Policy Center (disclosure: I once served on their board) published a study, 
"Start them Young - Following the Tobacco Industry's Path: The Search for Replacement 
Shooters." Link attached. httpszl/vpc.org[publications/start-them-voungl. Because of the decline 
in hunting, some weapons marketers have changed their focus from bolt action riﬂes to military 
assault style riﬂes. Under federal law an individual must be 18 to purchase a riﬂe, 21 to 
purchase a handgun. 
Marketing deadly products to youth is a danger and a black mark on our society. The 
modest provision in this bill would provide a civil remedy to any victims who could proximately 
show that he or she was injured by improper marketing of ﬁrearms to youth. 
The cause of action in this bill provides signiﬁcant limitations on liability. The cause must 
be proximate. There are no punitive damages. lt narrowly merely provides a limited civil 
remedy for those who are directly and proximately injured by improper marketing. 
That private remedy has salutary beneﬁts. It satisﬁes the need for compensation in 
circumstances when compensation is due. The plaintiff must show that the marketer caused 
the injury. it is also a deterrent to false marketers. Any marketer must know it faces civil 
liability for deceptive or improper ads.
2
Also, as the Joe Camel case demonstrates, a private action can be a springboard for 
positive change. Government resources are limited, and the government cannot be depended 
on to act in all circumstances. 
Mr. Jenkins argues that the way to curb gun violence is changing public attitudes. 
Actions by courts and legislatures can help alter public opinion. ln my lifetime, public attitudes 
have changed in civil rights, against drunk driving and towards marriage equality. Let's not 
forget that Brown v. Board of Education began as a private action to gain access to schools. 
State legislators changed public attitudes about drunk driving by toughening the laws in 
response in part to a campaign by Mothers Against Drunk Driving ("MADD"). Ethnic slurs, once 
acceptable if not fashionable, now may be actionable in the workplace. Civil justice, legislation 
and changed attitudes go hand in hand. 
l urge the Committee to look favorably on this provision of the Bill.
3
