LD 1696 An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Action for Persons Suffering Damages Arising from the Sale of 
Abnormally Dangerous Firearms 
  
Memorandum of Opposition  
Date:  May 17, 2023 
To:  Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee.  
From:  Jonathan Martell  
RE: LD 1696 An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Action for Persons Suffering Damages Arising from the Sale of 
Abnormally Dangerous Firearms 
 
Members of the committee, I would like to express my Opposition of LD 1696 An Act to Create a Civil Cause of 
Action for Persons Suffering Damages Arising from the Sale of Abnormally Dangerous Firearms 
 
My Name is Jonathan Martell. I am a Sanford City Councilor, Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun 
Owners of Maine, Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club and NRA Member.  
 
This bill appears to be overly broad so as to trap almost anyone selling anything remotely firearm related into 
being liable for misuse of a firearm.  
I'll start with the definitions: 
 
 “Firearm related product” is extremely broad to include anything from a receiver to a screw or screwdriver.  
 
1.“Reasonable Controls”: This is defined as:To prevent the sale or distribution of a firearm related product to a 
straw purchaser.  
 
A straw purchase is one in which one Person “A” buys a firearm for Person “B”, at Person “B’s” request. They’re 
illegal, because criminals and other people who cannot pass a background check often get other people, who 
can pass a background check, to buy guns for them. Straw purchaser is defined in part E, but is not used 
correctly throughout this bill. 
 
While this may sound reasonable, background checks only applies to firearm sales. Background checks can 
NOT be performed for anything other than a firearm.  
It goes on to state: A firearm trafficker, a person prohibited from possessing a firearm under state or 
 federal law or a person who the firearm industry member has reasonable cause to  believe is at substantial risk 
of using a firearm-related product to harm the person or another person or of possessing or using a firearm-
related product unlawfully. 
 
There is no reasonable way a gun store or any other person to determine, without prior knowledge, if an 
individual was prohibited or at risk. This does not pass any measurable standard of being reasonable. Firearm 
accessories are just that, accessories. They are not harmful by themselves. Notice no examples are being 
presented here. Replace the phrase “Firearm Related Product” with screw or rubber cap. How is that dangerous 
or harmful? 
 
The other two items are equally ill defined. No one wants their products stolen, but not everything can be kept in 
a vault where customers are unable to view merchandise.  
 
Promotion of unlawful manufacturing, sale, etc is not generally an issue, but could be considered a freedom of 
speech violation.  
 
2. Requirements for firearm industry members: Again, these so called reasonable controls are not 
reasonable, nor are they enforceable. 
 
3. Prohibited Conduct:  Unreasonably dangerous is not well defined as what is an unreasonable risk of harm to 
public health and safety in the state.   
 
1. Assaultive Purposes is simply a made up term to sound scary. Assault is an action, not an 
adjective. Again, this is extremely vague to be left open to any interpretation. 
2. It is already illegal to convert a firearm into a machine gun or other NFA item without proper 
approvals.  
3. Minors and prohibited persons are not able to buy firearms, so why would this even make sense 
to market to that demographic. Again, over broad for no reason.  
 
4. Violation and Enforcement: This allows for frivolous lawsuits for the unreasonable and unenforceable 
requirements in sections 2 and 3. 
 
5. Unfair Trade Practices: This points to Title 5 Chapter 10. No subsection is defined. Evidence of what 
violation? 
 
6. Prohibited Defenses: Reasonable defenses are precluded from this proposed law with no recourse for 
frivolous lawsuits. 
 
7 Attorney Fees:  Even if a case is won, no attorney fees can be awarded. This is purely intended to put any 
firearms related manufacturer out of business 
 
Again this bill is nothing more that creating a trap to put firearms related business and even unrelated 
businesses in harms way. This attempt at legalizing harassment, and stripping business of their legal rights to 
force them out of Maine or out of business should not stand. Please vote ought not to pass for LD 1696 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jonathan Martell 
Sanford, ME 
Sanford City Councilor 
Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun Owners of Maine 
Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club 
National Rifle Association Member 
 
