N.=\‘I‘rcjsNi\r. Rn-*1 Asscrrtr.-moixr or A?\-‘[I~IRl(l.=\ 
INSTITUTE FOR LEGISLATIVE ACTION 
1 1250 \VAPLES MILL ROAD 
FAIRFAX, VIRGINIA 22030
4 ;"/‘T%,f_*t" \;\ 
i§ _l\ \:;§‘1‘:)}\>‘:>;A 
May 17, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
l00 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Canrey, Representative Moonerr, and Honorable Members of the Committee: 
I am writing to you, on behalf of the National Riﬂe Association, regarding Legislative Document l696 
(LD 1696); an act to create a civil cause of action for persons suffering damages arising from the sale of 
abnormally dangerous ﬁrearms. This bill seeks to create a cause of action against a ﬁrearm industry 
member’s intentional manufacturing or sale of an “abnormally dangerous ” ﬁrearm. This would ensnare 
both large retailers and small gunsmiths throughout the state and wrongfully punish them for the misuse 
of ﬁrearm products by violent criminals. Because of this, on behalf of the NRA, I would like to express 
our strong opposition to this legislation. 
First and foremost, the term “abnormally dangerous ” is poorly deﬁned. LD l696 deﬁnes abnormally 
dangerous as a ﬁrearm or related product that is most suitable for “assaultive purposes ” rather than 
self-defense or other “legitimate ” activities. The standard provides no clear guidance to the ﬁrearm 
industry regarding what ﬁrearms would be ok to manufacture and sell in Maine. Under this law,a 
government agency could label a ﬁrearm as simple as a bolt action .22 riﬂe “assaultive ” because an 
individual could use it for harm against another individual. This broad deﬁnition creates a dangerous 
scenario for the complete degradation of Second Amendment rights in Maine. 
While the deﬁnition in this bill is very problematic, the true purpose of the bill seems to be an attempt to 
evade the federal Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (“PLCAA”). The PLCAA protects 
members of the ﬁrearm industry from being held responsible for the third party misuse of products they 
manufacture or sell. It is unreasonable for Louisville Slugger or a sporting goods retailer to be held liable 
when a criminal uses a baseball bat in a crime. It is unreasonable for Ford or an auto retailer to be held 
liable when a vehicle is used in a crime. And, it is equally unreasonable for a ﬁrearm manufacturer or 
retailer to be held liable for the acts of a criminal that the manufacturer or retailer have no ability to 
foresee. This liability would be an unfair and egregious overstep by the State of Maine and would shut 
down ﬁrearm commerce in Maine overnight. 
Because of these reasons stated above, the NRA and its members strongly urge you to oppose LD 1696. 
Please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Justin E. Davis 
State Director, NRA-ILA 
\‘v'W\\’.[ll'2lllIl.Ul'£§1
