' 
Testimony before the Judiciary Committee in support of 
LD 1696: An Act to Create a Civil Cause of Action for Personsﬁujjfering Damag' es"Arising from the 
Sale of Abnormally Dangerous Firearms ’' 
'‘ 
May 17, 2023 L’ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee, my name is Tara Williams. I am a mom, an early childhood educator, a volunteer 
with Moms Demand Action, and a residentof Cumberland, Maine. ‘ ‘ "' 
The Maine Chapter of Moms Demand Action supports LD 1696, because we need to hold the 
gun industry accountable to the same rules as every other consumer product industry. A person 
harmed by a consumer product other than guns — like opioids or cars —can generally bringa 
claim in court to recover damages if they can show the manufacturer designed a defective 
product or otherwise acted dangerously or irresponsibly. 
in 2005, Congress passed the Protection ofLawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA) that bars 
most legal cases against reckless members of the gun industry that refuse to take even the 
most basic steps to prevent criminals from getting armed. PLCAA gave gun manufacturers and 
sellers more protection from litigation than makers of cars ortobacco products. 2 " 
There is an exception to PLCAA if the gun manufacturers misconduct violates state law. This bill 
would create such a law for Maine, by establishing clear standards that gun companies who do 
business in Maine must abide by, putting in place reasonable safeguards to-prevent their guns 
from ending up in the hands of people who shouldn't have them. ALD 1696 will ensure that 
those who violate those standards can be held accountable.T 
l* 
Gun Violence;jnjMaine ,9 
0 in an‘l 
a§jerag:e}]ear in Maine, 163 people die by guns.‘ A 513;; Lji V 
.0 
the deaths has increased ’41%"from 2012 to 2o21in a 39%
i 
s 
increasé»friationwide. ’ This means rthat\\ihf"\202\1 there~\were 048 moregun in 2012.2 1 
.‘ 
vs In _Maine}ithe rateof gun suicide;in,creasei:l. _4596.from,2Q12;to,2021, compa.red*§te ‘ a 19% change, 
0 Most suicides (55%}\and mhornicides (63%) in Maine imldlve aigunf. l V" 
. 2 '2 M it 
0 Gun suicides and suicide attempts cost Maine , $2.0 bi\ 
l,,lip,n each}/ear. Maine has the 17th-highest 
‘ 
cost of gun suicides and suicide attemptsin the US at‘*$il;,,506 per resident. ‘ 1 ll
. 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. WONDER Online Database, Underlying Cause of Death.A 
yearly average was developed using four years of the most recent available data: 2018 to 2021. 
1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. WONDER Online Database, Underlying Cause of Death. Rates 
are ageadjusted. A percentage change was developed using 2012 and 2021 data. 
3 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. WONDER Online Database, Underlying Cause of Death. Rates 
are ageadjusted. A percentage change was developed using 2012 and 2021 data. . 
4 Ted R. Miiler and Bruce Lawrence Analysis of CDC Fatal injury: 2019 and HCUP Nonfatal injury: 2019, accessed March 28, 2023 at 
https://everystatorg. See Methodology: Economic Cost of Gun Violence for more information.
The gun industry has the information and tools to innovate, but PL¢AA has eliminated legal 
incentives for that industry to make ﬁrearms safer or to engage in responsible sales practices. 
LD 1696 would reverse that trend. 
v PLCAA blocks most litigation that could incentivize gun manufacturers to design its 
products more safely, including the addition of simple safety features that have been 
available for years that could prevent unauthorized access by children and teens. 
0 PLCAA also blocks legal claims that could compel gunmakers to stop selling to those 
dealers who fuel the criminal market, have poor safety practices or training, or are not 
willing to use basic security measures or record every sale on video. 
o Gun manufacturers received more than two million pieces of data about ﬁrearms 
recovered at crime scenes or in criminal investigations since 2010.5 
0 Yet with all of this information available, gunmakers have little incentive to stop- 
irresponsibly supplying those dealers who cater to the criminal market—because PLCAA 
removes so much pressure and accountability. . 
o This bill would create an affirmative requirement for gun manufacturers and dealers to 
put these types of safeguards in place. Those who failed to do so would be subject to‘ 
lawsuits by those who are harmed as a result. 
¢ Another source of crime guns are those stolen from gun dealers, and PLCAA shields the 
gun dealers who’ve taken no steps to secure their premises when their guns are stolen 
and then used in crime. 
0 Between 2012 and 2021, more than 160,000 firearms were reported to be lost by or 
stolen from dealers across the country. ‘ 
0 The federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives makes a number of 
recommendations regarding store security, but the choice is up to the industry on 
whether to implement any of them, including keeping accurate and up to date inventow 
or utilizing locks and bars to protect against burglary. ’ 
0 The new safeguards mandated by this bill would include theft-prevention measures. 
For too long, thanks to PLCAA, the gun industry has been shielded from the lawsuits that are 
most often used in the United States to hold businesses accountable for products or practices 
that harm people. We don’t have to stand for this in Maine. We can pass our own state law that 
sets up clear standards for the gun industry. Please vote ought to pass on LD 1696. 
5 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Data & Statistics, https://bit.ly/3a9Tj6r. 
6 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Data & Statistics, https://bit.ly/3a9Tj6r. 
7 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, Safety and Security information for Federal Firearms Licensees, ATF 
Publication 3317.2, revised February 2010, https://bit.ly/2KajHmm.
