l\/lay Z5, 2023-
I 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COIlS€1"V’é1I1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine Mame kaitlyn.nuzzo(cDtnc.org 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
RE: LD 1934 - Resolve, to Improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning Grants 
and Technical Assistance to Communities in Maine 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Government, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and l am the Government 
Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity 
to testify in support of LD 1934 - Resolve, to Improve the Coordination and Delivery 
of Planning Grants and Technical Assistance to Communities in Maine. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive togr Eher. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. 
LD 1934 directs the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future to take on a review of 
opportunities and structural changes within state government and make 
recommendations to support Maine communities. lt requires the review to consider 
municipal needs to navigate complex challenges including land use planning, climate 
resilience, natural resource protection, transportation, housing development, 
economic development, infrastructure, and more. importantly, the review must 
consider mechanisms to help municipalities and regions compete for state and federal 
funding opportunities. Maine is well poised to access new federal funding and we must 
support communities and regions in seizing this opportunity. 
Municipalities and regional planning organizations are focused on proactive solutions 
to a wide range of challenges, but they often have limited funding and capacity. In -a 
survey conducted by TNC and Coastal Enterprises lnc. (CE!) in 2017, we gathered data 
from officials in 143 Maine municipalities. l\/lore than two-thirds said that inadequate G 
funding was among the top five barriers to moving forward with clean energy and 
efficiency projects in their comm: inities, while 61 percent ranked lack of staff capacity 
among their top five barriers. 
While this bill addresses a broad range of challenges, I will focus on the areas where. 
TNC works. As communities prepare for the effects of climate change, technical and 
financial assistance will be essential to coordinate and bolster resources for resilience. 
Existing programs like the Municipal Stream Crossing Grant Program and the 
Community Resilience Partnership offer support but additional coordination and 
assistance could make it easier for local leaders to identify these opportunities. 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 natureorggmaine
In addition, state planning assistance can help with implementation of existing laws, 
requirements, and rules. Without a centralized touch point, municipalities must 
navigate sometimes complex, new requirements around land use, housing, and 
transportation with limited staff capacity. 
Enhanced and coordinated planning assistance from state government would benefit 
and support all Maine communities. LD 1934 is an excellent first step in identifying 
opportunities, gaps, and recommendations for further action. The Nature Conservancy 
is happy to be a resource in these efforts as this review moves forward. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of LD 1934. i‘m happy to answer 
questions now or at any time.
