,.. , . HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
_ 0- AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Melanie Sachs TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
84 Kelsey Ridge Road 
Freeport, ME 04032 
Residence: 207-299-6825 
Melanie.Sachs@legislature.maine.gov 
May 25, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Melanie Sachs, sponsor of 
LD 1934, Resolve, to Improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning 
Grants and Technical Assistance to Communities in Maine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Good afternoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Govermnent. My name is Melanie Sachs and I represent 
House District 102, which includes Freeport. I am honored to submit this testimony in support of 
LD 1934, Resolve, to Improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning Grants and 
Technical Assistance to Communities in Maine. 
Members of this committee are very familiar with the challenges Maine communities are facing 
as they manage multiple complex issues with limited resources and staff capacity. From 
affordable housing and managing growth to planning for climate change and providing essential 
community services, communities are navigating critical challenges. 
State agencies can provide programs and assistance to our cities and towns, but it is not always 
clear how to access them, and local public officials must navigate multiple state agencies and 
staff and websites to ﬁnd the support and technical assistance they need. I had the honor of 
serving as a Town Councilor for many years in Freeport and know ﬁrsthand how challenging it 
was for our excellent and dedicated town staff to identify, apply for and manage those 
opportunities. This can be especially overwhelming for our smaller communities. 
We are also experiencing a time of unprecedented opportunity for federal support for 
infrastructure rebuilding — from broadband access to community downtowns to our energy 
infrastructure. While municipal staff and leaders are trying to stay on top of state programs and 
opportunities, competing for resources and meeting federal requirements is a daunting challenge. 
Greater state support at the regional and local level, as well as increased communication and 
coordination, could assist communities in competing for infrastructure grants. 
This bill would direct the state, convened by the Governor ’s Ofﬁce of Policy Innovation and the 
Future, to review how programs that assist communities with planning grants and technical 
assistance are delivered, and recommend changes to improve coordination and program delivery. 
District 102: Freepoit
Importantly, this bill requires that municipalities and regional planning organizations be 
consulted as part of the process. I worked with municipalities of every size, and almost every 
regional planning organization in our state last session on a bill to establish the Maine 
Redevelopment Land Bank Authority, and I know that leveraging their collective experience is 
critical. The resulting plan will be actionable and will provide clear direction for better delivery 
of the state programs needed to support communities. 
Maine has nearly 500 cities, towns and tribal governments. They are struggling to keep up with 
the increasing pace of change in our state, as well as the opportunities and challenges. It is 
essential that we consider the state role — and how we can Work in partnership with communities, 
their leaders, and regional governments to strengthen their capacity. This resolve takes an 
important step in this direction, and I am hopeful this committee will agree. 
District 102: Freepoit
