 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
In Support of  
 LD 1934 -  Resolve, to Improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning Grants and Technical Assistance to 
Communities in Maine  
May 25, 2023
 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and members of the State and Local Government Committee, my name is Rebecca 
Lambert, and I am testifying today in support of LD 1934 on behalf of the  Maine Municipal Association’s (MMA) 
elected 70 -member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC).  
 From 1968 through 2012, municipalities across Maine, specifically the smallest communities, experienced 
the benefit of the Maine State Planning Office (SPO) through four core duties specified through legislation. These 
included coordinating the development of the state's ec onomy and energy resources with the conservation of its 
natural resources; providing technical assistance to the Governor and Legislature by undertaking special studies and 
plans and preparing policy alternatives; providing technical assistance to towns an d regions; and conducting 
continuing economic analyses, including economic forecasting.  
The abolishment of the S PO not only eliminated a significant resource  for municipalities,  but also created a  
dramatic shift from being a program created to assist munic ipalities in meeting state policy goals to a regulatory 
authority, spread among multiple state agencies, that at times fails  to recognize local capacity when  enacting 
planning- related mandates.  
As a result , there is a significant need among state departments who design rules and obligations that are 
carried out at the municipal level to have some sort of coordinating entity which will become more important as 
the state rolls forward with climate , housing,  and land use goals.  
 An example of this can be seen when looking at water and land regulation s with t he regulatory entities  
spread  through multiple different departments within the state. Water protection activities by municipalities must 
meet regulation re quirements from the Department of Environmental Protection ’s Land and Water  bureaus, and 
in some instances the Department of Marine Resources and Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, and Department of 
Transportation , as well.  
Communication can get challenging b etween several different entities since at times they are directing 
municipalities to act in ways that conflict with the directives from another state agency . An entity within state 
government that could coordinate those demands would help to preemptiv ely identify conflicts, provide clear 
guidance to municipalities, and enable more effective p lanning and governance.  
 Municipal officials spend tremendous amounts of time trying to meet their on  the ground obligations, and 
would not only benefit from a sin gle point source for data but also cross -municipal collaboration between and inside 
departments at the state level .  For these reasons, MMA  support s the measures outlined in LD 1934.  
Thank you for your time and considering the municipal perspective.  
