S'n\'rr; 0 F M AlNi~I 
*~_‘k1:-' t . , 
GOVERNOR S OFHCE OF POLICY INNOVATION AND THE FUTURE 
.7l:r;i1 
E. 18l S'l‘A'l‘E House STA'l‘iON 
A, AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333~(ll8l 
LD 1934 Resolve, to improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning Grants and Technical 
Assistance to Communities in Maine 
Testimony in Support 
May 25, 2023 ‘‘ 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, members of the State and Local Government 
Committee. My name is Sarah Curran, and i am Deputy Director, Climate Planning and Community 
Partnerships in the Governor's Office of Policy innovation and the Future. i am here today to testify in 
Support of LD 1934, Resolve, to improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning Grants and Technical 
Assistance to Communities in Maine.' 
The Governor's Office of the Policy innovation and the Future (GOPIF) was created by Governor Janet 
Mills to collaborate across State agencies, stakeholders, and public to recommend innovative policy 
solutions for critical issues facing Maine. Our areas of focus include climate change, workforce _ 
development, housing, issues facing Maine's children, youth and aging residents, opioid response and 
recovery, and Maine's long-term economic prosperity. We staff, support and help lead several cross- 
department cabinets and projects, including the Children's Cabinet, the Maine Climate Council, and the 
Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan, among others. 
GOPIF also administers the Community Resilience Partnership, a program recommended by Maine's . 
four-year climate action plan, Maine Won't Wait, which offers communities technical assistance, 
planning support and action grants for both climate mitigation and adaptation activities. 
The Mills Administration believes there is a need for robust and coordinated technical assistance and 
support for Maine's communities. A 
Our cities, towns, and tribal governments are navigating complex challenges, from climate impacts toa 
lack of affordable housing to land use planning to accessing new federally funded infrastructure and 
energy opportunities. As described in the state's climate action plan Maine Won't Wait, the lack of local 
capacity, technical expertise, and funding are consistently cited by municipalities as reasons why they 
are not able to address their most pressing challenges in the way they might like. Maine's communities 
have a documented uneven access to planning resources across the state to support these and other 
local planning issues, as demonstrated in the attached map. 
With the elimination of the former State Planning Office (SPO) in 2012, there is not currently a single state 
government agency or office responsible to administerfinancial and technical assistance programs to help 
build sustainable communities. Some SPO programs were eliminated or significantly reduced; others were 
moved to different state agencies.- 
The reduced support for municipalities, as well as the complications of small Maine communities 
navigating multiple state agencies to understand opportunities and support has been voiced as a problem 
— and this committee has heard multiple bills on this topic in this committee and others over the last 
PHONE 207 624 7458 WWW.MAlNE.GOV/i ’UTURE
several years. The Administration recognizes that there is a need for the state to provide planning and 
technical assistance to towns and regional entities and for those resources to be coordinated and 
coherent across agencies and in their interactions with municipalities, consistent with the state's policy 
goals. Streamlined, coordinated support — or a ”one~stop shop" has been voiced as a need by some 
municipal and regional government leaders. 
Maine communities are contending with increasing growth and are likely to face unprecedented 
challenges in the years ahead. 
Demographic and land-use trends, hastened by the pandemic, indicate many parts of Maine are 
experiencing growth. Continued record real estate sales and changes in the housing market are resulting 
in a lack of housing supply, exacerbating community workforce and economic opportunities. Additionally, 
climate change disruptions, from rising sea levels to disrupted water supplies and changing natural 
resources will require greater growth management strategies — creating greater urgency for improved 
long-term planning at the state and community level. 
Currently, communities navigate programs across multiple state agencies in order to access technical 
assistance and funding. 
The challenge of navigating programs across multiple agencies was highlighted by the Maine Municipal 
Association in testimony in 2021. They suggested: ”Municipal officials spend tremendous amounts of 
often unpaid time trying to meet the obligations on the ground and would benefit from both a single 
point source for data but also cross-municipal collaboration between and inside departments at the 
state level." 
Better coordination of technical assistance and funding to communities in Maine would reduce the 
burden on communities seeking assistance, as well as support improved outcomes, especially for the 
smallest and most under resourced communities. 
lt will also help improve community access to significant federal funds that are currently available to 
support infrastructure and energy investments, including in transportation, broadband & technology, 
energy and building efficiency, and resilience and environmental protection. Many of these formula 
funds are flowing through state agencies, and state agencies can also help support competitive 
applications. 
We believe that this bill is a welcome opportunity to continue discussions about how the state could 
provide more robust municipal support to Maine communities in need. We support LD 1934 Resolve, to 
improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning Grants and Technical Assistance to Communities in 
Maine. This resolve will lead to a robust cross-agency planning effort and will require much-needed 
input and guidance from our local governments and leaders. We are hopeful the outcome could 
improve the state and municipal partnership this administration has worked hard to foster, and the 
planning required will generate an actionable outcome. 
Thank you for your service and for the opportunity to testify today. 
Sarah Curran, Deputy Director, Climate Planning and Community Partnerships 
Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future
Maine Climate Resilience January 2022 
Local and Regional Planning Capacity 
Service Local and Regional 
Planning Capacity 
Municipalities and 
Llnorganlzed Territories 
" /=>,=.= In-house planning staff 
and good (2 or more stall‘) 
resilience planning 
experience at the regional 
level 
ln-house planning stall‘ 
and some (0-1 stall) 
resllience planning 
experience at the regional 
level 
N0 in-house planning stall 
and good (more than 2. 
stall) resilience planning 
experience at the regional 
level 
No in-house planning stall 
and some (1-2 stall) 
resilience planning 
experience at the reqlonal 
level 
No in-house planning slafl 
and mlnlmal lo no (0 staff) 
resilience planning 
experience at the regional 
level
/
