 
 To:  Members of the Joint Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
From:  Marianne Hill, Economist 
Date:  April 5, 2023 
Re:  Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 1221: An Act to Make Changes 
to the Distribution Amounts to Certain Maine Clean Election Act 
Candidates in Contested General Elections 
 
 
 Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, 
 
My name is Marianne Hill and I live in South Portland. 
 
Maine’s Clean Election Act has enjoyed overwhelming support in related public 
hearings because of the recognition that truly representative democracy depends on 
limiting the influence of those seeking financial gain through manipulation of the 
legislative process. The people of Maine respect the integrity of clean election 
candidates and the resulting quality of their legislators. In 2020, 39% of 
Republican candidates and most of Democratic candidates ran Clean Election 
campaigns.1 Our state legislature is more representative and responsive to voters, 
thanks to Clean Election funding, and better able to resist the exploitation of 
Maine’s resources for the benefit of a few.   
 
 Nationally, belief in the strength of US democracy is eroding. Public trust in the 
national government has fallen to alarming levels.2 This is due in large part to the 
gap between what voters want and what government delivers in policies related to 
jobs, health care and other basics..3 The Democracy Index ranks the US a “flawed 
democracy”, due in part to this shortfall in accountability to voters.4  
 
The fact that money has too much influence on politics is recognized by voters.5 
The state offers a beacon of hope to the rest of the nation, showing that more 
representative democracy is possible.  It is to Maine’s credit that it is providing 
revenues to candidates running for public office in contested elections.  I am proud 
of Maine’s national leadership in the critical work of strengthening our democracy.  
 
 
 The amounts currently provided are modest in comparison to their beneficial 
impact.  Any cuts would weaken the state’s ability to craft and act on policies that 
protect the best interests of Maine people. And would represent a step backwards 
for democracy both here and nationally. 
 
I urge you to oppose LD 1221 and report “ought not to pass”.   Thank you for your 
consideration. 
 
 
Marianne Hill, Ph.D. 
South Portland 
601906-7487 
 
Sources 
 
1 - From Maine Citizens for Clean Elections, Report 17: Democratic participation continues 
to outpace Republican. There were 62 Republican candidates in the Clean Election program 
(39% of Republican candidates) and 122 Democratic candidates in the Clean Election 
program (72% of Democratic candidates). Republican participation remains substantial, 
especially in the Senate. 
2 - https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/public-trust-in-government    
3 – Hill, Marianne. 2022.  Building A Solidarity Society, Chapter 3. Palgrave Macmillan.  
4 - See  Economic Intelligence Unit, Democracy Index 2020, London.  
5 -  https://www.cbsnews.com/news/poll-americans-say-money-has-too-much-influence-in-
campaigns/  
    - https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/07/22/most-americans-say-social-media-
companies-have-too-much-power-influence-in-politics/  
    - https://news.gallup.com/poll/193484/americans-major-donors-sway-congress-
constituents.aspx     
        - https://news.gallup.com/poll/188747/majority-americans-dissatisfied-corporate-
influence.aspx  
Marianne Hill
South Portland
LD 1221
To: Members of the Joint Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
From: Marianne Hill, Economist
Date: April 5, 2023
Re: Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 1221: An Act to Make Changes to the 
Distribution Amounts to Certain Maine Clean Election Act Candidates in Contested 
General Elections
 Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs,
My name is Marianne Hill and I live in South Portland.
Maine’s Clean Election Act has enjoyed overwhelming support in related public 
hearings because of the recognition that truly representative democracy depends on 
limiting the influence of those seeking financial gain through manipulation of the 
legislative process. The people of Maine respect the integrity of clean election 
candidates and the resulting quality of their legislators. In 2020, 39% of Republican 
candidates and most of Democratic candidates ran Clean Election campaigns.1 Our 
state legislature is more representative and responsive to voters, thanks to Clean 
Election funding, and better able to resist the exploitation of Maine’s resources for the
benefit of a few.  
 Nationally, belief in the strength of US democracy is eroding. Public trust in the 
national government has fallen to alarming levels.2 This is due in large part to the gap
between what voters want and what government delivers in policies related to jobs, 
health care and other basics..3 The Democracy Index ranks the US a “flawed 
democracy”, due in part to this shortfall in accountability to voters.4 
The fact that money has too much influence on politics is recognized by voters.5 The 
state offers a beacon of hope to the rest of the nation, showing that more 
representative democracy is possible.  It is to Maine’s credit that it is providing 
revenues to candidates running for public office in contested elections.  I am proud of 
Maine’s national leadership in the critical work of strengthening our democracy. 
The amounts currently provided are modest in comparison to their beneficial impact.  
Any cuts would weaken the state’s ability to craft and act on policies that protect the 
best interests of Maine people. And would represent a step backwards for democracy 
both here and nationally.
I urge you to oppose LD 1221 and report “ought not to pass”.   Thank you for your 
consideration.
Marianne Hill, Ph.D.
South Portland
601906-7487
Sources
1 - From Maine Citizens for Clean Elections, Report 17: Democratic participation 
continues to outpace Republican. There were 62 Republican candidates in the Clean 
Election program (39% of Republican candidates) and 122 Democratic candidates in 
the Clean Election program (72% of Democratic candidates). Republican 
participation remains substantial, especially in the Senate.
2 - https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/public-trust-in-government  
3 – Hill, Marianne. 2022.  Building A Solidarity Society, Chapter 3. Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
4 - See  Economic Intelligence Unit, Democracy Index 2020, London. 
5 -  
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/poll-americans-say-money-has-too-much-influence-i
n-campaigns/
    - 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/07/22/most-americans-say-social-media-
companies-have-too-much-power-influence-in-politics/ 
    - 
https://news.gallup.com/poll/193484/americans-major-donors-sway-congress-constitu
ents.aspx   
        - 
https://news.gallup.com/poll/188747/majority-americans-dissatisfied-corporate-influe
nce.aspx

