 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1764  
 
AN ACT REGARDING THE CHARGE FOR RESEARCH TIME BY STATE  
AGENCIES FOR FREEDOM OF ACCESS ACT REQUESTS  
 
Senator Carney,  Representative  Moone n, and members of the Committee on Judiciary, I a m Victoria Wallack, 
director of communication s and government relations for Maine School Managemen t Association, testifying 
on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association , in support of L.D. 1764 . 
 
We support this bill because it  recognizes ther e is a cost t o fulfilling freedo m of access requests and that cost 
has grown with the proliferation of requests made to school districts . One strategy employed in these requests  
is to break them up into smaller increment s not to exceed two hours,  so there is no cost to the requestor to 
offset the cost of fulfilling these requests.  
 
The staff in our  district s, who have t o fulfill these requests , are taking time away from their other 
responsibilities, but  that work has to be done . 
 
Our recommendation is to explicitly include school administra tive districts in this proposal because as written 
we are not include d in the definition of agenc y, under Title 5, §8002.  
 
It reads: 
 
"Agency" means  any bod y of State Government authorized by law to adopt rules, to issue licenses or to take 
final action i n adjudicatory proceedings, including, but not limited to, every authority, board, bureau, 
commission, department or officer of the State Government so authorized; but the term does not include the 
Legislature, Governor, courts, University of Maine System,  Maine Maritime Academy, community colleges, 
the Commissioner of Education for schools of the unorganized territory, school administrative units, 
community action agencies as defined in  Title 22, section 532 1, special purpose districts or municipalities, 
counties or other political subdivisions of the State.   
