COMCAST 
Comcast Testimony on LD 1932 
An Act to Require Broadband Internet Access Service Providers to Prorate 
Customer Bills 
Chair Lawrence, Chair Ziegler, and members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee, 
thank you for the opportunity to offer the following testimony in opposition to LD 1932. My name 
is Chris Hodgdon I am Comcast’s Vice President of Government Affairs here in Maine. Comcast 
serves 16 Maine communities, in the Mid Coast region from Freeport to Woolwich and along the 
New Hampshire border from Kittery to Sanford. We currently offer our broadband, video, voice, 
and mobile services to more than 69,000 Maine homes, businesses and institutions. 
As a preliminary matter, customers may cancel Comcast’s Xfrnity services, including our Broadband 
Internet Access Services and Mobile Service at any time for any reason. Since Comcast’s Xfrnity service 
is paid in advance this often results in a pro rata credit due to the customer once the service is terminated. 
This policy of offering pro rata credits or rebates has been Comcast’s policy for many years and did not 
change with the 2020 enactment of LD 203 1 . Additionally, Comcast makes it easy for customers to request 
a credit in the event of a service outage. We strive to provide customers with easy and convenient ways to 
communicate with Comcast, including recent improvements to the online Xfrnity Assistant which allows 
credit request without speaking to an agent. 
Despite it being Comcast’s policy to offer a pro rata credit, if due, upon service termination, we express the 
following concerns about LD I932. Putting aside the substantial questions about whether federal law 
preempts the application of this Bill to Broadband Internet Access Service and Wireless Services it is 
inappropriate to enact this language in MRSA 35-A. Issues such as those addressed in LD 1932 would 
more properly be situated in MRSA l0 under the authority of the Attorney General. This is particularly 
true because Broadband Intemet Access Service is not a common carrier service nor is it provided by 
utilities under the jurisdiction of the Maine Public Utilities Commission. For example MRSA 35-A’s 
deﬁnition of “public utility” expressly excludes virtually all “mobile telecommunications 
services, ” including Comcast’s Xfrnity Mobile. 
In addition to jurisdictional issues, LD 1932 needs clarification to avoid being needlessly and 
unfairly disruptive for providers like Comcast which allow service termination at any time and 
provides pro rata credits when due. For example, Section 2 of the Bill which requires service 
cancellation, does not account for legitimate business policies which require customers to return 
provider owned equipment such as modems before service cancellation. Additionally, services 
may include a term contract or the ﬁnancing of hardware such as wireless handsets through the
provider. Customers should not be allowed to cancel service until equipment is returned in good 
working order or the terms of ﬁnanced hardware have been met. 
Section 3 of the Bill requires Comcast to provide a credit upon request for service outages of six(6) 
or more consecutive hours over a 30-day period. While it is Comcast’s policy to provide credits, 
when appropriate, LD 1932 would make these credit requests automatic, removing our ability to 
adequately investigate and respond such requests. To the extant that this legislation is being 
advanced in an effort to induce providers to prioritize service restoration or network resiliency it 
is important to understand that the pace and prioritization of restoration is not under the control of 
Internet Service Providers. Outages such as those caused by power outages, falling trees and motor 
vehicles are the most common cause of these disruptions. When electrical distribution 
infrastructure is damaged by a storm, falling trees or vehicle accidents restoration of Comcast’s 
infrastructure can not begin until electric service is restored, and the location is made safe. The 
pace and prioritization of work is not within Comcast’s control. Pole owners and electric utilities 
necessarily determine where and when restoration occurs and when Internet Service Providers can 
begin their work. 
While storms, accidents and physical damage is neither the fault of the provider nor the customer 
there are instances when loss of service is within the customer ’s control Many customers opt to 
own their own modem rather than lease one from Comcast, service interruptions due to customer 
owned equipment malfunction of failure is not within Comcast’s control. Additionally, wiring 
within customer ’s homes and businesses are the property and responsibility of customers. 
Damaged internal wiring is a common source of service interruption and degraded service and like 
customer owned equipment is beyond the provider ’s control. Rather than enact legislation that 
removes our ability to work with customers to identify and understand outages and if appropriate 
issue a credit we urge the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass. 
Comcast believes, if challenged, LD 1932 would be preempted by federal law. Mass market Broadband 
Internet Access Services is preempted ﬁom state-level regulation as an interstate information service and 
has repeatedly and consistently been held as such in federal courts. Further, efforts to apply the provisions 
of this legislation to cellular mobile radio services such as Comcast’s Xﬁnity mobile would similarly be 
preempted. 
Thank you for the opportunity to address the Committee regarding this legislation. Interruptions 
and outages are disruptive and certainly effect the customer experience which is why our policy is 
to work with customers directly, if they contact us and request a credit, we empower our customer 
care employees to provide that credit. We have worked hard to develop new tools to make it 
simple and easy for customers to contact us. No additional legislation is warranted. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments regarding LD 1932. Comcast looks forward 
to working with the sponsor and other stakeholders to address these concerns and improve this 
legislation. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have.
Comcast Makes it Easier to Get Refunds When Your Internet Goes Out 
Luke Bouma, Cord Cutters News 
5/11/23 
Have you ever heard your internet go out for a long period of time? lt happened to me just this week 
when l woke up and found my internet was ofﬂine. if you are working from home like l am, it's no fun at 
all. Even if you don't work from home, we count on the internet for everyday activities that it has become 
a necessity for many. 
Now Comcast is making it easier to get credits when your internet is ofﬂine. Recently Comcast added 
the ability to ask for an outage credit right from your account page. No longer do you need to call 
Comcast and wait on hold to talk to an agent for a credit. Now it is automatically applied just by clicking 
the request a credit button. 
This option has been in testing for some time now but is now widely available, as best we can tell, in all 
markets. 
Well this may not be a perfect option as you still need to request the credit it is a far better experience 
than what was once offered. 
2022 was not kind to cable TV companies as Comcast and Spectrum lost a combined 2.6 million TV 
customers in 2022. Now in 2023 that number is growing as Spectrum has already doubled it losses in the 
1st quarter of 2023 vs that same period in 2022. 
In Comcast’s Q1 of 2023 earnings report released this week, Comcast reported it lost 614,000 video 
customer losses. That works out to be 6,800 subscribers Every Day. 
Comcast saw traditional pay TV customers leave at a far faster rate in in the 1st quarter of 2023 vs the 
4th quarter of 2023 when they lost 440,000 video customers. To help offset these losses, Comcast also 
reported adding 355,000 wireless customers. 
Now it seems that Comcast wants to be able to keep customers happy with easier-to-get credits.
