CliCi"“ ., L(.. 1‘, ‘,_,.\ 
May 23, 2023 
The Honorable Mark Lawrence 
The Honorable S. Paige Zeigler 
Co-Chairs, Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Maine Legislature‘ 
c/o Legislative information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Co-Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler: 
On behalf of CTlA® , the trade association for the wireless communications industry, l write to 
oppose LD 1932 dealing with the proration of broadband customers ’ bills. This legislation is 
unnecessary as mobile broadband providers offer consumers numerous options for service, 
including no contract plans and pay-as-you-go offerings, and work with their customers when 
issues may arise because the competitive mobile marketplace requires it. The bill is also 
preempted by federal law. 
The wireless industry has been at the forefront of addressing consumer demands and changes 
in the wireless industry. For example, CTlA’s Consumer Code for Wireless Service has been an 
integral part of delivering superior customer service to wireless consumers since 2003.‘ The 
Code - followed in all 50 states - has helped consumers make informed decisions when 
selecting a mobile sen/ice plan and has contributed to the continued competitiveness within 
the industry. The Code also gives mobile providers the flexibility to quickly respond to 
changes in consumer demand. 
Mobile broadband providers that are signatories to the Code, including AT&T, T-Mobile, 
UScellular, and Verizon, have committed to voluntarily adhere to a set of industry principles. 
These principles include agreeing to disclose to consumers at the point-of-sale or on their 
websites whether a fixed-term contract is required and its duration; the trial period during 
which a consumer may cancel sen/ice without an early termination fee; and providing ready 
access to customer sen/ice. CTiA periodically reviews the Code to ensure it reflects the 
continued innovation within the wireless industry and the needs of consumers. 
1 
See https: / /\!\J\:if\ ﬁi.Cii2i.Qi7_g._,ii:i ’i e_;_wi relesgj §)_<;i ggsgryii _n_gi_p§§ry;g1_m@ ’@e_njt_§j_g:_Q p_symencode-for-wireless; 
garvice (last accessed May 22, 2023). 
1400 i6tliStieei,l\ii.»\/ i 
Suite GOO l 
Washington,l)C)O(i56 Y 
wwv/,<"i|.a.n|';_;
ln addition, mobile broadband providers seek to address the needs of customers because of 
the competitive nature of the industry that provides consumers with a choice of providers. For 
example, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has found that more than 9 out of 
10 Americans have a choice of three or more 46 providers. That’s because there are nearly 100 
mobile providers, resellers, and MVNOs nationwide. This competition not only provides 
consumers with a choice of providers, but it has also driven down prices. in fact, Americans 
are paying less for mobile services, including unlimited data plans that are 43 percent cheaper 
than in 2010. The wireless industiy ’s intense competition continues to bring lower prices- 
even in the face of historic inflation. While consumers have faced price increases for 94 
percent of tracked goods and services nationwide, the average prices of mobile service 
decreased. 
Moreover, mobile broadband providers offer a wide range of plans with different price points. 
These plans include “all you can use” plans, fixed contract plans, “pay-as-you go” or prepaid 
options, and month-to-month plans. These sen/ice options are provided at different price 
points so that consumers can choose the option that works best for them. A recent report 
observed that mobile broadband service has been “a significant factor in bridging the digital 
divide” in part because of mobile sen/ice providers ’ “varied and attractive pricing tiers." With 
prices declining and mobile providers incentivized to respond to consumer demands amid 
fierce competition, it is unnecessary to regulate mobile providers as mandated by LD 1932. 
Furthermore, the bill’s credit or rebate requirement amounts to mobile rate regulation, which 
is preempted by federal law. Under the federal Communications Act, “no State . . . shall have 
any authority to regulate the . . . rates charged by any commercial mobile service or any 
private mobile service, ” i.e., by any wireless sen/ice provider? The credit or rebate 
requirement, if enacted, would likely constitute unlawful state regulation of mobile rates.A 
mandated credit or rebate amounts to a reduction in the price that mobile providers may 
charge. The Supreme Court has stated that rates do not exist in isolation. American Telephone 
and Telegraph Co. v. Central Office Telephone, lnc., 524 U.S. 214, 223 (1998). The FCC has also 
recognized that a rate is an “amount of payment or charge based on another amount.” 
Southwestern Bell Mobile Sys., lnc., Memorandum Opinion and Order, 14 FCC Rcd 19898, 
19906, para. 19 (1999) (emphasis omitted). Finally, Maine’s Public Utilities Commission (PUC) 
treats rebates as a form of rates subject to regulation in the context ofenergy bills. See, e.g., 
2 
Multicultural Media, Telecom & Internet Council and CTIA, Wireless in Communities of Color: Bridging 
the Digital Divide, at 6 (July 2022), 
3 
47 U.S.C. § 332(C)(3)(A).
2013 Me. PUC LEXIS 37, *l2 (establishing the rebates that a gas utility service will provide to 
customers). 
While the First Circuit recently upheld a 2020 Maine law that requires cable providers to offer 
customers a pro rata credit or rebate upon cancellation, Section 332 of the federal 
Communications Act governs mobile service including preemption issues, and the court 
expressly distinguished the narrower scope of federal preemption of state cable rate 
regulation from the broad federal preemption of state regulation of mobile rates. The court 
suggested that while the Cable Act only preempts regulation of rates for “the provision of 
sen/ice, ” mobile preemption reaches “rates charged” generally by mobile providers. ‘ State 
regulation of broadband pricing is also preempted because such regulation would disrupt the 
federal policy of nonregulation of broadband and because federal law occupies the field of 
regulation of broadband. 
The mobile broadband marketplace is highly competitive, which affords consumers the 
choice of providers, rates, and plans that best suit their needs. Because of this intense 
competition - which has also driven down prices for consumers - mobile providers work with 
their customers to resolve issues. As such, LD 1932 is unnecessary. For these reasons, CTIA 
respectfully requests an Ought Not to Pass report on the bill. 
Sincerely, 
)<f»@M— 
Gerard Keegan 
Vice President 
State Legislative Affairs 
“ Spectrum Ne., LLC v. Frey, 22 F.4th 287, 302 (lst Cir. 2022).
