‘A
- . . ..1 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (207) 287-14()() 
Raymond, ME 04071 MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
Jessica.Fav@legislature.maine. gov 
May 23, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay introducing 
LD 1923, An Act to Require Broadband Internet Access Service Providers to 
Prorate Customer Bills 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and honorable members of the 
Energy Utilities and Technology Committee. I am Jessica Fay, representing House District 86, 
which includes Casco, Raymond, Frye Island and part of Poland. Thank you for the opportunity 
to present LD 1932, An Act to Require Broadband Internet Access Service Providers to 
Prorate Customer Bills. 
In 2020, this committee passed LD 2031, An Act To Require a Cable System Operator To 
Provide a Pro Rata Credit When Service Is Cancelled by a Subscriber. When I testified in 
favor of that bill, I did so because it was an issue of faimess. While providers are now required to 
pro-rate cable bills, they are not required to pro-rate intemet bills. 
When a consumer cancels their service early in a billing cycle, they are on the hook for paying 
for an entire month, even if they are required to retum equipment like modems. This bill 
proposes that consumers be refunded the part of the bill for the month that they don’t have 
service. 
Internet service is an expensive necessity for work, for school, for communication and for us to 
stay connected. Companies charging for services not provided can be a burden on families and 
older people. 
There is a provision in the bill regarding power outages, and I understand that there is some 
concern that this could impact service provision. I am sure there is a way to address these 
concerns and move the bill forward. 
I understand that you have another bill, LD 1167, An Act to Require Communications Service 
Providers to Prorate Customer Bills for Cancellation and Allow a Reduction in Service for 
a Customer with an Outstanding Balance, sponsored by Rep. Perry from Bangor. While LD 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
1 d ISP’s. I hope to work with you 1932 is similar, it is simpler than LD 1167. It aims only to inc ue 
t a in for services that they are not and ISP’s to make sure that Maine consumers are no p yg 
receiving. 
Thank you for your time and attention.
