 May 11, 2023 
 The Honorable Donna Bailey 
 Senate Chair, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
 3 State House Station 
 Augusta, ME 04333 
 The Honorable Anne Perry 
 House Chair, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
 2 State House Station 
 Augusta, ME 04333 
 RE:  5/11/23 Public Hearing and United States of Care’s Support for LD 1795 
 Dear Chair Bailey, Chair Perry, and Members of the Committee, 
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of  LD 1795  , commonsense 
 legislation that would establish reasonable limits on facility fees charged to patients by hospitals 
 and health systems. United States of Care (USofCare) is a non-partisan, non-profit organization 
 working to ensure  everyone  has access to quality, affordable health care, regardless of health 
 status, social need, or income.  In the past, we have highlighted Maine’s transition to a 
 state-based marketplace exchange and its innovative Maine Guaranteed Access Reinsurance 
 Association (MGARA) as two initiatives pioneered by the state to expand access to coverage and 
 improve health care affordability. 
 Unfortunately, despite this meaningful action taken by the Legislature, health care remains 
 unaffordable for many in Maine. More than  one third  of Mainers have reported delaying medical 
 care due to the cost of health care, which remains some of the  most expensive  in the country. 
 One of the main drivers of increasing health care costs can be traced to  health care consolidation 
 in Maine and nationwide, which has led to less competition and higher prices for patients, 
 usually with no corresponding increase in quality of care. 
 As hospitals and health systems purchase outpatient clinics, such as primary care physician 
 offices and imaging centers, they are increasingly billing for “facility fees” in addition to the 
 traditional “professional” fee.  These facility fees, which can sometimes exceed the cost of the 
 underlying medical care itself, often come as a surprise to patients, who may or may not be able 
 to pay them. In one particularly egregious example, a Kennebunkport man received an  $813 
 facility fee  charge for a $45 routine procedure despite calling his insurance company ahead of 
 time to check on the price. 
 Limits on facility fees lower people’s out-of-pocket costs while also serving as a tool to 
 disincentivize  hospital acquisitions of outpatient facilities that do little to improve families’ 
 access to care. In fact, this type of consolidation – physician-hospital integration – has been 

 associated with an  average price increase of 14%  for the same service. Tacking on these fees, on 
 top of price increases, doesn’t guarantee any additional quality of care; rather, patients are just 
 paying more for the same service they could receive at an independent clinic and further 
 discouraged from accessing needed care because of cost. 
 LD 1795  tackles this question head on by putting in place strong limits on when and where 
 facility fees can be charged to patients. The bill would prohibit hospitals from charging patients 
 facility fees for all services offered by a hospital or health system off-campus and a select 
 number of services delivered regardless of location, including primary care doctor visits and 
 many diagnostic or imaging services. To fully quantify the effect facility fees have on people’s 
 access to care, the bill would also require hospitals and health systems to submit annual reports 
 listing the name and address of facilities that charge facility fees, the total amount of revenue 
 collected from these fees, and a list of the top ten procedures or services that generate the most 
 facility fee revenue. This information would be posted publicly to help inform patients seeking 
 medical care and avoid any unplanned facility fee charges. 
 Momentum is growing to reign in these surprise costs.  Connecticut  has led the way in banning 
 facility fees for telehealth services and many outpatient office visits and requires hospitals to 
 notify patients of any allowable fees prior to point of service. In December, New York became 
 the  first state  to ban facility fees specifically for preventive care, while  Indiana  passed a sweeping 
 ban on facility fees earlier this month that limits what billing forms providers and institutions 
 can use. Legislation to limit facility fees for preventive services in  Colorado  is headed to the 
 Governor’s desk, and bills are currently being advanced in  Massachusetts  ,  North Carolina  , and 
 Texas  . With Maine leading in so many other ways on health care, this bill is a logical next step to 
 address high health care costs and protect patients. 
 United States of Care is supportive of LD 1795 and strongly encourages a “yes” vote 
 in support of this bill  that takes steps to ensure that Mainers have access to the medical care 
 they need without worrying about its cost. We thank the committee for its work on this issue and 
 urge the committee to consider United States of Care a resource moving forward. Please do not 
 hesitate to reach out if you have any questions. 
 Sincerely, 
 Caitlin Westerson  Eric Waskowicz 
 State Partnerships & External Affairs Director  Policy Manager 
 United States of Care  United States of Care 
 cwesterson@usofcare.org  ewaskowicz@usofcare.org 
 (970) 589-7424  (717) 419-1485 
