H 
Dldfoj 
Testimony of Ban Demeritt 5/ l l/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Support of LD 1795 
An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-profit insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
An investigation by the Portland Press Herald in August shed light on the unexpected use of 
facilities fees in hospital billing, highlighting the costs and frustrations of consumers. To be 
transparent, the report also shared stories of consumers experiencing insurance claim denials. 
I share the Portland Press Herald’s April update on facility fees with my testimony. ‘ 
We all have work to do to make healthcare expenses easier to understand. MeAHP looks forward 
to Working with stakeholders between the sessions to consider how pending rules related to the 
No Surprises Act may create opportunities for improvenient? 
Today’s Work is focused on facility fees. LD l795 will create limitations on the use of facility 
fees and bring transparency and accountability to a billing practice that strikes many consumers 
and advocates as underhanded. 
Medicare ’s reimbursement rates for services physicians provide increase when delivered through 
an integrated hospital outpatient department. The federal government's willingness to pay more 
1 httos:[/www.pressherald.com/2023/O4/28/maine-legislature-mav-restrict —facilitv-fees-charged-b\¢ 
hosgitals ﬁicoral talk stream 
2 httos:Z/wwwfederalregister.20v/docume nts/2022/O9/16/2022 -19798/req uest-for-information-advanced- 
exnlanation-of-bene ﬁts-and-good-faith-estimate-for —covered 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
for services based on the owner of the premises rather than the credential of the provider has 
contributed to the surge in private practice acquisitions by healthcare systems.3 
Facility fees are being assessed on consumers with private insurance too, adding to consumer 
expenses and increasing the costs of Maine health care premiums with no additional value at the 
point of care. 
As of 2020, most primary care providers now work outside of private practice.4 It is easy to see 
Why people are confused when they see the same doctor at the same location as last year but see 
a new and unexpected bill on this year’s bill. 
Defining and limiting the use of facility fees in Maine, especially concerning consumers covered 
by private insurance, will increase transparency and improve faimess. 
We thank the Presiding Officers and other Legislators for biinging this bill forward and urgea 
Vote of Ought to Pass on LD 1795. 
3 
https:L/www.medpac.gov/wp-contentQp|0ads/imbort data/scrape files/docs/defaulb 
source/reports/mar2O medpac ch15 sec.ndf p.458 
4 
httns:1/www.ahip.org/resources/healthier-oeoole-through-healthier-markets 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
