Maine Medical 
' SUPPORT Maine Physicians v ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine ~ PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
TO: Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs 
DATE: May 11, 2023 
RE: OPPOSE — LD 1795, "An Act to Ensure Access to Federally Approved Opioid 
Overdose-reversing Medication" 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest and oldest professional physician association 
representing over 4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
The MMA opposes any legislative effort to eliminate facility fees from hospital reimbursement in 
Maine. MMA membership includes physicians in all practice settings — solo “direct primary care” 
practitioners, traditional small private practices, a few large private practices, federally-qualified 
health centers, ambulatory surgical facilities, independent hospitals, and large integrated health 
systems. 
Because of the evolution of our health system over time, each of these practice settings hasa 
somewhat different reimbursement methodology on which the organization has built a business 
model. In the absence of comprehensive health care reform in this country, MMA opposes 
changes to reimbursement methodologies that have become part of our health care system and 
on which health care organizations have come to depend. Most policymakers are aware of the 
significant financial stress currently being experienced by our hospitals and other health care 
organizations because of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The reimbursement methodology at issue in this bill is known as “provider-based ” 
reimbursement which is a component of the federal Social Security Act used by hospitals in 
Maine and across the country to provide essential services to their communities, particularly in 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
rural areas, where the cost, complexity, and administrative burden of our health care system 
were driving physicians and other practitioners out of independent, private practices and 
promoting consolidation of health care organizations to achieve economies of scale. 
The requirements of “provider-based ” reimbursement may be found at 42 CFR sec. 413.65. This 
program enables hospital-based outpatient medical practices to draw a “facility fee” in addition 
to a “professional fee” if they meet certain standards designed to enhance the services those 
practices are able to provide to their communities. 
ln marketing, outreach, and patient education efforts, it must be clear to the public that these 
medical practices are part of the integrated hospital system. These practices are also financially 
and clinically integrated with the hospital. The hospital is providing a broad range of support 
sen/ices in these three areas and the facility fee is supporting the hospitaI ’s ability to provide 
these services. This legitimate federal reimbursement program is largely responsible for 
supporting the primary and preventive care safety net in much of rural Maine. 
Thank you for your attention to our comments. We urge a vote of Ought Not to Pass. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
