I\/ll—|A 
Maine Hospital Association 
MAlNE'S LEADTNG 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
COMMENTS OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
In Opposition To 
LD 1795 - An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees 
May 11, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Heath Care, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee, my name is Jeffrey Austin and I am here on behalf of the Maine Hospital 
Association to testify in opposition to LD 1795. 
It is a very signiﬁcant bill and would be ﬁnancially devastating to hospitals. This bill essentially 
attempts to instill rate regulation on hospitals for the beneﬁt of caniers. 
The problem is that it sets the reimbursement rate for many hospital services at zero. This will 
close numerous services all across the state. 
The Legislation 
Page 1, line 12 creates a deﬁnition of “facility fee.” It declares that a facility fee is reimbursement 
“that is intended to compensate the health care provider for the operational expenses of the 
health care provider, separate and distinct from a professional fee.” 
Page 1, line 36 then bans facility fees for most outpatient services. It states, “A health care 
provider may not charge, bill or collect a facility fee, except for. . ..” 
These two parts of the legislation combine to ban hospitals from charging for their operational 
expenses. That is unreasonable and essentially bans hospitals from providing all the services 
covered by this bill. 
Facility Fees 
Most billing related to hospitals is split between a professional fee (for the doctor) and the facility 
fee (for everything else). Historically, physicians were not employed by hospitals. So, the two 
bills reﬂected the fact that they were two separate entities.
That is still true in a lot of cases today — the physician practice is independent of the hospital. We 
understand that the public is not always aware of this fact. 
Nevertheless, even if the physician is employed by the hospital, there is nothing hidden or 
inappropriate about hospitals charging for operational expenses such as: 
the hospital, the nurses, the electricity, the supplies, all of the administrative costs related to billing, 
collections, regulatory compliance, medical malpractice, data collection and reporting, community 
relations and so forth. 
Vlfhether that is called a facility fee, hospital fee, nurse fee or any other label, hospitals should be 
allowed to cover our operational costs. 
Financial Impact 
This legislation would eliminate hospital reimbursement for both outpatient services that are not 
“on campus” with the hospital and even for some outpatient services that occur inside the hospital 
itself. 
We do not have an exact estimate of the impact because we don’t have an inventory for which 
outpatient services are performed on campus vs. off campus as identiﬁed in this bill. 
Our rough estimate is that the impact is between $250-$750 million per year. 
All Payers . 
This bill appears to apply to all payers, cormnercial, self-insured, Medicare and Medicaid. This 
legislation places the facility fee prohibition in Title 22 -— meaning it is regulating hospitals; rather 
than Title 24 — which regulates some carrier plans. As such, hospitals are prohibited from imposing 
the facility fee, presumably on anyone, including Medicare and Medicaid. We see no limiting 
language in the bill to just state-regulated commercial carriers. 
As we have testiﬁed to this committee before, this committee should not regulate hospitals in such 
a broad fashion since you can not regulate all these payers. 
Medicare is run by the federal government and the state should not prohibit reimbursement that is 
expressly allowed by the Medicare program. 
Medicaid is run by the state government. However, the state of Maine established a rate setting 
process and the committee that oversees Medicaid reimbursement is the HHS Committee. My 
experience is that all reimbursement questions should ﬂow through both the new process and the 
HHS Committee. 
Page2|6 
THEMHA. ORG | (207) 622-4794 |33 FULLER ROAD IAUGUSTA, ME 04330
To put a ﬁner point on it, this bill prohibits us from billing Medicaid and Medicare as we are 
instructed and required to do by those government programs. We are prohibited from 
charging anything other than a professional fee as part of the professional fee; we can’t “load” the 
operational charges into the professional fee. 
Finally, self-insured plans (ERISA plans) are beyond your reach and you can not impose regulation 
on their activity. As such, you sh0uldn’t regulate our activity with respect to them. 
Rate Regulation 
With respect to the commercial plans for which you normally establish rates, we strongly oppose 
this bill because it is essentially a form of rate regulation. 
In fact, it’s terrible rate regulation because it uses state law to prohibit hospitals from charging for 
their operational expenses but does not guarantee anything in its place. 
Banning our ability to cover our costs is absurd public policy. 
Outpatient Facility Fees 
Currently, most hospital operations are billed as a department of the hospital, even if those 
operations are off-campus. When hospitals decide to treat a particular medical practice asa 
department of the hospital, that decision has both upsides for the hospital and downsides. 
The upside is largely revenue: the hospital uses the same billing practices as are done for the 
hospital proper, including facility fees. The outpatient practice has overhead expenses just as the 
hospital does. 
There are downsides for the hospital as well. The medical practice gets treated as if it were a part 
of the hospital for public reporting purposes, for hospital tax purposes, for free care policy 
purposes, for giving Medicaid recipients access, and a number of other regulatory requirements. 
Existing Maine Law 
Maine’s law governing commercial reimbursement, requires hospitals to bill carriers usinga 
standard claim form for ofﬁce visits and expressly leaves other visits to contract negotiations. For 
ofﬁce visits, that single claim form covers both professional services and overhead costs. 
It is not clear to us if the prohibition in the legislation prevents hospitals from seeking “operational 
expenses ” as part of the standard claim we make today. 
Page3|6 
THEMHA. ORG [(207) 622-4794 133 FULLER ROAD IAUGUSTA, ME 04330
The Real Problem 
As we look back at some of the media coverage on public frustration surrounding facility fees, we 
are surprised that this kind of legislation is viewed as the solution. 
One of the lead stories in the Portland Press Herald on this topic was of a gentleman who called 
Harvard Pilgrim Healthcare for an advanced quote on the price of a cardiac stress test. Harvard 
Pilgrim incorrectly infonned the gentleman that the price was only $45 (the professional fee) and 
did not disclose to him the facility fee. That is not the fault of the hospital. Cardiac stress tests 
are not $45 services. 
When the $800 facility fee was charged, we assume properly from the media coverage, Harvard 
Pilgrim simply denied the claim and refused to pay. Why? Because they can. There is no 
repercussion to denying claims following a service being provided. Overwhelmingly people do 
not appeal and when carriers lose appeals the Bureau of Insurance does not impose penalties. So 
why not deny claims for valid, covered services? 
Care will get delivered, its payment that is denied. 
Why is bamiing facility fees the result of Harvard Pilgrim incorrectly quoting the price of 
the service and then improperly denying the claim? This bill entirely misses the mark. 
What If 
If this kind of legislation were to pass, hospitals would not ‘do nothing. ’ Most of them would 
close the service. Take the above example of a cardiac stress test. The bill would ban a fee for 
the operational cost of the hospital for delivering the service. The hospital would get zero for the 
cardiac tech who conducted the test, the treadmill, the EKG monitor, the building, the electricity, 
the billing department, the regulatory compliance department, legal, IT, accounting and other 
administrative services etc. The service would immediately end. 
If somehow a facility could survive on the professional fee alone, hospitals would immediately 
ﬂip these practices to “private” practices and they would no longer be subject to free care policies, 
the hospital tax and the myriad other hospital-level regulations. 
During the question and answer period of the public hearing two weeks ago on the “right to shop” 
legislation, the representative for the private physical therapists (PTs) was asked about the practice 
of private PTs not accepting Medicaid patients. She explained that private PTs don’t get “the 
higher, hospital-level ” compensation from commercial carriers to offset the losses experienced due 
to Medicaid rates being low and Medicaid patients frequently ‘no showing’ their appointments. 
So, the private PTs don’t take Medicaid. Well, if hospitals don’t get the higher, hospital-level 
compensation, what do you expect us to do? 
P a g e 4 I6 
THEMHA. ORG {(207) 622-4794 |33 FULLER ROAD |AUGUSTA, ME 04330
Furthermore, if the concept of the “facility fees” is so objectionable to policy makers, so be it. You 
could enact this legislation that is revenue neutral to hospitals and carriers by instructing carriers 
that they must increase hospital practice fee schedules by the amount cut by this bill. 
For example, F QHCs often get total reimbursement equal to that of hospitals for the sen/ices that 
we provide which are similar, yet, they don’t bill a ‘facility fee.’ 
However, your regulation of commercial rates would g be enough to hold us harmless due to the 
potential negative impacts from Medicaid and Medicare and ERISA plans. 
Worst Operating Year Ever 
The rating agency Fitch just called 2022 the “worst operating year we’ve ever seen” for hospitals. 
Following the federal ﬁnancial rescue packages in 2020 and 2021, which enabled hospitals to 
survive, hospitals faced inﬂationary costs in 2022 on their own. And since hospitals don’t control 
their prices, they were slaughtered ﬁnancially. 
The State of Colorado published an analysis of hospital costs, charges and proﬁtability before the 
pandemic. 
Figure 12: 2018 Colorado and U.S. States and the District of Columbia 
Total Margin“ 
I Colorado I Not Colorado 
A BeM      
‘:5 
.. 5.0%                        
-» Median 6.5% 
o.o% 
Peer Group Profit 2018 Comparison for Hospitals with More than 25 Beds”                                                                                                                       
Maine Hospitals are average in terms of cost, but quite low in terms of proﬁt. 
Whether the fees are called facility fees, overhead fees, nursing fees or simply hospital fees, they 
— in combination with all other hospital revenues — are not producing excess proﬁts for hospitals. 
P a g e 5 I6 
THEMHA. ORG {(207) 622-4794 |33 FULLER ROAD lAUGUSTA, ME 04330
As you can see from another state’s review of hospital proﬁts from 2018, Maine hospitals are some 
of the least proﬁtable in the country. Keep in mind, this chart shows “total” margins that includes 
income from non-operating sources. Margins that exclude investment income and only include 
reimbursements for sen/ices are generally even lower. 
Also, please remember, that 2018 was a pretty good year. 
Conclusion. 
The total dollar amount of the loss, while signiﬁcant, is not the real issue. For those practices that 
are impacted, the percentage loss is potentially 100%. Those practices can’t survive. 
Rate regulation is a serious issue and should not be conducted in the fashion proposed by this bill. 
Please oppose LD 1795. 
P a g e 6 I6 
THEMHA. ORG | (207) 622-4794 |33 FULLER ROAD IAUGUSTA, ME 04330
