l\/laineltiealtli 
Testimony of Katie Fullam Harris 
MaineHealth 
In Strong Opposition to LD 1795 
“An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees” 
May 11, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, I am Katie Fullam Harris, and I am here to testify in strong 
opposition to LD 1795, “An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees.” 
This bill is a rnisguided attempt to address the cost of health insurance to private payers. It is being 
promoted across the country, so in no way is it a reﬂection on Maine’s environment. This bill does 
represent another attempt to address the cost of health care solely by paying providers less for the 
services they deliver. It does nothing to address the underlying cost of healthcare, nor to ensure that 
we maintain a system that meetings the needs of all patients, not just those fortunate enough to have 
private insurance. 
As this is a standard bill that has been submitted in at least six states, it fails to account for the@ already on Maine’s books that requires providers to bill private insurers only for professional fees 
associated with an ofﬁce visit. 
In addition to failing to reﬂect current Maine law, this bill is broadly drafted in a manner that could 
be interpreted in many ways. On one hand, it clearly includes speciﬁc services for which there is no 
professional fee code to bill them. These include wound care and lactation consulting, for example. 
The impact to MaineHea1th of a narrow interpretation would be up to $7.7 million annually. 
However, if one interprets the bill to cover all outpatient E and M codes and services provide 
ambulatory settings, the impact to MaineHealth would be over $50 million annually. And that is 
before the department identiﬁes a separate list of services to be excluded from provider-based 
billing. To put this number into perspective, that would more than double the losses our system 
sustained in FY 22. 
Finally, as drafted, this bill appears to include Medicare and Medicaid. Should that be the intent of 
the sponsor, their inclusion would have devastating consequences for communities that rely upon 
hospital services to support their health. 
Hospitals and health systems provide care 24 hours a day, seven days a week to all patients in need, 
regardless of insurance status. Hospital-based providers support primary care, maternity care, 
oncology, chronic disease management, behavioral health and a host of services for patients whose 
payment source, including commercial payers, do not cover cost. MaineCare leaves a 17% gap 
110 Free Street ' Portland, ME 04101 Phone: 207-661-7001 Fax: 207-661-7029 mainehealth org
between the cost of delivering care to its enrollees and payments for that care. Labor alone 
comprises 65% of our cost smucture. The foundation of our mission and role in caring for all 
patients is necessarily very expensive, and cutting reimbursement without addressing underlying 
costs of delivering care will require reductions in services, and particularly to rural communities. 
Maine continues to see attempts, such as this bill, to reduce costs to one set of stakeholders while 
failing to account for the impact to the entire system. You cannot reduce true cost without 
addressing the underlying cost structure. As I have said to this committee before, health care is an 
ecosystem, and changes to its ﬁnancing structure must be made within the context of their 
consequences to the broader whole. Even if interpreted narrowly, this bill would have serious 
ﬁnancial consequences to MaineHealth and our ability to continue to invest in access to high quality 
care for all Mainers. 
Please vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1795.
