Testimony of Laura Ronan in Support of LD 1795, An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain 
Medical Facility Fees; Senate Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Public 
Hearing Date: Thursday, May 11th 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and honorable members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee. I am Laura Ronan, a resident of Dresden and a semi-retired public health 
professional with over 30 years’ experience working in the Maine healthcare system including 
considerable experience related to health insurance.  I am here to speak in support of LD 1795. 
On March 9, 2022, I went to the Mid-Coast Hospital Walk-In Clinic, located in downtown Brunswick, 
because I sustained a knee injury that needed prompt attention. I saw a Physician Assistant (PA) who 
ordered x-rays that were immediately performed across the hall inside the walk-in clinic. I am here to 
provide information about the subsequent bill I received that included a facility fee associated with the 
interaction with the PA and another identical facility fee associated with the x-rays.  (Each facility fee 
was ambiguously labeled “clinic visit” on the bill.) I probably would never have noticed there were two 
facility fees for the same visit, but MaineHealth billed me directly for one of the facility fees after 
Medicare denied that part of their claim. As you probably know, providers cannot bill the beneficiary for 
charges denied by Medicare. After nearly a year of disputing this charge, I received a refund in March, 
2023 from MaineHealth for this duplicate facility fee and the check stub stated “a refund as a result of 
your requested inquiry”.  
As a well-informed consumer, I was aware that a facility fee might be tacked onto my bill although no 
information was given to me at the time of my visit to this outpatient clinic. What I did not expect was 
that MaineHealth would charge a facility fee for each service provided during the same visit in the same 
clinic.  Nor did I expect that during at least five phone calls with MaineHealth’s billing office,  they would 
continue to rebuff  (and even hang up) my protestations about the duplicate facility fee and the practice 
of billing me for  charges denied by Medicare. In fact, MaineHealth repeatedly insisted that the charge 
was correct and told me that Medicare was to blame. I have worked for many years to advocate for 
access to healthcare and, although the amount in dispute was within my means, I felt an obligation to 
try to correct this injustice for the many people who would be treated similarly.  The advent of 
uncontrolled and arbitrary facility fees is another barrier to healthcare access, and my experience 
demonstrates that limitations and transparency are needed as outlined in LD 1795.  
I also talked with the Medicare Claims Office on numerous occasions and submitted an appeal (a lengthy 
process) that I believe finally brought the situation to a resolution. Clearly, Medicare does not allow two 
facility fees during the same visit and Medicare considers billing the beneficiary for charges they deny 
“an assignment violation” for which I was told they conduct “provider education”.  It was extremely 
difficult to tease out the facility fee/clinic visit charge because the amount was not differentiated in a 
line item on the bill mailed to me and was only visible when I went on-line to view the “details” for the 
bill. (The facility fee was actually more than the charge for the encounter with the PA.)  Furthermore, 
MaineHealth billed Medicare using the code “Hospital Outpatient Clinic Visit for Assessment and 
Management of a Patient”, and billed Medicare for one facility fee as Mid-Coast Walk-In Clinic and the 
other as Mid-Coast Main Street XR IMG Hospital Services, again an issue with lack of transparency.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
