May 11, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Representative Anne Perry 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, lnsurance, and Financial Services 
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services; 
Thank you for the opportunity to share thoughts on LD 1795. l support this bill as a means to reduce 
confusion and unexpected costs for consumers, and to increase the transparency of health care prices in 
Maine. 
ln P.L. 2005 Ch. 97, action was taken by the legislature to require the use of standard individual provider 
claim forms—rather than institutional claims f0rms—-for ”office-based" services, which appears to have 
been intended to prohibit separately charging facility fees for services provided in hospital-affiliated 
settings, when the same services can be safely performed in non~hospital settings including physician- 
run practices.1ln recent years, however, news stories have made it clear that the existing law in Maine is 
not being uniformly applied, and patients have continued to be impacted by unexpected facility fees? 
Facility fees are a uniquely challenging health care cost for consumers, because they can be excluded 
from health insurance coverage, or be subject to a separate hospital cost-sharing obligation. The use of 
facility fees also obscures the true cost of care from both consumers and policymakers. l acknowledge 
that this law does not fully address underlying costs of providing care or provider rates, and that it is 
likely health systems will leverage their market power to increase rates to replace revenue lost from 
facility fees. That result is still preferable to the current system, however, because consumers would be 
better protected from unexpected and high-cost bills, and prices would be more transparent. 
Additionally, research suggests that any premium impact from constricting or eliminating facility fees is 
likely to be negligible? 
While I support the bill as written, there are some changes that l believe would be helpful in clarifying 
intent and strengthening implementation: 
1. The bill should acknowledge and reinforce Maine's existing protections enacted in P.L. 2005 Ch. 
97. 
2. The bill should clarify the application of the prohibition for claims to public payers. These 
programs have their own structures for reimbursing hospitals, and the bill as drafted may cause 
confusion or unintended consequences. ln particular, I recommend the legislature work with the 
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of MaineCare Services, to ensure the 
1 Letter from BOI Superintendent Alessandro luppa to the Joint Standing Committee on Insurance and Financial Services, 
January 6, 2006: https://digitalmaine.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1052&context=bi_docs 
Zloe Lawlor, "Hidden charges, denied claims: Medical bills leave patients confused, frustrated, helpless," Portland Press Herald, 
August 21, 2022: https://www.centralmaine.com/2022/O8/21/hidden-charges-denied-claims-medical —bills-leave-patients- 
confused-frustrated-helpless/ 
3 Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, "Moving to Site Neutrality in Commercial insurance Payments," February 14, 
2023: https://www.crfb.org/papers/moving~site-neutrality-commercial-insurance
prohibition on charging facility fees to the MaineCare program is compatible with current 
payment methodologies. 
3. The reporting requirement in the bill should be revised to require financial reporting from all 
hospital-affiliated facilities, not just those that charge a facility fee. This would allow for better 
monitoring of impact in cost—shifting following implementation of the law. 
4. The reporting requirement should be adjusted to require quarterly submissions, to ensure 
analysis can be performed on a timely basis while data remains relevant. 
5. The bill should include a provision to require off-campus hospital-affiliated facilities to obtain 
and utilize a separate National Provider Identifier (NPI) that is distinct from the main campus 
NPl. This separate NPl should be used on all claims for services provided at that location, 
inclusive of facility and physician billing. Ensuring that accurate location-specific NPls are used 
uniformly would significantly improve transparency and the ability to effectively evaluate the 
total combined cost of services. 
Finally, l note that the law will require new investment to build the State's capacity for financial 
monitoring and oversight of health systems. Hospitals and other providers in Maine are already subject 
to oversight of their clinical operations, but historically the State has not had a significant role in 
monitoring and enforcing provisions related to financial transparency and billing, or auditing hospital 
financing. To ensure the program is effective, the State will likely need to establish a new and purpose- 
built team with the knowledge and experience to interpret and analyze complex hospital financial 
reporting. 
Sincerely, 
-Lxzgg/ ¢,,.//? Z¢4_ 
Meg Garratt-Reed 
Executive Director, Office of Affordable Health Care
