  
 
 
 
 
 
 Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
May 11, 202 3 
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1795 – An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1795, An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain 
Medical Facility Fees . This bill prohibits certain health care providers from charging, billing , or 
collecting a facility fee in certain situations and requires annual reporting on the amount of facility 
fees hospitals charge or bill.   
 
As the Governor has said, she is interested in all ideas and effective approaches to protect Maine 
people from surpri se costs and make health care more affordable.  The Department shares this goal 
along with that of LD 1795 to improve data-driven, equitable health care billing  and 
reimbursement . However , we are  neither for not against this bill and offer the  considerations  
detailed below.  
  
The Department interprets this bill as restrict ing hospitals from billing , charging , or collecting  a 
facility fee for off campus services when the facility is outside of  250 yards from  the hospital , or 
for services provided at a facility that includes a hospital’s emergency department or emergency 
services provided at a freestanding emergency facility . To our knowledge there are no freestanding 
emergency departments in Main e.  
 
MaineCare  presently pays a reduced  claims payment for  facility fee s for off campus  acute care 
hospital outpatient  services except for  services rendered at : 
 
a) A dedicated emergency department;  
b) Remote locations of a hospital (where inpatient services are furnished) and 
locations that are within 250 yards of a remote location of a hospital; and  
c) A location that was billing as an outpatient department of a hospital prior to 
November 2, 2015.  
 
In addition, MaineCare  restricts  separate acute care hospital outpatient facility fees  for outpatient 
diagnostic services and admission -related outpatient non -diagnostic services  for wholly owned and 
wholly operated outpatient services if these services are delivered within 1 -3 days of an inpatient 
admission (dependent  on type of admission) . The  technical /facility  component of  these fees is 
 
 bundled within the inpatient reimbursement  instead of paid additionally/separately via outpatient 
reimbursement.  
 
Presently, MaineCare is aligned with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) on its 
policy for facility fee payment  for acute care hospitals , except that MaineCare  has not required  the 
use of a claim modifier that would also reduc e facility fee payments for the off campus site  
exception s listed  in a) through c)  above.  Additionally, beginning in October 2015, MaineCare 
reduced f acility payment for non -emergency use of the  emergency department . 
 
If this bill passes, MaineCare would need to change current reimbursement practices for acute care 
hospitals to cease facility fee reimbursement for outpatient evaluation and management services, 
and applicable labs, diagnostic, and i maging services. The Department would need  to evaluate  
whether , given MaineCare billing configurations  across s ettings , the elimination of the outpatient 
facility fees for labs, diagnostics , and imaging services  would result in non -payment versus a 
targeted reduction in facility -based fees .  
 
The Department is unclear whether this bill also pertains to Critical Access Hospitals and 
Psychiatric Hospitals. These hospitals do bill for outpatient services , including  off-campus 
outpatient services , but do not bill  for distinct “facility fees.”  MaineCare currently does reimburse 
for facility costs for these off-campus  outpatient services and costs  associated with Critical Access 
Hospitals and Psychiatric Hospitals  through a cost settlement process, regardless of whether those  
services are provided at locations outside of 250 yards from the facility , or when the location began 
billing for outpatient services.  We recommend that the Committee clarify the hospitals to which 
this bill would apply  if they are to move forward .  
 
The rate reform system established last year in PL 2021 Ch. 639 created a process for ensuring  
data-driven, equitable, adequate,  and sustainable provider reimbursement that incents high value 
care. The schedule calls for hospital -related paymen ts to undergo this process in the near term. 
Implementation of the proposed changes in this bill simultaneously with the rate reform process 
established in law  would  require  addition al clarification , time, rulemaking , changes to the claims 
processing system , and a state plan amendment with CMS.  
 
Lastly, t he reporting requirements and oversight/compliance aspects of this bill would require 
additional  resources, staff, and infrastructure.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact us. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  
 

