"‘ 
601 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW T 202.778.3200 
“H I P South Building, Suite soo F 202.331.7487 
Washington, D.C. 20004 ahip.org 
Guiding Greater Health 
May ll, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Co-Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Co-Chair 
Joint Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services Committee 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: AHIP Comments on L.D. 1795, An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical 
Facility Fees' 
To Chairs Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Joint Health Coverage, Insurance, 
and Financial Services Committee, 
America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP) appreciates the opportunity to comment on LD 1795 which 
would prohibit facility fees under certain circumstances, and which would require an annual reporting on 
the amount of facility fees charged or billed. 
Every American deserves access to affordable, comprehensive, high-quality coverage and care. However, 
health care prices continue to escalate year after year, making coverage and care less accessible for 
everyone. We thus appreciate the Committee ’s interest in lowering health care costs for Maine patients 
and employers by looking at how hospitals are driving up health care costs. LD 1795 makes great strides 
in the right direction towards achieving this important goal. The transparency requirements will help to 
understand the true impact of facility fees on health care costs in the State. And the limitations on facility 
fees will help rein in costs, but these limitations should be broadened to bring meaningful savings to 
Mainers. 
T o better understand the distribution of growing health care costs, AI—HP analyzed data from commercial 
health insurance plans between 2018 and 2020 to determine how enrollees ’ premiums are spent. During 
this 3-year span, when all hospital spend is accounted for, it is the largest driver of premium cost at 42.2 
cents per dollar.‘ 
Evidence shows that consolidation in the hospital sector leads to higher health care prices for Americans? 
Hospital-acquired physician offices commonly bill patients for facility fees, even when the hospital- 
owned location is off-campus and not physically proximate to the hospital ’s main location. In these 
instances, there is often no change in either the physical location, services provided, or change in the 
acuity of patients seen. Thus, these locations are permitted to bill facility fees solely due to hospital 
ownership, Studies have shown that this type of consolidation is not associated with improved health 
1 
httpsz!/www.ahip.org/resources/wheredoes-your-health-care-dollar-go. 
Z https://ahigorg- 'A 
production.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/AHIP ,_Statement _, Senate "Judiciary,,hearing_vertical consolidation 06 ,1 
2 l9.gdf.
May ll, 2023 
Page 2 of3 
outcomesf ’ but is associated with higher physician prices, including commercial rates.‘ Thus, while 
patients can go to a variety of care settings to receive comparable care, their ﬁnancial costs may differ 
dramatically depending on the setting in which their care is delivered. Most patients, however, do not 
know about the cost difference until after the care is provided and they receive a bill. 
For example, medical imaging services are typically priced signiﬁcantly higher in hospital settings versus 
other settings, such as outpatient imaging centers. This higher payment structure has created a perverse 
incentive for hospitals to acquire physician practices and convert them to off-campus, provider-based 
hospital outpatient departments and thus allowed providers to‘ 
charge patients more with no demonstrable 
difference in care or outcomes. 
Facility fees are not isolated to physician practices, they have also made their way into free-standing 
emergency departments (EDs), which have sprung up in many states. Freestanding EDs are more akin to 
urgent care centers but charge out-of-control prices. It has been reported that some of these sites have 
charged more than $1,000 for a single COVTD-19 test that could be obtained elsewhere for closer to 
$100.5~ 
These practices increase premiums and out-of-pocket costs and make care less affordable for all patients 
and consumers. Speciﬁcally, payment differentials across sites of service create two problems for the 
health care system. First, it results in increased costs to patients and their health insurance providers for 
individual services at the point of care. Consumers often face lower co-pays for a visit to a physician ’s 
ofﬁce than a visit to a hospital facility, where they may have to pay cost sharing for a facility fee, in 
addition to cost sharing for professional services. Second, the prospect of higher reimbursement rates paid 
to hospital-affiliated practices is seen as a contributing factor to consolidation, as hospitals have an 
economic incentive to purchase independent physician offices to receive higher rates at those locations.6 
In fact, as of 2020, the majority of physicians in the U.S. (50.2%) worked outside of private practice.7 
Solutions that permit comparable payment for comparable services encourage an efﬁcient and 
competitive market that works for everyone. Additionally, a recent industry study found that if enacted, 
site-neutral payments, or the prohibition of all facility fees, would save patients and taxpayers close to 
$500 billion over ten years.8 
3 
See, e.g., Marah Noel Short, Vivian Ho, “Weighing the Effects of Vertical Integration Versus Market 
Concentration on Hospital Quality; ” Medical Care Research and Review (Feb. 2019); available at: 
https://journalssagepub.com/doi/ 10.1 177/ 10775 58719828938; TG Koch, BW Wendling, NE Wilson; “The Effects 
of Physician And Hospital Integration On Medicare Beneﬁciaries’ Health Outcomes; ” Rev Econ Stat. 2020: 1-38. 
doi: 10.1 162/rest_a_00924 
4 James Godwin, et al.; “The Association between Hospital~Physician Vertical Integration and Outpatient Physician 
Prices Paid by Commercial Insurers: New Evidence; ” Inquiry (Mar. 2021); available at: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC794073 6/. 
5 
https:/iwwwahip.org/documents/AH1P_1P-COVID19_TestPrices.pdf. 
5 Government Accountability Ofﬁce (GAO); “Increasing Hospital-Physician Consolidation Highlights Need for 
Payment Reform” (Dec. 2015); GAO-16-189; available at: https://www.gao.gov/assetsf2ao-1 6- I 89.pdf; MedPAC Report to Congress, Chapter 3 (March 2015); available at: 
https://Wwwmedpac.gov/wpcontent/uploads/import_data/scrape_ ﬁles/docs/default-source/reports/chapter~3- 
hospital-inpatient-and-outpatientservices-march-2015-report-.pd ﬁ MedPAC Report to Congress, Chapter 6 (June 
2022); available at: https://www.medpac.gov/wp~ 
content/uploads/2022/06/Jun22_Ch6_MedPAC_Report_to_Congress_SEC.pdf. 
7 
American Medical Association (AMA); “Recent Changes in Physician Practice Arrangements: Private Practice 
Dropped to Less Than 50 Percent of Physicians in 2020;” available at: https://www.ama-assn.org/system/ ﬁles/’2021- 
05/2020-prp-physician-practicearrangements.pdf. 
8 
https://www.bobs.comisites!defaultf ﬁles/ﬁle 
attachments/affordability/BCB SA __Issue ,_Brief _ Site_NeutraI_Pat/ment __Proposa1_2 .28 .23 .pdf.
May ll, 2023 
Page 3 of3 
AHIP and its members thus support eliminating facility fees in many outpatient settings to defend patients 
from overpaying. Health insurance providers ﬁght for lower prices for Mainers by using free-market 
tactics to negotiate lower prices with care providers and other elements of the health care ecosystem. 
Eliminating facility fees is a competition-enhancing approach that would improve affordability and access 
for everyone. 
LD 1795 is a great ﬁrst step towards this goal. However, we believe that it can be expanded to bring even 
more meaningful savings to Maine patients and employers. Currently, the prohibition on facility fees is 
narrowly limited to: 
0 Services provided at an urgent care clinic. 
0 Outpatient evaluation or management services at most sites. 
0 Speciﬁed outpatient, diagnostic, or imaging services to be determined on an annual basis. 
This still allows health providers to charge facility fees for a signiﬁcant portion of services whether in- 
hospital, in emergency departments, or in freestanding emergency facilities. As a result, Mainers will still 
face this surprise fee under many circumstances. Also, the Committee should also consider requiring 
health care providers to notify potential patients of facility fees they may incur if they receive services at 
that location. By broadening the limitations on facility fees and increasing transparency requirements, LD 
1795 would provide much stronger consumer protections, especially when the bill contains penalty 
provisions. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. AHIP and its members stand ready for further 
discussions on this important topic. 
Sincerely, 
Sarah Lynn Geiger, MPA 
Regional Director, State Affairs 
America’s Health Insurance Plans 
slgeiger@ahip.org / (609) 605-0748 
AHIP is the national association whose members provide health care coverage, services, and solutions to 
hundreds of millions of Americans every day. We are committed to market-based solutions and public 
private partnerships that make health care better and coverage more affordable and accessible for 
everyone. Visit www.ahip.org to learn how working together, we are Guiding Greater Health.
