Sierra Kent 
Bangor, Maine/Michigan 
Testimony in support of LD 1795, “An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain 
Medical Facility Fees” 
 
 
My name is Sierra Kent and I’m testifying in support of LD 1795, “An Act to Protect 
Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees.” 
 
I’m a traveling respiratory therapist and in February of this year, I went to the 
emergency room at Northern Light EMMC for suspected appendicitis. (Before going to 
the ER, I consulted with several of my doctor friends and they recommended that I visit 
the ER because it could be a matter of life and death.) Once I was at the ER, I spent all 
but a few minutes in the waiting room. I was given an IV with antibiotics and some 
Tylenol. For a split second, I was brought into an exam room while a doctor pushed on 
my stomach. I wasn’t in the exam room for more than five minutes.  
 
When I got the bill for the ER visit, the total bill was over $9,000, $4,605 of which was a 
facility fee charge. The balance for me to pay after insurance was $2,507. I was 
confused by the facility fee charge, so I asked some of my doctor friends about the 
charge and was told that it’s the charge for just walking into the ER. I thought, “Wow! I 
wish they would give you a warning before because a lot of people would probably turn 
around if they saw that.” There’s a lot of insurance fraud that happens, so I also called 
the hospital and requested an itemized bill, something that I still haven’t received. 
 
I was afraid that the bill would go to collections, so I figured at least that I could set up a 
payment plan. However, I found out that my only option is for a six-month payment plan 
in which I’d be paying almost $500/month, which I can’t pay right now. I’m having other 
health issues and I can’t work. This is so stressful. I have some savings, but I need that 
money to go toward my living expenses like rent.  
 
I know the medical bill is my responsibility because I received the services, but I would 
have liked to have had a heads up and some sort of estimate of how much my bill was 
going to be beforehand. That may have altered my choice of going to the ER. If I had 
known the bill was going to be $9,000 before insurance, I would have done something 
differently. Maybe I would have gone to an urgent care.  
 
I wish there was better communication and transparency about these costs. I know that 
if you don’t have health insurance, you can ask for an estimate of expected charges 
before you received services. We should be able to ask for that regardless of whether or 
not we have health insurance. 
Sierra  Kent
Bangor
LD 1795
Sierra Kent
Bangor, Maine/Michigan
Testimony in support of LD 1795, “An Act to Protect Patients by Prohibiting Certain 
Medical Facility Fees”
My name is Sierra Kent and I’m testifying in support of LD 1795, “An Act to Protect 
Patients by Prohibiting Certain Medical Facility Fees.”
I’m a traveling respiratory therapist and in February of this year, I went to the 
emergency room at Northern Light EMMC for suspected appendicitis. (Before going 
to the ER, I consulted with several of my doctor friends and they recommended that I 
visit the ER because it could be a matter of life and death.) Once I was at the ER, I 
spent all but a few minutes in the waiting room. I was given an IV with antibiotics 
and some Tylenol. For a split second, I was brought into an exam room while a doctor
pushed on my stomach. I wasn’t in the exam room for more than five minutes. 
When I got the bill for the ER visit, the total bill was over $9,000, $4,605 of which 
was a facility fee charge. The balance for me to pay after insurance was $2,507. I was 
confused by the facility fee charge, so I asked some of my doctor friends about the 
charge and was told that it’s the charge for just walking into the ER. I thought, 
“Wow! I wish they would give you a warning before because a lot of people would 
probably turn around if they saw that.” There’s a lot of insurance fraud that happens, 
so I also called the hospital and requested an itemized bill, something that I still 
haven’t received.
I was afraid that the bill would go to collections, so I figured at least that I could set 
up a payment plan. However, I found out that my only option is for a six-month 
payment plan in which I’d be paying almost $500/month, which I can’t pay right now.
I’m having other health issues and I can’t work. This is so stressful. I have some 
savings, but I need that money to go toward my living expenses like rent. 
I know the medical bill is my responsibility because I received the services, but I 
would have liked to have had a heads up and some sort of estimate of how much my 
bill was going to be beforehand. That may have altered my choice of going to the ER. 
If I had known the bill was going to be $9,000 before insurance, I would have done 
something differently. Maybe I would have gone to an urgent care. 
I wish there was better communication and transparency about these costs. I know 
that if you don’t have health insurance, you can ask for an estimate of expected 
charges before you received services. We should be able to ask for that regardless of 
whether or not we have health insurance.

