I
I
I 
TESTIMONY OF THE f 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
I 
WILDLIFEI 
.I 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 608 , 
"Resolve, to Improve Outcomes for Participants in the Antlerless DeerIPermit Lottery" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative LANDRY of Farmington.2
I
I 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Senator BLACK of Franklin I 
Representative WOOD of Greene, Representative BLIER of Buxton, Representative 
CAMPBELL of Orrington, Representative HEPLER of Woolwich, Representative 
O'CONNELL of Brewer, Representative PLU ECKER of Warren, Representative SOBOLESKI 
of Phillips, Representative TH ERIAULT of Fort Kent, Representative THORNE or Carmel 
DATE OF HEARING: March 13, 2023 I 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and membiers ofthe Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department in 
opposition to L.D. 608.'
‘ 
. \.‘ . ,. 
This resolve requires the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to‘ 
change the 
department's antlerless deer permit lottery to allow an applicant whose name is drawn 
to be assigned to another wildlife management district if the applicant's' first choices of 
district have already been assigned. It directs the department to model the changes on 
the relevant procedures of the department's moose public chance drawing. 
In 2022, we introduced a suite of changes to the way we regulate the harvest of 
antlerless deer. These changes were designed to improve our ability to meet doe 
harvest objectives by making the harvest of antlerless deer a more attractive option and 
by trying to get permits into the hands of hunters that are more likely to use them. One 
change made during this process was to reduce the number of Wildlife Management 
Districts (WMDs) a hunter may select when applying for their permit from 3 down to 2. 
When selecting WMDs for their permit, a hunter is essentially ranking the WMDs in 
which they are most likely to want to use their permit, formerly from 1 to 3 and now 
from 1 to 2. By removing the option to select a 3rd WMD, we eliminated the least
attractive hunter choice and improved the likelihood that if selected for a permit, it 
would be ih an area that the hunter was more likely to want to harvest an antlerless 
deer. This bill would not only revert that change but go a step further by allocating a 
permit to hunters for an area they did not select at all rather that is geographically 
nearby. We feel this approach will lead many hunters to. accept a permit in an area they 
are relatively unlikely to hunt. In doing so, we would decrease our ability to achieve doe 
harvest objectives except by issuing more permits, which would be a return to issues 
experienced previously with our deer permit system that we were trying to correct with 
the changes implemented in 2022. - lu
' 
I would beiglad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
,
|
l
'
l
|
1
l
