 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business  
in support of  
LD 890, An Act to Create the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment Fund  
 
March 21, 2023 
Amy.Winston@ceimaine.org  
Amy Winston, Senior Director, State Policy  
 
Dear Senator Curry,  Representat ive Roberts , and Distinguished Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Amy Winston . I live in Edgeco mb and am the Sen ior Policy Director at Coastal Enterprises, Inc.  
(CEI). CEI support s LD 890, An Act to Create the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment Fund.  
 As non-profit, mission -driven Community Development  Financial I nstitution (CDFI)  based in Brunswick , 
CEI works to build a just, vibrant and climate resilient future for p eople and communities in M aine and 
other  rural regions. We do this by integrating finance , business expertise , and policy solutions  to make the 
economy  more equitable . In FY 2022, CEI provided busi ness training or one -to-one business advi ce to 
3,132 entrepreneurs and invested  $26 million  in businesses in Maine and rural communities to support 
diverse business ownership and job creation  and 1,069 Maine people  accessed housing and financial 
coaching to help th em buy a home, prevent foreclosure, or increase their savings . CEI has invested  in 
childcare  for nearly four  decades.  
 The state’s Economic Development Strategy (2020 -2029)  describes  the demographi cs of an aging 
workforce, tight labor market and an economy and workfo rce in transition. The state needs to add 75,000 
workers by 2030. To  grow and attract talent  Maine needs to build a n enviable system of q uality, affordable 
childcare . To do this, we need to look closely at the thin ning ranks of childcare pro viders.  By establishing  
a dedicated , nonlapsing fund to support early child hood educators with student loan  repayment , LD 890  
directly addresses the “workforce behind the workforce”  and the quality of care.  Importantly, LD 890 fits 
into a comprehensive  solution to saving our childcare system . As a Maine Children ’s Alliance “Right from 
the Start ” coalition  partner  we will also be supporting LR 1449, An Act to Bu ild Maine ’s Economy by 
Supporting Child Care and W orking Families  – which will double the mon thly w age supplement for early 
childhood educators.  
 The business  owners we are working with in our ChildCare Business Lab  may  also benefit  from having this 
new option available  for their staff. We know that student loan repayment options  have helped  to 
successfully  locate needed medical and other prof essionals in underserved areas . This program  represent s 
one tool that offers  a step in the right direction  while lawmakers consider a  comprehensive approach  to 
solving  the childcare crisis . This bill creates a needed source of support to  help recruit  and retain  qualified, 
trained professionals to a field that has been decimated by  a retirement  exodus due and better wages in 
almost  any other sector . It is align ed with CEI’s Good Jobs  strategy  where we know that supporting 
workers is integral to b usiness success.  We also know that quality jobs lead to quality care . Professional 
training will impart best practice in curriculum and social and emotional development.  
 
 
The language  in this bill allocates $6 million in funds for 1,000 loan repayment recipients - and leaves  the 
definition of “un derserved ” to the rulemaking process. There is ample data on the statewide need for 
childcare workers . Applying an equity lens to this dat a for purposes of defining underserved will be critical 
to meeting  obje ctive  need in granting repayment  in a way that equitabl y serves our state and addresses  
our state’s  racial, econom ic, cultural,  and geographic  needs and disparities.   
 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input on LD 890 and to advocate fiercely for childcare . Please 
don’t  hesitate  to contact me if our C hildCare Business lab leaders can answer questions or provide 
additional information about growing good jobs and supporting diverse childcare business  development . 
  
 
 
 
 
