FIKIWE FINANCE AUTHORIIY 0F MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 890 
An Act to Create the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment Fund 
March 21, 2022 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement, and Business 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify Neither for Nor Against L.D. 890, An Act to Create the Child Care Provider 
Student Loan Repayment Fund. 
This bill would establish within the Department of Health and Human Services 
the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment Fund to support childcare workers in 
underserved areas of the state with the repayment of student loans. The Department 
would make awards on a first-come, first-served basis using certain criteria outlined in 
the bill and presumably via rulemaking. The awards would be up to $6,000 per recipient, 
but it’s unclear from the bill language whether this would be for a set term of years, one- 
time, or ongoing until presumably the awardee’s loan debt was paid off. The bill proposes 
$6 million in both years of the biennium to fund the program. 
If the sponsor, committee, and the Department wish for the Department to 
administer the program, that is fine with FAME. We are here simply as a resource and in 
case the stakeholders decide ultimately to have FAME instead administer the program 
based on our experience administering similar ones for other professions. 
As far as loan repayment programs similar to this in operation, we administer the 
Maine Dental Loan Repayment Program; the Nursing Education Loan Repayment 
Program; and the Maine Health Care Provider Loan Repayment Pilot Program. Childcare 
providers are also eligible to participate in FAME’s Educators for Maine Program. That 
program provides merit-based forgivable loans for Maine students enrolling in or 
pursuing undergraduate or graduate education degrees. Applicants must demonstrate an
l
interest in careers in education or childcare and that they are planning to work in Maine after graduation. 
Award amounts are based on available funding and are subject to change annually, but not less than $3,000 for undergraduate students and not less than $2,000 for graduate students. For academic year 23-24, awards are $5 ,0O0/year for undergraduates and $4,000/year for graduate students. Loans are forgiven if the recipient is an educator or speech pathologist in an eligible elementary or secondary school or at a quality childcare program in Maine. Loan recipients who are Jobs for Maine’s Graduates specialists may also be eligible for forgiveness in this program. 
Should the Legislature decide to enact and fund this bill, and task FAME with administering it, we would be happy to do so. We recognize the valuable role childcare providers play in Maine and appreciate the heavy burden their student debt places on their abilities to work in this critical field. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments. I will be happy to answer any questions you have.
2
