Joseph Baldacci THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 9 13 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Joe Baldacci introducing 
LD 890 “An Act to Create the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment Fund.” Before the 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
March 21, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. I am Senator 
Joe Baldacci, and I represent Senate District 9, which is made up of Bangor and Hermon. I am here today 
to present LD 890, “An Act to Create the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment Fund.” 
The child care worker shortage that we are facing here in Maine is a challenge that we need to address. I 
have received numerous calls from my constituents in Bangor and Hermon that there is major need for 
more qualified child care employees and the aftermath of the pandemic has only made the situation 
worse. The need for qualiﬁed individuals is incredibly important. After all, we are putting the lives of our 
children in the hands of our childcare workers, putting our trust and faith in them that they will take care 
of our kids and make sure they are healthy and safe. 
We put incredible demand on our child care workers, and much like our healthcare workers, we need 
systems in place to ensure greater recruitment and retention of these workers. That’s why this legislation 
establishes the Childcare Provider Student Repayment Fund to support childcare workers across the state 
in underserved areas with the repayment of student loans. The fund will be used on a ﬁrst come, ﬁrst 
serve basis to provide up to $6,000 annually to a child care provider. In order to be eligible: 
I They must work in an underserved area of the state, 
0 Work at least 30 hours a week for a licensed child care facility or a licensed family care provider, 
0 Have worked as a child care worker for at least 120 days before requesting a distribution of funds, 
have incurred student loans," 
0 Demonstrate that they have made a payment after reviving the funds to their student loans. 
I thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Chair, Heaifh emdH1:m(m Services Commitfee * State and Local Government Committee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-2585 * T0]/Free: I-800-423-6900 * TTY: 7)‘! 
Joe. Baldacci@Zegis!afz1re. mafnagov * fegislafzere. ma1' ne.g0v/senate
