Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 890 
“An Act to Create the Child Care Provider Student Loan Repayment 
Fund ” 
 
March 2 1, 2023  
Krysta West , Deputy Director  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Curry , Representative Roberts  and members of the Committee 
on Innovation, Development, E conomic Advancement and Business. I’m Krysta West , 
the Deputy Director of the Maine Forest Products Council. On be half of the Council, I 
am submitting testimony today in support of LD 890, “ An Act to Create the Child Care 
Provider Student Loan Repayment F und.”  
 
Last fall, the Council took a simple poll of our members and quickly found that one of the greatest barriers to the  forest products  industry at this time is the lack of available 
workforce. This issue is particularly challenging for rural businesses where the services required to support a robust workforce are lacking.  
 Without safe, affordable and local options, parents are faced with the tough choice of 
securing employment and picking up shifts or caring for children. Unfortunately, these 
challenges  have only become tougher since the pandemic caused a significant number 
of facilities to permanently close  and providers to leave the industry. I can attest 
firsthand that e ven right here in the City of Augusta, le ngthy w ait lists are common for 
childcare services, especially for infants and toddlers.  
 
As a result, some larger empl oyers within the industry have  started taking a proactive 
approach and are working to open new facilities in unders erved communities  or secure 
spaces at existing daycare providers. T o support this trend, and hopefully enable more 
employers to address this pressing issue, the Council has joined a diverse coalition this 
session supporting a bipartisan bill induced by Senator Trey Stewart , LD 1222, “ An Act 
to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer -supported Tax Credit ." 
 
While it is said that if you build it, they will come, these efforts don’ t address one  factor 
that has driven the daycare shortage , and that is the lack of childcare providers . We view 
LD 890 as potentially a useful tool to recruit new providers to the childcare industry in underserved areas of the state.
 
 For these reasons, the Maine Forest Products Council urges your support of LD 890. Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
 
