 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Child and Family Services  
11 State House Station  
2 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel.: (207 ) 624 -7900 ; Toll Free: (877) 680 -5866  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) ; Fax: (207) 287-5282  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
  
 
March 21 , 2023  
 
Senator Chip Curry , Chair  
Representative Tiffany Roberts , Chair  
Members, Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement , and  Business  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement, and Business : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 890, An Act to Create the Child Care Provider 
Student Loan Repayment Fund . This bill proposes the establishment of a student loan repayment fund 
for child care  providers. The fund would provide up to $6,000 per year in reimbursement for student 
loan payments to child care workers employed in underserved areas of the state.  
 
While OCFS is supportive of work to incentivize employment in the field of early care and  education, 
OCFS is not equipped to administer a program like the one proposed in this bill. The Finance 
Authority of Maine (FAME) already administers tuition repayment/relief programs and FAME or a 
similar entity should administer this program. OCFS does not have the requisite expertise or capacity 
to design and implement a system of student loan repayment.  
 
In addition, OCFS would recommend that the Committee consider how the bill could be amended to 
include parameters for the repayment program that enco urage child care providers to obtain education 
in a concentration area relevant to work with young children (child development, early childhood 
education, etc.)  This would ensure that the program not only incentivizes work in the field but also 
serves to e nhance the quality of early care and education opportunities in the state. OCFS agrees that 
there is a need to increase the accessibility of early care and education and that staffing can be  a barrier 
that prevents providers from being able to fill all ava ilable/licensed slots. OCFS’ initiatives have been 
designed to both increase capacity and increase quality. These initiatives include scholarship 
opportunities and the workforce stipends . 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
       
      Dr. Todd A. Landry , Director  
      Office of Child and Family Service s 

