LINDA HASKELL
GARLAND
LD 1477
LD 1477 - RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Align the Proceedings for Circulating Written Petitions for People's Vetoes and Direct
Initiatives with Federal Law
Testimony opposing LD 1477 - RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Align the Proceedings for Circulating Written Petitions for 
People's Vetoes and Direct Initiatives with Federal Law LINDA HASKELL,  co-chair
republican party of Garland
Good Morning, Speaking to the Chair person, Senators and Representatives of this 
committee
I oppose the following changes;
Constitution, Art IV, Pt. Third, ยง20, as amended by CR, c. 1, is not to be further 
amended by
adding the following;  Section 20. Meaning of words "electors," "people," "recess of
 Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written
 petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions for direct
 initiative. As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words 
"electors"
1 and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; "recess 
of the
 Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session of the Legislature; 
"statewide
 election" means any election held throughout the State on a particular day; "measure"
 means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the people, or 2 or more such, 
or part
 or parts of such, as the case may be; "circulator" means a person who solicits 
signatures for 
written petitions, and the lining out of;  ", and who must be a resident of this State and
whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the 
circulator's 
residence as qualified to vote for Governor" as written in LD1477.
We The People oppose further manipulation of our Maine Constitution. It appears this
is another 
attempt to further the destruction of the Maine Constitution as we have known it since
"October 29, 
1819", 204 years ago, our forefathers worked to make a better life for the residents of 
the State of Maine. 
We The People are witnessing the crumbling of the future for our descendants. 
Thank you for your attention. Are there any questions?
Testimony in opposition of LD1477, LINDA HASKELL. Garland, Maine
