_ _§ -7.. 
*5- 
1% 
JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR STATE OF MAINE 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS POLICY 
162 STATE HOUSE STATION 
19 UNION STREET 
FIRST FLOORt 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0162 ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES 
KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
COMMISSIONER 
OFFICE or CANNABIS POLICY 
JOHN HUDAK DIRECTOR 
April 24, 2023 
Re: LD 1757 — An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Reporting and Tracking 0fAdult Use 
Cannabis~ 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
I am John Hudak, Director of the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP) and I am before you today to 
provide testimony on behalf of our office in vigorous opposition to LD 1757, because this bill 
will: 
0 Completely undermine Maine’s adult use regulatory framework; 
0 Exacerbate existing barriers to banking by cannabis businesses; 
0 Subject businesses owners and the State to increased federal scrutiny; and 
0 J eopardize the health and safety of adult use cannabis consumers. 
It also creates an incredibly concerning precedent that threatens the certainty and enforceability 
of contracts with the State, which could lead to increased contracting costs for all state agencies, 
not just OCP, as potential vendors attempt to account for the risk of future legislative 
intervention in their contracts with the State of Maine. 
Tracking, testing and taxes are the three foundational elements of any well-regulated cannabis 
program and this bill would effectively eliminate inventory tracking, make it nearly impossible 
to effectively administer the state’s mandatory testing system, and would make it difficult to 
verify that taxes are appropriately remitted in this all-cash industry. 
As you heard last Tuesday, we have just completed contract ri 
enegotiations to implement the last 
round of fundamental inventory tracking changes the legislature enacted, creating a ﬁrst in the 
nation structure for ﬂexible size batch tagging (FSBT). This bill would overtum those good faith 
negotiations and leave adult use cannabis program participants and OCP in a lurch while the 
state spends millions of dollars to develop the inadequate and ill-conceived “portal” described in 
this bill. There is simply no switch that we can ﬂip to implement this portal, and regardless of 
whether the costs of developing and implementing this system are borne by the State, licensees 
will suffer incalculable costs when banks and ﬁnancial institutions refuse to assume the risks 
associated with banking cannabis businesses. 
Indeed, in remarks submitted to this committee last week, the Maine Credit Union League 
indicated: 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
Any proposed change that would widen the gap between what is accepted by 
federal guidance and what is required at the state increases the challenge in 
providing cannabis banking in Maine. Currently cannabis businesses need to 
decipher the differing regulations between what is required by the state and what 
is required to access banking services. As much as possible, we would urge the 
committee to create parity between these regulatory requirements. Doing so will 
increase access and availability to banking service for camrabis businesses. ‘ 
It's not only federal banking regulators who are keenly aware of the important relationship 
between robust inventory tracking and a well-regulated cannabis industry. No other state in the 
country has implemented a camiabis reporting system as insufficient as the one contemplated in 
this bill, because to do so would swiftly upset the tenuous nonenforcement relationship between 
state cannabis programs and the Department of Justice that has existed since the publication of 
the Ogdenz and Cole3 Memoranda. 
We want to be clear: no other state is doing what is proposed in this bill, and the states that have 
tried to implement their own tracking or reporting systems quickly discovered just how 
cumbersome, inadequate and expensive is a homegrown system to operate. Washington state 
regulators have shared with our ofﬁce the challenges of the reporting system developed by that 
state.4 At best, they described their system as unable to adequately address their needs as 
regulators and at worst completely unsatisfactory to regulators and licensees alike. Washington 
has between 8 and 13 full time IT and data analytics staff holding that system together, and 
reports from our colleagues in Vermont are even more concerning. We are certain that licensees 
in Maine’s adult use program would immediately grow frustrated with systems like 
Washington ’s, that often cannot effectively integrate with third party software; or the one in 
Vermont that requires licensees to upload Excel spreadsheets and have an agency staffer 
manually verify the mandatory test results of every single cannabis item bound for retail sale. 
Turning to testing for a moment: this bill does not contemplate the tracking of the mandatory test 
results required under Maine’s existing testing law, nor does it account for the inevitable delays 
in inventory transfers that will result from delays in matching mandatory test results with 
whatever records are submitted through the portal contemplated in this bill. Maine law is clear: 
no cannabis or cannabis product can be sold to a consumer unless it has passed all mandatory 
testing. If this bill is enacted the Legislature will have to decide whether it wants to subject 
licensees to long delays in moving their product to retail while test results are manually veriﬁed 
to the best of our ability based upon the minimal reporting requirements of this bill, or whether it 
is acceptable for consumersto be exposed to contaminants like pathogenic bacteria, heavy metals 
or extraction solvents. 
1 
See Testimony from the Maine Credit Union League, Neither For Nor Against LD 1529, submitted April 19, 2023, 
and available at: https://legislature.maine.gov/testimony/resources/VLA20230419Simonisl33263845165277263.pdf 
2 Memorandum for Selected United States Attorneys, issued October 19, 2009 by Deputy Attorney General David 
W. Ogden, available at: https:1/www.justice.gov/sites/default/ ﬁles/opa/legacy/2009/l O/19/medical-mar ﬁuanapdf 
3 
Memorandum for All United States Attorneys, issued August 29, 2013 by Deputy Attorney General James M. Cole, 
available at: https://www.justice. gov/iso/opa/resources/30520138291327 56857467.pdf 
4 Washington state regulators shared with OCP staff that their in-house reporting platform was intended to bea 
stopgap measure until the state is able to secure a contract with an inventory tracking system vendor. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
w\vw.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
Finally, it is important to note that the inventory tracking system infrastructure we have in Maine 
is not only effective as a regulators tool, providing our ofﬁce with real-time access to inventory 
tracking and testing information, but it also serves as a deterrent to diversion of cannabis by 
requiring licensees to account for all cannabis within the system from the time it is planted to the 
time it is sold to a consumer. It is difficult to overstate how crucial is robust inventory tracking 
to Maine’s adult use cannabis program: from testing to taxes to consumer conﬁdence in the 
cannabis they are consuming to providing our 15 compliance staff with the information they 
need to monitor licensees across 35,000+ square miles of this state, inventory tracking is critical 
to maintaining the future of Maine’s adult use market. 
We thank the committee for its time and we’1l do our best to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
wwwmaine.gov/dafs/ocp/
