 
 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1757  
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Reporting and Tracking of Adult Use 
Cannabis  
Join t Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
April 2 4, 2023  
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs,  
My name is Robert Caverly and I serve as the Vice President of Advocacy & Outreach at the 
Maine Credit Union League. The League proudly represents Maine’s 50 credit unions and 
more  than 72 5,000 members statewide. Please accept our testimony neither for nor against  LD 
1757 ; An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Reporting and Tracking of Adult Use Cannabis .  
As this committee is aware,  providing financial services to the cannabis industry is a challenge 
that requires compliance with federal requirements. Despite the challenge, Maine  has credit 
unions that remain committed to providing this important community service, as they have 
done since 2014.  
Maine’s  current regulations for the adult-use cannabis industry  more closely align with national 
standards.  This consistency means that it is far easier to provi de financial services to adult -use 
cannabis providers and  is part of why we have consistently urged this committee to make the 
medical program reporting requirements more similar to adult-use, rather than widening the 
gap.  
Deviating from the current law w ill likely decrease the access to financial services that these 
businesses have  due to financial regulatory requirements . It is our concern that if LD 1757 were 
to pass, adult -use providers that reduce the tracking requirements as proposed will lose access  
to financial services due to being out of compliance with the expectations of federal financial 
regulators .  
If the goal of this committee is to ensure a well -run cannabis industry that has access to financial 
services, we would encourage the alignment of  Maine law with national standards  and to look 
to states that have a robust and well banked cannabis -industry . Indeed, that is the perspective 
we have represented in our testimony on LD 355, 788, and 1529, as well as in our letter this 
committee and legisl ative leadership  in January 2022.  
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on this important topic. If the League can be 
of any assistance during the deliberations of this bill or others similar, please do not hesitate 
to contact us.  
