l\/IAINE ASSOCIATION 
or 
l~Ii~:At.TH PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 4/24/23‘ 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Support of LD 15332 
An Act to Provide Consistent Billing Practices by Health Care Providers 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans (MeAHP). Our 
plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, Community Health Options, Harvard 
Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private and non-proﬁt insurance carriers provide or 
administer health insurance coverage to about 600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to 
improve the health of Maine people by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
The National Provider Identiﬁer (NPI) system was developed pursuant to the Administrative Simpliﬁcation 
provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). HIPAA requires that covered 
entities (i.e., health plans, health care clearinghouses, and those health care providers who transmit any health 
information in electronic form in connection with a transaction for which the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services has adopted a standard) use NPIs in standard transactionsl 
Maine’s networks of health care providers have undergone tremendous consolidation and expansion in recent 
years. MaineHealth completed a consolidation of hospitals in 2018 to become Maine’s largest healthcare 
organization. It characterized the consolidation as an opportunity to bring members into a single organization so“ . . .resources can now ﬂow more easily among various parts of the health care system.”2 - 
It is important that accuracy is not shortchanged in the drive for scale and efficiency. 
Health care costs and patient outcomes are optimized when care is provided and billed through the appropriateu 
setting. LD 15 33 will improve the accuracy of billing and the affordability of health care services by requiring 
providers to use a distinct NPI for an off-campus outpatient department of a facility and a standardized claims 
form for professional services. 
The members of the Maine Association of Health Plans support this important improvement to health care 
billing and urge a vote of ought to pass. 
1 
https://www,cmsgov/Regutations-and-Guidance/Administrative-SimpIification/Unique-Identi ﬁer/Uniqueldenti ﬁersFAQs, accessed 
4/23/23' 
2 The Courier—Gazette, 10/29/2018, https://kno><.\/iIiagesouocom/news/consolidation-of-IocaE-health-care-groups 
ﬁnalized/article c8f24a33-d4Oe —587f-af59-347b62c99eed.htmt 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
