l\/lainel-lealth 
Testimony of Katie Fullam Harris 
In Opposition to LD 1533 
“An Act to Provide Consistent Billing Practices by Health Care Providers ” 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the ]oint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, I am Katie Fullam Harris, and I am here to testify in opposition to LD 
1533. 
Very simply, this bill is intended to limit payments to hospital-based centers that provide care to Maine’s 
communities. The types of services that would be impacted include infusion therapy and radiology therapy 
centers, behavioral health clinics, and hospice and home health providers that operate under a hospita1 ’s 
license. These are services that will not be sustained should payments be reduced to hospital-based 
providers. 
In addition, the vehicle that this bill uses to achieve such savings is the requirement that every outpatient 
department of a hospital or facility obtain and use its own unique National Provider Identiﬁer As the 
bill is drafted, every hospital-based home health agency and hospice provider would have to apply fora 
separate NPI number for every home they visit. The unnecessary administrative burden associated with that 
would likely result in signiﬁcant reductions in the availability of these critically important services. 
W/hile we can all express frustration and concern with the manner in which health care is paid for today, the 
reality is that Maine’s hospitals are the backbone of our state’s health care infrastructure. Hospital-based 
providers are ensuring access to care to all Maine people — regardless of their insurance status - throughout 
our state. We do not see for-proﬁt companies clamoring to set up services and employ local people in places 
like Rumford, Farmington or Pittsﬁeld. Nor do we see for~proﬁt providers opening their services widely to 
those who rely upon MaineCare or who are uninsured. 
It’s Maine’s non-proﬁt hospitals that provide access to an array of inpatient and ambulatory care throughout 
Maine. \X/hile for-proﬁt companies seek a ﬁnancial return on investment for their shareholders, Maine’s 
hospitals seek to meet then missions and visions, such as MaineHealth ’s own “W/orking Together so our 
Communities are the Healthiest in America. ” 
The current health care system is extremely fragile. Hospitals are struggling ﬁnancially, and they are doing all 
that they can to maintain access to services during this challenging time. The ﬁnancing of hospitals is likea 
piece of fabric: if you pull one thread, you can end up unraveling the entire piece. This bill is an example of 
an attempt to pull a thread that could result in the demise of a system that delivers excellent quality care to 
the people of Maine. 
110 Free Street ' Portland, ME 04101 Phone: 207-661-7001 Fax: 207—661—7029 mainehealth.org
