northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1533 An Act to Provide for Consistent Billing Practices by Health Care Providers 
 
Testimony in Opposition 
April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in opposition to this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with more than 10,000 employees statewide. 
 
Northern Light Health outpatient service providers treat more patients from medically  
underserved populations who tend to be sicker and more complex to care for than 
patients treated in independent physician offices and ambulatory surgical centers.  The 
American Hospital Association completed a national study comparing hospital 
outpatient services to independent providers.  The data documents that patients cared 
for by hospital outpatient providers are: 
 
• 73% more likely to be dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid; 
• 52% more likely to be enrolled in Medicare through disability or end-stage renal 
disease (ESRD); 
• 31% more likely to be non-white; 
• 62% more likely to be under age 65 and, therefore, eligible for Medicare based 
on disability, ESRD or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); and 
• 11% more likely to be over 85 years old 
 
The costs of care delivered by Northern Light Health hospitals and practices is different 
than independent practices or ambulatory surgery centers as care we for the unique 
needs of each community we serve. Hospitals are the only health care provider  that 
must maintain emergency standby capability 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. This 
standby role is built into the cost structure of our hospitals and supported by revenue 
from direct patient care — a situation that does not exist for any other type of provider. 
We provide 24/7 emergency care to all who come through our doors, regardless of 
ability to pay or insurance status.  All services, including hospital outpatient provider 
services, are included in the Northern Light Health charity care and financial assistance 
policies. 
 
Hospitals are also subject to more comprehensive licensing, accreditation and 
regulatory requirements than other settings. This includes the Emergency Medical 
Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), stricter requirements for disaster preparedness and 
 response, stringent ventilation and infection control codes, quality assurance, 
accreditation, and fire and life safety codes.   
 
Caring for people in our communities irrespective of payer source results in a much 
higher volume of Medicare and MaineCare patients than independent practices that do 
not have the same community service mission.  This results in significant government 
underpayment for our services,  In fiscal year 2022 we experienced the following unpaid 
cost of public programs: Medicare $208,557,110 and Medicaid $112,656,916. More 
information regarding the benefit Northern Light Health provides to communities 
throughout the State of Maine is detailed in our annual community benefit report. 
https://northernlighthealth.org/getattachment/Community-Health-Needs-
Assessment/Community-Benefit-Reports/Community-Benefit-2022-online-version-
FINAL.pdf.aspx?lang=en-US  
 
Northern Light Health is proud of our service to the people of Maine during the COVID-
19 pandemic.  We administered over 400,000 doses of vaccines to support public health 
and cared for thousands of COVID-19 patients that were acutely ill.  We continue to 
work our way through recovering from the significant financial impact.  Our expenses in 
FY 22 were $168 million dollars higher than they were in FY 21 resulting in a financial 
loss of $132 million dollars.  We are not an outlier, hospitals in Maine and nationally are 
struggling financially. 
 
Should this harmful bill reducing payment for hospital outpatient services pass, hospitals 
will be forced to reduce or eliminate outpatient services.  Hospitals and health systems 
no longer have the operating margins to offset losses.  We ask that you vote in 
opposition to this bill. 
 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
