 
 
 
 
1302 
 
 
Senator Tipping 
Representative Rhoeder 
Members of the Labor & Housing Committee 
 
Re: LD 1302, An Act to Create a Rebuttable Presumption Under the 
Workers’ Compensation Law for Line Workers diagnosed with Post-traumatic 
Stress Disorder 
 
My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine.  I am 
providing these comments in opposition to LD 1302 on behalf of Maine’s 
consumer-owned utilities known as the Dirigo Electric Cooperative.  Those 
companies are Van Buren Light & Electric, Houlton Water Company, Eastern 
Maine Electric Cooperative, Fox Island Electric Cooperative, Madison Electric 
Works, Kennebunk Power & Light, Isle Au Haut, and the electric facility at 
Brunswick Landing. 
 
The consumer-owned utilities’ position is that a rebuttal presumption that 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) arises out of the course of employment 
is not appropriate for utility line workers because their work typically does 
not involve the level of stress and human suffering necessary to presume such 
a disorder. 
 
Mayo Clinic defines PSTD as a “mental health condition that’s triggered by a 
terrifying event – either experiencing it or witnessing it.  Symptoms may 
include flashbacks, nightmares and severe anxiety, as well as uncontrollable 
thoughts about the event.:  the personnel identified in the existing language of 
39-A MRSA sec. 201, sub-3-A – law enforcement officers, correction officers, 
E911 dispatchers, firefighters, and emergency medical services persons ~~ 
witness terrifying events quite frequently that often involve a great deal of 
human suffering along with situations involving abuse, injury, violence and 
death appropriately acknowledges the impact of such work conditions on 
employees. 
 
 
 
Utility line workers perform the vital work of building, maintaining and 
repairing the electric grid, a rule that becomes more difficult and potentially 
dangerous in extreme weather conditions.  Consumer-owned utilities value 
their employees, implement safety protocols, provide safety gear, and 
regularly assess how much time can be spent working in extraordinary 
situations when a number of factors need to be taken into account for the 
protection of the individual line workers, coworkers and the public.  Line 
workers can take breaks during difficult tasks, wait for extreme weather to 
subside, and perform line repairs after traffic accidents are cleared by 
emergency medical personnel.  The nature of line work does not necessitate 
emergency action in life-or-death situations that create flashbacks, 
nightmares, and uncontrollable thoughts.  The work performed by utility line 
workers – much like construction workers – is simply not comparable to 
emergency personnel concerning the events that necessitate a rebuttable 
presumption for work-related PTSD. 
 
While it is possible for a line worker to be diagnosed with PTSD resulting from 
work-related stress, such an event would be highly unusual for the profession 
and too extraordinary to create a statutory presumption.  Furthermore, the 
increased cost of insurance coverage to provide for the increased risk 
exposure of possibly having to rebut the statutory presumption is cost 
prohibitive to utilities and their consumers. 
 
Respectfully, the COUs oppose LD 1302.  
 
 
 
 
 
