Testimony in Opposition to LD 1302 
An Act to Create a Rebuttab/e Presumption Under the Workers’ Compensation Law for 
Line Workers Diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
April 13, 2023 
Presented by Elizabeth Brogan 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Committee on Labor 
and Housing, my name is Elizabeth Brogan and I am the Executive Director of the 
Workers’ Compensation Coordinating Council and Maine Council of Self-Insurers. I 
appear before you today in opposition to LD 1302. 
Mental injuries caused by mental stress, including post-traumatic stress disorder, are 
compensable under the Maine Workers’ Compensation Act for all kinds of workers, 
including line workers, based on the individual merits of each case. Work stress which is 
”extraordinary and unusual" in comparison to the average employee in Maine, is an 
element of the claim. The Legislature did not limit mental stress claims to any single 
group, but left it up to the fact-finders, highly qualified and experienced Administrative 
Law Judges, to determine if the requirements of the claim have been met. Occupations 
that include more stressful work may have more mental injury claims, and the claims 
may be more easily made, without the need for further presumptions in the Act. 
Injuries should be presumed to have arisen out of and in the course of employment 
(basically, at work and because of work) where circumstances are so compelling that the 
only rational inference can be that the injury is work-related. Where a presumption is 
created, facts are assumed to be true from the outset, a thumb on the scales, favoring 
one party over another, forcing the employer to disprove the presumed facts. Wherea 
presumption is created, it will be applied in every instance in that category of claim, 
regardless of the individual circumstances of the case, and removing from the factfinder 
the discretion to consider the case as they would any other. 
Where there is no presumption, claims by line workers, and claims by all other groups of 
workers, for all types ofinjuries, are decided based on the individual merits of the case, 
consistent with the construction language in §153 (3) of the Act, which states that ”Al| 
workers’ compensation cases must be decided on their merits” and that the Act “is not 
to be given a construction in favor of the employee," or of the employer. 
For these reasons, we urge the committee to vote "ought not to pass" on LD 1302. l am 
happy to answer any questions.
