MAINE STATE 
CO.MMi£RCE 
Q/0’/re voice Q/"ii/1'4 ‘/1' /1e /2!/.s‘i/rem 
Testimony of 
Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 1302 An Act to Create a Rebuttable Presumption Under the Workers’ Compensation Law for Line Workers 
Diagnosed with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder 
April 13, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, my name 
is Peter Gore, and I am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street Solutions, and I am here on behalf of 
my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association representing both large and 
small businesses speaking to you today in opposition to L.D. 1302 An Act to Create a Rebuttable Presumption 
Under the Workers’ Compensation Law for Line Workers Diagnosed with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. 
As drafted, LD 1302 would provide the same type of presumption to line workers and PTSD, as had been 
provided to various public sector employees, including firemen, EMT’s and police officers. The difference is that 
this presumption will be for the first time provided to a private sector worker, and thus impacting the entire 
workers compensation premium base. We are opposed. 
The fact is, PTSD claims are already compensable under the act. The caveat to this is that it must be 
proven that they arose out of or in the course of work. Any injury should be presumed to have arisen at work and 
because of work. The factual circumstances surrounding any viable workers comp claim should be so compelling 
that the only rational inference can be that the injury is work-related. Presumptions, whether on the public or 
private sector should be rare because they are essentially a thumb on the scales, favoring one party over another. 
In the case of LD 1302, it would force the employer to disprove the presumed facts. 
Up until this bill, in the private sector where there is no presumption on any injury, claims by line workers, 
as well as claims by all other workers, for all types of injuries, are decided based on the individual merits of the 
case with a level playing field. The Workers’ Compensation Act should ideally provide a fair system for all of Maine's 
workers and employers, not one with different standards, depending on the type of work performed, with some 
groups of employees favored and not others. 
Finally, if line workers are to be given special treatment for their PTSD cases, who will be next. Workers in 
different sectors of our economy sometimes are exposed to disturbing visages. It might be an accident or injury 
that involves themselves, a fellow worker, a member of the public, anyone. Who is to say they are any less 
deserving of a similar presumption going forward. Where do you draw the line? Are all PTSD claims to be givena 
presumption unilaterally? if so, what does that mean for costs and comp insurance rates? 
The Chamber is not unsympathetic to any worker exposed to an event that results in a PTSD claim. 
However, we know that those cases are already compensable under the act. Like any other comp claim, they 
simply must be proven that they arose out of work. inserting a rebuttable presumption into private sector workers 
comp claims is the thumb on the scale, and begins the process of socializing all such claims across the 
28 State Street, Suite 101 E1 Augmsta, Maine 04330-5630 E1 tel (207) 6234568 B fax (207) 622-7723 website: wviwv.tnainechatnbenorg e-mail: info@n1ainechamber.0t ‘g
MAINE 5% T A F, 
CHAMBER 
C ti 3 ii/ll ll? iii (X51 
l/'/'26 v:,i/' 04? Q/ll//1!//Rt? Z22/.\‘!i;c'f»'>; 
premium base. Not unlike the experience with public sector employees, the call for an ever-expanding 
number of presumptions for an expanding universe of different workers is sure to follow. We are opposed to this 
as a public policy change to our workers comp law and urge this committee to give LD 1302 an ought not to pass 
recommendation. Thank you for your time. 
28 State Street, Suite 101 El Augusta, Maine 04330-5630 8 tel (207) 623-4568 B fax (207) 622-7723 B website: ww\v.mainecliainberxorg El c-mail: info@n1:1inecliambenorg
