MAINE SOCIETY OF 
HEALTH SYSTEM PHARMACISTS 
P.Q. BOX 261 Augusta, |\/IE 04332 I 207-294-8800 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
RE: Testimony, LD 1395 An Act to Increase Transparency Regarding Certain Drug Pricing Programs 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and Financial 
Services Committee: 
My name is Amy Downing, I am a resident of Smithfield and the Executive Director of the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists. Today I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists, an organization that has more than 300 members statewide 
and primarily represents individual Pharmacists, Technicians and students who practice in a health- 
system setting. I am testifying in opposition to LD 1395. 
LD 1395 seeks to increase transparency on the discounted drug pricing provided to safety net 
healthcare organizations, but does not state the purpose behind the information that is being 
collected. It is worth noting that this bill does not seek is to gather information regarding how 
organizations utilize these savings to benefit their communities, which cannot be understated. 
Under reimbursement by third party payers, rising costs of supplies and pharmaceuticals, labor 
shortages, and rising bad dept all have been contributing to steep financial losses for hospitals 
across the nation and right here in our State of Maine. This has led to hospitals closing down 
services, hospital beds, and swelling emergency departments throughout the State. It is also worth 
noting that this bill as written only applies to Hospitals, when Federally Qualified Health Centers 
and others receive 340b discounts under this program. If this bill were to pass, it should apply to all 
340b covered entities as defined by HRSA and not just Hospitals. 
States including Arkansas, Georgia, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Minnesota, Montana, North Dakota, 
Ohio, Oregon, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Utah, Vermont, and West Virginia have all 
been directing their efforts at passing legislation to protect the 34Ob program that is under constant 
threat from pharmaceutical companies seeking to skirt around providing these discounts to 
improve their already substantial profits in the United States. The data sought to be publicly 
reported under this bill is also exactly the information that is being sought by pharmaceutical 
companies to further their narrative that hospitals are using these discounts for profit rather than 
to benefit patients. Anyone that follows the news here in Maine or follows the markets knows that 
more than half of the nation's hospitals have reported operating losses last year, while 
manufacturers attempting to avoid these discounts have posted record profits. Rather than 
imposing additional burdensome requirements on our already struggling hospitals, I would urge our 
State legislature to oppose this bill and consider joining these other States in protecting our 
healthcare institutions access to the 340b program. 
The Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists would be happy to work with the committee in 
any way we can on LD 1395. Please reach out if we can be of service. 
Kind Regards, 
Amy Downing
MAINE SOCIETY 0: 
>1 HEALTH SYSTEM PHARMACISTS 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 I 207-204~88OO 
Executive Director 
Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists
