l\’l|—lA Maine Hospital Association 
MA|NE'S LEADING 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
COMMENTS OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
In Opposition To 
LD 1395 — An Act to Increase Transparency Regarding Certain Drug Pricing Programs 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Heath Care, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee, my name is Jeffrey Austin and I am here on behalf of the Maine Hospital 
Association to testify in opposition to LD 1395. 
The 340b drug discount program for healthcare providers is a complicated federal program. It is 
extensively regulated and provider audits are extensive. In Maine, providers such as FQHCs, 
Planned Parenthood and safety-net hospitals serving low-income and other at-risk populations 
qualify to participate in the program. Curiously, Planned Parenthood and FQHCs were not 
included in the transparency requirements of this bill. 
Hospitals in Maine that qualify for the drug discount program — roughly 24 out of 36 hospitals— 
are incredibly reliant on the program: we estimate that it reduces drug expenses for hospitals by 
roughly $300-350 million per year. 
Because of the scale of this program, lots of different groups have been trying to capture that 
savings for themselves that Congress umnistakably intended to beneﬁt safety net hospitals. 
HRSA is the federal oversight agency. Here is the very brief description of the purpose of the 
34Ob program on the oversight entity’s website: 
The 3 40B Program enables covered entities to stretch scarce federal resources as far as possible, 
reaching more eligible patients and providing more comprehensive services. 
The 340b program is not a carrier discount program, a consumer discount program, or a discount 
program for PBMs or even government payers. It’s for hospitals. It is the subject of legislation in 
Congress, it is under attack in multiple courts, and misinfonnation is being spread about the 
purpose of the program. 
This committee saw legislation last session that was modeled on legislation that has been 
successfully enacted in approximately a dozen other states across the country that would protect
340b phannacies, patients, and providers like hospitals. Arkansas led the way with this legislation 
and their law, as was explained last session, is in the courts. So far, Arkansas has prevailed against 
attempts to undermine those state protections. 
This committee voted against that legislation. The Committee discussion largely focused on how 
the 340b program is a federal program, the state has no regulatory oversight or policy role in the 
340b program. Furthermore, the Committee noted that there were multiple lawsuits going. The 
Committee declined to get involved and the bill was killed. 
All of those things were true then and remain true today, and we presume you will again choose 
to kill this legislation to get involved in the 340b program. 
Hospitals don’t oppose transparency. In fact, they are one of the most transparent industries in 
Maine. 
Here is just a sample of publicly available information about hospitals: 
0 Hospital Cost Reports — Hospitals are required by law to ﬁle with DHHS copies of their 
“cost reports” that run in the hundreds of pages detailing all of the costs incurred by the 
hospital. These cost reports are public. 
0 Audited Financials. Hospitals provide DHHS with copies of audited ﬁnancial statements. 
0 Tax Returns — Hospitals in Maine are non-proﬁt and their tax retums are public. 
0 MHDO — The Maine Health Data Organization collects, and publicly reports a lot of 
different hospital information such as: 
o Quality data — data on the performance of hospitals in tenns of healthcare quality; 
o Financial data — data on the performance of hospital in terms of ﬁnancial metrics; 
o Price data — we’ve discussed this in this committee Monday. 
0 Certiﬁcate of Need — If hospitals want to expand or merge, they are subject to an approval 
process that involves public reporting of the project. 
There are many other reports on the hospital industry that present aggregated information such as 
sentinel event reports. 
As MHDO’s director Ms. Harrington testiﬁed Monday, it is getting to the point with ‘price’ 
information that the public may be confused on which “price” they are looking at and what it 
means to them. There is not too little information, there is almost too much. 
While we don’t oppose transparency, our request to this committee, and even more frequently to 
the HHS Committee, is that before we do any more reporting — public or otherwise — please give 
us a clear explanation as to what the ‘actionable ’ need is for it. Who needs it and what action are 
they going to take using this information? If the request is simply made in the name of 
‘transparency ’ and to ‘inform’ groups, we must argue that that is not enough to ask our members 
to spend their limited time and their limited resources on ﬁlling out even more fonns. 
P 2. g e 2|3 
THEMHA. ORG 1 (207) 622-4794 133 FULLER ROAD !AUGUSTA, ME 04330
Please understand, the oversight agency at the federal level, HRSA has extensive reporting and 
audit requirements. 
Furthermore, the use of 340b savings has been litigated...to the Supreme Court...with Maines 
NorthemLight Health as a named plaintiff. 
Here is 
Please don’t leave Congress ’s 340B program that was designed to help safety net hospitals to the observation of the unanimous Supreme Court of the United States: 
If HHS believes that this Medicare reimbursement program overpays 340B 
hospitals...HHS can ask Congress to change the law. 
Of course, if HHS went to Congress, the agency would presumably have to confront the 
other side of the policy story here: 340B hospitals perform valuable services for low- 
income and rural communities but have to rely on limited federal funding for support. 
As amici before this Court, many 34 OB hospitals contend that the Medicare reimbursement 
payments at issue here "help oﬂset the considerable costs " that 340B providers "incur by 
providing health care to the uninsured, underinsured, and those who live far ﬁom hospitals 
and clinics. " As the 340B hospitals see it, the "net ejfect” of HHS ’s 2018 and 2019 rules 
is "to redistribute funds from ﬁnancially strapped, public and nonproﬁt safety-net hospitals 
serving vulnerable populations —including patients without any insurance at all~t0 
facilities and individuals who are relatively better ojf ” 967 F.3d at 840 (Pillard, J., 
dissenting). In other words, in the view of those hospitals, HHS's new rates eliminate the 
federal subsidy that has helped keep 340B hospitals aﬂoat. All of which is to say that the 
340B story may be more complicated than HHS portrays it. In all events, this Court is 
not the forum to resolve that policy debate. 
Congress — please oppose LD 1395. 
Page 
THEMHA. ORG [(207) 622-4794 I 33 FULLER ROAD I AUGUSTA, ME 04330
