TESTIMONY OF  
Karynlee Harrington, Executive Director  
Maine Health Data Organization  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services  
 
Public Hearing Date:  April 27 , 2023  
L.D. 1395  
“An Act to Increase Transparency Regarding Certain Drug Pricing Programs”  
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services.  My name is Karynlee Harrington; I am the Executive 
Director of the Maine Health Data Organization (MHDO) and the Maine Quality Forum (MQF).  I 
am here today to present testimony neither for nor against L .D. 1395, An  Act to Increase 
Transparency Regarding C ertain Drug Pricing Programs . 
The purpose  of the MHDO  as defined  in Title  22, Chapter  1683,  is to create  and maintain  a 
useful,  objective,  reliable,  and comprehensive  health  information  database  that is accessed by 
a broad group of authorized users to  improve  the health  care  quality and costs  for Maine  people ; 
and  to promote  the transparency  of the cost and quality  of health  care services including the 
costs of prescription drugs in the State  through  a publicly  accessible  website.  The Maine Health 
Data Organization is governed by a board of directors which includes representatives Pay ors, 
Hospitals, Providers, Home Health Care, Consumers, Employers, and Government.   
For over fifteen years, the MHDO has been collect ing healthcare data  files from several entities 
including Maine’s hospitals  and payors ; and more recently  pharmaceutical drug manufactures, 
2 | P a g e  
 wholesale distributors , pharmacy benefit managers , and nursing facilities . MHDO maintains  in its 
secure data warehouse  over 1 billion health  care records , and that number grow s every month 
new data is submitted .   
MHDO’s data continues to be the  source of healthcare data for the analysis of health care costs, 
utilization, and outcomes .  Specifically, MHDO’s data supports legislation including transparency  
reporting requirements specific to  health care costs and quality , including the transparency of 
prescription drug pricing and utilization , surprise billing, workers comp, MaineCare rate setting, 
analyses  specific to the opioid crisis , insulin costs, primary care and behavioral health care 
spending in Maine, ambulance costs, right to shop, Maine’s reinsurance program, and the office 
of affordable healthcare.  
Due to the prescription drug transparency laws that have been enacted over the last seve ral 
years, the MHDO is responsible for defining , collecting,  and reporting  annually  on detailed level 
prescription drug data  sets as defined in 90 590 Ch. 570, Uniform Reporting System for 
Prescription Drug Price Data Sets .    
Given the infrastructure that  exists within MHDO for the reporting of hospital data , MHDO’s  
experience with  the collection and use of  pharmacy data  and our mandate to promote the 
transparency  of prescription drug costs , MHDO is well positioned to take on additional data 
collection and  reportin g as envisioned in L.D . 1395.  We do  however  have some technical 
questions with the requirements in L.D. 1395 and would welcome the opportunity to meet with 
the sponsor and stakeholders prior to the work session to discuss  potential re finements  to the 
bill.   
3 | P a g e  
 In closing , one of MHDO’s guiding principles in the collection  and use  of data , is to  balance the  
administrative burden on those entities required to submit data to the MHDO ,  with meeting the 
purpose of the MHDO.   
This concludes my testimony.  I would be happy to answer questions now or at the work session.   
