northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1395 An Act to Increase Transparency Regarding Certain Drug Pricing Programs 
Testimony in Opposition 
April 27, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Matt Marston and I am the Chief Pharmacy 
Officer for Northern Light Health.  I am here today providing testimony speaking in 
opposition to this bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals 
located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and 
ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and 
specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three 
percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern 
Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with more than 10,000 
employees statewide. 
 
The 340B Program is a Federal program which is overseen by the Health Resources and 
Services Administration (HRSA) and the Office of Pharmacy Affairs (OPA) that seeks to 
aide healthcare organizations including safety net hospitals in providing services by 
requiring drug manufacturers to offer medications at a discount.  As participants in the 
340B program, we are required to have oversight of the pharmacies we contract with 
under the program and of the use of these pharmaceuticals purchased at 340b 
discounts within our hospitals.  We complete yearly external audits along with having a 
robust internal monitoring system in place.  
 
We review prescription claims monthly for every contract pharmacy location that is 
registered with OPA under our organizations. Whenever a prescription is found to be 
not eligible under the program we investigate why it was approved to make sure our 
software solutions and audit processes are performing appropriately.  We also utilize 
software to analyze medications utilized in our facilities for 340b eligibility.  This 
program itself is audited by our teams monthly for accuracy to ensure there are 
redundancies built into our program compliance activities. 
 
Once per year Northern Light Health engages an external auditing firm to perform a 
complete review our 340B program as required by HRSA.  They audit areas such as our 
cost reports, OPA database, provider files, purchasing activity, contract pharmacy 
claims, and split billing claims.  It is a comprehensive audit which takes several months 
to complete in its entirety.  The information sought in this bill is largely duplicative to 
what is already captured in these external and internal auditing processes. 
 
Additionally, HRSA themselves performs audits of the 340B Program at covered entities.  
When selected for a HRSA audit, a data request is made to the covered entity and must 
be fulfilled within 3 weeks time.  The audit looks at the eligibility of the hospital, 
eligibility of patient claims, the hospital cost report, signs of duplicate discounts, OPA 
database enrollment, contract pharmacy claims, split billing claims, Medicaid billing, 
 wholesaler set up, and any claim modifiers that need to be in place.  HRSA then 
conducts a 1 to 2 day remote or on-site audit where the entity needs to answer a series 
of questions and prove the eligibility the claims that are audited.  
 
Northern Light Health participates in the American Hospital Association’s 340B Good 
Stewardship Principles, which is a voluntary program demonstrating our commitment to 
communicating the value of the 340b program, publicly disclosing our hospital 340b 
savings, and providing rigorous internal oversight of the program’s integrity.  We have 
our own 340B Program website that can be accessed by the public and shares 340B 
savings along with information on the programs that the savings go toward funding at 
340B - Northern Light Health .  Northern Light Health supports discussions regarding 
adding additional transparency to the 340b program, however the information 
requested in this bill includes proprietary business information, such as rates negotiated 
with contracted pharmacies and Third Party Administrator software vendors that would 
put our organizations in breach of contract and would likely violate State and Federal 
antitrust laws. 
 
This new law would impose a tremendous reporting burden on the hospitals in Maine.  
Some of the information requested is not readily available and would take substantial 
labor resources and systems changes to be able to accommodate.  This could not come 
at a worse time as Maine Hospitals struggle to financially sustain the healthcare services 
offered and pharmaceutical companies seek to gain access to this information to further 
their attacks on this critical federal program to avoid providing these discounts to 
healthcare providers in order to increase their profits at the expense of our Maine 
communities.  Given that the enforcement authority of the 340b program lies with HRSA 
at the Federal level and that Maine hospitals covered under this program must adhere 
to routine audits by this governing body already, Northern Light Health ask the 
committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 1395 so as not to impose additional 
burdensome reporting on the State’s healthcare organizations. 
 
Northern Light Health would be happy to work with the committee to address any 
follow-up questions or concerns related to this bill. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCOP, BCPS 
VP – Chief Pharmacy Officer 
Northern Light Health 
 
 
 
