 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 www.nashp.org  Washington, DC  
1233 20th Street NW, Suite 303  
Washington, DC 20036  
202-903-0101  
     Portland, Maine  
    Two Monument Sq., Suite 910  
    Portland, ME 04101  
    207-874-6524   
Testimony Relating to LD 1395, An Act to Increase Tranparency Regarding Certain Drug 
Pricing Programs  
From : Maureen Hensley -Quinn , Senior Program Director , Coverage, Cost and Value at the  National 
Academy for State Health Policy  (NASHP)  
To: Maine Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committee  
Date : April 25 , 2023  
RE: LD 1395  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Affairs Committee,  
My name is Maureen Hensley -Quinn and I am a Senior Program Director at the National Academy for 
State Health Policy. NASHP is a non -partisan forum of policymakers that works to develop and promote 
innovative health policy solut ions. Our work is guided by state health  officials across multiple agencies 
and offices  – including executive and legislative branches of government  – to solve problems, conduct 
policy analysis and research, and provid e technical assistance.  Over five years ago NASHP’s state 
Academy Members requested we work with states to identify cost drivers in the health system . States 
asked NASHP to develop and share strategies that focus on reducing price and cost in order to provide 
effective cost -containment pol icy options to states. Our work on health care costs includes NASHP’s 
Centers for Drug Pricing and Health Systems Cost to support states as they attempt to address the 
spiraling costs of prescription drugs and high and rising provider prices . 
Through our C enters for Drug Pricing and Health Systems Cost, state officials raised questions about 
the 340B drug discount program and have sought to better understand drug pricing and health system 
financials . NASHP is neutral  on specific state legislation, so shares  this testimony as neither “for” or 
“against” LD 1395 . However, NASHP generally supports increased transparency and making 
information available to state agencies to be better equipped to make evidence -informed policies . 
The 340B Program & State Efforts to  Understand Its Impact on Health Care Costs  
Congress established the 340B Program as part of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 
102-585). Section 340B was created “to enable [covered] entities to stretch scarce Federal resources 
as far as pos sible, reaching more eligible patients and providing more comprehensive services”. 
Federal administration of the program resides within the Office of Pharmacy Affairs of the Health 
Resources Services Administration (HRSA). As a prerequisite to participatin g in the Medicaid Drug 
Rebate Program, drug manufacturers agree to provide pharmacy products to covered entities at 
significantly reduced prices. (The minimum discount is 23.1% but inflationary rebates often result in 
rebates that are much higher.)  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 www.nashp.org  2 The ability to purchase drugs at significant discounts is incredibly important to the safety net providers 
striving to fulfill their mission of providing quality care to people with low incomes, including the 
uninsured. For many years the federal governmen t limited participation in the 340B program to a 
relatively small number of not for profit clinics and hospitals serving these populations. However, in 
recent years Congress has greatly expanded the number of providers who can participate (known as 
“covere d entities”) and as a result the total value of drugs purchased under the program has 
skyrocketed.  
 
The explosive growth in the 340B program can be attributed primarily to increased participation by 
hospitals, some of which are part of large health system s that include provider offices, etc., as opposed 
to stand alone clinics. In 2021, hospitals accounted  for 86.9% of total 340 B prescription drug 
purchases, or approximately $38.1 billion.  
States across the country, including Maine , are devoting tremendous resources and building analytical 
capacity to better understand drivers of health care cost and the financial health of impor tant health 
providers, like hospitals, to ensure quality health services are available to their citizens. State officials 
have taken note of the rapid growth of drug purchases under the 340B program and are aware that it 
represents a much larger percentage  of pharmacy spending than it had in the past. Health systems can 
and do routinely dispense drugs brought using the 340B discount to patients with commercial 
insurance, creating a profitable “spread” between hospital’s acquisition cost and what it is ultim ately 
paid by a health plan. Spread pricing has become a critical revenue source for covered entities – so 
much so that there is concern that access to 340B discounts is a driver of health system consolidation. 
The 340B drug rebate program is critical to b ringing the state lower cost drugs, provides a substantial 
revenue source for an increasing number of hospitals and health systems, but the state has virtually no 
information or data about this program.  
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 www.nashp.org  3 There is no specific requirement in federal law that  participating hospitals use drugs purchased under 
340B solely to benefit low -income people or the programs that support their health care. And states are 
eager to understand the extent, if any, that the increased financial value realized by hospitals tran slate 
into greater benefit for low -income residents or the greater community.  
The chart below demonstrates how much additional revenue a 340B covered entity can generate when 
dispensing a drug to a patient covered by commercial insurance compared to a non -340B provider 
dispensing the same drug to a patient covered by Medicare:  
 
Increasing Transparency of the 340B Drug Discount Program  
LD 1395  represents an effort by  Maine  to better understand the impact that the 340B program has on 
health care spending in the state. It requires each hospital participating in the program to report 
information on the purchase price of drugs bought under the 340B program and additional information 
describing the amount that the hospital was reimbursed by payers for those drugs . It also requires 
reporting on each hospital’s payer mix, annual revenue, and contracting relatioships with 3rd party 
vendors.  
Gaining information about the 340B program will be important as Maine  strives to understand the 
drivers of health care spending, the financial resources within the market and the impact that rising 
costs have on the system’s ability to deliver quality care to all of the state’s residents. There is value in 
understanding how  savings realized through the 340B program fit in to the overall picture of health care 
spending and sustainability in the state.  
Conclusion  
In introducing this legislation, Maine  follows other states interested in better understanding the 340B 
drug pricin g program and its impact on health care costs. During the current state legislative session, 
Connecticut  introduced legislation  similarly focuse d on 340B  program oversight and  transparency . 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 www.nashp.org  4 Washington state’s  recently  enacted budget  prompts the state to establish an annual  reporting 
requirement for all covered entities participating in the 340B program that receive Medicaid funds . 
As the Committee continues its work on this important bill NASHP is available to support your work, 
answer any questions and provide additional i nformation as necessary. I would  be happy to provide 
follow -up information to answer any question s you may have  and can be reached at mhq@nashp.org . 
Thank you for the opportunity to share this information.  
Respectfully,  
Maureen Hensley -Quinn  
Senior Program Director  | Coverage, Cost, and Value Team  
National Academy for State Health Policy  
April 25 , 2023  
