Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the committee:  
 
I thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 1395.  My name is Noah Nesin, I 
am a family doctor and I am here as Chair of the Maine Prescription Drug Affordability Board, speaking 
on behalf of that board.  The Maine Prescription Dr ug Affordability Board (MPDAB) was established in 
2019 pursuant to MRS Title 5 Chapter 167 -1 with members appointed by the Governor, the Senate 
President and the Speaker.  We have worked (without funding) since 2020 to fulfill our cha rge from the 
legislat ure and have submitted annual reports for 2021 and 2022 with recommendations for actions, 
including legislation, to reduce the burden of prescription drug costs on the people of Maine.  Our 2022 
report includes the following: “… in order to promote and assure the appropriate use of 340B revenue as 
described in the original federal legislation the Maine Prescription Drug Affordability Board recommends 
that the Maine Legislature require greate r transparency and accountability for the 340B program in 
Maine. ” 
As we point out in that report , the 340B program’s purpose is to enable covered entities “to stretc h 
scarce federal resources as far as possible, reaching more eligible patients and providin g more 
comprehensive services.”   Federally Qualified Health Centers have typically used these revenues to 
support sliding fee scales, reduce prescription costs, extend hours of operation, and enhance support 
services, and FQHCs are subject to detailed prog rammatic and reporting requirements to the Health 
Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).  
As the 340B program has been expanded to include other entities , concern has grown over cost and the 
use of these revenues.   Our report includes references and quotes related to this concern, one of which 
points out that in 2021 discounted purchases reached $43.9 billion, with hospitals accounting for 87% of 
those purchases.  We do not argue that those funds are being misused, or that hospitals in Maine don’t 
need additional revenue streams beyond those generated by patient care.  But it is prudent to require 
transparency about those funds in order to better inform public policy.  Therefore, the members of 
Maine’s Prescription Drug Affordability Boar d support passage of this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Noah Nesin, MD, FAAFP  
23 Dunston Dr . 
Glenburn, ME 04401  
Chair, Maine Prescription Drug Affordability Board  
 

