TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 468 BY THE PENOBSCOT BAR 
ASSOCIATION
May it please the Chair and the Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee:
My name is Brett Baber, and I am the current treasurer and Board Director of the Penobscot 
County Bar Association and the Penobscot County Law Library Association. With me today is 
Christopher Largay, the immediate past President and present Board Director of the Penobscot 
County Bar Association and the Library Association.
Following a unanimous vote of the Association’s Board of Directors on Friday, February 24, The 
Penobscot County Bar Association neither supports nor to opposes L.D. 468, an Act Regarding 
Regional Law Libraries. We respectfully submit that this bill should be tabled to (1) conduct a 
needs assessment for regional law libraries; (2) determine which organizations or entities should 
operate the regional law libraries, and, if privately operated, (3) determine the extent of financial 
support to be provided by the State of Maine through the judicial budget.
By way of a brief background, the Penobscot County Bar Association has either directly or 
through a stand-alone Library Association, maintained a law library that, while privately funded 
and operated, was located in a public courthouse with public accessibility since at least the early 
1900’s. In its heyday, the Penobscot County Law Library maintained an extensive collection of 
primary law books, statutes and case reports, as well as extensive legal treatises. Lawyers 
utilized the law books day and night to research the law in support of their litigation needs or 
their transactional work. At present, our library is operated by the Penobscot County Bar 
Association and its Board of Directors, with a Library Committee referred to as the Penobscot 
Law Library Association.
Two developments have occurred which have impacted how lawyers and the public access the 
written law. 
First was the advent of computer assisted legal research and the internet. Lawyers can effectively 
research almost any legal question now through the use of their smart phones or desktop 
computers. The public may also access these resources on a subscription fee basis much like 
many other computer resources.
The second development occurred on a local level when the old Superior Court and the District 
Court were relocated to the new Penobscot County Judicial Center in 2009. Given the competing 
space needs at the new Judicial Center, and the reduced public need for hardbound law books, 
the decision was made to curtail the amount of floor space that would be devoted to a law 
library. Rather than having a law library that comprised a third of the third floor in the old 
courthouse, the current library is located in what is best described as a large executive office. The 
Penobscot County Law Library attempts to continue to serve the legal needs of the bar and the 
public by providing, at State expense, free Internet access to Westlaw and Lexis, the two largest 
online legal research providers, and what is considered to be basic legal reference materials 
including Maine statutes, Maine case law, treatises on Maine law and some other basic legal 
books. The hardbound collection is maintained at Bar Association expense with an annual state 
subsidy of about $22,000 and we are currently running a deficit of about $6,700 per year to 
maintain this basic collection, and to provide a part time staff person for upkeep and to assist any 
patrons of the Library despite an annual state stipend. This staff librarian, Judy Bennett, has 
served the PCBA and residents of Penobscot County for over 20 years. 
The current bill raises a number of questions: 
1. How much usage is there for hardbound law books which are increasingly expensive?
2. How much usage is there for the computer assisted research capabilities?
3. What is the best operational entity for the regional libraries, a private law library or the 
judicial system? We note the answer may be different for Cumberland and Penobscot 
Counties.
And, if the Penobscot County Law Library is to be operated by a private law library association, 
how much funding is to come from the State judicial budget?  
We also note there are a number of ambiguities and typographical errors in the bill as presented 
which need to be addressed.
For these reasons, we ask the Judiciary Committee to table this bill with a request from this 
Committee to the Judiciary to bring affected stakeholders into the discussion including the 
Penobscot County Bar Association, the Cumberland County Bar Association, the Maine State 
Bar Association, the Maine Trial Lawyers Association and the Maine Association of Criminal 
Defense Attorneys.
Respectfully submitted:
Brett D. Baber, Esq.
Treasurer of the Penobscot County Bar Association and the Penobscot Law Library Association
Christopher Largay, Esq.
Immediate Past President of the Penobscot County Bar Association 
