LD 956
- An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and
Gender  Identity Data Collection
in Health Car e Facilities
March 22, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and honorable members of the Health and Human
Services Committee, my name is Gia Drew . I am the Executive Director of EqualityMaine, which
has been representing Maine’ s LGBTQ+ community since 1984, and I am testifying today on
behalf of EqualityMaine, ACLU of Maine
, GLBTQ Legal
Advocates & Defenders,
Maine
Women’ s Lobby , and
American Academy of Pediatrics,
Maine Chapter
in support of LD 956: An
Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in Health Care Facilities.
Even though information about a person’ s sexual orientation and gender identity can help inform a
person’ s healthcare plan, people are rarely asked questions about our orientation, behavior , and
gender identity by providers. If done well, most people, including members of the LGBTQ+
community , are very comfortable answering questions about their sexual orientation and/or gender
identity (SOGI) on medical forms. Asking non judgemental questions about a person’ s identity
affirms their lived experiences and helps healthcare providers of fer better care.
The lesbian, gay , bisexual, transgender , and queer community (LGBTQ+) has been recognized by
the National Institutes of Health and the American Society of Clinical Oncology as experiencing
significant health disparities.
1
However , our community
is woefully underrepresented in databases
and research because sexual orientation and gender identity (SOGI) data are rarely collected. Aside
from anecdotal information, we don’ t even know how many people in our community were af fected
by COVID-19.
According to a 2022 survey that we conducted with Maine Health
2
, the majority of LGBTQ+
Mainers indicated they felt comfortable being asked about their sexual orientation and gender
2
https://drive.google.com/file/d/110d_3A1q6enVegDCk4GnCfBlje09XMA1/view?usp=share_link
1
https://ascopubs.org/doi/full/10.1200/jop.2017.024281

identity by a healthcare provider . Additionally , having accurate data about the LGBTQ+ community
pertaining to our health, including health outcomes, helps provide accurate and scientific
information about health trends and can point out barriers our community faces. Collection of
quality data is essential for evidence-based policymaking as well. Currently , there is a need for
more agencies to improve and expand their ef forts to collect information on sexual orientation and
gender identity (SOGI), including data on intersex populations. Doing so will better inform and
facilitate policy decisions designed to understand and address disparities for LGBTQ+  people.
While there are some surveys that collect data on the characteristics and well-being of LGBTQ+
people, inclusion of questions about sexual orientation and gender identity on medical forms allows
for better understanding of this population relative to general or other population groups, including
economic, housing, health, and other dif ferences. These insights can lead to potential resources and
interventions needed to better serve the community . Further , these data meet critical needs to
understand trends within lar ger population groups. For example, we have learned from state and
federal surveys that suicide rates and reports of bullying are significantly higher for sexual minority
youth populations compared to non-sexual minority youth populations.
3
According to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention’ s Youth Risk Behavior Survey , significant dif ferences are found
in suicidal ideation and behavior by sexual identity . 2019 YRBS data indicate that 14.5% of
heterosexual youth had seriously considered attempting suicide in the past 12 months compared to
46.8% of lesbian, gay , and bisexual youth.
Accordingly , we also must identify practices for all agencies engaging in SOGI data collection to
safeguard privacy , security , and civil rights, including those regarding appropriate and robust
practices of consent for the collection of this data and restrictions on its use or transfer .
I urge you to support this bill, and to vote ought to pass on LD 956.
Gia Drew
(she/her)
On behalf of:
EqualityMaine
ACLU of Maine
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders
Maine Women’ s Lobby
American Academy of Pediatrics, Maine Chapter
3
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/index.htm
