                                                                                              
Augusta, ME 04332 | 207 -204-8800  
 
March 22 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee  
 
RE: Testimony Neither for Nor Against  LD 956- An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender 
Identity Data Collection in Health Care Facilities  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services  
Committee:  
My name is Amy Downing and I am a resident of Smithfield and the Executive Director of  both  the 
Maine Pharmacy Association  and Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists . Today I am submitting  
joint  testimony on behalf of  both of the associations. Together, these two organization s address the 
advocacy, continuing education and professional needs of all licensed pharmacists, pharmacy 
technicians and student pharmacists in Maine. We promote public health by advocating for th e 
profession of pharmacy.   I am submitting testimony  Neither for nor against LD 956.  
While we can understand collecting information on gender identity to make sure health care providers 
and staff know how to address their patie nts, we would like to provide a dditional considerations for the 
committee  as pharmacies would be included in this law and we believe that was likely unintentional.   
Additionally, if the gen der identified by the patient does not match what is on file with their insurance it 
will result in a claim rejection for covering their prescription.  Pharmacies must follow national sta ndards 
from National Council for Prescription Drug Programs ( NCPDP ) in electronic claims transmission and do 
not have the ability to alter these fields .  This could unintentionally result in coverage challenges for 
patients at the pharmacy counter.  
The definition of “Health Care Facility” referenced in this bill  means a facility, institution or entity 
licensed pursuant to this Title that offers health care to pe rsons in this State, including a home health 
care provider, hospice program and a pharmacy licensed pursuant to  Title 32 .  We w ould ask the 
committee to consider amending the bill so that pharmacies are not required to ask for this information. 
We would not want this bill to put any undo hardship on the pharmacy or the patient when they arrive 
to the pharmacy counter.  Intake information collected at pharmacies is not as thorough as a more 
extensive facility such as a hospital .  
Thank you for your consideration. If you have any questions prior to your work session, please reach 
out.  
 
 
 
Amy Downing  
Executive Director | Maine Pharmacy Association  & Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists  
amy@mainepharmacy.org   
207-204-8800  
 

