Aspen Ruhlin
Mabel Wadsworth Center
LD 956
Aspen Ruhlin
they/them/theirs
Community Engagement Coordinator 
Mabel Wadsworth Center
Bangor, ME 04401
LD 956 Public Testimony
An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in Health Care 
Facilities 
3/22/2023
I would like to begin by thanking the chairs of this committee, Senator Baldacci and 
Representative Meyer, along with the rest of the Health and Human Services 
Committee for hearing my testimony today. I would also like to thank Representative 
Rana for presenting this bill and the cosponsors for cosponsoring. My name is Aspen 
Ruhlin, I use they/them pronouns, and I am the Community Engagement Coordinator 
with Mabel Wadsworth Center in Bangor. For those who may be unfamiliar, our 
health center offers an array of services including abortion care, primary care, 
contraception, STI testing, and gender-affirming hormone therapy. As such, and 
because our values dictate that we provide all patients with competent and affirming 
care, we have become well-known in the state as a safe healthcare provider for 
members of the LGBTQ+ community. I am also a member of the LGBTQ+ 
community. Today, Mabel Wadsworth Center is asking you to vote in support of LD 
956.
From a professional standpoint, I can confidently say that collecting sexual 
orientation and gender identity data not only improves care for patients, but is easy to 
do. In my experience training other healthcare providers in LGBTQ+ competency, 
there is often a concern that collecting this data necessary to provide all patients with 
competent care would place an undue burden on healthcare providers and 
administrative staff alike. It is as easy as adding a couple questions to an intake form 
and allows patients to be their genuine selves and receive competent, respectful care. 
Without this data being collected, patients are assumed to be cisgender and 
heterosexual, which leads to negative experiences and negative health outcomes for 
LGBTQ+ patients.
As a facility that collects this data and often has to refer patients to facilities that 
don’t, the importance is obvious to us. Even with documentation explaining that a 
patient is transgender and is being referred for gender-affirming surgery, our patients 
get misgendered at other offices because there is nowhere in the chart for their gender,
only their legal sex. We have had patients overjoyed to be finally receiving competent
sexual health care because their identity is no longer incorrectly assumed.
I can also speak to this on a personal level. Prior to receiving my own care at a facility
that does collect this data, I had providers who didn’t. While I am certainly now an 
outspoken advocate for LGBTQ+ issues, I wasn’t always, and it is unfair to expect 
everyone to be able to do so. There was a point where I was a young queer trans 
person being misgendered at my appointments, whether it was a flu shot or for my 
cancer treatment. There was a point where I had to interrupt my provider’s lecture on 
getting back on birth control as a sexually active college student as my girlfriend 
wouldn’t be able to get me pregnant. The assumption that I was cis and straight was 
not only incorrect, but made me feel othered and isolated.
There is much that needs to be done to improve healthcare and health outcomes for LGBTQ+
Mainers. This bill is a hugely important step in the right direction. We strongly encourage you 
to vote in support of LD 956. Thank you.

