% ,_ Consumers for ,,_o_ Bo, 24,0 ’ 
A r , ME mass Affordable Telephone-iigil-280-965-7476 
“ 
Health care Fax 1-ass-214»52sa 
Advocating the rlghtto quality ———————————— g l’N"w‘m3meCam'(jr 
affordable health care for all Mainers. ¢0n$umerheaIth@maine¢ahwrs 
Statement of Ceilidh Shea 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
To the Joint Standing Committee On Health and Human Services 
Speaking in Support of: LD 956, An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and 
Gender Identity Data Collection in Health Care Facilities 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health and Human 
Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments in support of LD 956, “An Act Concerning 
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in Health Care Facilities. ” 
My name is Ceilidh Shea, and I am a Policy Advocate at Consumers for Affordable Health Care, a nonpartisan, 
nonproﬁt organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care for every person in Maine. CAHC 
is a nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization founded in 1988 and based in Augusta whose mission is to advocate the 
right to quality, affordable health care for every person in Maine. As designated by Maine’s Attomey General, 
CAHC serves as Maine’s Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP), which operates a toll-free 
HelpLine. Our HelpLine, ﬁelds approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who 
need help obtaining, keeping, using, or ﬁxing problems with private health insurance or with accessing or 
affording health care services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine’s Medicaid program, 
MaineCare, and helps people apply for and navigate the enrollment process for MaineCare. lt is With that 
background that We provide these comments. 
There are three primary reasons why we support LD 956. Firstly, adding sexual orientation and gender identity to 
the list of demographic questions that are already routinely asked in health care settings, such as occupation, 
ethnicity, marital status, etc., can help improve patient experiences and foster trust and stronger relationships 
between individuals and their health care providers. Data from the 2021 Maine Transgender Community Survey 
found that trans people who were asked about their gender identity during the intake process when receiving care 
were more likely to be gendered correctly by their health care providers. Responses from the survey also revealed 
that fear of misgendering and discrimination were one of the leading causes why trans people did not seek health 
care when they needed it or return to a provider. 
In addition to building trust and strengthening the patient-provider relationship, asking for gender identity and 
sexual orientation will help ensure people receive appropriate medical care. Health risks and considerations can 
vary greatly depending on sexuality and gender identity. For example, in the United States, gay and bisexual men 
are the population most affected by HIV. The CDC recommends that all sexually active gay and bisexual men get 
tested for HIV at least once a year.‘ Men wl1o have sex with other men are also at increased risk for gonorrhea, 
however data suggests they may be less likely to be diagnosed, in part due to screenings not always being 
conducted in the correct part of the body. Gonorrhea is oﬁen only tested for in genitalia, however according to the 
CDC, urogenital-only testing may miss up to 70% of gonorrhea infections in men who have sex with other men, 
since infection sites among this population are more likely to be located in the rectum or throat? When healthcare 
providers are aware of their patient’s sexual orientation and gender identity, they can better recommend 
' 
inlps1Kilnwinlb.niii.goviundcrstanding~liivfl ’act-shectsfhiv-ancl~gay-and-bisexiiai»mcn 
2 https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatmenbguidelines/msmhtm
appropriate testing and steps necessary to ensure their patient’s health and safety in relation to certain diseases or 
conditions. 
Health disparities apply to a number of other disease categories and risk factors for the LGBTQIA plus 
community. Lesbian, gay and bisexual adults were 36 percent less likely than heterosexual adults to have ideal 
cardiovascular health based on surveys of risk factors like smoking and blood glucose levels? Similarly, research 
has found increased incidence of speciﬁc cancers in the LGBTQIA plus populations. For example, the odds of 
developing skin cancer are signiﬁcantly higher in both gay men and bisexual men compared with heterosexual 
men. Another study found that lesbian and bisexual women have signiﬁcantly higher rates of cervical cancer 
compared with heterosexual women, which may be due to the lower rates of regular cervical cancer screenings 
among this population. ‘ 
It is critically important to capture demographic data in health care settings. It is extremely difﬁcult to identify 
and address health disparities amongst LGBTQIA plus communities without demographic data related to sexual 
orientation and gender identity. We are unable to fully address, head on, these disparities, at a systemic level, 
without good data to illustrate the disparities that exist and greatly impact individuals. 
Thank you. 
3 
hltps:!5wwW.zwtimes.co12153.323?O{1§Z¥9fu1eEiiiivefigbtq-heart-iiealtlthluii 
4 Cerviczii :lCi'iI4.3l ’:iﬂ£3 attctuiature anti £‘i3i"v‘i£§ii -"ntuccr caucus women who with wmnczt - i’i‘»~i(T" inih.uo\i)
