 
 
207.888.9826  American Cancer Society  Cancer Action Network   
hilary.schneider@cancer.org  PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
  fight cancer.org | 1.800 .227.2345  
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Regional Government Relations Director,  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  
 
In Support of LD 956 “An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in Health 
Care Facilities” 
March 22, 2023  
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human  Services Committee . My name 
is Hilary Schneider, and I am the Regional Government Relations Director of the North Atlantic  Region for the 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN).  In this role, I serve as the lead Government 
Relations Director for Maine. ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer 
Society, supports evidence -based policy and legislative solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a major health 
problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public policies that ar e helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures 
that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice in public policy matters at all levels of 
government.  
I would like to thank you for this opportunity to submit the following testimony  in support o f LD 956. 
Cancer affects nearly everyone, but it does not affect everyone equally. LGBTQ+ people are disproportionately 
burdened with cancer due to several risk factors (i.e., higher smoking prevalence , higher prevalence of unhealthy 
weight, higher rates of alcohol use)  and screening disparities , experiencing obstacles to prevention, detection, 
treatment,  and survival because of systemic factors that are complex and go beyond the obvious connection to 
cancer . These obstacles include homophobia and transphobia, socioeconomic status , structural racism, limited 
access to the healthcare system  and insurance coverage, and negative experiences with healthcare providers 
resulting in significant barriers to care.   
The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute estimates that between 5% and 10% of the general 
population identifies as LGBTQ.i The American Cancer Society estimate s there will be 10,490  newly diagnosed 
cancer cases and nearly 3,500  deaths from cancer in Maine in 2023 .ii Without accounting for increased risk for 
cancer, using an estimate of 5% would mean , in Maine,  there could be at least 525  new cancer cases and 175 
cancer deaths among LGBTQ patients  in 2023 alone .  
People with chronic illness such as cancer are more likely to have hospitalizations, ER visits, ambu latory 
surgeries, and provider visits. If they encounter discrimination or mistreatment while seeking care, which has 
been reported extensively by the LGBTQ community, they are more likely to avoid or delay necessary health care 
and endure worse  long -term  outcomes.   
When large data sets or surveys, including cancer registries  or patient panel data sets , do not  collect data about 
sexual orientation or gender identity, it leaves lesbian, gay, bisexual,  and transgender patients  embedded and 
invisible among the information these surveys provide . Research specifically examining the need for tailored 
prevention, screening and treatment guidelines for transgender and gender non - conforming (GNC) people is 
 
 
207.888.9826  American Cancer Society  Cancer Action Network   
hilary.schneider@cancer.org  PO Box 350, Westbrook, ME 04092 -3438  
  fight cancer.org | 1.800 .227.2345  greatly lacking.  Like all individuals, LGBTQ + individuals are just that – indiv idual – and cannot be described  by 
only one piece of information about the individual. It’s important to recognize that LGBTQ+ individuals may also 
belong to other underserved communities and thereby face additional or exacerbated disparities (e.g., based  on 
race/ethnicity, limited English proficiency, disability, or low socioeconomic status) and given the data and 
information challenges for other disparities, lack of data further exacerbates what we know and don’t know . 
Cancer screening , treatme nt and survivorship recommendations can be different based on sexual orientation or 
gender identity. As such, this information is critical to the delivery of high -quality, patient -centered care. SO/GI 
data collection has been recommended by both the Instit ute of Medicineiii and the Joint Commissioniv to learn 
about which populations are being served, and to measure quality of care provided to LGBT Q+ people. 
Gathering this data is therefore an important part of identifying and addressing LGBT Q+ healt h disparities in 
health centers and other health care organizations.  It is important that patients are given the opportunity to 
provide this information, but not required to do so. In addition, it is important for all staff, both clinical and non -
clinical,  have training on effective ways to collect this data.  
Reducing cancer disparities and advancing health equity is an overarching goal of the American Cancer Society 
and ACS CAN. Health equity means everyone has a fair and just opportunity to prevent, find,  treat, and survive 
cancer. Equity acknowledges that people have different circumstances, so different tools and resources are 
needed for people to have equal cancer outcomes . 
For the above reasons, we urge you to vote in support of LD 956. We app reciate your time and consideration of 
our comments. I would be happy to answer any questions about this testimony.  
 
i Margolies L, Brown CG. Current state of knowledge about cancer in lesbians, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people. 
Seminars in Oncology Nursing. 2018:34(1):3 -11. 
ii American Cancer Society . Cancer Facts & Figures 2023. Atlanta: American Cancer Society;  2023.  
iii Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) People: Building a Foundation for 
Better Understanding. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011. Available at 
https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/13128/the -health -of-lesbian -gay-bisexual -and-transgender -people -building .    
iv The Joint Commis sion. Advancing effective communication, cultural competence, and patient - and family -centered care 
for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community: A field guide. Oak Brook, IL: Joint Commission; 2011. 
Available at https://www.jointcommission.org/ -/media/tjc/documents/resources/patient -safety -topics/health -
equity/lgbtfieldguide_web_linked_verpdf.pdf?db=web&hash=FD725DC02CFE6E4F21A35EBD839BBE97 .  
