126 Sewa" Street E Kathy Kilrain del RIO 
Augusta! Maine o4330‘6822 q Advocacy & Programs Director 
TW/V°'ce: (2o7)_62§ ‘7058 
P | P |° S I t" kkilrainde|ri0@meJp org 
www malneequal]ustice.org e°P e O ICY Q u Ions 
MEJ Testimony in Support of LD 956, An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender 
Identity Data Collection in Health Care Facilities 
i\/larch 22, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, I use she/her pronouns, and l'm 
the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. lam 
speaking today in support of LD 956. 
As you know very well, accurate data is vital to helping us make informed policy decisions. Strong 
data allows us to have a clear picture of the experiences of different populations and identify 
disparities, trends, and the impacts of our policies. Too often we lack accurate data about 
communities that have been marginalized, including people with certain sexual orientations or 
gender identities. A lack of data can also make certain populations invisible, erasing their lived 
experiences and making it harder to determine what policies are needed to address challenges 
experienced by those communities. 
When we don't ask, we make poor assumptions. Most of us view the world through the lens of our 
own experiences and also through the lens of the culture we are surrounded by. That means that if 
a provider is straight, they may inadvertently assume that their queer patients are heterosexual 
unless they ask or unless the patient volunteers that information. One study of lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual youth found that, ”only 12.5 of LGB youth reported that a physician or other health care 
clinician knew they were bisexual, mostly homosexual, or 100% homosexual, gay, or lesbian/'1 This 
leads to poorer health outcomes because people with different sexual orientations can have 
different health needs. Among the conclusions of the study just referenced was the following: 
"Routinely capturing sexual orientation data might enable tracking of health care utilization 
indicators for LGB youth.” Again, if we don't capture the data, we can't really understand what is 
happening for different populations. 
People who are transgender or nonbinary frequently experience being misgendered. Misgendering 
in and of itself causes harm and can lead to individuals avoiding getting the health care they need. 
1 https: _L[jamanetwork.com _[journa1s _[jamanetworkopen_/ fullarticle / 2785601
2 
Studies show that people who identify as transgender or nonbinary who experience misgendering 
and other discriminatory treatment by a health care provider are more likely to avoid future care, 
which in turn leads to poorer health outcomes? The 2021 Maine Transgender Community Survey 
found that misgendering was especially problematic for people who are nonbinary, and in turn they 
were the least likely to have seen a health care provider in the past five years. Sadly, we still live in 
a world where many people use superficial characteristics to make assumptions about gender 
rather than asking people what their gender or pronouns are. This is true in health care settings as 
well. Just 35% of trans patients were asked their gender identity during the intake process ata 
primary care, emergency, or urgent care provider. in Maine, misgendering was experienced most 
by trans women and nonbinary Mainers. A national survey found that 32% of trans patients were 
intentionally misgendered by a provider and 46% of trans people of color experienced intentional 
misgendering? ’ The same survey found that 22% of trans people avoided needed medical care due 
to fear of discrimination, which rises to 28% for trans people of color. And they found that 40% of 
trans people avoided preventive care due to fear of discrimination, rising to 54% for trans people of 
color. Ensuring health care providers know the correct gender identity for their patients is one step 
in addressing some of the challenges affecting health care access for trans and nonbinary people. 
Like other demographic characteristics, sexual orientation and gender identify are essential aspects 
of who each of us are and can have significant impacts on our health care needs. To begin to address 
the disparities experienced by trans and nonbinary Mainers, we need to capture this data across 
our entire healthcare system. With better data, you and future legislatures will be able to make 
better policy decisions. 
For these reasons, Maine Equal Justice supports LD 956. We appreciate your attention to this issue 
and I'm happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Z https://www.ncbi.n1m.nih.gov,Lpmc/articles/PMC5436369, ’ 
3 https: _//www.americanprogress.org_/a1*ticle/ protecting-advancing-health-care-transgender-adult — 
communities!
