V MaineTrans.Net 
/u ;,/ redeﬁning gender 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testimony of Maine Transgender Network 
LD 956: “An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in 
Health Care Facilities" 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, my name is Quinn Gormley, I use she/her pronouns, and l am 
here today as the Executive Director of the Maine Transgender Network, Maine's sole 
organization specifically dedicated to supporting transgender people and those who love us, in 
enthusiastic support of LD 956: "An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 
Data Collection in Health Care Facilities." 
Though l would gladly regale you with a careful and technical analysis of the benefits of this bill, 
there is a common tendency to miss the very human aspects of data collection, so I am going to 
share a few stories that highlight the need for this legislation. The first is about my friend 
Charles. Charles is a sexually active gay man. He has multiple partners, and in a responsible 
effort to keep them, and himself safe, he undergoes an STI screening every three months. 
When he went to schedule one of these exams last year, he learned that his PCP had retired 
and he was assigned to a new provider. 
At the appointment, he was surprised when the provider asked him some new, optional 
questions. These included questions about his sexual orientation, the gender identities of his 
sexual partners, and what parts of his body he used during sex. He was more surprised when 
the STI screening involved swabbing new areas of his body, and astounded when he learned 
that he had a serious case of Gonorrhea, and it was likely he'd had it for nearly a year. He asked 
his provider how it was possible this was missed on previous exams. The answer: his previous 
provider hadn't bothered to ask him about his sexual orientation or partners, and had simply 
assumed he only needed to swab his penis. Charles‘ gonorrhea, like in the cases of about 70% 
of men who have sex with men, was latently diagnosed because his provider didn't ask the right 
questions. 
The right questions often lead to the right preventative treatment and screenings. As a trans 
woman l appreciate how electronic health systems can help improve care when used well. 
Unfortunately, they often aren't. 
Several years ago, I woke up to three emails from my doctor's office. The first was a reminder 
about the importance of regular, self administered testicular cancer screenings. I'd had a scare
with this cancer when I was younger, and I get this message every year. The second was a note 
from a new nurse in the office who was very concerned that she saw no record of me ever 
receiving a gynecological examination and that at 25 years old it was urgent I scheduled an 
appointment. The last message was from my PCP, asking about the status of my recovery from 
gender affirming bottom surgery several months earlier. 
About a month ago I underwent an urgent abdominal surgery. My surgeon found me in the 
recovery room a few hours after I woke up with a grave look on his face. This man, who several 
hours before had cut me open and placed his hands inside me, very gently informed me that he 
had not seen a uterus while performing the surgery, and that it was likely I was infertile. He was 
very sorry. Through the still fading haze of anesthesia, I did my best to explain to him that this 
was, in fact, not the life shattering news he thought it was. 
My favorite though, occurred about six months ago in an emergency room in Bangor. I sat, 
stunned, as a resident doctor yelled at me about my refusal to take a pregnancy test. He 
insisted that the birth control I was prescribed was not a guarantee that I was not pregnant. 
Through tears, I did my best to tell him that the hormones I was prescribed weren't for birth 
control, and that as a trans woman there was no chance I was pregnant. I then begged him to 
move on, and finish the sexual assault forensic examination he was there to complete. The best 
part about this story, is that it wasn't even the first time I've had to have this conversation in the 
middle of a receiving a rape kit. 
As a queer and transgender woman, every time I enter a new healthcare facility I am faced with 
the decision of when, to who, and how to disclose my trans status. Not being a healthcare 
provider myself, I am often unsure if it is even necessary to disclose for the care I am receiving. 
But whether or not it is, the question always leaves me terrified for how or if I will be treated. 
And in settings where for reasons of medical crisis there is not an opportunity to broach the 
subject, it often comes out in ways that are deeply humiliating. 
Queer and trans patients deserve providers who ask us the right questions and provide us 
appropriate care. And we desen/e to know when questions about who we are and who we love 
will come up in our appointments, so we can be prepared for them. Electronic Health Record 
systems are incredible tools that will continue to improve our population and individual 
healthcare experiences. But our healthcare facilities need a push to ensure they are using 
EHRs effectively for all of their patients. Requiring facilities to ask for SOGI data is a necessary 
step towards this end. l urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 956. 
Thank you, 
Quinn Gormley 
she/her 
Executive Director 
Maine Transgender Network
