 
       
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Support of : 
LD 956: An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in Health Care 
Facilities  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Room 209, Cross State Office Building  
Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci, Representativ e Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, a nd most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously. 
 MPHA is  in support of LD 956: “An Act Concerning Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data Collection in 
Health Care Facilities.” This bill requires health care facilities to collect data related to sexual orientation and gender identity as part of individuals ’ health care information  (i.e., in addition to other demographic data, such 
as age and race).  
 Research has shown that when there are differences between an individual’s identification documents (e.g., 
medical records) and their gender identity there is a greater likelihood for worsened mental health, including 
higher levels of anxiety and depression.
1,2 Research has also shown that sexual minorities (e.g., lesbian, gay, 
and bisexual individuals) experience more  discrimination, stigma, and stress than their heterosexual peers . They 
are at greater  risk of poor health outcomes and health -harming behaviors , such as delaying medical care – often 
because of discrimination and other systemic barriers .3,4 
 Collecting information about patients’ gender identity and sexual orientation will help health care providers 
know how to correctly address their patients and help health care provide rs deliver  better medical care. 
Collecting this information  will also help public health practitioners better understand health statuses, health 
risks and disparities , and strategies for addressing them . We believe this bill is good public health policy and 
will help improve health outcomes. We respectfully request you to vote LD  956 “Ought to pass.” Thank you for 
considering our testimony. 
 
 
1 Restar A, Jin H, Breslow A, Reisner SL, Mimiaga M, Cahill S, Hughto JMW. Legal gender marker and name change is associated 
with lower negative emotional response to gender -based mistreatment and improve mental health outcomes among trans populations. 
SSM Popul Health. 2020 May 11;11:100595.  
 
2 Scheim, Ayden I et al.  Gender -concordant identity documents and mental health among transgender adults in the USA: A cross -
sectional study.  The Lancet Public Health. 2020;5(4):e196 - e203.  
3 Jackson  CL, Agénor M, John son DA , et al. Sexual orientation identity disparities in health behaviors, outcomes, and services use 
among men and women in the United States: A  cross- sectional study. BMC Public Health  2016; 16:807. 
4 Kates J, Ranji U, Beamesderfer A, Salganicoff A & Dawson L. Health and a ccess to c are and coverage for lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender (LGBT) individuals in the U.S.  Kaiser Family Foundation. 2018.  
 
