Di/_ ~ ~ P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2Q7_43O_3334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1449: “An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Violations of 
Conditions of Release. ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ in response to LD 1449, “An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Violations 
of Conditions of Release. ” 
To be charged with a domestic violence related crime that is a Class C or higher, a 
person must have either caused serious harm to their victim or have been convicted 
previously of a Class D crime of domestic violence or violation of a protection order. Either 
way this is typically reflective of a pattern of abuse. We would also note that strangulation, a 
known indicator of heightened risk for lethality, would be charged as a felony assault. These 
cases are particularly concerning, since non-fatalstrangulation is frequently a precursor to 
domestic violence homicide (H RP 13*“ report, p. 18). 
After being charged with the felony crime, for which they could be facing up to 5 or 
10 years of incarceration, conditions of release are imposed on the defendant. ln domestic 
violence cases, the conditions almost always will include a prohibition on the defendant 
having any contact with the victim. This is one of the primary ways our criminal legal system 
response attempts to create safety and space for survivors to start healing. Whena 
defendant, charged with a felony domestic violence crime and prohibited through a court 
order from having contact with their victim, then goes on to have contact with that victim in 
violation of that court order, under current law, they are charged with the Class C crime of 
violation of conditions of release. 
If you think about what that looks like from the perspective of the victim: they have 
reported either a serious assault or a continued pattern of abuse; they have gone through a 
law enforcement interview, sometimes even writing out and signing a sworn statement; and 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, which included providing emergency shelter to more than 250 children. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of3 
sometimes this will involve having photos taken of their body and/or a hospital visit. They have spoken to a victim witness advocate, likely had a subsequent interview with an 
assistant district attorney and may even have had to testify in front of a grand jury. They have been told that a court has ordered the person who has harmed them not to have any 
contact with them. They may have even started to feel some distance from the trauma, 
beginning a process of healing. Then the person who harmed them, who has been court 
ordered to stay away, contacts them - sometimes from within the correctional facility they 
are being held at pre-trial. Even if there are no overt threats made to them during that 
contact, what does that say to a victim about the State’s ability to protect them and make the abuse stop? What level of trust should the victim now place in the criminal legal system- 
the system asking them to continue to participate in the prosecution of the person who has 
harmed them? What reason would they have to believe that the State will be able to keep 
them safe from further harm? 
To this type of violation, a violation of a clear and unambiguous court order, there 
should be swift and sure consequences - particularly for those individuals who perpetrate 
domestic violence, most of whom believe they are privileged to do so, and that the price of 
any consequence for their behavior will not be more than they are willing to pay. Yet, just by virtue of what has happened, a victim is going to have greater trepidation at the idea of 
cooperating with prosecution, questioning whether or not the system can make a difference 
in their lives and whether that impact will be positive or not. 
In response to a request from MCEDV last week, the Maine Prosecutors Association 
provided the following data indicating how Class C Violations of Conditions of Release have 
been charged in the last several years, which suggests that between 58-69% of all felony 
VCRs that were charged over the last three calendar years were in response to a defendant 
having prohibited contact with their victim. 
2020 2021 2022 
Total Class C 620 513 344 VCRs Charged 
Violation was 450 318 248 
contact w/a 
victim 
Violation was 170 195 96 
other than 
contact w/a 
victim 
% of Class C 69% 58% 68% 
VCRs for victim 
contact 
violation
|)v_ “ P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2o7_43O_g334 
It is our understanding that the data cannot be further distilled to determine the 
frequency of the other three types of violations that serve as a basis for the ClassC 
violations of conditions of release charge, including prohibited possession of a firearm. ’ 
There are certainly choices can be made about which types of violations indicate a 
heightened public safety risk and warrant a heightened response. We would submit to you 
that a person, charged with felony domestic violence, who then goes on to have prohibited 
contact with their victim or retains possession of a deadly weapon in clear violation of the 
court’s order are two types of violation worthy of deep consideration prior to modification. 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. MCEDV and our 
member programs look forward to continuing to engage with legislators and other 
interested parties on these important issues. 
Contact information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph= (207) 430-8334 
Email: andrea@mcedv.org 
1 Advancement of good public policy requires good data. At present, the State cannot pull together aggregate 
data from the point of arrest through sentence completion. Maine continues to struggle to understand the 
practical impact of various criminal legal system policy choices because the state has failed to prioritize the 
collection and reporting of reliable data. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
