Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 1449
April 9, 2023
To members of the Committee on Judiciary of the Maine Legislature:
I am writing to the Committee to offer qualified support for LD 1449, “An Act to 
Amend the Laws Regarding Violations of Condition of Release.” Support is qualified 
based on what I hope is a significant number who are released and not held in jail as a
result of changing bail violations from Class C to Class E. Bail violations should be 
sanctioned in some other way, rather than individuals being returned to jail without an
option of release before trail. I hope that changing these violations to Class E will 
mean that those charged with bail violations will no longer be returned to jail but will 
be dealt with in some other way.
Maine’s county jails have too many people in them.  Most are considered “pre-trial,” 
which means they are being locked up even though they are deemed innocent until 
proven guilty. Except in those cases where a person is determined to be either a flight 
risk or a danger to some member(s) of the community, such as a person charged with 
domestic or sexual violence, no one should be held before trial. The current bail 
system is unfair—it allows those with money, or access to  it, to be released while 
those who do not have enough of it are locked up until trial. Attempting to establish a 
defense while incarcerated is difficult, sometimes impossible. It is a corruption of our 
current criminal punishment system and creates an imbalance in a justice system.
The majority of those in jail have problems with either mental health (MH), substance
use disorder (SUD), or both. In many cases, they have been arrested even though their
real problem is a public health issue. They should be receiving treatment for those 
MH or SUD issues, not locked up in places where those conditions may get worse and
are unlikely to get better, even if there are programs offered in the jail. This is 
expensive for all Maine people and detrimental to our communities, because those 
individuals should be receiving treatment so they can get better, which can’t happen 
effectively if they are in jail. Enabling more of those charged with a crime to get help 
or treatment can reduce crime in the long term in our state. 
In many cases, those who are locked up for bail violations are punished for an act that
is not illegal. It is only a condition of bail. This is excessive punishment. There can 
and ought to be some other sanction for that violation, but being locked up without 
any way to be released should not be one of those. 
Please support LD 1449. 
Sincerely,
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706
larryd@myfairpoint.net
