PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.acIumaine org 
AMERICAN GIIIII. LIBERTIES IINIUII 
Maine‘ 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1449 — Ought to Pass 
An Act To Amend the Laws Regarding Violations of Conditions of Release 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I am here to support LD 1449. 
The ACLU of Maine has worked for years to reform our state’s pretrial system. 
A consistent theme in our testimony, and in our public advocacy, has been the myriad 
harms caused by the money bail system. Even one day behind bars can lead to the 
loss of jobs, child custody, and a bed in a recovery house. You, and your colleagues 
and predecessors, have also heard us discuss how criminal records can hinder peoples’ 
future success. This bill addresses some of these concerns, by removing the provision 
of Maine’s law that makes some violations of conditions of release a felony offense 
instead of the usual misdemeanor. 
Maine is one of only seven states where a violation of a condition of pretrial 
release other than a failure to appear in court is in and of itself a new crime.1 In other 
states, if a person violates a bail condition and the district attorney feels the violation 
was egregious, they can file a motion to revoke bail and address the violation, without 
adding an additional criminal charge to a person’s record. Here, -we not only make 
violations a new crime in and of itself, but some violations are felony crimes. This 
makes us an extreme outlier compared to other states.' 
Being convicted of a felony can lead to what we call collateral consequences: 
sanctions, penalties and regulations that a judge ‘does not include when sentencing 
someone, but that apply to people convicted of crimes long after they have served 
their time. This includes the loss of professional licenses, loss of the right to vote in 
many states, loss of the right to own a firearm in many states, loss of custody, and 
difficulty in getting and keeping jobs. 
We urge you to bring Maine closer in line with 43 other states by voting “ought 
to pass” onL _D 1449.'
