STATE OF MAINE 
KATHRYN SLATTERY R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY 
DISTRICT V DISTRICT I 7% 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS NATASHA IRVING 
])15'1'R1(}T II DISTRICT VI 
NEH, MCLEAN M v ROBERT GRANGER 
; "Pf A DISTRICTVII 
D1s'nuc'rIII aw 
_j ‘$15 Tom) R. COLLINS MAEGHAN MALONEY MA 
4, /;_;_' .. 
Drsmrcrlv T DISTRICTVI11 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
SHIRA BURNS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
“An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Violations of Condition of Release” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Public Hearing Date: April 10, 2023 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1449 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Shira Burns and I represent the Maine Prosecutors Association. I am 
testifying in opposition of LD 1449. 
Enacting this legislation directly attacks the heart of holding domestic violence offenders 
accountable and providing victim safety through the criminal justice system. Currently, you can 
only be charged with a Class C Violation of Condition of Release (VCR) if you are on bail fora 
felony-level crime and you violate one of the following conditions: 
l. Avoid all contact with a victim of the alleged crime, a potential witness regarding the 
alleged crime or With any other family or household members of the victim or the 
defendant or to contact those individuals only at certain times or under certain 
conditions; 
2. Refrain from possessing a ﬁrearm or other dangerous weapon; 
3. Enter and remain in a long-term residential facility for the treatment of substance use 
disorder; and- 
4. Return to custody for speciﬁed hours following release for employment, schooling or 
other limited purposes. 
Looking at the statistics on the use of this charge, by far the most common reason a person is 
charged with Class C Violation of Conditions of Release is because a domestic violence offender 
contacted his victim after speciﬁcally being told by a judicial officer not to do so and that it would 
be a felony-level crime if he does contact his victim. This contact contributes to the ongoing power 
and control an offender exhibits over his victim. By reducing this conduct to a Class E crime, with 
the maximum sentence of 6 months, it minimizes the actions taken by a domestic violence oﬁender 
that chooses to continue to use power and control tactics even when the criminal justice system has 
intervened. Furthermore, judges are giving sentences above 6 months for this conduct, showing the 
need for higher level crime. 
This bill reduces the class of crime for a person possessing a ﬁrearm when specifically ordered not 
to through conditions of release while released on felony-level bail. Again, this applies directly to 
our domestic violence crimes. About half of our homicides each year are domestic violence related 
and most of them are committed with a ﬁrearm. An abusive partner’s access to a ﬁrearm is a serious 
threat to victims of domestic violence, making it ﬁve times more likely that a woman willbe
killed.1 This bill goes on to reduce the class of crime for possession of a ﬁrearm when prohibited 
through conditions of release when a ﬁrearm Was used in the crime. For example, a defendant may 
have been arrested for robbery with the use of a ﬁrearm and released on speciﬁc conditions not to 
use or possess a ﬁrearm, but now could only be charged with a Class E offense if found in 
possession of a ﬁrearm in violation of his conditions of release. 
Section 2 through 6 of this bill only affects domestic violence crimes and how they can be elevated 
to a Class C crime. Our current statute allows a domestic violence crime be elevated to a Class C if 
the offender has previously been convicted in the last ten years for a domestic violence crime, 
violation of protection ﬁom abuse order, or for a felony violation of condition of release for 
specially contacting the victim or for possession a dangerous weapon or ﬁrearm when the victim of 
the crime was a family or household member. This bill seeks to repeal the section where a domestic 
violence crime can be elevated to a Class C crime With a prior conviction in the last ten years ofa 
Class C VCR for contacting the victim or possession a dangerous weapon or ﬁrearm when the 
victim of the crime Was a family or household member. Repealing this section would be 
inconsistent with having a violation of protection order as a basis to enhance the crime since they 
Would be based on similar, if not the same, conduct by the offender. The conviction of a felony- 
level VCR for contacting a victim of a crime that is a family or household member or possession of 
a dangerous weapon or ﬁrearm is an entirely appropriate conviction to enhance a subsequent 
domestic violence crime. It shows the ongoing pattern of abuse, physical or not, that these offenders 
choose to engage in. 
Domestic violence is a serious public health problemz Repealing laws that can actually holda 
domestic violence offender accountable for their own choices is bad public policy and even worse 
public safety. 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association is in opposition of LD 1449. 
Shira Burns, Esq. 
Executive Director 
Maine Prosecutors Association 
Shira.burns@maineprosecutors.com 
1J.C. Campbell, et al., “Risk Factors for Femicide in Abusive Relationships: Results ﬁom a Multisite Case Control Sturdy. 
American Journal of Public Health 93, no.7 (2003): 1089-1097. 
2 wvvw.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/intimatepartnerviolence/indexhtml
