Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 194
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT Committee
Would you please consider amending LD 194 An Act to Update and Clarify the Public Utilities 
Commission's Reporting Requirements so that 35-A MRSA Section 3217, subsection 1  is not 
repealed.
The effort to include this in the Maine PUC Annual Report is minimal and, more specifically, is
as follows as it appeared in the 2021 Annual Report :
 " ELECTRIC RESTRUCTURING ACTIVITY IN OTHER STATES The Restructuring Act directs 
the Commission to report activities in other states associated with changes in the regulation of electric 
utilities. Fully implemented restructured markets remain primarily concentrated in the northeast and 
mid-Atlantic states. State-by-state data are provided at this 
link:http://www.eia.gov/electricity/policies/restructuring/restructure_elect.html 
Data sources: LMP data: 
https://www.iso-ne.com/isoexpress/web/reports/pricing/-/tree/monthly-lmp-indicesFCM data: 
https://www.iso-ne.com/about/key-stats/markets#f  "
I have often referred to the LMP data and the FCM data and the PUC links are good 
to keep intact.
I would really like the PUC to expand this section of their report, They state "The Restructuring Act 
directs the Commission to report activities in other states associated with changes in the regulation of 
electric utilities."  
Maine as a state utilizing ISO-NE as the system operator should be informed of activities other states 
have on ISO-NE rules, methods and proposed changes. I offer the following statements from the 
website Citizens' Task Force on Wind Power - Maine (windtaskforce.org)
JANUARY 3, 2023ISO-NE president outlines progress, next steps in clean energy transition 
ISO-NE president outlines progress, next steps in clean energy transition - ISO Newswire
Part of The President's Statement: "The region will need to make significant 
investments in building critical infrastructure, including new transmission lines to 
carry energy generated by offshore wind and solar farms to its destination,” he writes.
“In addition, existing power plants and fuel sources will need to be retained and 
maintained to provide critical energy supply reserves until long-duration storage 
technologies take hold.”
New England or New Brunswick? Posted by Dan McKay on December 29, 2022 at 5:12am
Would Maine be better off sharing grid scale electrical operations with The New Brunswick System 
Operator than ISO-NE?   A Number of Facts Say Yes.  
1. The Maine PUC selects New Brunswick as the standard offer provider for most of Maine, 67 % for 
CMP Residential & Commercial Accounts, 100% for Versant Residential and Commercial Accounts    
2. Weather is a prime driver of electricity demand. New Brunswick weather is much like Maine 
weather, much more so than Boston and Connecticut weather. 
 3. Maine and New Brunswick are similar populations and economics 
 4. Transmission lines already connect Maine to New Brunswick 
  5. New Brunswick has access to Hydro-Quebec power   
6. A joint system operation with NB will lower electric costs significantly and immediately  
 7. Maine could enjoy all the physical assets of NECEC  
 8. Maine could become zero carbon in the electric generation sector by doing away with 5 natural gas 
plants, RECs, Renewable Portfolio Standards, Net Metering, Long Term Energy Contracts, RGGI and 
a large portion of EMT directives, thus saving many millions of dollars in electric rates.   
9. There would be no need for the Northern Maine Renewable Project, the Aqua Ventus project or even
more wind and solar projects. Many wind projects would elect to retire once their long term contracts 
with Southern New England Utilities expired.  With Maine at zero carbon, all projects proposed would 
be evaluated by need and impacts on the shared grid with New Brunswick  
 10. Maine is only a small island in ISO-NE, subject to the whims of the large power centers of 
Southern New England.
 The Electric Bill Mostly Originates from ISO-NE Actions Posted by Dan McKay on 
December 27, 2022 at 6:20amView Blog  
UNDERSTAND, ISO-NE MARKET ACTIONS = 83% OF ELECTRIC BILLS.
See Chart 5 – CMP Historical Prices by Components Page 18 of PUC 2021 Annual Report
Components of a Maine Electric Bill 
Over the Years: 
The Green Bar Is the Supply (Generation) Costs. It Originates From the ISO-NE Wholesale Market. 
The Blue Bar is Transmission Costs. It Originates from Actions of the ISO-NE 
Market and is Approved by the Feds.
The Red Bar is the Distribution Costs. It Originates from the Local Utility Serving 
Maine, i.e. CMP, Versant. 
This Graph Depicts CMP Costs      
The Supply Costs and the Transmission Costs in 2023 Will have More Than Doubled Since 2012 
(2023 Supply Costs= 17.63 cents)
Other states have impact on ISO-NE which has impacts on Maine. These actions by 
other states in the ISO-NE Network effectively make Maine's goal of zero carbon a 
futile endeavor. 
I leave you with a recent article appearing in the "Boston Globe" revealing the 
invasion of activists into ISO-NE Committees:
https://www.bostonglobe.com/2023/01/25/science/how-climate-activists-took-over-little-known
-group-iso-new-england/?s_campaign=8315

