DV. 101 Western Ave. 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coaiition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2074303334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
ln SUPPORT of LD 1240: “An Act to Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal 
Representation to Families in the Child Protection System” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, l am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ to urge your support of LD 1240, “An Act to Develop a Pilot Program to 
Provide Legal Representation to Families in the Child Protection System.” 
Everyone involved in Maine's child welfare system wants parents to keep their 
children safe. A best practice child welfare response to families impacted by domestic abuse 
and violence is to ensure survivors and their children are supported in a way that allows 
them to stay together safely, avoiding the trauma of unnecessary child-removal. Maine has 
long struggled with actioning our intentions around that practice. Making attorneys 
available earlier in the process is essential to helping all involved focus on, prioritize, and 
provide a family with those supports and interventions that are most likely to address the 
underlying concerns bringing the individual or family into the child welfare process in the 
first place. Access to an attorney would also ensure that parents are provided with clear, 
accurate, and timely feedback on the likely legal consequences for compliance or non- 
compliance with any of the Department ’s recommendations and/or non-negotiable 
requirements early enough in the process for it to make a difference in the trajectory of the 
entire family's child welfare experience - but especially the experience of the children for 
whom these choices have the most profound and long-lasting impact. 
The Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel’s 2021 annual report, which served as the 
basis for the work of the Commission to Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal 
Representation to Families in the Child Protection System, included an ask that the Maine 
Legislature fund exactly this kind of expanded legal representation pilot program. 
Additionally, pre-petition legal representation programs are supported by national child 
welfare system technical assistance providers, like Casey Family Programs. Casey is an 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year, which included providing emergency shelter to more than 250 children. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
I\/ICEDV Page 2 of4 
organization that has been relied upon by the Maine Department of Health and Human 
Services to help support the positive evolution of its own work. They provide technical 
assistance in all 50 states to support long-lasting improvements in the well-being of children, 
families and the communities where they live. Casey Family Programs has identified pre- 
petition legal representation as critical to the continuum of legal advocacy and asa 
strategically focused effort to help support families. Our neighbor state of Massachusetts 
has recently invested significantly to expand their pre-petition legal representation program. 
Support for pre~petition legal representation comes from recognition that the 
current system of providing a low-income family with counsel only after a child has been 
removed brings legal representation into the process too late to avoid unnecessary 
disruptions for children and costs to the state. Once children have been removed, families 
are in a place where trying to get to a successful place is a profoundly difficult challenge. 
And the costs are high to the state and taxpayers. With child removal, the state must pay for 
foster placement; for parent attorneys for every parent or guardian; for legal representation 
of the state from the Office of the Attorney General; for a guardian ad litem for the children; 
and for costs incurred by the Maine Judicial Branch throughout what is often more thana 
year of litigation. Eventually, by supporting families with what they need to be safe and 
thrive, such that child removal is unnecessary, and providing pre-petition legal 
representation will not only reduce child trauma, it will also result in cost-savings to the 
state. 
Under our current system, families are necessarily reliant on individual caseworkers for 
information not only on what to expect and what their rights are, but also as to what the 
State’s obligations are. In the recent parent survey conducted by the Maine Child Welfare 
Advisory Panel, only 15.5% of respondent parents answered “Yes” to the question of 
whether caseworkers helped them understand what to expect in the process. inherent in 
that response is also the reality that families are not getting useful or digestible information 
about their rights, the State’s obligations, and the consequences for not meeting the 
Department's expectations. 
Substantial narrative feedback from the Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel's Fall 2021 
survey to community providers also supported MCWAP recommending that Maine take 
steps to support pre-petition representation. Having an attorney involved as soon as OCFS 
opens a case would help address the following observations from those surveys, all of which 
were noted by multiple provider respondents: 
0 A need for OCFS staff to be more transparent and honest with parents about what to 
expect and what their rights are in this process. Several providers noted experiencing 
frequent misrepresentations made to parents by OCFS staff. 
v A common practice of DH HS failing to offer and/or failing to provide pre-removal 
resources that DH HS has at their disposal, or otherwise failing to do enough to 
support families to that the compounding trauma of removal might be prevented. At
Dv. 101 Western Ave. 
' P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 207.430.8334 
least one commenter expressly linked this to the parent not having representation in 
this stage of the case. 
0 OCFS having not adhered to their own policies, practices, and statutory obligations. 
0 A need for a check on biases within the system, with particular reference to case 
workers and investigators. 
0 Unrealistic expectations for immediate outcomes despite a clear lack of resources 
available to address the issue, with subsequent removal action taken as a result ofa 
parent having failed to meet those unrealistic expectations. 
0 Expectations in cases involving domestic abuse and violence in particular, that put 
accountability for changing behaviors and intervention to prevent abuse on the non- 
offending parent as opposed to the parent engaging in abusive behavior? 
0 Directives to move/leave/separate from the other parent and cease contact with that 
abusive partner without the practical needed supports for the non-offending parent 
and children in place, such as legal representation to obtain protection orders and/or 
family court orders and practical supports like childcare and transportation.3 
Making legal advice and representation available to parents earlier on in the process will 
help ensure that these articulated concerns by providers happen less frequently and do not 
have as much of an impact on families when they do. lt will help ensure that family plans are 
structured in a way that does not have parents engaging with a checklist of unnecessary 
obligations to meet but instead a list of supports focused on those things most likely to 
address factors that pose the most risk to child wellbeing. it will support parents in 
achieving safety objectives through ancillary court proceedings like protection from abuse, 
1 
An example of this would include the frequent creation of an imbalance of expectations regarding contact 
between the parents where domestic abuse and violence is apparent, in which the onus is placed on the non- 
offending parent to have no contact with the abusive parent rather than holding the abusive parent 
accountable for staying away from the other parent and children. 
3 Lack of resources for the non-offending parent in managing the risks posed by the abusive parent leave the 
family ill-equipped to meet expectations and stay safe. And so such directives are often in opposition to the 
actual safety concerns of non-offending parents. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 4of4 
family court and eviction cases, and it will help hold the Department accountable to its 
obligations to families whose progress it is monitoring. 
If Maine continues to view child welfare as solely the responsibility of the Office of Child 
and Family Services, Maine's children will be lost in bureaucracy rather than supported ona 
path to safety and joy. Child welfare literally ‘takes a village, ’ and child wellbeing is better 
attended to by ensuring all families have access to the basic resources they need to thrive. 
MCEDV encourages iVlaine’s leaders to continue to support better universal access to 
childcare, transportation, housing, and healthcare services. Just a little bit of help and 
acknowledgement of real challenges can often make a world of difference to a struggling 
family. Providing pre-petition legal representation is an essential example of that kind of 
help. lt’s not about thwarting the efforts of the Office of Child and Family Services to keep 
children safe; it's about expanding the support available to parents to ensure they are set up 
for success in achieving our shared goal of children safely connected with nurturing parents 
and protected from harm. For all of these reasons, MCEDV and our member programs urge 
you to support creating a pre-petition legal representation program here in Maine. 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. MCEDV and our 
member programs look forward to continuing to engage with legislators and other 
interested parties on these important issues. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 430-8334, Email: andrea@mcedv.org
