. “:1. 
1; HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Holly Stow. TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
71 Dover Rd. 
Boothbay, ME 04537 
Phone: (207) 633-5979 
Hollv.Stover@legislature.maine.gov 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Holly B. Stover presenting 
LD 1240, An Act to Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal Representation 
to Families in the Child Protection System 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, I am Holly Stover, and I represent House District 48, including the towns of Boothbay, 
Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, Southpoit, South Bristol and Westpoit Island. I appear before you 
this afternoon to present LD 1240, An Act to Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal 
Representation to Families in the Child Protection System. 
LD I240 is a follow-up to LD 1824, Resolve, To Establish the Commission to Develop a Pilot 
Program to Provide Legal Representation to Families in the Child Protection System. The 
Commission spent several months meeting and speaking with national experts on prepetition 
services and the ways other states have implemented these particular services. The Commission 
concluded with several recommendations that were brought forward to you today in LD 1240. 
LD 1240 would allow the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services to design and 
implement a 2-year pilot program to provide legal counsel and related advocacy services to 
indigent parents and guardians residing in Androscoggin, Franklin and Oxford counties when the 
Department of Health and Human Services initiates an investigation of a report of suspected 
abuse or neglect to determine if a child is at risk of harm. It directs the Commission to establish a 
"warmline" to provide information and referrals statewide to parents and guardians who are 
subj ect to child protection investigations and to screen parents and guardians for eligibility to 
receive pilot program services. It directs the Department of Health and Human Services to 
coordinate with the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services to provide information to the 
public regarding the warmline and pilot program. 
In order to measure the effectiveness of the pilot, LD 1240 requires that there be an evaluation 
component that will include data collection and assessment. It is important that an independent 
entity conduct this evaluation and that reports of progress be made at the end of the ﬁrst year and 
updated at 6-month intervals until the end of the third year. Ideally, the evaluation will inform 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southport and Westport Island
the Legislature on the impact of using civil legal services during the pre-petition phase of child 
protective cases and provide information regarding the replication of this pilot project to other 
areas of the state. 
LD 1240 allows an opportunity to provide civil legal representation to parents or guardians who 
have historically had little or no support during this period of child protection investigation. We 
have learned from other states that some of this work can be absorbed into existing funding 
structures. I am asking for your support on LD 1240 to improve civil legal representation for 
children and families in open child protective proceedings. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southport and Westport Island
