 
 
Testimony of  Melissa Hackett  
Policy Associate,  Maine  Children’s Alliance   
In opposition to LD 12 40: “An Act to Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal Representation to 
Families in the Child Protection System”  
April 1 0, 2023  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen  and esteemed members of the Judiciary  Committee. 
My name is Melissa Hackett, and I am offeri ng testimony in support of LD 1240  on behalf of the 
Maine Children’s Alliance. Our organization  is a public policy, nonprofit improving the lives of 
Maine children, youth and families through research, collaboration,  and advocacy.  I am a policy 
asso ciate, with a focus on child welfare.  
Our organization supported the legislation last session that established the Commission to 
Develop a Pilot Program to Provide Legal Representation to Families in the Child Protection 
System ,i whose work and findings led to the legislation before you now. This Commission 
brought together policymakers, administrators, providers,  and attorneys, to learn from experts 
in the field about best practice and models for providing legal representation to  families 
involved in the child welfare system. We believe this information and robust discussion resulted 
in the development of meaningful and actionable legislation to pilot a progra m to deliver legal 
representation to families involved with  child protec tion here in Maine.  
This is critical to ensuring parents have legal counsel and are provided information and support 
as they navigat e the complexities of the legal process related to the custody of their child. Th e 
legal process is already challenging for  people outside the system to understand and navigate; 
for parents who are at risk of losing  their children to state custody, this is also an emotionally 
tumultuous time, making it even more challenging . There are also equity implications, given 
that low -income families are less likely to have the resources to afford legal counsel at an early 
stage in the legal process.  
As was noted in the Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel’s 2021 Annual Report:  

Under the current system, a low -income family is only provided with counsel after a child has 
been removed. During the assessment period of child protective cases, families are reliant on 
individual caseworkers for information on what to expect and what their rights are, and for 
information on the State’s obligations and limitations. In the Panel’s 2021 parent survey, only 
15.5% of respondents answered “Yes” to the question of whether ca seworkers helped them 
understand what to e xpect in the child protective process. Providing legal representation during 
the assessment phase of child protection will ensure families receive useful and understandable 
information about their rights and the St ate’s o bligations at this critical point in the case 
process.  
By providing legal counsel sooner to families during child protecti ve involvement , we can ensure 
parents have a better understanding of th e process , including their role, the State’s role, and t he 
Court’s role in working to address challenges to child safety to prevent the removal of a child. It 
is particularly important that this legislation would create more equitable access to legal 
counsel for parents involved in the child welfare system, who  are otherwise  less likely to be able 
to afford the benefit of their own legal counsel.  
We support the goals of this legislation, and the identified mechanism for establishing a warm 
line for parents and a pilot program to provide legal representation to parents early in the child 
protective process. This is an important step to ensuring pare nts have the information and legal 
support they need to navigate their case and to work to address challenges so the ir children can 
safely remain with them. We urge the committee to vote ought to pass on this legislation.  
Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
 
i https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9341   
