‘ Allumbgtigh" _ ' 
'1 %i"' * 
‘ill l,J'l3" 
April 18, 2023 
From: Joel Allumbaugh 
President 
The Alluinbaugh Agency 
Visiting Fellow 
The Foundation for Government Accountability 
RE: L.D. 1373 
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, insurance & Financial 
Services: 
l come before you today in support of L.D. 1373, An Act To Allow Employers To Shop For Competitive Health Plan 
Options by Expanding the Disclosure of Health Claims Information. 
I would like to take this opportunity to introduce The Allumbaugh Agency. We are a full—service employee benefit 
agency specializing in the design and administration of employee benefit plans. Our customers are l\/laine small 
businesses and their employees. lam also a Visiting Fellow with the Foundation for Government Accountability, 
a nonpartisan, non-profit organization that strives to improve health care policy in the states and Washington, 
D.C. 
This bill aims to further provide options and increase affordability for employer health plans by amending the 
claims experience statute. It requires insurers to provide claims experience reports to employers whose rates 
are based upon the claims experience of their group. It expands an existing requirement to specify what reports 
insurers are required to provide. The reports required are consistent with the data requested by insurers and 
stop loss insurers when pricing competitive plans. 
l ask you to consider a few key points. First and foremost, this bill simply requires insurers to provide to 
employers the information they request when providing quotes. Insurance companies will deny a request for 
quotes when they cannot get adequate reporting on claims experience, yet when they are the incumbent 
insurer, they refuse to provide the very data they require. This is a significant double standard that only hurts 
employers and their employees ’ access to affordable health insurance. In addition: 
Employers Need Competition to Lower Rates 
Employers benefit when they can shop their health insurance plan among multiple insurers to find the best plan 
and rates for them and their employees. When they are unable to access the necessary information to seek 
quotes, they are powerless when rates increase. This hurts both the employer and their employees.
‘ Allumpaugh ,i _- 
,|,.i 1 
\‘l ‘ 2*, -I. 
Employers have a Right to this Information 
Claims experience is data associated with the employer' s health plan and is their data, not the insurance 
companies. 
Reports do not Disclose Personal Health Information 
All reports are de~identified and do not disclose names of any employees. Further, the bill allows for the reports 
to be sent directly from one insurer to another, bypassing the employer altogether, as an additional protection if 
needed to protect personal health information. 
Carriers Provide this Data Today 
The carriers provide reports with comparable information today when employers select their level funded 
products which they market to same employer population this bill targets. Arguments that these reports are 
unique or not suitable for distribution ring hollow. 
Minimalist Approach 
This bill takes a very minimalist, targeted approach to only request the basic information that is commonly 
requested by insurance companies and stop loss insurers when seeking competitive health plan options. 
Information Enables Plan Improvements 
Employers routinely utilize claims data to inform plan improvements. For example, data indicating a high 
incidence of diabetes with gaps in care compliance could enable an employer to add diabetic support programs 
such as care management services and access to diabetic supplies and services at low or no cost to employees. 
Thank you for your consideration. l urge you to improve access to lower cost health insurance coverage for 
employers and their employees and vote ought to pass on LD 1373. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Joel Allumbaugh 
President, The Allumbaugh Agency 
Visiting Fellow, The Foundation for Government Accountability
