   
 
 
 
 
 
Legislative Document 788 : Enabling Financial Services for Maine’s 
Cannabis Industry  
 
Prepared for:  Chairwoman Donna Bailey, Maine Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services  
  
Prepared by: Geoff Lawrence, Director of Drug Policy, Reason Foundation  
     
Date: April 5, 2023  
 
 
Legislative Document 788 Could Lead to Partial Banking Solution for Maine’s Cannabis 
Industry  
 
Dear  Chair woman Bailey  and members  of the committee:  
 
On behalf  of Reason  Foundation,  thank  you for accepting  these  comments  and making  them  part of the public 
record.  Reason Foundation is committed to ensuring that state -regulated marijuana markets are 
competitive, offer widespread opportunities for entrepreneurship, and can successfully transition comm erce 
away from dangerous illicit markets and into the legal market.  
 
One of the primary challenges in setting up a state marijuana market is dealing with the general lack of 
financial services available to state -licensed cannabis businesses. Legislative Do cument 788 directs the state 
treasurer to “review options for meeting the banking needs of individuals and businesses involved in the 
adult use cannabis and medical cannabis industries.”  
 
Financial institutions in the United States are subject to a variety of federal regulation even if they are 
chartered at the state level. In general, banks are required to purchase deposit insurance from the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, and most credit unions must purchase deposit insurance from the Nation al 
Credit Union Administration. Both are federally chartered and have refused to grant deposit insurance to 
new financial institutions that propose to service the state -legal cannabis industry. To engage in interbank 
transactions, a financial institution m ust also obtain a Federal Reserve master account. The Federal Reserve 
has denied these to new institutions proposing to serve the cannabis industry. All financial institutions must 
also comply with federal anti -money -laundering laws, including the Bank Sec recy Act.  
 
It is possible for an existing financial institution to offer accounts to state -licensed cannabis businesses while 
remaining in compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act, although doing so is resource -intensive. In 2014, the 
Financial Crimes Enforcem ent Network (FinCEN), a division of the Justice Department, promulgated rules that 
financial institutions would need to follow in order to offer accounts to state -licensed cannabis businesses. It 
includes performing extensive know -your -customer (KYC) requi rements and ongoing reporting on 
transactions to FinCEN. Among the KYC requirements, financial institutions must:  
 
• Verify with the appropriate state regulator that the business is duly licensed and registered;  

   
 
 
 
• Review the state license application;  
• Request available information about the business and related parties from state licensing 
authorities;  
• Develop an understanding of the normal and expected activity for the business;  
• Monitor publicly available sources for adverse information about the business and related parties on 
an ongoing basis;  
• Monitor the account for suspicious activity on an ongoing basis; and  
• Refresh information obtained about the customer at the time the account was opened on a periodic 
basis.  
 
In addition to these requirements, a financia l institution must submit a Suspicious Activity Report to FinCEN 
at least every six months detailing the amounts of deposits, withdrawals and transfers that occur within the 
customer’s account even if the financial institution believes the customer is in f ull compliance with state 
laws. If the financial institution suspects the customer may be out of compliance or engaged in unlicensed 
activity, reporting requirements become more extensive.  
 
This volume of work is resource -intensive, and so most financial i nstitutions have made the business decision 
not to offer accounts to state -licensed cannabis businesses because servicing these accounts is unprofitable. 
This has left cannabis businesses to transact and pay taxes in physical cash, which presents a variety  of public 
safety concerns and general inefficiency.  
 
However, while states may be limited in their ability to address this situation, there are state policies that can 
ease the burden of banking the cannabis industry. Primarily, states can create an infor mation -sharing portal 
that allows financial institutions to electronically access documents and transaction data relating to their 
customers who are cannabis businesses. This data should include a window into the customer’s sales and 
receipts of regulated cannabis inventory so banks can trace deposits to legitimate transactions, as well as a 
full docket containing the licensing information needed for financial institutions to complete their KYC 
requirements. The licensed cannabis business would need to cons ent to the release of this information to 
their chosen financial institution. Michigan has already created an information -sharing portal that performs 
these functions, and it appears to have eased some of the costs for financial institutions to offer accou nts to 
these businesses.  
 
Although widespread accessibility of financial services for the cannabis industry will remain dependent on a 
change in federal law, Maine can at least follow Michigan’s lead and create a data -sharing portal.  
 
Thank you,   
  
Geoffre y Lawrence   
Managing Director of Drug Policy, Reason Foundation   
 
