It is imperative that legal Maine businesses have access to the financial tools they need to safely, 
securely and effectively operate, grow, and contribute to our economy. The cannabis industry is a 
legitimate state licensed trade but is treated unfairly. Having safe access to financial institutions allows 
them to operate in a more efficient, compliant, and fiscally responsible manner. Providing access to 
financial institutions is a step in the right direction to support these businesses and their employees. It 
would increase safety for our communities and decrease discrimination against these businesses. 
In my experience, the biased treatment of the adult-use/recreational cannabis industry has led to 
financial hardships that the State of Maine needs to recognize.  Cannabis-related businesses are unfairly 
targeted by high fees due to limited competition for financial options and the adult-use/recreational 
side of the industry has an overstated gross value due to the inability to record business expenses when 
filing taxes. 
Having increased opportunities to access financial institutions would decrease public safety threats; 
robberies, illegal use of funds (i.e. money-laundering, terrorist financing etc.), tax evasion, stigma 
against the industry, costs associated with the few banks willing to work with businesses in this industry 
and would help decrease some of the financial hurdles that are a barriers to entry for most small 
businesses.
Banking opportunities would also increase safe, regulated, transparent financial business practices as 
well as provide affordable access to financial services for state licensed businesses which would increase 
the physical safety for customers, employees, communities and neighborhoods by decreasing the 
amounts of cash on hand, in-turn helping our local law enforcement. 
Banking would also increase business investments and donations to local communities, higher accuracy 
in record keeping and tax compliance for sales and income. It would also help increase respect and 
legitimacy. Increasing competition amongst banks for accounts within the industry would help lower the 
costs and fees currently associated with few banks in Maine that are willing to work with cannabis 
related businesses. It would also help provide loan opportunities for startup businesses and to 
employees that may want to purchase homes etc., It would also help increase the willingness of indirect 
businesses to work with cannabis establishments (i.e. fuel companies, landlords etc.) that may 
otherwise not want to jeopardize their owns businesses through their relationship with a cannabis 
establishment or an employee.
As a legitimate state licensed adult-use cannabis business owner, I feel that we are unsupported and 
underappreciated by our state. We operate in the most regulated industry in Maine, receive the least 
amount of support, and are the most discriminated against. 
In 2022, on the Office of Cannabis Policy website, the adult use/recreational cannabis industry had 
almost $160 Million recorded sales (which was mostly in cash) and the state’s tax share and revenues 
from licensing and fees will be about $26,216,280. There was a total of 267 adult use establishments 
(cultivation, manufacturing, retail stores, testing sites) with 3,496 active Individual Identification Cards 
issued. (These I.I.C’s are generated by the State of Maine after the individual successfully passes a 
federal background and fingerprinting check). 
The sales amount for the medical use side for 2022 is unavailable, however in 2021 it was $6.6 Million. 
Currently, there are 7,083 registered caregivers, employees/assistants and medical providers, with 8,419 
printed patient certificates. 
If looking at the number of state licensed businesses and individuals in this industry including the 
employees and assistants, there are over 10,500 people involved in the trade. Not including the 8400 
patients and all of the transactions on the adult use side. 
This is a staggering safety issue. Imagine the amount of cash that is transferred one to another, directly/ 
indirectly and the havoc not having access to banking can cause. 
According to the State of Maines Bureau of Financial Institutions, currently, there are 91 operating 
financial institutions in Maine.  There are only 2 that will serve the cannabis industry. 1 of the 2 can only 
serve the 5 most southern counties out of 13 in the state due to their charter. Fees associated are 1.5% 
on all deposits (an agreement between the bank and the business stipulates that all funds that come 
into the business is deposited and financials are given to the bank monthly to provide verification). This 
could equate to an annual fee of $8900/yr if all 267 of the adult use businesses throughout the stated 
grossed an equal share of the $160M sales. If all these adult use establishments were doing business 
with these banks, those financial institutions would be making almost $2.5M just in deposit fees. 
Limited banking options in this cash-based industry is unacceptable. 
Thank you for your time and your due diligence.
Natasha Johnson
Meristem LLC
Cannabis Business Owner 
Southwest Harbor, Maine
Natasha Johnson
Southwest Harbor
LD 788
It is imperative that legal Maine businesses have access to the financial tools they need to 
safely, securely and effectively operate, grow, and contribute to our economy. The cannabis 
industry is a legitimate state licensed trade but is treated unfairly. Having safe access to 
financial institutions allows them to operate in a more efficient, compliant, and fiscally 
responsible manner. Providing access to financial institutions is a step in the right direction to 
support these businesses and their employees. It would increase safety for our communities 
and decrease discrimination against these businesses. 
In my experience, the biased treatment of the adult-use/recreational cannabis industry has 
led to financial hardships that the State of Maine needs to recognize.  Cannabis-related 
businesses are unfairly targeted by high fees due to limited competition for financial options 
and the adult-use/recreational side of the industry has an overstated gross value due to the 
inability to record business expenses when filing taxes. 
Having increased opportunities to access financial institutions would decrease public safety 
threats; robberies, illegal use of funds (i.e. money-laundering, terrorist financing etc.), tax 
evasion, stigma against the industry, costs associated with the few banks willing to work with 
businesses in this industry and would help decrease some of the financial hurdles that are a 
barriers to entry for most small businesses.
Banking opportunities would also increase safe, regulated, transparent financial business 
practices as well as provide affordable access to financial services for state licensed 
businesses which would increase the physical safety for customers, employees, communities 
and neighborhoods by decreasing the amounts of cash on hand, in-turn helping our local law 
enforcement. 
Banking would also increase business investments and donations to local communities, 
higher accuracy in record keeping and tax compliance for sales and income. It would also 
help increase respect and legitimacy. Increasing competition amongst banks for accounts 
within the industry would help lower the costs and fees currently associated with few banks in 
Maine that are willing to work with cannabis related businesses. It would also help provide 
loan opportunities for startup businesses and to employees that may want to purchase homes
etc., It would also help increase the willingness of indirect businesses to work with cannabis 
establishments (i.e. fuel companies, landlords etc.) that may otherwise not want to jeopardize 
their owns businesses through their relationship with a cannabis establishment or an 
employee.
As a legitimate state licensed adult-use cannabis business owner, I feel that we are 
unsupported and underappreciated by our state. We operate in the most regulated industry in
Maine, receive the least amount of support, and are the most discriminated against. 
In 2022, on the Office of Cannabis Policy website, the adult use/recreational cannabis 
industry had almost $160 Million recorded sales (which was mostly in cash) and the state’s 
tax share and revenues from licensing and fees will be about $26,216,280. There was a total 
of 267 adult use establishments (cultivation, manufacturing, retail stores, testing sites) with 
3,496 active Individual Identification Cards issued. (These I.I.C’s are generated by the State 
of Maine after the individual successfully passes a federal background and fingerprinting 
check). 
The sales amount for the medical use side for 2022 is unavailable, however in 2021 it was 
$6.6 Million. Currently, there are 7,083 registered caregivers, employees/assistants and 
medical providers, with 8,419 printed patient certificates. 
If looking at the number of state licensed businesses and individuals in this industry including 
the employees and assistants, there are over 10,500 people involved in the trade. Not 
including the 8400 patients and all of the transactions on the adult use side. 
This is a staggering safety issue. Imagine the amount of cash that is transferred one to 
another, directly/ indirectly and the havoc not having access to banking can cause. 
According to the State of Maines Bureau of Financial Institutions, currently, there are 91 
operating financial institutions in Maine.  There are only 2 that will serve the cannabis 
industry. 1 of the 2 can only serve the 5 most southern counties out of 13 in the state due to 
their charter. Fees associated are 1.5% on all deposits (an agreement between the bank and 
the business stipulates that all funds that come into the business is deposited and financials 
are given to the bank monthly to provide verification). This could equate to an annual fee of 
$8900/yr if all 267 of the adult use businesses throughout the stated grossed an equal share 
of the $160M sales. If all these adult use establishments were doing business with these 
banks, those financial institutions would be making almost $2.5M just in deposit fees. 
Limited banking options in this cash-based industry is unacceptable. 
Thank you for your time and your due diligence.
Natasha Johnson
Meristem LLC
Cannabis Business Owner 
Southwest Harbor, Maine

