Maine Credit Union Lecigue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
Written Testimony from the Maine Credit Union League 
Neither for Nor Against LD 788, Resolve, Directing the Treasurer of State to Review and Develop 
Options for Meeting the Banking Needs of the Cannabis Industry 
March 22, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Robert Caverly and I serve as the Vice President of Advocacy & Outreach at the Maine 
Credit Union League. The League proudly represents Maine's 50 credit unions and more than 
725,000 members statewide. Please accept our testimony neither for nor against LD 788; 
Resolve, Directing the Treasurer of State to Review and Develop Options for Meeting the Banking 
Needs of the Cannabis Industry. 
As this committee is aware, Maine was an early state to legalize any form of cannabis, starting 
with the legalization of medical cannabis by citizen's referendum back in 1999. From the very 
beginning of legalization, it has been a challenge to provide financial services to cannabis-related 
businesses (CRB). However, since 2014 a small number of credit unions have consistently offered 
CRB accounts to their members. 
Recently those credit unions offering CRB accounts were informed by their federal financial 
regulators that a new interpretation of existing guidance required a change in how CRB accounts 
were managed to remain in compliance. After significant research, the League found that those 
increased standards were consistent with requirements imposed on credit unions across the 
country. However, it represented a significant and unforeseen change to Maine credit unions and 
CRBs alike. Prior to this increased scrutiny, Maine credit unions offering CRB accounts successfully 
operated programs in the field. Considering this, on January 26"‘ of 2022, the Maine Credit Union 
League advised legislative leadership and other interested parties on this issue: 
This stricter interpretation also represents a move towards standardization of 
[CRB] compliance for financial institutions across the country. However, given 
Maine's [CRB] landscape, a ‘one size fits all’ approach may lead to more Maine 
[CRBs] operating without a financial partner, a consequence that ill serves the 
industry and the general public. 
It is critical to clarify that an increasing number of Maine credit unions continue to offer the 
necessary banking services to our CRB partners in both the medical and adult use industries. 
Although the new interpretation from regulators has necessitated the adoption of more costly 
services to comply with the federal guidance, our credit unions are committed to making banking 
services available to CRBs. The unfortunate effect of this is increased fees being passed alongto
the CRBs. Credit unions cannot operate their CRB programs at the expense of the rest of their 
membership. 
The changes to CRB accounts because of the new regulatory interpretation has understandably 
created angst, concern, and sometimes distrust within the CRB community, specifically medical 
marijuana businesses. To implement the required adjustments, credit unions with medical CRB 
members had to impose a temporary moratorium on accepting any new members until the new 
regulatory expectations were in place and applied to their current membership. The required 
moratoriums are gradually lifting, along with additional credit unions launching their own CRB 
programs, meaning that access to financial services for CRBs is slowly increasing. Compounding 
the relationship between CRBs and their credit unions is the substantive differences between 
what CRBs are required to report and track to operate as a licensed medical provider in Maine, 
and what is required to be reported to maintain a depository account with their credit union. The 
League believes that closer alignment of those differing regulatory requirements would 
encourage greater participation in CRBs establishing bank accounts. 
Despite the challenges listed above, many Maine credit unions remain eager partners and are 
ready to take steps to extend financial services to complying CRBs. We believe that any nation- 
wide study of cannabis banking would result in Maine credit unions being recognized as market 
leaders, offering needed services to their members at competitive rates and fees. 
Moreover, as the committee considers how to move forward on this important issue, we strongly 
encourage the involvement and consultation of the Bureau of Financial Institutions (BFI) as a key 
partner in this endeavor. The Bureau is well positioned to report on the current state of banking 
and to identify challenges faced by Maine financial institutions in the cannabis space. Though this 
issue is, at its root, a federal one, BFI can provide some insight into how federal regulators look 
at financial institutions operating in the cannabis space. Maine credit unions have a long history 
of cooperating with BFI to ensure that our members receive the best service available, and we 
believe their consultation in any study in this area is crucial to its success. 
As this committee likely knows, the final solution to address the challenges surrounding cannabis 
banking in Maine resides in action being taken at the federal level. The League has long advocated 
for and will continue to advocate for policies like the SAFE Banking Act, which aims to createa 
safe harbor for financial institutions to bank CRBs. Maine's entire congressional delegation 
supports this policy change, but it has yet to be bought to the floor of the United States Senate 
for consideration. It is important to know that the SAFE Banking Act is not a silver bullet, more 
policy considerations will be needed to fully normalize CRB banking, but it is an important first 
step. 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony on this important topic. If the League can be 
of any assistance during the deliberations of this bill or others similar, please do not hesitate to 
contact us.
