TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND 
FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. 189 
“An Act to Include an Expanded Archery Permit in the Super Pack License Issued by the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife ” 
Sponsored By: Senator POULIOT of K61'1116b €C. 
Cosponsored by Representative BRIDGEO of Augusta and Senators: BLACK of Franklin, 
BRAKEY of Androscoggin, HARRINGTON of York. 
DATE OF HEARING: February 6, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Bill Swan, Director of Licensing and Registration for the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for 
nor against L.D. 189. 
This bill proposes to include the expanded archery either-sex permit in the super pack 
license issued by the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. The bill also increases the 
super pack license fee by $32. 
= Currently, the only hunting permit that is not included in the super pack license is the 
expanded archery either-sex pennit. This proposal would include that permit and thus simplify 
the super pack license by removing this one exception. In 2022, we had 5,732 customers 
purchase a super pack license. Of those, only 913 also purchased the expanded archery either-sex 
permit which is currently not included in the super pack license. Those 913 customers harvested 
188 adult male deer. This proposal will be seen only as a fee increase by the majority of super 
pack license holders and will not be popular with most of them. The Department is not overly 
concerned with the potential for increased adult male deer harvest as a result of this proposal. 
Our thought is that most superpack license holders who are interested in harvesting a buck in 
expanded archery areas are already purchasing the permit. 
The Department would like to offer a suggestion for an amendment that might be more 
palatable for the majority of superpack license holders, which is to include one either-sex permit 
with the superpack license at no cost. This would have a ﬁscal impact on the Department of 
approximately $29,000 annually. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
