0. HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Morgan Rieuy TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
l6 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Phone: (207) 228-5767 
Morgan.Riellv_@iegislature.maine. gov 
April 19, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Morgan Rielly in support of 
LD 1523, “An Act to Establish a Qualifying Condition Review Board to Provide Beneﬁts to 
Certain Service Members” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Aﬂairs 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Morgan Rielly, and I represent House 
District 127, which includes part of Westbrook. I am here today in support of LD 1523, “An Act 
to Establish a Qualifying Condition Review Board to Provide Benefits to Certain Service 
Members. ” 
LD 1523 was born out of LD 173 (signed into law by Governor Mills in 2021) and its 
subsequent report. LD 173 in Section 3 of the bill directed the Maine Bureau of Veterans ’ 
Services (MBVS) to conduct a study and report back to the legislature regarding the feasibility of 
establishing a Qualﬁying Condition Review Board for veterans who received an other than 
honorable (OTH) character of discharge from the military due to PTSD, TBI, MST, beinga 
member of the LGBTQ+ community, or a combination of these reasons. MBVS’ report 
concluded that a review board “could be effective and beneﬁcial.” The report also found thata 
serious barrier that Maine’s LGBTQ+ veterans face is an OTH discharge due to their sexual 
orientation, which bars them from accessing state and federal beneﬁts. I want to clarify, however, 
that a Qualifying Conditon Review Board only impacts state and municipal beneﬁts. The board 
does not deal with federal beneﬁts, which a Veterans Service Officer (VSO) can help a veteran 
ﬁll out the necessary forms. 
While there are currently processes to review OTH discharges (i.e. Army Review Board), they 
often take a long time. For example, the report highlighted a situation with a homeless veteran 
who served with Special Forces in Afghansitan and got PTSD, which led to substance abuse and 
an OTH discharge. It took this veteran three years even with the helpx of MBVS before they could 
access VA healthcare and beneﬁts. A monthly or quarterly board would have allowed this 
District 127: Westbrook
veteran, if found eligible, to have accessed municipal and state beneﬁts, services, and programs 
they were cut off from while waiting for the Army Review Board’s decision. 
So far, three other state’s in the northeast have established boards. These are New York, Rhode 
Island, and Conneticut. LD 1523 goes off the recommendations and ﬁndings in MBVS’ report 
and looks at establishing a review board modeled on Conneticut ’s board. The Director of MBVS’ 
would appoint three volunteer members to serve on the committee for three year-terms, with one 
member as chair. We may need to amend the language in the bill so that anyone appointed to the 
board has the necessary clinical qualiﬁcations, along with prior experience in the armed services, 
to be able to serve on the board. I will also defer to MBVS if three is an adequate amount of 
members to serve on the board. In their report ﬁndings they mention that “MBVS could work 
with partner agencies ” which could be added to the board. 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration. l’m happy to answer any questions. 
District 127: Westbrook
