 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST -  LD 245 ‘ An Act to Require a Person Receiving Unemployment Benefits to 
Attend Scheduled Interviews to Fulfill the Work Search Requirement’   
 
Dear Senator Tipping , Chair, Representative Roeder , Chair, and Members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing , 
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers 
Association  (MGFPA). MGFPA is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within 
Maine’s food community; Main Street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores 
and supermarkets, food and beverage producers and processors, manufacturer s, wholesalers, distributors, 
and supportive service companies.  
 
We value the intent of this proposal to aid the business community in the need for additional workers  and to 
recognize employers’  frustration with  those who purposefully do not show up for a  scheduled job interview . 
The COVID pandemic drastically altered recruitment and retention efforts.  In response, “The Maine Jobs & 
Recovery Plan, approved by the Legislature, invest s nearly $1 billion in federal American Rescue Plan funds to 
improve the li ves of Maine people and families, help businesses, create good -paying jobs, and build an 
economy poised for future prosperity.” Programs to attract home Mainers, attract new Mainers , increase 
training and credential program access, along with apprentice program s are in the works. W e’re hopeful that 
collectively these efforts will aid in a prosperous labor market with adept Mainers  in a variety of sectors .   
 
Anecdotally, f eedback that I’ve heard  as of most recently is that businesses  have ha d to hire candidates 
outside of the ir scope of traditional ly sought after  skills in an effort to keep their business es running. 
Fortunately, o ur grocers and manufacturers are nimble and have worked tirelessly to make modifications to 
their business models to ensure success.  We do hear that at times employers go through the hiring process 
only to find out that the newly hired staff doesn’t return after a s little as one shift. Various reports estimate 
that it costs as much as $4,000 to complete the hiring proces s. We recognize the volatility in the market as 
folks seek to fill the employment gaps and navigate finding the perfect personnel pairing s for their business.  
 
In review of the ME DOL ’s Unemployment Insurance website under the ‘ Employer Services ’ section,  there is a 
form titled “Report refusal of work, recall or interview.” A suggestion to the ME DOL may be to ensure this 
form is easily accessible in multiple areas or prominently displayed  as it was somewhat challenging to locate . 
For a busy business owner  or manager, I can see why it’s troublesome to take the time to find this form and 
make the report.  Within the form there is a question that specifically asks, “Claimant was scheduled for 
interview and was a no show?” Secondly, “Reason given for the refusal.” It is suggested that if the employer is 
unable to contact the claimant to type “N/A.” Our question  relates to the process. What  are the next steps to 
a “N/A” submission ? Potentially this is where additional action or information is necessary. Is the interview  no February 1 6, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 show valid ? Was it intentional? How is a justifiable no show  vs. an “unable to contact” interview handled ? 
Does it prompt  for a rescheduling opportunity ? What are the ramifications for an intentional no show ? How 
are the details beyond thi s form communicated to the employer to ensure the time and effort that they put 
into the potential hire is valued ? Completing the loop is imperative to the process to ensure employers do not 
feel as though they’ve  wasting their time and to ensure that thos e who seek to purposefully disregard the 
interview are held accountable in some capacity.    
 
We are supportive of efforts that will ease employer burdens along the hiring process and also support a clear 
approach to communicating and responding to an empl oyer’s report of “refusal of work, recall or interview.”  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

