Ma l ne Center for 
Economic Policy 2°Z;.iiZ'Zi ‘iZ 
Testimony in Opposition to l.D 245, “An Act to Require a Person Receiving Unemployment Benefits to 
Attend Scheduled Interviews to Fulfill the Work Search Requirement" 
February 16, 2023 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst 
Good Afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is James Myall, and lam an economic policy analyst at the Maine 
Center for Economic Policy. l’m here to testify in opposition to LD 245, "An Act to Require a Person 
Receiving Unemployment Benefits to Attend Scheduled interviews to Fulfill the Work Search 
Requirement" 
MECEP opposes LD 245 because it will add unnecessary additional barriers to receiving Unemployment 
Compensation, which provides a crucial safety net for many Mainers who find themselves out of work. 
While LD 245 appears to be in line with the goals of the Unemployment insurance program in 
encouraging claimants to seek new employment, we are particularly concerned about unintended 
impacts of the bill. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, we all witnessed the important role that Unemployment Insurance 
plays as a safety net program. We also all witnessed the ways in which administrative requirements can 
provide a real obstacle to getting the money to people who need it urgently. Last session, this 
committee made changes to the program to enable it to run more smoothly and better serve Mainers. 
This bill risks undermining that good work. it will create a new reporting requirement for employers, and 
another hoop for claimants to jump through. 
We are particularly concerned that there could be many legitimate reasons that a claimant would be 
unable to attend a scheduled interview. Perhaps their car breaks down, they run into bad weather, or 
they have a child care emergency. This bill does not provide any flexibility or allowance for any 
unforeseen circumstances like this, meaning that a claimant could lose benefits for something outside 
their control. 
MECEP urges you to vote ”ought not to pass" on LD 245 and to reject the imposition of new 
requirements on the unemployment insurance program. 
Thank you. I'll be happy to answer any questions. 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
