; 
re»: <51; s P ms Llv 
MAI NE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
February 16, 2023 
In Support of LD 245, An Act to Require a Person Receiving Unemployment Benefits to 
Attend Scheduled Interviews to Fulfill the Work Search 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine. 
Hospitalityl\ ’laine represents more than 1,000 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer support of LD 245. 
We thank Senator Guerin for bringing the issue of employers finding candidates for open job positions to 
light. There have been theories from labor economists as to why there are hurdles to filling these jobs, but 
the fact stands that these positions go unfilled. We've heard from employers that say they are continually 
adjusting their business model in ways that will hopefully attract employees —~a favorable position for 
prospective employees to be in. However, the issue today is enforcing accountability measures for job 
seekers receiving unemployment compensation (UC). The state also has an obligation to oversee that the 
UC program —funded by taxpayer dollars— is administered appropriately and responsibly. 
Losing a job unexpectedly puts many in a difficult spot as they scramble to balance finances and transition 
to job searching. As it stands today, a Mainer filing for UC must be job seeking @ accept an offer fora 
suitable job if one is made. It's expected that job seekers take every opportunity available to be reemployed 
as they lean on UC benefits. 
There needs to be a motivation for people to get back to work, and at a minimum we should expect those 
receiving UC benefits to attend scheduled inten/iews. LD 245 enforces accountability and incentivizes job 
seekers to meet the requisites in place to receive benefits. We understand that there may already bea 
mechanism in place through the Maine Department of Labor for employers to report job seekers that are 
negligent in their obligations to receive UC. Given that the issue outlined in the bill is an ongoing problem, 
we urge the Department to disseminate information to business owners reminding them of the existing 
reporting portal. I would be happy to promote this information with our membership as well. 
We are also sympathetic that there may be instances when a candidate is unable to attend an interview 
due to unforeseen circumstances and we would not want to punish him or her for that. In any event, this 
legislation will hopefully encourage continued talks about steps the Legislature can take to put people back 
to work. We urge you to vote LD 245 ought to pass to hold job seekers receiving UC accountable for their 
role in seeking reemployment. This legislation also reminds us of the importance of rigorous oversight of 
these taxpayer dollars. Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions.
