Testimony in Support of LD 245:
“An Act to Require
a Person Receiving
Unemployment Benefits to Attend Scheduled Interviews to Fulfill the Work Search
Requirement”
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as director of
policy at Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a nonpartisan,
non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic freedom in
Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 245.
Losing a job unexpectedly would force most people into a difficult transition,
especially those with dependents. State unemployment compensation (UC) exists to
help Mainers in these tough but temporary times. Because the program is funded by tax
dollars, its administration should be held to the highest standards of accountability.
Today, a Mainer filing for unemployment compensation must be seeking–and
accept–an offer of suitable work if offered in order to retain their eligibility for the
program.
1
Beneficiaries are expected to take every
opportunity available in order to get
off of unemployment and begin to become financially self-sufficient again.
LD 245 would simply require a UC applicant to appear at a job interview that
they scheduled to keep receiving benefits. It is unfortunate that this provision must be
added to the law, but one need only speak with a few employers to learn that many are
dealing with applicants skipping scheduled interviews in order to satisfy the state’s lax
UC eligibility requirements. This phenomenon is ubiquitous.
Today, there is no guarantee that a UC beneficiary is actually seeking work if they
are merely scheduling interviews they have no intention of completing. If one can book a
job interview, but never show up, there might as well be no work requirements at all.
The current rules are a farce–it's that simple.
Please deem LD 245 “Ought To Pass” and ensure that Mainers’ tax dollars meant
to help those truly struggling are not being wasted on those taking advantage of lax
unemployment requirements. Thank you for your time and consideration.
1
26 MRSA §1193: Disqualification
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

