.,.,...* . 1.. \1- 
-rf . r . 
Stacey K. Guerin """*;,‘§ 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 4 Augusta, Maine 04333 6. 
THE l\»LAINE SENATE 
l3 l st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Stacey K. Gnerin 
In Support of LD 245, "An Act to Require a Person Receiving Unemployment Beneﬁts to Attend 
Scheduled Interviews to Fulﬁll the Work Search Requirement" 
l6 February 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee, thank you for allowing me to present LD 245, “An Act to Require a Person 
Receiving Unemployment Beneﬁts to Attend Scheduled Interviews to Fulﬁll the Work Search 
Requirement. ” I am State Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent Senate District 4 which 
includes almost all of Piscataquis County and much of Penobscot County. 
With my husband, I run a small business restaurant supply company in Veazie, Maine. For those 
in my position, ﬁnding people willing to work in this day and age is as difﬁcult as it has ever 
been. A large contributing factor to this problem is the fact that those who are on Maine’s current 
unemployment assistance program are required to apply for jobs, but are not required to attend 
the interviews that they schedule, allowing them to remain on unemployment assistance until 
their beneﬁts run out. Essentially, many of those on unemployment are effectively being paid to 
apply for open positions, and then ghost potential employers. This proposed legislation would 
require the Department of Labor, Bureau of Unemployment Compensation to establish an online 
portal for employers to report individuals who refuse to appear for scheduled employment 
interviews. 
I originally heard of this proposal from a Democrat, former Massachusetts Senator Diana 
DiZoglio. She sponsored the legislation for constituents of hers who are small business 
owners. According to The Salem News, “DiZoglio says she supports the proposal “in concept” 
and believes businesses have a legitimate gripe that enforcement of the state’s work search 
requirements for people collecting unemployment beneﬁts needs to be 
strengthened. ” Unfortunately, her bill stalled in the Senate, and she was ultimately elected State 
Auditor, so the legislation did not pass. 
Other states, including the state of Arkansas, are currently considering similar changes to their 
statute, highlighting that this problem is country wide. The Arkansas proposal does allow for 
exceptions for those who provide legitimate reasons for not being able to make it to their 
interviews. I would be open to amending my bill to do the same with well deﬁned parameters. 
My proposed legislation will close a glaring loophole in our system. We cannot and should not 
allow taxpayer dollars being disbursed through our unemployment system to be dishonestly 
collected by those not truly seeking work. Rather, it should be reserved for those who are making 
an honest effort. 
Innovation, Development, licomwrzirr Advuncenze/if and Busine.s's (70mn1r'Ifee 
State 1"/0z1.s'e (20.7) Z87-15/)5 * Fax (Z07) 287-I527 "‘ Toll Free 1-800-423- 
690e’) * TTY 7/1 
Stacey.Guer'i11@legisFz1Iz1/'2.imzinegov * fegis/arzzre. mcliriagov/senale
