Testimony of Suzan McKechnie, Bureau of Unemployment Compensation 
Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For Nor Against LD #245, An Act to Require a Person Receiving Unemployment 
Benefits to Attend Scheduled interviews to Fulfill the Work Search Requirement 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, February 16, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. l am Suzan McKechnie, Deputy Director of the Bureau of 
Unemployment Compensation at the Maine Department of Labor. l’m here to testify neither 
for nor against LD 245, An Act to Require a Person Receiving Unemployment Benefits to Attend 
Scheduled interviews to Fulfill the Work Search Requirement. 
The proposed law changes in this bill seek to accomplish two things. First, to have the 
department create an online portal for employers to report individuals who fail to report fora 
scheduled interview. Second, to deny benefits when the facts support that the job being 
interviewed for would have been suitable. The denial would remain in effect until the individual 
has returned to work and earned 10 times their weekly benefit amount. 
The department already has an online form for employers to report if someone refuses a job,a 
recall to a job, or refuses or did not show up for a scheduled interview. The form is available at 
www.maine.gov/unemployment/ucbr. During this past year, we received 314 submissions. 2 
were for not attending a scheduled interview and the remainder were reported refusals of a job 
offer. Of the 314, 150 individuals had no record of ever filing for unemployment. 112 had filed 
some time in the past, but no longer filing when the job offer, or recall, was made. The 
remaining 52 — less than 20% - were actively filing. In these situations, the claims are reviewed 
and fact-finding interviews are conducted. 
It is important to understand the differences between the number of unemployed individuals 
versus the number of people receiving unemployment benefits. Using December 2022 
numbers, there were about 25,000 unemployed people in Maine. For the same time period, 
there was an average of 5,200 people filing for benefits. 
There is often a perception that individuals refusing interviews orjob offers must be collecting 
unemployment and are only going through the motions of a job search to keep their benefits. 
Our experience when researching these reports is that most individuals reported were not 
collecting unemployment benefits or if they had, they were no longer filing at the time the 
refusal, or no show, occurred. 
In our current economy, there are two jobs for every one job seeker. When there are multiple 
options out there for people, this happens more frequently. it is frustrating for employers when 
a job is declined, or an interviewee doesn't show up. 
The trend of two jobs for every one job seeker is due in part to the aging of Maine's workforce. 
The number of people reaching retirement age has increased over the last decade. As groupsof
people reach retirement age, the workforce participation rate for that group declines. This is 
certainly true of Maine's Baby Boomer population. For those who are in younger generations, 
the workforce participation rate is over 80%. 
if the Committee decides to move forward with the bill, we recommend removing the language 
for the online portal and adding language that indicates that the scheduled interview must have 
been offered in writing, either by mail or email, and must have been provided with reasonable 
notice. There must be documentation to support the facts of the case. One person's word 
against another is challenging to adjudicate. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have now or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit 
and train a talented workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals 
when jobs are lost, aiding people with disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people 
on the job and providing research and analysis of employment data to support job growth.
