HOUSE 0E REPRESENTATIVES Fig? 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION" 
‘ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
. (207)287-1440' 
David Woodsome MAINE RELAY 711‘ 
1 156 Sokokis Trail 
\ North \\"a1erb0i'0. ME 04061‘ 
Da\"id.Wo0ds0me@ legiyslaulremaine.go\' 
Cell: (207) 432-5643 
Testimony on 
L.D. 614, “An Act to Provide a Free Antlerless Deer Permit to 
Certain Landowners Who Allow the Public to Hunt on Their 
Property"A 
Presented by 3
§ 
Representative David Woodsome 
District 139 . 
I
1 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee 
Monday, March 13, 2023 ; 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and 
distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife: 
I am State Representative David Woodsome, and I proudly represent 
District 139, Limerick, Parsonsfield, and a portion of Waterboro. It 
is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of introducing 
L.D. 614, “An Act to Provide a Free Antlerless Deer Permit to Certain 
Landowners Who Allow the Public to Hunt on Their Property. ” 
On behalf of many private landowners, I am requesting that the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (DIF&W) reihstate the 
policy of granting antlerless deer permits to landowners of 25 acres 
or more who allow the public to hunt on said land. This request is 
the result of numerous calls and in—person conversations with 
distraught landowners in relation to the current antlenless deer 
permit policy. F 
It is questioned if the DIF&W, and other influentialipolicymakers 
involved with the decision to end the previous landowner antlerless 
permit policy, appreciate the vast acreage and personal efforts made 
by individual landowners to improve their property foréthe benefit of 
deer and other wildlife while keeping it accessible fon public 
-hunting. Some landowners have even expressed that they may post their 
land going forward if the present antlerless permit policy is 
maintained. 3 
Thank you for your time and consideration. My hope is to work with 
the DIF&W to keep as much land available for hunting in Maine as 
possible while likewise showing appreciation to those landowners who 
over the years have kept their property unrestricted.' 
District 139 Limerick, Parsonsﬁeld and Waterboro (Part) 
I 
Printed on recycled papal
