TESTIMONY OF THE I 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE; 
* 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 614a 
"An Act to Provide a Free Antlerless Deer Permit to Certain Landownjers Who Allow 
the Public to Hunt on Their Property"I 
Presented by Representative WOODSOME of Waterboro.g 
Cosponsored by Senator BLACK of Franklin and Representatives: CAMPBELL of 
Orrington, LANDRY of Farmington, SOBOLESKI of Phillips, Senator: HARRINGTON of York. 
DATE OF HEARING: March 13, 2023~ 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition to L.D. 614. ;i 
This bill amends the law governing the landowner consideration for the iantlerless deer 
permit lottery to provide an antlerless deer permit at no cost to all eligible landowners 
who apply for a permit and keep their lands open to hunting by the public. This bill also 
defines an eligible landowner as a landowner who owns at least 20 acres of contiguous 
land and does not post the landowner's land to prohibit hunting by others. This bill is 
very similar to L.D. 763. _T
I 
The opportunity to hunt antlerless deer during the firearms season is managed through 
a lottery system, which provides ‘a fair and predictable way to allocate hunting 
opportunity. Most WMDs have more interested hunters than available hunting 
opportunity. Currently, qualifying landowners are eligible for up to 25% §ofthe available 
antlerless deer permits in open districts before the general lottery takes: place for that 
district. If they fail to get an antlerless permit from the allotted landowner permits in 
that district, they will be placed in the general lottery and afforded an additional 
opportunity to be awarded a permit. The current eligibility criteria for landowners are 
defined in rule O9-137 CMR 16.07: the landowner must have 25 contiguous acres that 
are primarily agriculture, forested, or undeveloped and open to huntingé. The currentI 
provision of 25% of permits for landowners in each district as well as the opportunity for 
a landowner applicant to be selected as a regular applicant if they are not selected asa 
landowner applicant already provide very significant advantages for landowners
l 
applying for permits. Under the current framework in the 2022 antlerless permit lottery, 
there were,8 central and southern Maine WMDs where 100% of qualifying landowners 
received an antlerless deer permit, and there were an additional 4 WMDs where greater 
than 90% of qualifying landowners were awarded a permit.2 
If this bill were to pass, in most years there would be no antlerless deer permits 
available for regular hunters (including youth) in many WMDs across the state because 
all available hunting opportunity in those districts would go to landowners. For- 
example, in the 2022 lottery, under the current acreage requirements and with 
qualifying landowners guaranteed_a permit as pér this bill, antlerless permits would 
have gone solely to landowners in 5 WMDs. In another 4 WMDs, over 70% ofthe 
permits would have gone to landowners. The number of WMDs where all or most of the 
available permits are given to landowners may increase further if the acreage‘ 
requirement is lowered to 20 acres. There were no permits available in WMDs 1, 2, 4, 5, 
and 28 in 2022, but it is likely that most of the permits in these areas would be allocated 
to landowners as well under the eligibility requirements in this bill. Most of the 
antlerless permits available to non-landowning hunters would be in southern and 
central Maine under the eligibility requirements in this bill, and in much of northern, 
eastern, and western Maine, limited or no antlerless permits would be available for non- 
landowner hunters.- 
In WMDs where the number of qualifying landowners exceeds the number of allocated 
permits, this bill appears to suggest awarding all landowner applicants a permit, which 
would result in the number of distributed permits exceeding what was intended, and an 
excessive level of antlerless harvest would result. These situations would primarily arise 
in the WMDs with limitedpermit numbers, which are in northern, western, and eastern 
Maine where our deer populations are the most vulnerable.y 
This bill_wo.uld also result in a negative fiscal impact of$12 perpermit issued to 
landowners, plus an additional $36 in federal funds, per permit. These funds would 
otherwise have been used in efforts to acquire and manage deer habitat. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work. session. 
l .‘ 
hat' 
l - J‘l
I
l
