 
 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth,  Maine  04105  • (207)  781-2330  • maineaudubon.org   
 
 
 
 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
℅ Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
January 30, 2023  
 
RE: LD 10, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Invasive Aquatic Plants  
 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 10, An Act to Amend 
the Laws Governing Invasive Aquatic Plants, on behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 
mem bers and supporters.  
 
 For the past 40 years, Maine Audubon has led a broad range of efforts focused on the health 
and well -being of Maine’s Common Loons. From documenting lead sinkers as a leading cause of 
death in adult loons, to providing educational p rogramming to thousands of people in every county, 
loon conservation is central to Maine Audubon’s work. Preventing and controlling the spread of 
invasive aquatic plant species is elemental to conserving the Common Loon. This bill strengthens 
Maine’s exist ing invasive plant laws.  
 
 LD 10 adds species to and clarifies the Maine list of invasive aquatic plants. Specifically, 
the bill includes all Myriophyllum  species that are nonindigenous to the State, as well as all species 
in the genuses Trapa  and Cabomba , and the plants water soldier, giant salvinia, swollen 
bladderwort and starry stonewort. The bill also prohibits the sale of any plant of the genus 
Myriophyllum  that is indigenous to the State, because it is so difficult to distinguish from the 
invasive s pecies of the same genus.   
 
 Each of the added species, if introduced to Maine waters, would be deleterious to loons, as 
well as other fish and wildlife. Clean, clear water is essential to loons. Their primary prey is small 
(6 – 8”) fish. As visual predat ors, loons need to be able to see fish in order to pursue and catch 
them. Invasive plants cloud Maine waters. Heavy infestations of aquatic plants can also choke the 
protected coves where loons nest, potentially adding challenges for loons trying to access  
traditional nesting sites. Thick vegetation may also pose challenges for young chicks who are less 
adept than their parents. Invasive species degrade the lake ecosystems that loons depend upon and, 
therefore, keeping invasive infestation out of Maine wate rs is important   to the long -term health of 
Maine’s loon population.  
 

 
 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth,  Maine  04105  • (207)  781-2330  • maineaudubon.org  Hopefully adding these species to the list of invasive aquatic plants will help Maine be 
proactive about keeping them out of most of our prized waters.   In places where invasives have 
been introduced, we have seen how they spread quickly, ruin the aquatic ecosystem, degrade or 
eliminate opportunities for swimming and boating, and lower property values.    
 
 I urge the Committee to support LD 10, An Act to Amend the Laws Governi ng Invasive 
Aquatic Plants.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq.  
Director of Advocacy  
 
 

