In support of LD 10     An act to Amend the Laws Governing Invasive Aquatic Plants  
 
 Dear Senator Brenner and Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,  
 We are volunteers who have spent 20 seasons monitoring our lake, Panther, in Raymond and most of those years also assisting with monitoring over 26 lakes across Maine for any of the 11 illegal invasive aquatic plants.  We have seen the disheartening take -over of waterbodies first- hand and know the extreme 
importance of catching any introductions into our state’s magnificent resource asap.  
 LD 10 ’s passage  would make for a far more comprehensive and flexible system in dealing with threats that 
may arise in t he future.  
 What this amendment does is to immediately add 4 specific, new species to the list of illegal plants to 
transport in Maine. One species, U. inflat a is already in 2 ponds/lakes we know of in Maine. The one in York 
County is now a dominant player  and the one in Franklin County has taken over , becoming nearly a 
monoculture. Another species, starry stonewort -Nitellopsis obtus a, is already in Minnesota, Wisconsin, 
Michigan and Ontario plus there are two sites in Vermont . 
 
LD 10 also expands 2 species  on the current list to their entire genera, Trapa and Cabomba, so we are ahead 
of the game if more species of these genera should arise.  This is the same for the Myriophyllum or milfoil genera of which 3 are specifically listed on the current list of 11:  it would include any other non- indigenous 
milfoils that should arise (we do have the 3 Myriophylla growing in our waters now).  
 Listing a plant as ‘invasive’ puts it on our radar so we can  be trained to not overlook it either at launches or in the water body. By listing species covered by Maine’s Invasive Aquatic Plants Laws, this allows DEP to take 
mitigative action if and when the discovery is made.  
 
One additional aspect of the amendment is that it precautionarily bans the selling in Maine of any Milfoil, 
including natives , which have the potential to hybridize or mutate . 
 
These plants don’t always march predictably along through connecting or contiguous lakes, but can play 
leapfrog ; such as , the surprise finding in 2019 of variable leaf water milfoil way off in Washington County.  
Our hair stood on end , when in 2021 DEP notified us of a fragment of Eurasian milfoil found on a boat trailer 
entering a lake next to ours, having just come from our lake;  DEP had traced that prior to our lake, this 
trailer had been in Lake Champlain in VT which has myriad implants of Eurasian milfoil (there are over 100 
separate lakes and sites in Vermont where this species is thriving).  
 We sadly applaud these expansionary  and foresighted amendments.  
 Marilyn and Ross Wescot t 
Raymond, Maine   cell:978 462- 3084    rbwes@aol.com 
