 
 
  
15 University Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
207-623-9511  
 
  
January 30, 2023  
 
Honorable Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Honorable Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -100 
 
RE:  LD 10, An Act  to Amend the Laws Governing Invasive Aquatic Plants   
 
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources : 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) is pleased to support  LD 10, An Act  to Amend the Laws 
Governing Invasive Aquatic  Plants.  
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through educational and 
technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The Association was formed in 
1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members.  
 
Many Maine water utilities use surface water as the primary source of drinking water supply.  Mainta ining a high -
quality source water supply is the first line of defense  in protecting public health, as well as  keeping water 
treatment costs manageable. Invasive aquatic plants represent a significant risk to water quality and aquatic life 
in Maine’s lakes,  ponds, rivers, and streams.   
 
Prevention of an infestation is ideal, as it much more difficult to try to remediate after invasive  species have 
become established  in a water body . Infestations of an invasive aquatic species can change the ecosystems of 
water bodies and greatly impact  the ability to treat the  source water  for a drinking water supply.   
 
While existing Maine State law prohibits the sale of many aquatic invasive plant s, this proposed legislation adds 
clarity to the definition of problematic s pecies of invasive  aquatic  plants.  This bill also expands the list of plants 
that are currently not legal to offer for sale in the State of Maine to include any plant of the genus Myriophyllum  
(water milfoil) . This genus is indigenous to the State, but are considered environmentally invasive and 
problematic  species . 
 
MWUA has long supported public policies  that help protect sources of drinking water .  This legislation would 
provide additional protection s to reduce the risk o f aquatic invasive species entering a water body .  Therefore, 
MWUA strongly encourages the Committee to vote LD 10 Ought to Pass.  
 
Yours for safe drinking water , 
 
 
Roger Crouse  
Chair, Legislative Committee , Maine Water Utilities Association  
General Manager, Kennebec Water District  
