Testimony in SUPPORT  of: 
 
LD 10, An Act To An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Invasive 
Aquatic Plant s 
 
 
Submitted to the Environment and Natural Resources  Committee  
January 30 , 202 3 
 
 
Good afternoon, Chair Brenner , Chair Gramlich , and Distinguished Members of the Environment 
and Natural Resources  Committee . Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today  in 
support of LD 10.  
My name is Susan Gallo,  and I a m the Executive Director  of Maine Lakes . Our membership 
organization includes more than  6,000  supporters and volunteers , including individual members 
as well as members from over 90 Lake Association s. We are  dedicated to our mission of 
promo ting, protecting,  and enhanc ing lake water quality, and of preserv ing the ecological, 
economic, recreational, and aesthetic benefits of Maine’s lakes  for all Maine people .  
While we do not work directly with invasive species management  today, Maine Lakes was 
deeply involved in the in itial efforts to establish the In vasive Species p rogram at DEP , and 
recently we have been part of several coalitions develop ing policy , priorities and 
recommendations for actio ns to reduce invasive species spread. The risk of invasive species 
entering new water bodies is a high priority for our members  due to the dire  consequences  for 
lakes and the high cost of management once they ’ve arrived .  
We know our risks for new invasive invaders is high, bei ng surrounded  on all sides by invaders 
that have not yet made it into our waters. We know that costs to control aquatic invasives once 
they’ve arrived is extremely high, and that the negative ecological impacts  for our native species  
(dens e mats of vegetat ion that shade and choke out other spec ies, lower quality fish spawning 
and feeding habitat , etc.) can be dire, harming sport fisheries and reducing recreational 
opportunities.  
This is the first addition to the Invasive A quatic list si nce it was first created more than 20 years 
ago. Updating the list to include more species, clarify taxonomy, and  include  all species of 
Miriophyllum (native and invasive) is important for the integrity of Maine’s  aquatic invasive 
species  program . Ensuring these species are not sold  at nurseries is an important  step to 
reducing the risk of inadvertent invasive introduciton into Maine’s waterbodies.  
Thank you for your time and attention today , and for your support of this bill.  Email me any time 
with questions about aquatic invasive species policies  or strategie s for risk reduction at 
sgallo@lakes.me .  

