PROPERTY TAX STABILIZATION 
Prepared by Justin Hennessy, Assessor, Town of Topsham 
Administrative Burden 
Annual application requirement — huge unfunded administrative burden —very rough estimate 500 to 1000 
applications minimum for Topsham — nearly ‘A of all real estate accounts in town. Conservative estimate at5 
minutes to process each is 80+ hours every year, which does not include answering questions or assisting with 
completing the form. There will be additional time to compile information for reporting to Maine Revenue. 
The first batch of application received have missing information, requiring callbacks, additional staff time. 
Transfers from other municipalities will require verification increasing administrative burden again. Try 
contacting a small town with an assessing agent 1 day per month. 
Assessing software and tax billing software not designed to track stabilized billed amounts. Likely will require 
manual tracking i.e. excel with increased potential for errors and additional staff time. 
Assessing software and tax billing software are not currently capable of printing stabilized amounts, only the 
calculated full value amount. This will without doubt cause confusion and prompt numerous questions and 
complaints to the Town office, another unfunded drain on staff time. 
Cooperative housing corporation homes within tax increment financing districts subject to credit 
enhancement agreements — delayed reimbursements from state — multiple parties involved, town, 
shareholder, housing corporation CREA designee, state — again additional administrative burden. 
Financial Impact Concerns 
Timing of payments, nothing in bill waives interest on the amount in excess of the stabilized bill. Town has 
payments in October and April, likely not to receive reimbursement from Maine Revenue until January, who 
pays the interest that will accrue? 
How realistic is the estimated budget projection for State funding of reimbursements? When the State 
experiences revenue reductions, will the state simply refuse to reimburse, cut revenue sharing, cut education 
funding? If the state fails to reimburse, who makes up the gap in the municipal budgets? 
Seniors are often the voice of reason at Town Meeting offering a counterpoint to elective spending. If they no 
longer will be burdened by the increase, will we see an increase in municipal spending, which in turn would 
increase the amount of State reimbursement required? 
Lack of eguity in benefit 
No income requirement, recently built million dollar homes will be eligible same as 1970's mobile home ina 
park. 
Stabilized tax bill is transferrable — establish residency on an older mobile home in Washington County, 
transfer it to an oceanfront home in Sagadahoc 
Establish your property tax burden on existing home, then completely renovate, or add an addition, adda 
multiple bay garage. Nothing triggers resetting the stabilized tax burden. This is not equitable.
PROPERTY TAX STABILIZATION 
Prepared by Justin Hennessy, Assessor, Town of Topsham 
Functional Issues 
Requiring residents to apply on annually. If they forget, or are late filing, they will see a potential large single 
year increase. This may be substantial if they had been stabilized for several years. 
Multiple homeowners, only one qualifies for the program, who then deceases several years later, surviving 
spouse does not qualify yet. Now on top of losing a loved one, they are hit with a substantial increase in 
annual property tax bill. 
What happens if annual tax burden decreases? For example, town decides to utilize surplus funds to offset 
taxes. Does the applicant need to skip a year in order to reset the stabilized tax amount? 
Omitted property information. Applicant stabilizes on outdated information on the assessment record, 
subsequently discovered that substantial changes have occurred without notice to Town, such as building 
permits. Law as written has no mechanism to correct their stabilized tax amount. This is not equitable to other 
taxpayers. 
Homes is only partially complete in April 1, 2022 so it has a significantly reduced annual property tax bill. This 
fall they apply for stabilization for the first time after moving in. They are relocating from another home in 
l\/laine — which home is the stabilized bill derived from? 
Alternative Suggestion 
Replace Stabilization Program with tiered Homestead Exemptions 
Example 65+ Homestead doubles to $50,000 or higher. 
Immediate benefit to lower income seniors, by actually reducing their annual tax burden instead ofjust 
freezing it at current level. 
Higher income seniors would still see some benefit, but would also be responsible to share the property tax 
burden if they chose to make significant market added improvements to their property. 
Eliminates the logistical issues with tracking stabilized amounts on individual basis. 
Works with all existing administrative programs assessing, tax billing and collection, and the existing 
reimbursement process with Maine Revenue Service. 
Eliminates the annual burden of application on Homeowner and municipality. 
No concerns about potential individuals taking advantage of the system.
