April  25, 2023  
Maine Legislature  
Taxation Committee  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
Re: LD 1650  
Chairpersons Grohoski and Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee : 
My name is Kerry Leichtman. I am a Certified Maine Assessor serving the jurisdictions of Camden, 
Rockport and Rockland. Thank you for the opportunity to address you in support of  Representative 
Terry ’s LD 1650 , An Act to Create a Tiered Senior Resident Homestead Exemption .  
I have been looking forward to  speaking with you about this bill , but I serve o n the State Board of 
Prope rty Tax Review and am at the fourth  and final day of a  hearing to day. If I am lucky it will conclude  
early enough for me to attend your hearing  for LD 1650 . I am sub mitting this via your porta l in case it 
doesn ’t. 
LD 1650 seeks to repeal the well-intentioned but ill -conceived LD 290, a bill that  has disrupted the 
operations of assessing departments throughout the state . LD 290 invites  scams that require very little 
ingenuity, it is a vailable to the needy and well-to-do alike, and is an affront to the fair and equitable 
sharing of the tax burden among the state’s citizens.  
It has also raised the hopes of the state’s senior and elderly  population with the promise of true  and 
necessary  tax relief, when there is no doubt the program can’t possibly be sustained . 
There is no promise in the bill that its stated 100% reimbursement to municipalities would be  honored in 
the future, and when it isn’t mil rates will surely rise and along with it, local property taxes, the brunt of 
which will be borne by everyone younger than 65 years old. Maine will become inhospitable to the 
young. Who then will be our tax payi ng workforce? Maine’s population is already the oldest in the nation.  
Assessing offices throughout the state were  overwhelmed with hundreds, and in some larger 
municipalities, well over a thousand applications ; applications that required processing and thorough 
vetting which required  hundreds of hours of manpower. Even though the Constitution ’s Article IX 
Section 21 clearly states that municipalities must be compensated for 90% of the costs associated in the 
implementation of Legislation, the bill contained no such compensation mechanism , though it did provide 
$315,242 to Maine Revenue to proces s and audit the work we were expected to do for free.  
LD 1650 was written with input from assessors across the state. Among the many improvements over LD 
290, the two most important are that it targets people 65 and older who truly need the assistance and it 
does so using a fam iliar and simple to admin ister program – the homestead exemption.  
I was one of the assessors who contri buted to the writing of this bill. Even so, I don ’t think it ’s the perfe ct 
solution. It increase s the homestead exemption to by $25,000 to $50,000 for seniors  whose ann ual income 
is no higher than 80% of the ir regional median  family income , and by $15,000 for senior s whose regional 
family income  is 80% - 100% o f the median.  I think t he benefit numbers should be higher  and like  
Senator Bennett ’s LD 130  in which he proposes a $75,000 h omestead . But that bill does  not have income 
limits, which seems to me to be necessary if the program is to be sustainable.  
LD 1650 also requires that municipalities be rei mbursed for the additional benefit  at 100%. If it isn ’t mil 
rates will rise as a result  of the lost revenue.  LD 1650 program participants will not have to reapply each 
year, they need only ap ply once . 
There are many p articular s to figure out  which can be addres sed at a work  session or by a work group  
tasked by you to create a single bill from good, cre ative thinking LDs such as 1650 and 130.  
Thank you for allowing my testimony.  
 
  
