f; PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774 5444 
www.ac|umaine.org 
AMERICAN CIVIL UBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, Esq. 
LD 1715 — Ought to Pass 
An Act to Replace Certain Stigmatizing Language in the Maine Revised Statutes, 
Titles 22, 25 and 34-A with Respectful Language 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL IUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
May 2, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, good afternoon. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am policy counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine 
and U.S. Constitutions through advocacy, education, and litigation. On behalf of our members, 
we urge you to vote that LD 1715 ought to pass. 
More than two thousand years ago, a philosopher named Parmenides pointed out that 
our manner of describing things changes the way we understand them.‘ Modern understandings 
of social psychology bear that out. One example is our understanding of substance use. 
Whereas we used to understand drug addiction as arising from someone’s purported moral 
failings, changes in thinking and advances in scientiﬁc research caused substance use disorders 
to be understood as medical conditions? Deriding people with substance use disorders is 
humiliating for them, and it reinforces feelings of isolation that often led to substance use in the 
1 See Simplicitus, Commentary on Aristotle ’s Physics 145.1-146.25 reprinted in INTRODUCTORY READINGS IN ANCIENT GREEK 
AND ROMAN PHILOSOPHY 17 (C.D.C. Reeve & Patrick Lee Miller, eds., 2015) (“What is to be thought of is the same as that on account 
of which the thought is. For not without what-is, on which it depends, having been solemnly pronounced, will you ﬁnd thinking; for 
nothing else either is or will be except what-is, since precisely this is what Fate shackled to be whole and motionless. Therefore it has 
been named of all things that mortals, persuaded that they are real, have posited both to be generated and to to perish, to be and not, 
and to change place and alter bright color.”). 
2 See Hannah Cooper, Medical Theories of Opiate Addiction ’s Aetiology and Their Relationship to Addicts ' 
Perceived Social 
Position in the United States: an Historical Analysis. 15 INT’L J. OF DRUG POL’Y 435, 43 6-443 (2004).
ﬁrst place?’ The idea that you can shame someone out of addiction has been, at this point, 
exposed as a dangerous practicef ‘ 
Using stigmatizing language might seem like a small matter, but the tendency to deﬁne 
ourselves in relation to, and express scorn for, perceived outgroups is deeply ingrained in the 
way we tend to process the world around us.5 Indeed, some scholars of labeling theory argue 
that “once individuals have been labeled or defined as deviants, they often face new problems 
that stem from the reactions of self and others to negative stereotypes (stigma) that are attached 
to the deviant label.”6 By changing “prisoner ” to “resident of a correctional facility ” and 
“probationer ” to “person on probation ” in Maine’s statute and rulebooks, this bill would help 
the state take a small step away from affixing people with scarlet letters and toward 
recognizing, and foregrounding, their humanity. It promises to improve the treatment of 
justice-impacted people and increase opportunities for rehabilitation. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
3 For an entertaining video that explains some of the research underlying these concepts in an accessible way, see Addiction, 
KURZGESAGT, available at https:/1 ’www.youtube.com/watch?v=C8AHODc6phg. 
‘*4 See, e.g., generally Richard J. Boimie & Charles H. Whitebread, The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowiedge: An Inquiry 
into the Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition, 56 Va. L. Rev. 971 (1970) (phenomenal history of marijuana laws and 
punishment in the United States). 
5 See COTTAM ET AL., POLITICAL PSYCHOLOGY 54 (3rd ed. 2016) (“[W]e organize the social world in terms of social categories. 
We all make assumptions about other people, ourselves, and the situations we are in. Sometimes we are very wrong, but often our 
expectations are functional. The ﬁrst step in perceiving another person is to classify the person or situation as ﬁtting a familiar 
category. ”) 
6 Jon Gunnar Bemburg, Labeling theory, In: Marvin D. Krohn, Alan Lizotte & Gina Penly Hall (eds), Handbook on Crime and 
Deviance (187-207) (2009 Springer Science + Business Media).
