Memo
To:Maine Legislators
From:Rob Sexton, Sportsmen’s Alliance
rtsstrategies@gmail.com
Date:February 1, 2023
Re:Age Minimums for Hunting
Introduction
Concerned about the recruitment of the next generation of hunters, in 2004 the Sportsmen’s Alliance 
conducted research that found that arbitrarily set age minimums for hunting were a barrier to 
recruitment. Research of other states at the time demonstrated that more than 30 states had no age 
restrictions on hunting whatsoever. 
At the same time, research on hunting related shooting incidents demonstrated that states where 
parents decided when their children were ready to begin hunting, instead of an arbitrary age limitation, 
were actually slightly less likely to be involved in an accident. In other words, laws that set age 
minimums did not result in safer hunting.  
These two conclusions led the Sportsmen’s Alliance to launch Families Afield, a program designed to 
eliminate the barriers that prevent the next generation from entering the field. The program was 
founded on two goals: allow parents to decide at what age their kids would begin to hunt; and create 
apprentice hunting programs for people of all ages. 
Families Afield laws have been passed in 41 states over the last 18 years resulting in more than 2 million 
licenses sold. During this expansion, these states have experienced the same safety record as those with 
significant age limitations remaining in place. 
LD 261 – Setting a Minimum Hunting Age
Based on more than ten years of data, the Sportsmen’s Alliance opposes the setting of an arbitrary 
minimum hunting age. There simply is no need for it. Safety data does not justify it. 
Another reason is that it suggests the government is a better arbiter of when a child should begin 
hunting, rather than leaving this decision to parents. Instead of deferring to a parents first-hand 
knowledge, this legislation will open the door to a debate over which arbitrary age is appropriate.  Why 
not three?  Why not five? Why not six? What are the general mental, physical and emotional attributes 
of any child when it comes to the responsibilities involved in hunting? Only a parent can answer these 
questions.
Introducing this debate is a mistake that will be seized upon by those who oppose hunting, firearm 
ownership, and likely both. And for what reason? There is no underlying data to remove this decision 
from the people who love and care for their children the most. For these reasons the Sportsmen’s 
Alliance asks Maine legislators not to advance LD 261.  
Thank you for your time. We remain available for any questions you may have.  
