Maine Professional Guides Association 
55 Morrison Hill Road 
Wilton, ME 04294 
www.mc1ineguides.0rg 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 261 
An Act to Reinstate a Minimum Age for Hunting 
February 15, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote 
and I am here today on behalf of the Maine Professional Guides Association in opposition to LD 126. 
The repeal of the minimum hunting age in Maine _several years ago was part of an implementation ofa 
national effort called the Families Afield program. Families Afield seeks to eliminate barriers to hunting, 
fishing, and trapping, and give parents and other adults the tools and opportunities necessary to get the 
next generation of sportsmen and women into the field efficiently and successfully. 
At the heart of the repeal of the hunting age was the intention to allow parents- not government or any 
other entity- to decide at what age their child is capable of safely and effectively carrying out the 
responsibilities and enjoyment of hunting, within the confines of safety provisions, laws and rules that 
Maine otherwise requires. 
While we do not disagree that many youth hunters are not prepared to hunt before the age of 5, it is 
still an arbitrary threshold by which to decide when a youth hunter is ready. The best measurement for 
deciding when a child is ready is the experience that a parent or other adult has with that child. For 
some, that could be 5 years old, and for others it could be 10 or 15. Ultimately, parents are in the best 
position to make that decision. 
What we have seen (and experienced) is overwhelming evidence that the repeal of the hunting age has 
been extraordinarily helpful in breaking down a barrier to recruit youth hunters to try the pursuit of 
hunting and gain a stronger appreciation for wildlife here in Maine. While we would defer to the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to identify any evidence to the contrary that might suggest a 
reason to change the law, we strongly feel that if the law isn't broken we shouldn't try to fix it. 
Thank you for your consideration and l would be pleased to answer any questions or provide more 
information for the work session. 
/in organization 0fpi"0fessionc1/ guic/es dedicaieci to promoting er qualify, efiiiccil outdoor experience.
