Testimony in SUPPORT  
of LD 261, “An Act to Reinstate a Minimum Age for Hunting”  
 
Before the Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  
Presented by  Jayne Winters, South China, ME  
 
February 28, 2023  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative  Landry , distinguished members of the Inland Fisheries & 
Wildlife  Committee, my name is Jayne Winters. I have lived in Maine all my life and currently 
reside in South China. I am submitting comments in SUPPORT  of LD 261, “An Act  to Reinstate a 
Minimum Age for Hun ting.”  While I strongly support the proposal to reinstate a minimum age 
for hunting, I oppose the age of five .  
 
According to a July 2022 “Outdoor Empire” article,  five states have no age l imit for hunting  big 
game alone , twelve  states mandate  10 years or younger , twenty -five mandate  11-15 years of 
age, and eight require hunters be at least age 16. Most states  require successful completion of 
hunter and safety education, with the general recommendation that a child be at least 10 years 
old to understand  what is taught in a course. In addition, youth hunters typically  must be 
accompanied and supervised by a licensed  adult.  
 
In 2015, LD 156 proposed to lower the eligibility age for a Maine Junior Hunting License from 
10 to 8 years of age. However , an amendment removed the minimum age requirement 
altogether , I believe in an effort to improve hunting opportunities and remove the government 
from a decision many feel should be made by parents. The only exception was for moose 
hunting, which has retained the minimum age of 10. If there is support for reinstating a 
minimum age for hunting, why not make it 10 again, to keep it consistent with what is already 
on the books for moose hunting?  While I personally feel most 10-year-olds are  too young  to 
handle firearms responsibly, the y would be with an adult and c ould gain vital experience by 
observation, hands -on trac king, scouting, etc.   
 
An individual must be at least 16 years of age  to obtain a Maine  driver’s license . S/he must 
have successfully complete d a driver’s education course and/or maintain ed a learner’s permit 
for six months with a minimum of 70 hours of dri ving experience, accompanied by an adult. 
How is a  child who isn’t old enough to have a driver’s license deemed mature and responsible 
enough to handle a firearm?  
 
I am not against hunting . I appreciate families wanting to pass the tradition along to the ne xt 
generation (s), but I don’t believe young children have the judgment or ability to safely handle a 
gun. Simple mistakes such as  accidental weapon d ischarge, mistaken targets , poor attention 
span, inability to follow directions and even  lack of physical strength, can have devastating 
consequences to the child as well as others. Maine has a fairly good hunting safety rec ord. Let ’s 
keep it th at way.   
 
I respectfully urge you to pass LD 261, with further  consideration  regarding appropriate age. 
Thank you.  
 
