TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN SUPPORT  
L.D. 261 " An Act to Reinstate a Minimum Age for Hunting. ” 
Committee On Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
February 13, 202 3 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry,  and distinguished  Committee members,  
Thank you for considering my comments in support of L.D. 261 , An Act to Reinstate a Minimum Age for Huntin g. 
Every year, nearly every state reports some type of hunting accident. There are an estimated 700 non -fatal hunting -
related injuries and 75 fatal shootings in the U.S. each year.  Too many of those accidents involve children.  
Youth don’t have the same disc ernment and handling skills as adults when it comes to hunting. They are more likely 
to make simple mistakes and injure themselves or others. When youth are involved in hunting, they may accidentally 
discharge a firearm. They may also mistake someone as pr ey. Additionally, g iven their smaller stature, youth may be 
more likely to be mistaken as targets by surrounding hunters.  
• In 2020, a 12-year-old boy  from Washington County was  accidentally  shot by his father wh ile bird huntin g. 
 
• Two 11-year-old boys were killed in separate hunting -related  accidents this past November.   
 
• In another case, a 15 -year-old hunter in Washington state accidentally mistook a woman nearby as a bear 
and fatally shot her in the head.  
 
• In 2012, two youth were duck hunting in a canoe. They stood up to fire at a flock of ducks flying overhead 
which caused the canoe to roll. One youth lost his footing, fell back, tried to catch himself, and accidentally 
fired his gu n, shooting his companion in the knee with his shotgun.  
Children’s lack of experience, maturity and adequate training can contribute to these types of incidents.  
Our knowledge that young brains are not fully developed drives the formation of regulations intended to keep our 
youths safe.  As a result, it is against the law for our children to drive, work, vote or drink a lcohol. But for some 
reason it is deemed safe and acceptable for a toddler to use a firearm to kill an animal?   It is not logical,  and it feels 
unsafe. 
Although I understand the argument of a parent teaching a child about hunter ethics and safety (my father taught me 
firearm  safety  when I was 10) - to send a child into the woods with a weapon who is not old enough to legally drive or 
work  - feels like an invitation to tragedy.  
As a result, I hope you will support this bill to establish a minimum hunting age in Maine.   Six years old still seems 
young to me, but it is a step in the right direction.  
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
Susanna Richer  
Portland, Main e 
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 261
Thank you for considering my comments regarding L.D. 261, An Act to Reinstate a 
Minimum Age for Hunting.
