 
 
MNPA.org 
PO BOX 135 Woolwich, ME 04579
207-621-0313
mainenpassociation@gmail.com
mnpa.org
       25+ Years of Independent Practice as Healthcare Providers for the People of Maine 
March 17, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Representative Anne Perry 
Members of the Health and Human Services Committee 
I am a citizen from South Portland and work as a nurse practitioner in primary care in the greater 
Portland area.  I am writing to you on behalf of the Maine Nurse Practitioner Association in support of 
LD 935 ‘An Act to Remove Barriers to Abortion Coverage in Private Insurance.’ We appreciate 
Representative Moonen and the co-sponsors for presenting this bill. 
We support LD 935 which will remove barriers that patients encounter when attempting to receive 
timely abortion services through their private insurer. The Maine Nurse Practitioner Association believes 
every woman has the right to make reproductive choices, access factual, unbiased information about 
reproductive choices, and those with limited means should have access to financial resources for their 
reproductive choices.  
Many of you are aware that most private insurance plans come with a hefty deductible that must be 
met before many health care services can be rendered. The ability to control your own personal medical 
decisions, including whether to end a pregnancy, is a fundamental human right. This limitation can 
restrict patient access to abortion which can increase their risk for poor health outcomes. I have seen 
patients wait to terminate a pregnancy due to cost and instead of terminating at 6 or 8 weeks they have 
to wait until they can afford the medical procedure or medications. This can increase health risk, mental 
health burden, and impact their ability to perform their responsibilities at work and home.  
We believe that private insurance recipients should be afforded the opportunity to access these services 
without having to meet high deductible costs first. This will provide cost savings to the insurance 
companies as the cost of abortions occurring later in pregnancy, routine pregnancies, and complicated 
pregnancies would be much higher.  
Thank you for your consideration of this bill as we urge you to vote in favor of LD 935. Please feel free to 
contact me at the number below for more information or if you wish to discuss further. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Amy Brown, FNP-C 
Tel # 207-621-0313 
mainenpassociation@gmail.com  
Legislative Committee Member 
Maine Nurse Practitioner Association 
