Good morning, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee. My name is Charlie Hartman, and I live in Vassalboro. I 
urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 935. 
When I was in my mid-20s, a gynecologist put me on a hormone pill to treat intense pain during my 
period. The treatment stopped my periods and took care of the problem, and the doctor said when I was 
ready to get pregnant, I could stop taking the pills and my periods would start again. The pills had serious 
side-effects, though, including mini-strokes in my brain that caused memory loss and aphasia, but the 
doctor told me to remain on the med because, “With women, you never know whether the medicine is 
causing the problem, or it's just you." It is an indicator of how seriously my brain was compromised thatI 
simply accepted his judgment and kept taking the pills. 
At the time, I was a student at Stanford Medical Center. The prescription, however, affected my 
academic performance. I couldn’t remember what I was learning, I could not write notes because my pen 
would write something different from what I was thinking, and once I treated a patient’s right leg instead 
of her left, even though her left leg was the one with the bandages on it. I was soon dismissed from the 
program. At this point, I realized I needed a new doctor. 
I went to a new gynecologist for a routine checkup. To my shock, she told me I was eight weeks 
pregnant. I told her about the meds and the doctor, and she explained that just because I didn’t have 
periods didn't mean I couldn’t get pregnant. And then she told me that because of the meds I had been 
taking, the chances of the fetus being viable were very slim. It was devastating to ﬁnd - at the same time 
— that I was pregnant and that the fetus probably wasn't viable. The doctor offered me an appointment, 
and I chose to have the procedure. 
I had insurance at the time, and it covered the abortion, but after being asked recently what I would have 
done if the insurance hadn’t paid for it, I was shaken. I would not have been able to afford the abortion, 
and I would probably have carried the fetus until I either miscarried or delivered a stillborn. 
Just thinking about this is very painful, but I cannot even imagine what I would have gone through ifI 
couldn’t afford to get the abortion I needed. No one should be forced to go through a pregnancy. 
Please Vote Ought to Pass on LD 935. Thank you.
