Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee 
 
My name is James Swan, I live in Waldoboro, Lincoln County and I urge you to 
vote Ought to Pass on LD 935. 
 
I write to express my support for this piece of legislation as a result of challenges 
my sisters, cousins and niece have experienced in securing reproductive healthcare 
over the years. LD 935 (An Act to Remove Barriers to Comprehensive Pregnancy 
Care in Private Insurance), sponsored by Representative Matt Moonen, is critical 
and would expand access to abortion care for all individuals. 
 
One in four people who can be pregnant will have an abortion in their lifetime. It is 
important to remember that abortion is a safe and normal procedure that can be 
done both in-clinic and with medication. I choose to use the word "abortion" in an 
effort to destigmatize this basic medical procedure and reduce the shame and fear 
associated with it. 
 
LD 935 would expand access to abortion by removing cost-sharing in insurance 
coverage of abortion. By making abortion more affordable and accessible, people 
wouldn't need to meet super high deductibles in order for their insurance to cover 
their care. This legislation would help remove barriers to care and ensure that 
everyone can access the care they need, regardless of their income. As a Mainer 
committed to equity for everyone in my community, this is crucial. 
 
It is important we remember that reproductive healthcare is not just a women's 
issue. Trans, nonbinary, and intersex individuals who have a uterus and can 
become pregnant. They too need access to reproductive healthcare services.  
 
In addition, we must recognize that a person's ability to access abortions is 
impacted by their identity. The access of Black, Indigenous, and people of color to 
preventative care, insurance coverage, sex ed, etc. is disproportionately impacted 
by medical racism and systemic discrimination. This legislation is an important 
step toward ensuring that all individuals have access to the care they need, 
regardless of their identity. 
 
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 935. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Sincerely, 
James Swan 
Waldoboro, Maine 04572  
