Jerome Collins
Kennebunkport
LD 935
To the Chairs and Members of The Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services:
I oppose LD: 935: To Remove Barriers to Abortion Coverage in Private Insurance. 
This bill suffers from an absence of numerical data that would indicate why it is 
required. State abortion data for 2021 indicate that there were 1095 abortions in a 
state population of 1,372,000. The bill appears to be forcing insurance companies to 
make financial accommodations for a minority of people wanting abortion services. 
Of this group, there is no evidence in the bill of financial hardship because of their 
insurance premiums. So this bill appears to be a "solution" in search of a problem.
The bill would force insurance companies to raise fees for expansion of their services,
and this increase in insurance premiums would have an impact on people like me- 
men- and other non-users of abortion services. it is a bullying bill that lacks any 
evidence that it is needed.
LD: 935: Ought not to pass.
Jerome A Collins
PO Box 1190
Kennebunkport, Maine 04046
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
LD: 616: To Protect health Care Professionals in Reproductive Health Care Services: 
I oppose this bill , which plays "fast and loose" with medical malpractice. It lacks any 
problem definition of abuse of malpractice laws or by malpractice insurance, while it 
proposes to correct a completely unproven, possibly non-existent problem. Without 
data to suggest a problem, the bill will free doctors from malpractice charges- some of
which may be real and unrelated to abortion. It is a bill with many obvious unintended
consequences impacting the quality of medical practice.
LD: 616: Ought not to pass.
Jerome A Collins
PO Box 1190
Kennebunkport, Maine 04046
------------------------------------------------
I oppose LD: 263: To Ensure Access to the Health Care Field of Abortion is a "what 
if" bill. It raises a hypothetical problem with no evidence that it exists. Because there 
is no evidence that mergers or acquisitions "might" diminish abortion services, does 
the state of Maine need a law to deal with possibilities. The bill seems predicated on a
fear that possibly a merger or acquisition might "conceivably" diminish abortion 
services. it is a bill aimed at diminishing the nightmares and anxieties of its sponsor.
LD:263: Ought not to pass.
Jerome A.Collins
PO Box 1190
Kennebunkport, Maine 04046

