Testimony of the Maine SAFE Fund 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
 
 
In reference to LD 935 An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Ought to Pass  
May 2, 2023  
 
We are writing in support of Representative Moonen’s bill, An Act to Remove Barriers to 
Abortion Coverage in Private Insurance (LD 935). SAFE Maine is a 501(c)3 non-profit abortion 
fund established in 1989. We have been supporting Maine individuals, families, and abortion 
providers for 34 years by funding abortion costs for patients with urgent needs. 
  
Our organization uniquely understands the myriad of obstacles to abortion care that people in 
our state face. Geographic distance to providers, weather-related events like snowstorms and a 
lack of state-wide public transportation or sometimes unreliable personal vehicles can impose 
overwhelming challenges. Furthermore, in Maine – as in the rest of the world – abortion 
restrictions disproportionately impact traditionally marginalized communities including 
indigenous people, communities of color and low-income communities who already face higher 
rates of maternal mortality and chronic disease. Transgender men and non-binary patients who 
can become pregnant, young people, and people who face language barriers (including 
immigrants and /refugees) also face unique challenges to accessing healthcare, especially 
abortion care, from a medical system that has historically denied service and caused harm. 
Historically, lack of insurance coverage was a barrier to accessing healthcare, like abortion care, 
but we are seeing that patients insured under a plan with high deductibles find access to 
needed procedures as impossible as having no insurance altogether. 
  
Maine law currently requires private insurances to cover comprehensive pregnancy care, which 
is a great win for the pregnant people of Maine who wish to continue pregnancies, but many 
health plans require patients pay out of pocket for abortion care until deductibles are met. 
  
Cost-sharing most severely impacts those with the fewest financial resources, which often 
translates into impacting those who are systematically oppressed. SAFE Maine, the state’s only 
abortion fund, is working to create a more equitable and just society by offsetting the urgent 
cost of abortion care for patients who have difficulty paying. We are increasingly recognizing 
that having insurance is not assurance that abortion care will be covered or will be affordable. 
LD 935 can help create a more equitable healthcare situation in Maine. 
  
Few people have the savings to afford a medical emergency and for those in need of access to 
abortion care, unexpected costs can mean choosing between paying rent, utility or other 
essential bills and push them into poverty. The SAFE Fund is proud to support Maine families 
and communities in making private medical decisions that are best for them by supporting 
access to abortion, but our emergency funding support is not a long-term solution. Insurance 
companies should pay for urgent, time-sensitive medical procedures, such as abortion, and 
should do so without cost sharing.  We strongly encourage the Maine Legislature to pass LD 
935.  
 
 
Julia McDonald
SAFE Maine
LD 935
Testimony of the Maine SAFE Fund
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
In reference to LD 935 An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws
Ought to Pass 
May 2, 2023 
We are writing in support of Representative Moonen’s bill, An Act to Remove 
Barriers to Abortion Coverage in Private Insurance (LD 935). SAFE Maine is a 
501(c)3 non-profit abortion fund established in 1989. We have been supporting Maine
individuals, families, and abortion providers for 34 years by funding abortion costs 
for patients with urgent needs.
 
Our organization uniquely understands the myriad of obstacles to abortion care that 
people in our state face. Geographic distance to providers, weather-related events like 
snowstorms and a lack of state-wide public transportation or sometimes unreliable 
personal vehicles can impose overwhelming challenges. Furthermore, in Maine – as 
in the rest of the world – abortion restrictions disproportionately impact traditionally 
marginalized communities including indigenous people, communities of color and 
low-income communities who already face higher rates of maternal mortality and 
chronic disease. Transgender men and non-binary patients who can become pregnant, 
young people, and people who face language barriers (including immigrants and 
/refugees) also face unique challenges to accessing healthcare, especially abortion 
care, from a medical system that has historically denied service and caused harm. 
Historically, lack of insurance coverage was a barrier to accessing healthcare, like 
abortion care, but we are seeing that patients insured under a plan with high 
deductibles find access to needed procedures as impossible as having no insurance 
altogether.
 
Maine law currently requires private insurances to cover comprehensive pregnancy 
care, which is a great win for the pregnant people of Maine who wish to continue 
pregnancies, but many health plans require patients pay out of pocket for abortion 
care until deductibles are met.
 
Cost-sharing most severely impacts those with the fewest financial resources, which 
often translates into impacting those who are systematically oppressed. SAFE Maine, 
the state’s only abortion fund, is working to create a more equitable and just society 
by offsetting the urgent cost of abortion care for patients who have difficulty paying. 
We are increasingly recognizing that having insurance is not assurance that abortion 
care will be covered or will be affordable. LD 935 can help create a more equitable 
healthcare situation in Maine.
 
Few people have the savings to afford a medical emergency and for those in need of 
access to abortion care, unexpected costs can mean choosing between paying rent, 
utility or other essential bills and push them into poverty. The SAFE Fund is proud to 
support Maine families and communities in making private medical decisions that are 
best for them by supporting access to abortion, but our emergency funding support is 
not a long-term solution. Insurance companies should pay for urgent, time-sensitive 
medical procedures, such as abortion, and should do so without cost sharing.  We 
strongly encourage the Maine Legislature to pass LD 935. 

