cash‘ 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Representative Anne Perry, and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee , 
My name is Lucy Hull, and I am a staff member with Grandmothers for Reproductive Rights (GRR!). I‘m 
writing to testify on behalf of GRRl in support of LD 935: An Act to Remove Barriers to Abortion 
Coverage in Private Insurance. 
GRR! is an education and advocacy organization, working intergenerationally to secure access to abortion 
care and reproductive services for all, which ofeourse includes our children, grandchildren and future 
generations. GRR! was founded in Maine in 2013 and many ofus are here today. Because of our decades 
ofcxperience with reproductive issues, GRREs understand deeply the importance of access, logistically 
and ﬁnancially, to reproductive hcalthcare. When Maine health insurance plans require extra cost 
sharings, abortion becomes inaccessible for vulnerable Mainers. 
LD 935 completes the advances begun in 2019 when Maine’s legislature passed LD 820, An Act To 
Prevent Discrimination in Public and Private insurance Coverage for Pregnant Women in Maine. Too 
many Mainers ane already struggling with high deductible insurance plans, copays, and coinsurance costs. 
These cost barriers prohibit pregnant Mainers from being able to access either abortion care or prenatal 
care. These barriers must come down. 
LD 935 would level the playing ﬁeld on abortion access for people with all types of insurance and lift the 
burden of ﬁnancing off the backs of patients during a time of record inﬂation and rising costs of goods 
and services. Abortion should not be a right that only a privileged few can afford. The Guttmaeher 
Institute reports that the majority of people seeking an end to an unintended pregnancy were using at least 
one contraceptive method at the time they became pregnant ’ . GRR!s know how desperate it feels to ﬁnd 
oneself pregnant despite precautions. Adding cost barriers during this time in someones life is inhumane, 
and Mainers have repeatedly shown support for improving access to abortion care by removing insurance 
and cost barriers. ORR! urges the committee to vote in support of LD 935. 
Thank you for your consideration, 
Lucy Hull 8; GRR1s across Maine
