1 
  
 
 
 
May 1, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
 
My name is Melissa Martin and I am submitting testimony today on behalf of the Maine Coalition 
Against Sexual Assault (MECASA), the organization which represents and serves Maine’s sexual 
violence prevention and response programs as well as Maine’s Children’s Advocacy Centers. 
MECASA initiates and advocates for victim-centered public policy; provides expert training, 
technical assistance, and resources for providers and partners; and funds the service providers in 
your communities.  
 
MECASA is here today in support of LD 935, An Act to Remove Barriers to Abortion Coverage in 
Private Insurance.  Thank you to Representatives Moonen; Senator Bailey; and Representatives 
Arford, Cluchey, Mastraccio, and Mathieson.  
 
Each year, approximately 14,000 Mainers experience sexual violence.  In our most recent Needs 
Assessment, a statewide assessment of all sexual assault providers across the state, one of the 
largest needs identified in Maine by survivors of sexual violence was basic needs such as access to 
housing, food, and healthcare.   
 
As such, we consider this bill an important step in allowing survivors access to essential healthcare 
to meet their basic needs.   
 
In addition, when survivors find themselves in need of an abortion after sexual violence it is 
important to remember that this is just one of the many costs associated with sexual violence.  For 
the average sexual violence survivor, the cost of that violence is over $100,000.1 
 
For this reason, we support this bill as a path for this Committee to reduce the financial cost to 
sexual violence survivors accessing essential medical care that may arise after sexual violence.   
 
 
1 https://www.nsvrc.org/blogs/cost-rape 

2 
 Thank you for your consideration. We hope you will support LD 935 and would be pleased to 
answer any questions you might have. 
 
 
 
 
 
About Maine’s Sexual Assault Service Providers  
  
One in five Mainers will experience sexual assault at some point in their lifetime.2 Each year, 
14,000 Mainers will experience sexual violence.3 
 
Maine’s sexual violence service providers  provide free and confidential services across the state 
to victims/survivors of sexual harassment and sexual assault and those close to them, as well as to 
individuals who wish to increase their understanding of the issues. Just some of the services 
include a 24-hour statewide sexual assault helpline, crisis intervention and information, support 
groups, in-person accompaniment and advocacy through the medical and legal systems, and 
school- and community-based prevention education. Services are provided for a victim/survivor 
regardless of when they experienced sexual violence, and regardless of what type of sexual 
violence they experienced. Types of sexual violence include, but are not limited to, sexual 
harassment and gender-based bullying, child sexual abuse, elder sexual abuse, stalking, sex 
trafficking, and sexual violence within an intimate partner relationship.     
  
24/7 Confidential  
Maine Sexual Assault Helpline:  1-800-871-7741  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Dumont, R. & Shaler, G. (2015). Maine Crime Victimization Report: Informing public policy for safer communities. 
Muskie School of Public Service, University of Southern Maine. 
3 Ibid. 
3 
  
 

4 
  
 

