LD 935 
Good morning, members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee, 
and thank you for the opportunity to address you today. My name is Mindy Woerter, and I live in 
Durham. 
Seven years ago, almost to the day, I decided to have an abortion. It wasn't a decision I 
expected to make at that point in my life. I was married, already a mother, and desperately 
hoping to grow my family. _ 
But, after making it through the ﬁrst trimester, I found out my wanted pregnancy was nonviable 
due to fetal anomalies incompatible with life. Continuing the pregnancy put my health at risk.I 
had a daughter at home to take care of, a family who needed me healthy and whole. 
I knew I couldn’t continue a pregnancy feeling like a ticking time bomb waiting for a miscarriage 
to happen, wondering if I'd face serious complications like infection, infertility, or even death - all 
were possibilities. There wasn't a question in my mind. I knew an abortion was the right choice 
for me. 
But since my husband is a federal employee, our insurance is prohibited from covering 
abortions except in very narrow circumstances. It didn’t matter that my pregnancy was 
nonviable or that my health was at risk. Unless I was actively dying, my insurance wouldn't 
provide abortion coverage. The bill was over $6,000. 
lt‘s hard to adequately describe how dehumanizing it felt to be treated as if my life held such 
little value. I still can't comprehend how the outcome desired by those in power would have 
been for me to suffer, and maybe even die, leaving my daughter without a mother. 
Because of my privilege, I was able to get the abortion l needed. But for many people, ﬁnancial 
barriers put abortion out of reach. Being forced to wait, or to choose between paying for an 
abortion and paying for food or rent, jeopardizes a person’s health, as well as their family's 
economic well-being. 
Everyone - no matter their source of insurance or their income — deserves access to safe and 
affordable abortion care. The right of bodily autonomy should not be subject to the whims of 
insurance companies, health care companies, or lawmakers. And health care professionals who 
do this important work deserve to be able to practice without fear of threats or harm. 
I urge you to support LD 935, so that everyone in Maine can choose, without interference or 
barriers or shame, what we do with our bodies. Abortion access is a fundamental human right. 
Thank you._
