Good afternoon. Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee my name is 
Tanja Hollander and I’m testifying in support of LD 935. I was here a little 
over four years ago testifying for LD 820. 
In 2016, I found out I was pregnant shortly after my 44*“ birthday. I’d spent 
most of my adult life trying to avoid pregnancy and was shocked to ﬁnd outI 
was pregnant. I’m a self-employed artist, and the pregnancy came when I was 
working 14-hour days, ﬁnancially maxed out, with only three months before 
a major museum deadline. I knew there was no way that I could ﬁnish the 
work while pregnant, I was already feeling uncomfortable and having 
difﬁculty working. Deciding to have an abortion was not one I came to 
lightly-- even though there was no doubt in my mind. I feel things very 
deeply, and being pregnant when you don’t want to be is awful. 
I called my doctor to schedule a pregnancy test and medication abortion. 
They told me that I could schedule the test, but not “the other thing.” For that 
they would refer me to a clinic. 
I hung up and called Planned Parenthood in Portland (a 45-minute drive from 
my home), but the ﬁrst available appointment was weeks away, which would 
be close to the ten week limit for a medication abortion. At that time, there 
were no pills by mail and Maine law prohibited Nurse Practitioners from 
administering the pills for a medication abortion. New Hampshire didn’t have 
a ban; I could get an appointment four days later in Concord, abouta 
two-hour drive each way. 
Because I couldn’t get care at home, my insurance wouldn’t cover my 
procedure. It cost $475, I had a remaining balance on a credit card of $550 
which I used to pay.
I feel incredibly lucky that I had the resources to pay for the abortion, to 
travel over four hours roundtrip to take a pill, to take time off from work.I 
know not everyone does. I can’t imagine being young and scared AND 
having to ﬁgure out how to pay for care because your health insurance won’t 
You should be able to make your own decision about whether to enda 
pregnancy without insurance companies denying care, and without having to 
travel far from home because of outdated laws. 
Please pass LD 935 so that more people can get the care they need.
