Tristan T. C. Peasley
Rockland
LD 935
Dear Governor Janet Mills and committee,
I strongly urge you not to pass this act as well as LD 616, LD 1343, and LD 1619.  
All four of these acts are pure evil and destroy human life.  Babies are the most 
vulnerable people, and more specifically unborn babies.  Abortion is very cruel and 
violent.  Babies’ little skulls are crushed.  In some cases the babies’ skin is burned.  
Videos of what’s going on inside a woman during an abortion have showed the baby 
trying to run away from that tube that’s sucking him/her up, to save his/her life, and 
the baby’s little mouth opening as he/she screams in terror.  These poor little babies 
are completely helpless and can’t defend themselves.  Janet Mills and other supporters
of this, do your homework and read or watch Unplanned (the book or movie).  Read 
about Abby Johnson.  No doctor, governor, or president has the right to murder 
another human being.  While any abortion is evil, these new acts which will allow 
abortion right up until birth are incomprehensible.  This is the next step in allowing 
more and more destruction of human life.  What will come next after this passes?  
Partial birth abortion or beyond?  Will Janet Mills stand up for partial birth abortion 
once that’s on the table?  She once not that long ago wouldn’t have stood for abortion 
all the way to birth.  Janet Mills is a liar.  During one of her debates with Paul LePage
just this past fall she said that she likes Maine’s abortion law the way it is and that she
does not plan to make it any looser.  Now she has gone back on that and she’s trying 
to pass one of the most extreme abortion laws.  Hitler got away with killing millions 
of Jews by brainwashing people in the same way Democrats are brainwashing people 
about killing babies.  I believe that these acts are a temper tantrum response to the 
Supreme Court overturning Roe V. Wade last year and that this is being done in spite.
The Supreme Court’s decision changed nothing in Maine; abortion remained legal as 
it was.  Mills and all other supporters of these acts, there is no need to make the 
abortion law in Maine more extreme just because you are mad about the Supreme 
Court’s decision.  Get over it!  Abortion is still legal in Maine for crying out loud!  If 
Republicans can peacefully move on from a fraudulently stolen presidential election 
and many other crooked things Democrats have done to destroy this country, you 
Democrats can get over the one thing that didn’t go your way, the overturning of Roe 
V. Wade.
