. 
5 M/\l=‘*ll;l ixiitiniiixatt 
;iiousllir, com l'l'i(“il~l 
131" Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition 
In favor of 1 706 - An Act to Clarify Statewide Laws Regarding Affordable Housing and Accessory Dwelling Units 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is BJ 
McCollister and I am the President of the Resurgam Group, I appreciate the chance to present testimony on behalf of 
the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (l\/lAHC). As a nonprofit membership organization representing over 140 Maine 
development, engineering, design, construction, and housing services organizations, our mission is to advocate for the 
creation and preservation of affordable housing for all Maine residents. We are testifying today in favor of LD 1706 -An 
Act to Clarify Statewide Laws Regarding Affordable Housing and Accessory Dwelling Units. 
This is a priority piece of legislation for the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition. The bill's proposed changes in this bill 
would allow for more affordable housing options for Maine residents, which is crucial in addressing the statewide 
housing crisis we currently face in Maine. The need for affordable housing in Maine is dire. We have built only an 
average of 250 affordable housing units annually, while the need is 1000 units per year. There are over 25,000 people on 
affordable housing waitlists statewide, and this crisis is not going away. The current production is not sustainable, 
especially since more people from other states are moving to Maine. In 2021 alone, 16,300 people moved here, and only 
6,800 building permits were awarded, with 4 out of 5 permits being for single-family homes. 
Maine needs more housing today to accommodate our workforce needs, our young people, and older Mainers. The 
housing crisis requires that we take action to better use land where single-family homes are already allowed and 
empower people to build housing on the land they own. Updating zoning regulations can make every Maine community 
more welcoming and affordable to people from all walks of life and at different times in their lives. 
This bill would make some important changes that would allow for more affordable housing options for Mainers. It 
would clarify municipal approval ofan affordable housing development to mean granting final approval, including 
issuing an occupancy permit. lt would also simplify the rules for building affordable housing units by clarifying that 
setback requirements are just one type of dimensional requirement and changing language stating where housing is 
allowed or permitted. 
Moreover, this bill would allow for accessory dwelling units on nonconforming lots, including in shoreland zones. It 
would also allow accessory dwelling units built without municipal approval, including accessory dwelling units in 
shoreland zones, if the accessory dwelling units otherwise meet state and municipal requirements for accessory dwelling 
units. Lastly, it would allow municipalities to approve accessory dwelling units through a permitting process that does 
not require planning board approval. 
These changes would make it easier and more affordable for people to build or find affordable housing in Maine. It 
would empower homeowners to create additional housing units on their property, and streamline the approval process 
for developers. By addressing some of the barriers to why housing is not built in the first place, this bill provides a 
complementary approach to solving Maine's housing crisis. 
We urge you to support LD 1706 and take action to address Maine's housing crisis. We all need to contribute to the 
solution, and this bill is an important step towards a more sustainable and equitable future for all Mainers. 
mainehousingcoalilionorg i_i1iogcDmainehouslnqcoalition.orq_ 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, l\/lE 04101
