 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Support of LD 1706 (“An Act to Clarify Statewide Laws Regarding Affordable Housing and Accessory Dwelling Units”)   J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  April 25, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 1706. The bill is a complement to the landmark legislation sponsored by former Speaker Fecteau last session (Public Law Chapter 672, “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”). That law encouraged affordable housing development by removing zoning policies that inhibited the building of multiple housing units and ADUs.   LD 1706 would provide clarifications to properly implement PL 672. These clarifications ensure execution of the law’s intent rather than changes to undermine the policy. We continue to support PL 672 and policies that aim to contribute to its efforts of increasing housing options in Maine.   For these reasons, we support LD 1706 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
