, 
MA|NE MUN|C|pA|_ l-800-1452-8786(instc1te) 
A 2 
(T) 207-623-8428 
ASSOCIATION 5iN€ZE wee (F)20,_62,_0m 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-91486 
Testimony of The Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 1706 - An Act to Clarijfv Statewide Laws Regarding Ajjfordable Housing and Accessory Dwelling 
Units 
April 25, 2023 
Sen. Pierce, Rep. Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 1706, An Act to Clarify Statewide 
Laws RegardingA ﬁ‘0ra'abZe Housing and Accessory Dwelling Units, on behalf of Maine Municipal 
Association which represents the interests of municipal government before the state and federal 
govermnent. The positions of the Association are formed at the direction of our 70-member Legislative 
Policy Committee, (LPC) who are elected by the selectboards and council of the municipalities in each of 
the 35 Senate districts in Maine. As a result, the positions represent a wide view of communities with 
varying resources, rural and urban, and those with ample local resources as well as those with none. 
While LD 1706 like LD 1358, this bill properly addresses the original intent that any affordable 
housing development should have the majority of units meet the regionally appropriate 30% of monthly 
income level, it further conﬂates several legal terms regarding municipal review of affordable housing 
projects. Additionally, it misses extended the deadline for implementation which the committee has heard 
is necessary for most communities. 
Under Sec. 2 the amendment referring to “granting ﬁnal approval ” is not helpful. There is no 
legal deﬁnition of “final approval ” because sometimes different municipal approvals are required from 
different boards or officials and there is no clear ﬁnal decision that authorizes the developer to build ona 
statewide basis. Thus the language “including but not limited to an occupancy certiﬁcate” does not assist 
clariﬁcation. A certiﬁcate of occupancy is issued after the building has been completed and also long after 
such a covenant should be registered regarding long-term affordability as a condition of the occupancy 
approval. 
It also doesn’t clarify who in the municipality is responsible for making this determination. In 
statutory language, “municipality ” usually refers to the legislative body, but it is unrealistic that the voters 
or town meeting would make these decisions. 
The Sec. 5. amendments do not fully address the density/dimensional requirements issue. For 
example, the law provides that if more than one dwelling unit has been constructed on a lot as a result of 
the law, the lot is not eligible for any additional increases in “density, ” but the only “density” related 
requirements addressed in the law are dimensional requirements (indicating density and dimensional 
requirements are the same thing). However, section 4364(B)(4), states that a municipality must exempt an 
accessory dwelling unit from any “density requirements ” and then says that the dimensional requirements 
must be the same as for the single-family dwelling unit on the lot (indicating that they are 
different). Sections like this are why municipalities struggle with understanding how to apply the new 
statute meaningfully.
Under Sec. 10., the amendment to 4364-B(3)(C) does not fully address the non-conformity issue. 
It seems to conﬂate non~confonning lots and non-conforming structures. Non-confonning provisions in 
ordinances generally allow for non-conforming lots to be built on, provided that the development meets 
other applicable development criteria. Non-conforming structure provisions address whether structures 
can be expanded, replaced, or built that do not conform to the dimensional requirements in the ordinance. 
Moreover, this provision should be added to the affordable housing development and additional housing 
unit sections. The same issue arises with these sections but is not addressed. 
With further regard to ADUs, under Sec. ll., all of the provisions of the Maine Uniform Building 
and Energy Code in communities that must enforce if they have a population of over 4,000 residents, 
must receive a periodic review during the construction process. Sec. ll not only removes the need to 
enforce MUBEC standards on this one building type, it preempts the ability for communities to enforce 
the life safety codes important, particularly for rental property, and it also removes the ability to apply 
enforcement to manage correcting inappropriate construction. This can impact insurance policies and 
leave the owner without recourse or coverage when standards do not meet MUBEC requirements or 
received the review during construction. 
Additionally, if the intent is to limit a planning board review, the use of the term “municipal 
approval ” in this section includes all other municipal reviews and required applications including but not 
limited to a building permit issued by the Code Enforcement Ofﬁcer (CEO) or plumbing inspection, and 
aesthetic requirements in historic districts. This language has the potential to increase neighbor challenges 
to new building with no recourse under other rights to consider for municipal variances such as buildings 
that “produce an undesirable change in the character of the neighborhood and will not unreasonably 
detrimentally affect the use or market value of abutting properties. ” (30-A M.R.S.A §4353 4-C(B)) 
We suggest the following language is more appropriate: 
Sec. 11. 30-A MRSA §4364-B, sub-§4, 1lD is enacted to read: 
D. An existing accessory dwelling unit that was not built with municipal approval, b£is 
allowed under this section, must be eligible for after the fact approval under a local land use 
ordinance, al-lowed if the accessory dwelling unit otherwise meets the requirements for 
accessory dwelling units of the municipality and under this section. 
There are additional issues with the language proposed under Sec. 13. As it was originally 
written, this section of the law was somewhat meaningless, as it only reiterated authority thata 
municipality already had under state and common law (i.e., that municipalities have home rule authority 
to establish permitting and approval authority for development in the municipality). 
Sec. 13. 30-A MRSA §4364-B, sub-§8, 1[A, as enacted by PL 2021, c. 672, §6, 
is amended to read: 
A. Establish an application and permitting process for accessory dwelling 
units that does not require planning board approval; 
This section was added, perhaps in response to comments in rule making that the law did not 
clearly establish home rule limitations on a municipality ’s authority. However, the Association ’s concerns 
were more about the substance of the law, not limits on a municipality ’s authority to permit and approve 
land use developments in general. If this proposed amendment is read along these same lines, the 
additional amendment is also somewhat meaningless as it could be read to simply authorize CEO review,
but planning board review and approval is also still allowed under a municipality ’s general home rule 
authority. 
If the purpose of the amendment is to prohibit a municipality from subjecting the development 
under this law to planning board review, this is going to upend local administration of land use ordinance, 
will likely be inconsistent with the model shoreland zoning guidelines and the subdivision law, and will 
likely make a CEO’s workload unmanageable. CEOs do not usually issue written approvals containing 
ﬁndings of fact and conclusions of law, which will make their decisions on large development projects 
difficult to review and lead to due process concerns. 
The Association suggests repealing sections 4364-A(5)(C) and 4364-B(8)(C) for legal 
clariﬁcation purposes. These sections do not make any sense and will only confuse both local 
governments and development further. 
I have included a report with regard to the Urban Institute ’s study of less restrictive zoning and 
the impact on affordable housing and the committee should be aware of the lack of connection between 
the two. This effort may increase building, but it will be for market rate and luxury homes as indicated by 
the study. Communities need a broad mix of housing options, but it is worth decoupling the aspirational 
statements with regard to this policy from the practical reality. 
The fully published report is available here: 
Stacy, C., Davis, C., F reemark, Y. S., Lo, L., MacDonald, G., Zheng, V.,& 
Pendall, R. (2023). Land-use reforms and housing costs: Does allowing for increased 
density lead to greater affordability? Urban Studies, 0(0). 
https://doi.org/l0. l l 77/0042098023 l 159500 
As increasing the availability of affordable housing is the goal of municipal officials and this 
committee there are a range of solutions that could be considered that would make this achievable. The 
section with confusing language around ADUs could be edited to both highlight the desired affordability 
aspect and allow property owners to potentially access additional construction loan options on this basis. 
As the committee has heard, DECD has not established a funding mechanism for this work yet 
and acknowledges that municipal reimbursement is necessary. Communities are anticipating around 
$10,000 in legal costs with ordinance drafting running around $2,000-$3,000 each. A change to the ADU 
language could remove the mandate and then make the not yet available grant more appropriate to 
achieve the planning needs for technical assistance each community has. These goals could probably be 
met with an amendment to 30-A M.R.S; § 4353 that would allow a municipal review board (i.e., the 
boards of appeals) to automatically grant landowners additional dwelling units that would otherwise be 
prohibited under a local land use ordinance in order to increase affordable housing in the municipality. 
Essentially, this would allow a variance from dimensional or dwelling unit requirements ina 
local land use ordinance if the applicant can show that they meet certain review standards or criteria, 
including a requirement that the additional development is affordable (which is not directly required in 
the law as it currently exists). A variance is a type of safety valve that allows for a board to waive 
ordinance requirements when doing so would result in the construction of affordable housing. Beneﬁts of 
this type of amendment include: 
~ Applying automatically to any municipality that has adopted zoning. 
- Not requiring municipalities to reconﬁgure or amend local land use requirements.
- Authority for a municipality to address additional development on lots on a lot~by-lot 
basis. 
~ Municipal boards are already familiar with granting these types of approvals, 
procedurally. 
' Municipalities can ensure that any additional dwelling units allowed under this section 
are affordable or contribute to the housing needs of the municipality. 
Here is the outline of a possible change to 30-A M.R.S. § 4353 to meet this intent: 
5. Variance for additional dwelling units to increase affordable housing. The board mav_grant a 
variance when strict application of the ordinance to the petitioner or petitioner ’s property would prevent 
an affordable housing development on the petitioner or petitioner ’s lot. 
1. The term “affordable housing development ” as used in this section means: 
a. Additional dwelling units;_[defme dwelling unit. maximum number of dwelling units 
allowed per lot. and affordability requirementsL 
b. Accessory dwelling units. [deﬁne ADU. maximum number of ADUs allowed per lot, 
and affordability requirementsLV 
2. In granting a variance under this section. the board must ﬁnd the following; 
a. The development meets the requirements of the state minimum subsurface wastewater 
laws or is connected to public water and sewer. 
b. The development will have adequate water and sewer. 
c. The development has received subdivision approval. if required. 
d. The development will not result in undue congestion or unsafe conditions. 
e. The development will result in additional affordable housing in the municipality, by 
meeting one of the following: 
i. A covenant will be recorded in the registry of deeds restricting the lease of the 
dwelling units allowed under this section to a term of one month or more. 
ii. A signed affidavit that the dwelling unit will be occupied by relatives or 
individuals under the care of an individual in the principal dwelling unit of the 
property. 
iii. A signed affidavit that the dwelling unit will be used to further a stated 
affordable housing_goal of the municipality or state. 
3. Any violation of these restrictions will render the variance null and void. 
4. This subsection does not authorize the reduction of dimensional standards required under 
the mandatory shoreland zoning laws. Title 38. chapter 3. subchapter 1. article 2B 
If this is of interest to the committee, I will be happy to provide further information at the work session. 
However, without the delay and additional clarity on the language that necessary for legal clarity, ofﬁcials 
remain opposed to LD 1706 as drafted.
