% L Waterville, ME 04903 
. egwﬁieiiw lnfo@mai..e ‘§§l)uT§§;§ilZ 
LD 326 An Act to improve Recruitment and Retention of First Responders 
Support 
March 20, 2022 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Robert "Butch" Russell and I live in Windham. I serve as the President ofthe Maine 
Ambulance Association, a non-profit trade association committed to improving and supporting 
Maine's EMS system. Our members include emergency medical services of all sizes and corporate 
structures, and from every corner of the state. l am also the CEO of North East Mobile Health 
Services, a For-Proﬁt Ambulance Services based in Scarborough, Maine. 
We support LD 326 because our ground ambulance services in Maine are facing a crippling 
workforce shortage. This program would support the recruitment of EMTs and paramedics so 
that our communities have the resources they need to support emergency medical services, as 
well as the interfacility transports that are so critical in making sure our citizens no matter where 
they live have access to the right care, at the right time, and at the right location. 
We have seen some success with current educational offerings of free or reduced courses and 
feel that continuing these efforts will aid with bolstering our personnel numbers. We want to 
advocate however, the importance of having service level involvement in selecting the students 
that would be receiving these educational offerings. We need to assure that the students 
receiving this free education are committed to working in EMS after they successfully complete 
the requirements. Our members have concern that many of the students taking advantage of 
community college courses today at the EMT level, have little to no interest in working in our 
field. By having the EMS Service "sponsor" students. We would assure that students in these 
courses, were committed in some way to serve our system. 
Thank you for your support of Maine's EMS providers. 
Butch Russell, President 
Maine Ambulance Association 
rrussell@nemhs.com
