Testimony LD 326
An Act to Improve Recruitment and Retention of First Responders
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, I am Eric Wellman, the current Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Project Director 
for the Maine Community College System (MCCS).  I am a Professor of EMS at Southern Maine Community 
College (SMCC) and have almost thirty (30) years’ experience in public safety.  I am here to provide testimony 
and answer questions neither in support of nor opposed to LD 326.
The EMS System in Maine has been experiencing decreasing numbers of providers prior to the pandemic of 
2020.  A steadily changing workforce and an ever-increasing knowledge base of medicine for EMS clinicians 
that is not reflective of the compensation offered has likely been the predominant cause.  The pandemic 
exacerbated a weakness that already existed.
Three years after the start of the pandemic many services have begun to raise wages and examine their 
internal work culture.  Workers continue to have multiple options.  The Committee on Accreditation of 
Educational Programs for the EMS Professions (CoAEMSP) reports that 33% of all national paramedic 
graduates are taking their first paramedic assignments outside the traditional realms of ambulance and first 
response EMS.  EMS while a highly rewarding path, has many undesirable characteristics.  Shift work, long 
shifts, unstable working environments, time away from loved ones, perceived risk, and health risk both mental 
and physical.
Like most public safety and healthcare professions we continue to have difficulty recruiting new personnel and 
retaining the personnel that we already have.  The Maine Community College System (MCCS) has dedicated a 
significant number of educational resources through recovery act funding and standard educational offerings 
for EMS clinicians.  The pipeline into EMS is working but is confronted with many challenges.  
Qualified and available instructors are in short supply.  The modern student has many needs.  Mental health 
concerns, confidence issues, refinement of communication skills, and an increasing need to focus on 
rudimentary skills that were not intended to be taught to high school students or graduates.  The professional 
development to get an instructor fully capable of teaching a modern student can take several months and 
significant mentorship.
MCCS currently employs ten (10) full time instructors and two (2) staff members (up from 6 pre-pandemic) 
across the six (6) colleges that provide EMS education.  These twelve (12) people collaborate to design 
curriculum, manage four (4) Maine EMS licensed training centers, and teach an academic load of courses.   
Much of the system is educated by part-time instructors.  These are dedicated people that teach in addition to 
their time as clinicians.  The increase of mandatory overtime, fatigue, and exhaustion that many clinicians feel 
have removed or greatly limited these valuable assets from the instructor pool.
The system is also challenged by the loss of field preceptors.  In many programs Emergency Medical 
Technician (EMT) students no longer perform a field observation or clinical rotation.  This is not desirable, but 
our system cannot handle the additional burden.
Advanced Emergency Medical Technician (AEMT) and paramedic education require live ambulance rotations 
for students to safely learn.  Many services do not experience the call volume that would be necessary for 
AEMT and paramedic students to complete their rotations in a timely fashion.  Those that do have the 
appropriate call volume have high demand and limited resources.  Many clinicians are already overworked and 
do not have the capacity to effectively educate a student.
Addition of more programs to meet the needs of the future are going to require more educational 
infrastructure that includes:
1. Professional development to increase the number of instructors.
2. Additional full-time educators.
3. Capacity at EMS agencies, with appropriate call volumes, to take more EMT, AEMT, and paramedic 
students.
4. Investment in simulation centers and simulation technicians to support additional education.
Recruitment is a starting point, but retention keeps our services functioning.  We must stop the constant flow 
of employees leaving their current employers.  National trends reflect that most EMS providers have left the 
field in five (5) – seven (7) years.  Employees are now following wages, benefits, and working conditions, even 
changing professions and careers to do so.  It is by far easier and less costly to retain a good employee than 
train a new one.  Every national study, trade organization, and affiliate organization points to the two major 
things that will stabilize retention, wages and working conditions.
EMS clinicians must be paid a wage that is commensurate with the service they provide to their community 
and healthcare systems.  This will require a system wide assessment of delivery models and a recognition that 
reimbursements will not ease the burden of the cost.  Supplemental funding will need to be provided to make 
the delivery of EMS functional.
Additionally, EMS clinicians need to continue their lifelong professional development.  This includes a need to 
access meaningful education to their clinical practice and operational needs.  Our system suffers from limited 
availability of quality continuing education, for the same reason of limited instructional resources and time 
commitments.
Retention would be greatly aided by higher wages and more professional development opportunities available 
to EMS clinicians.
Thank you for your consideration of these critical issues.
Eric A. Wellman, MS, NRP
EMS Project Director 
Maine Community College System
ewellman@mccs.me.edu
207-741-5720
