Testimony in Sugport of LD 326 
An Act to Improve Recruitment and Retention of First Responders 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Rick Petrie, and l ama 
Paramedic who has worked in the Maine EMS system for 42 years. I am now the Chief 
Operations Officer for North East Mobile Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service based 
in Scarborough Maine and the Program Director for the Jackman Paramedic project. 
l was also fortunate to serve as a member of the EMS Blue Ribbon Committee whose 
work laid the foundation for this, and other, legislation supporting Emergency Medical 
Services in Maine. 
As the Blue Ribbon Committee heard very clearly, EMS is in trouble. We are 
inadequately funded, tightly regulated, and under resourced. We have a significant 
staffing shortage because of poor wages and benefits, long hours and incredibly difficult 
working conditions. Yet, every day, EMS providers have found a way to respond, 
sacrificing time with their families, appropriate rest, and their own mental health. ln the 
past, much of the State relied on volunteers, but those days are coming to an end. 
Educational programs for EMS providers are expensive and time-consuming. The 
standards to become licensed have increased dramatically over the last 40 years 
enabling our providers to be better prepared for a wide-range of medical and trauma- 
related emergencies. In many cases, education allows a person to seek a better paying 
job with stronger benefits and increased chances for advancement. 
Not so with EMS. Reimbursement is so poor that licensed EMS providers cannot be 
compensated at a level commensurate with their responsibilities. Most people can’t 
afford to take the entry-level classes necessary to enter the field, and many EMS 
providers can’t afford classes to increase their level of licensure. EMS sen/ices, already 
operating at a loss, cannot afford to cover the cost of classes. 
We have seen an increase in people willing to take entry-level classes when they are 
offered for significantly reduced or free tuition, people that we are desperate to recruit 
and retain. We need to continue this project, which will hopefully help us bolster our 
diminished ranks 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Rick Petrie, EMT-P 
rpetrie@nemhs.com 
207-754-9109
