 1 
 
131st  Legislature  
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 29 
 
    
Senator Anne Carney  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
Office (207) 287 -1515  
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing  
  
LD 21, Resolve, Designating Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as 
Samantha Smith Way  
 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
February 21, 2023  
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and esteemed members of the 
Committee on Transportation, I am Anne Carney, proudly rep resenting Senate 
District 29, which includes South Portland, Cape Elizabeth and part of 
Scarborough. It is a pleasure  to be with you today to introduce LD 21, Resolve, 
Designating Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as Samantha Smith 
Way.  
 
This legislation seeks to direct the Department of Transportation to designate 
Maine Turnpike Approach Road from Route 1 to the Maine Turnpike in the City of 
South Portland as Samantha Smith Way. Maine Veterans For Peace brought this 
proposal forward, and they  are hear today to  express the importance of recognizing 
this young goodwill ambassador and peace  activist .  
 
Samantha Smith  became an  advocate for peace during a time of great tension 
between the US and the USSR. In the fall of 1982, 10 year old Samantha,  a fifth -
grader at Manchester Elementary School , read a Time magazine story about Soviet 
leader  Yuri Andropov and the threat of nuclear war. She asked her mother: "If 
people are so afraid of him, why doesn't someone write a letter asking whether he 
wants t o have a war or not?" Her mother replied, "Why don't you?"  
 
Here is the letter she wrote:  
 2 Dear Mr. Andropov,  
 
My name is Samantha Smith. I am 10 years old. Congratulations on your 
new job. I have been worrying about Russia and the United States  getting 
into a nuclear war. Are you going to vote to have a war or not? If you aren't 
please tell me how you are going to help to not have a war. This question 
you do not have to answer, but I would like it if you would. Why do you 
want to conquer t he world or at least our country?  God made the world for 
us to share and take care of. Not to fight over or have one group of people 
own it all. Please let’s do what he wanted and have everybody be happy too.  
 
Samantha Smith  
 
She did not receive a response , so she wrote to Soviet ambassador to the United 
States  Anatoly Dobrynin  asking if Yuri Andropov intended to respond. Due to her 
persistence, Samantha received a reply and an invitation to visit the Soviet Union 
in the summer of 1983  as the guests of the Soviet leader . She and her parents spent 
two weeks traveling in the Soviet Union, getting to know children and adults in 
many parts of that country.  
 
Her kind, direct and inquisitive nature, contagious optimism , and genuine interest 
in learning about other s, created a bond between everyday people in the two 
nations, and inspired many to believe war between the two superpowers could be 
averted. Through her bold action, Samantha inspired Maine children and many 
adults as well to speak up on issues of importan ce in their lives.  
 
She died just two years later, in a plane accident. A memorial statue of Samantha 
Smith stands just outside the Maine State Museum, about 100 yards from this 
committee room.  
 
Today we ask the committee to pass LD 21. Naming a well -traveled approach 
ramp a fter Samantha Smith will preserve the memory of this remarkable young 
Mainer and, I hope, inspire great conversations on family road trips about the 
importance of speaking up for what you believe in and believing you can make the 
world a better place.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. I’m happy to answer your questions.  
 
Anne Carney  
State Senator, District 29  
