Testimony of Cecelia Smith 
In Support of LD 21 
Resolve, Designating Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as Samantha Smith Way 
February 21, 2023 
Me, my mother, and my Chesapeake Bay Retriever sitting in our kitchen, listening to Michael Jackson, 
trying to una’erstana' why our country might get blown up at any second. 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation, my name is Cecelia Smith, I live in Brunswick Maine and today I am testifying in 
support of LD 21. 
Recently, the 8"‘ graders at Brunswick Junior High did a project in which we chose an American who 
has changed our countiy’s history for the better, researched their accomplishments, wrote a speech, 
dressed up and ﬁnally presented to the lower grades as them. For this project, I chose Samantha Smith. 
The above quote was the start of my speech. 
In my research, I learned many things about America’s youngest ambassador and littlest diplomat, 
including her main accomplishments of writing a letter to the Soviet Premiere at the age of 10. Visiting 
the Soviet Union to learn about and befriend Soviet children during the cold war and spreading her 
message through an autobiography and media appearances such as the Tonight Show with Johnny 
Carson and Good Morning America. 
I would also like to point out that the Maine Turnpike Approach Road that this bill designates as 
Samantha Smith Way is a place where many tourists drive. This may show a nice aspect of Maine’s 
history to them. I don’t know about most families, but mine would certainly Google her in that 
situation. I also know people who, having grown up with her or in Maine at the same time as her, would 
smile to see her being remembered when they drove by. 
Her efforts helped lead to better relations between our nations and many others, which inspired children 
across the country. 
Naming this approach road after her would continue her legacy and further her message, in a time very 
similar to hers. 
Thank you for taking the time to listen to my testimony today, I would be happy to answer any questions 
you may have.
