Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Donald W. Kimball, Jr., and I live in South Portland. I 
am a veteran of the USAF where I served in the Strategic Air Command from 1977-1981 at the 
former Pease AFB in NH. I have been a member of Veterans For Peace for twenty years, and am 
proud to be part of this world-wide group of veterans and their supporters many of whom know 
the true costs of war. I'm also very proud to be speaking today to advocate for the proposed 
Samantha Smith Way in South Portland, As many of you know, Maine's "Littlest 
Diplomat “ would have been 50 years old this year had her life not been cut tragically short bya 
plane crash in 1985 in which she and her father Arthur were killed. Samantha's work for peace 
and understanding between the people of Russia and the United States is never more important 
than today as the war in Ukraine brings the world closer to a nuclear holocaust than any time 
since the Cuban Missile Crises in 1962. 
From personal experience, I know how close we have come to nuclear war before. While 
stationed at Pease AFB on November 9, 1979, We came close to launching our alert force of 
nuclear-armed FB-111's due to a false alarm. Our role back then was one of deterrence, the US 
would not strike ﬁrst, but only in response to a launch from an adversary. That Sunday 
morning, we received a launch alert from SAC headquarters. A computer error had shown that 
the Soviet Union had launched over 2,000 missiles at the US. As the klaxons sounded the alarm 
and the windows rattled in base housing from the pilots ﬁring up the alert force for takeoff, I 
know nuclear war is a REAL possibility. Now more than ever, we need to remember Samantha 
and her efforts for peace and understanding between our two great nations. Veterans for Peace 
believes there is perhaps no better way to remember Maine's own daughter for peace than to 
name the connector road off Exit 45 in South Portland “Samantha Smith Way.” When this most 
ﬁtting project is completed, millions of travelers every year will then travel the Samantha Smith 
Way. 
Thanks to Senator Anne Carney and legislative aide Sam Baker for initiating this legislation, and 
to this committee for considering it. 
Sincerely, 
Don Kimball 
Veterans for Peace 
South Portland
