 
 
Laurie Osher, PhD  
13 Mayo Street  
Orono, ME 04473  
Phone:   (207) 944 -6743 
Laurie.Osher@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 
 
 
February 12, 2023  
Testimony of Representative Laurie Osher in support of  
 LD 21: Resolve, Designating Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South 
Portland as Samantha Smith Way  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and ho norable members of the Transportation 
Committee, I am Representative Laurie Osher from Orono. Thank you for providing me the 
opportunity to express my support for LD 21: Resolve, Designating Maine Turnpike 
Approach Road in South Portland as Samantha Smith Way.  
 
Samantha Smith’s conviction and strength is an important story of how individual citizens’ 
actions are valuable to changing perceptions and policy.  Samantha Smith played a role in the 
deescalation of the Cold War, and in doing so, she modeled the i mportance of communicating 
with those we fear and making friends with people who we imagine to be so different from 
ourselves.  
 
I thank Senator Carney for introducing this bill so that we can memorialize this young Mainer.   
 
In 1982, 10 -year-old Samantha  Smith wrote a letter to the Soviet Union’s General Secretary Yuri 
Andropov.  Her letter began, “I have been worrying about Russia and the United States getting 
into a nuclear war. Are you going to vote to have a war or not? If you aren't, please tell me h ow 
you are going to help to not have a war.”  General Secretary Andropov replied to her: “We want 
peace for ourselves and for all peoples of the planet. For our children and for you, Samantha.” 
He invited her and her parents to visit the Soviet Union and t o attend the international children's 
camp – Artek – on the sea. She wrote a book about her experience entitled “My Journey to the 
Soviet Union.”  
 
Even before her visit to the Soviet Union in the summer of 1983, the young Mainer Samantha 
Smith became famou s for her appearances on TV talk shows.  She shared her plain -spoken 

wisdom with viewers around the country and the world. She was often introduced as the United 
States’ youngest ambassador.  After her trip to the Soviet Union, she was invited to Japan, wh ere 
she met with Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone and attended the Children's International 
Symposium in Kobe.  In her speech at the symposium in Japan, she proposed that Soviet and 
American leaders exchange granddaughters for two weeks every year, suggest ing that a president 
“wouldn't want to send a bomb to a country his granddaughter would be visiting.”  
 
In Orono, the University of Maine has already honored Samantha Smith by naming a dormitory 
after her in its Doris Twitchell Allen Village residential com munity.  The idea of a 10 -year-old 
becoming an ambassador was central to the philosophy of Dr. Doris Twtichell Allen.  Dr. Allen 
(UMaine ‘23 & ‘26) was a progressive child psychologist from Old Town, Maine.  After World 
War II, she launched the Children’s International Summer Village program, now known around 
the world as CISV, an organization that brings pre -teens from around the globe to live together 
during the summer.  CISV’s history page says, “Doris Allen believed that by creating 
opportunities for ch ildren of different cultures to come together to learn and make friends, they 
would grow up to become ambassadors for a more just and peaceful world.”  Maine’s CISV 
chapter is one of the most active in the US, hosting summer villages and sending young Main ers 
around the world.   
 
Samantha didn’t get to continue her work as an ambassador, because she died in an airplane 
crash in 1985.  Throughout her short life, she was a beacon of hope and an embodiment of 
potentiality.  Her letter writing and ambassadorshi p serve as a model for individuals wondering if 
one person’s actions can change the world.  We can honor her and encourage others to learn 
about her actions by naming the Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as 
“Samantha Smith Way.”  I urge you t o vote Ought to Pass on LD 21: Resolve, Designating 
Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as Samantha Smith Way.  
