STATE or MAINE 
/ 3 DEPARTMENT or TRANSPORTATION 
1 16 STATE HOUsE STATION 'su'*~‘
» __'i 
ll $3. AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0016 
ll °: 
February 21 20239 
JanetT Mills Bruce A Van Note 
GOVnF€NOP. COMMlSSlONEF§ 
Testimony of Meghan Russo 
Maine Department of Transportation 
Before the 131"‘ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 21 
Resolve, Designating Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as 
. Samantha Smith Way 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, I am Meghan Russo, Legislative Liaison for the 
Maine Department of Transportation. MaineDOT is neither for nor against LD 21, 
Resolve, Designating Maine Turnpike Approach Road in South Portland as Samantha 
Smith Way, and normally does not testify on bills that name roads and bridges, but 
because this is the ﬁrst such bill in this Legislature, we hope that an overview of past 
practice regarding such bills will be helpful. 
MaineDOT considers the naming of bridges, roadways, and other state transportation 
infrastructure to be within the purview of the Legislature. Simply put, we build them and 
you name them. Accordingly, we generally do not take positions on so-called “naming 
bills.” However, we usually submit written testimony regarding whether the particular 
infrastructure under consideration has been named before, and if so what those name(s) 
are. In this case, we are not aware of any previous legislatively-sanctioned names for this 
section of roadway. 
We also note that the Committee historically has asked sponsors of naming bills to 
produce written evidence of support for the proposed name from the mtmicipality or 
municipalities in which the infrastructure is located. This avoids some local issues that 
have prompted renaming bills in the past. 
We hope this information is helpful. In the future, we will simply submit written 
testimony on bills that seek to name roads and bridges. Thank you for your time. I am 
happy to answer any questions you may have. 
### 
{HF MAlNE I)EP1\R'I ‘MFNT OP TRANSFURI ‘/\'llO]\' IS AN AFFlRMA‘l‘i\’l AKTION - EQUAL OlIOR'lUNl'T ‘Y TMIIOXFR 
PHONI‘ (Z07) 624-3000 TF1 USPRS (All MAINE RElz\‘\ 711 FA}1:{2O7) Zl
