Denise Harlow
Oquossoc
LD 1853
Good Afternoon, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the 
Taxation Committee.  My name is Denise Harlow, and I live in Oquossoc.  I am 
testifying in support of Representative Collings’ LD 1853: An Act to Conform the 
Mining Excise Tax Laws to the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act and Set the 
Mining Excise Tax at 10 Percent.  
I served on the ENR committee for 8 years from 2010-2018 and asked Representative
Collings to submit this bill last session to align the Mining Excise Tax with the 
Metallic Mineral Mining act that passed in 2017.  Representative Collings presented 
this bill to Legislative Council last year.  Only Speaker Talbot Ross voted to allow it 
to be heard by the full legislature.  Thank you, Representative Collings for again 
presenting this important issue.  
Short History
The senate chair in 2017, Senator Saviello, submitted a concept draft LD 1283: An 
Act to Modernize the Mining Excise Tax to address the need to update the excise tax 
law when the mining law changed. Here is the summary for LD 1283, taken from the 
legislative website:
This bill proposes to update the mining tax laws to reflect current terminology and 
practice and to impose a new rate of tax on mining activities.
Ultimately, Senator Saviello asked the Tax Committee to kill the bill since the 
interested parties did not work on it. It is extremely disappointing that the former 
house chair of the committee, Ralph Tucker, did not work with the tax committee to 
correct the language and tax rate discrepancies in the ensuing 2 terms he served as 
chair on ENR after the passage of the Mining Law.  Instead, he did absolutely nothing
about this issue, while possessing the knowledge that this was left undone.  This 
oversight by the former ENR chair Tucker makes me wonder what else was left 
undone in the Metallic Mining Act, but I digress from the tax issue at hand.
There are a few problems with the current Mining excise tax which is why I asked 
Representative Collings to submit this bill for you to consider.
Language
When ENR passed the mining law in 2017, there should have been language changes 
made to align Title 36 with the newly passed Mining law in Title 38. The Mining 
Excise Tax in Title 36 has language that is nonexistent in the updated Metallic Mining
law in Title 38. One example is that mine site is defined in the outdated Mining 
Excise tax law in Title 36, but there is no such term in the law passed in 2017.  In 
Tittle 38, mining area is defined as:
12.  Mining area.  "Mining area" means an area of land described in a permit 
application and approved by the department, including but not limited to land from 
which earth material is removed in connection with mining, the lands on which 
material from that mining is stored or deposited, the lands on which beneficiating or 
treatment facilities, including groundwater and surface water management treatment 
systems, are located or the lands on which water reservoirs used in a mining operation
are located.  
I am not a tax expert, but when you look at Title 36 and 38, you will see other 
inconsistencies, which is one of the reasons this bill is necessary.
LOWEST TAX RATE IN THE COUNTRY
Maine’s mining excise tax is .9 percent and the lowest in the nation. This is extremely
outdated when compared to other states.  Here is a link to a variety of taxes or 
royalties assessed on extracted natural resources throughout the country:
https://dor.alaska.gov/docs/default-source/legislative-response-letters/dor-response-to
-house-resources---2.29.16-(part-2-of-2---part-1-sent-2.15.16).pdf?sfvrsn=7a969124_
3&fileticket=yuHAZprOMMs%3D&portalid=5
TOURISM AND JOB LOSS
All the deposits known to us throughout the state are in beautiful, pristine places, 
most notably Mount Plumbago sits on the borders of Grafton Notch State Park. Our 
state is a state that relies heavily on tourism. If we are willing to allow a destructive 
industry to decimate the most beautiful areas of our state, shouldn’t the state benefit in
some way?  The mining excise tax will not cover the burden placed by mining on 
towns or areas, but it is a very tiny way to recognize the destruction it causes, the need
to pay for this destruction it inevitably causes and remediate some of the long-term 
issues mining causes. But, do not think that money from an excise tax will cover the 
full destruction of this activity.
INCLUSION OF LITHIUM 
The third issue with the excise tax is that it needs to include lithium and any mineral 
containing lithium in it. It could be added in the proposed bill here:
Page 4 of proposed bill
Sec. 20. 36 MRSA §2855, sub-§9, as enacted by PL 1981, c. 711, §10, is repealed and
the following enacted in its place: 
Metallic mineral. "Metallic mineral" means any ore or material to be excavated from 
the natural deposits on or in the earth for its metallic mineral content to be used for 
commercial or industrial purposes. "Metallic mineral" does not include thorium or 
uranium. Metallic Mineral does include lithium and any mineral containing it.
APPROPRIATION of MINING EXCISE TAX
The appropriation of the fund is slightly confusing. There is the Mining Impact 
Assistance fund (Title 36 Part 4 Chapter 371 §2861) which provides up to 50% 
assistance to the community based on the tax loss in that community if revenues are 
available.  Don’t the towns devastated by mining deserve more than 50 percent?  And 
even this amount of money will not make a town “whole” when there is pollution 
from mining, since there will always be forever chemicals that require forever 
remediation when mining.  Additionally, the funds need to be appropriated by 2/3rds 
of the legislature.
There is also a Mining Oversight Fund in which 25 % of the remaining revenues from
the mining operations will be deposited in the Fund. This Fund is overseen by the 
Board of Trustees.  I tried to find the members of this Board, but they have not been 
named, yet. The process of appropriation is somewhat confusing.
Thank you for your time.
Denise Harlow
Oquossoc

