Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg
LD 1853
Greetings Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Taxation 
Committee,
I urge you​r​ support ​on ​LD 1853.
The current Mining Excise Tax Law is antiquated and must be changed if ​permitting 
​this historically destructive activity​ in Maine​. Crucial wording in the Excise Tax Law 
is incompatible with the Metallic Mineral Mining Law on such basic terms of 
definition of mining operation or exploratory mining. The current tax rate on gross 
profits of 0.9% is absurdly low in comparison to other states' mining taxes which 
range from 2.25% to 10%. Local municipalities are denied the ability to tax, while the
state of Maine collects all the tax revenue. Concerningly, the law states that the local 
municipalities must be reimbursed for their lost revenue to “at least 50%”- not the 
100% they could normally collect.
Despite the very low tax rate and lack of reimbursement to the municipalities, the cost
and burden of many effects of mining are placed onto them. Municipalities will have 
to maintain expensive infrastructure such as town roads, fire departments, etc. without
fair and reliable reimbursement. Further, the burden of noise, blasting, water usage 
and pollution, possible lights 24/7 and large vehicular traffic are further stressors. It is
​also ​important that extraction and mining of lithium or minerals containing lithium be 
taxed under the Mining Excise Tax Law.
Maine state policy that was stated explicitly in the 1940's is to encourage mining for 
its economic benefits. It was believed then that mining would provide badly needed 
jobs. We've since learned that mining is a net job loser and that mine site remediation 
expenses from long abandoned mining sites to Maine taxpayers are in the millions of 
dollars.
A 10% tax would provide critical assistance to municipalities, counties or 
unorganized territories significantly affected by mineral resource development and to 
ensure that revenue is available for environmental remediation when damage occurs.
​
Thank you for your careful consideration to ensure that the metallic mining industry 
does not further burden the waters, the environment, nor the people of Maine as we 
face a multitude of rising threats to environmental health.
Nickie Sekera
Fryeburg, ME
May 18, 2023

