650 Suffolk Street, #405  Lowell MA 01854 www .epilepsynewengland.org 
 
Our mission  is to help people  and families  affected  by epilepsy  in New England.  
We are an independent 501 (c)(3) nonprofit organization with tax identification # 22 -25058 19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony to the  
COMMITTEE ON HALTH COVERGARE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES  
Thursday, April 6, 2023  
 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1165  
An Act to Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescriptions Drugs  
 
Submitted by  
 Bill Murphy  
Director, Advocacy & Public Policy  
Epilepsy Foundation New England  
  
  
Chairs Bailey and Perry and Members of the Committee:  
 
On behalf of the more than 14,000 individuals in Maine living with epilepsy, we are pleased to 
join with countless others in Maine who have chronic illnesses and depend upon needed 
medications to ask that you please support passage of LD 1165.  
 
According to the Kaiser Family Foundation  in 2021, 29% of US adults reported not taking their 
medication as prescribed due to cost . 
 
Yet, Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBM)  generate some $315 billion annually from five  income 
streams  that include rebate sharing!  
 
Doesn’t it make sense that patient s who pay a premium for insurance coverage should benefit 
from the discounted price that the insurers and PBMs have access to?  
 
We applaud  Representative C raven  and her many cosponsors who think so, and thus, have 
submitted LD 1165 for your consideration.  
 
Everyone is well aware of the rising costs of healthcare and access to medications. Yet, 
according to the researchers, demands for rebates from PBMs are at least partly responsible for 
rising list prices. Because the PBM market is highly concentrated, with three companies serving  
 
 

650 Suffolk Street, #405  Lowell MA 01854 www .epilepsynewengland.org 
 
Our mission  is to help people  and families  affected  by epilepsy  in New England.  
We are an independent 501 (c)(3) nonprofit organization with tax identification # 22 -25058 19 approximately 75 percent of the market, it is obvious that consumers are  not benefiting from 
higher rebates or if rebates are simply driving higher profits for PBMs.  
 
Higher costs increase the financial burden on state governments and their residents, adversely 
affecting health outcomes and constricting government fi nancial resources for other priorities.  
 
 
LD 1165 not only assures savings are passed on to consumers but provides needed transparency 
and oversight.  
 
Under the current insurance system, rebates on pharmaceutical drugs are negotiated by PBMs in 
exchange for formulary placement. Instead of passing these savings through to patients who 
desperately need to afford their prescriptions, these rebates are retained by the PBMs and health 
insurers. This means that our most vulnerable citizens do not benef it from the lower net price of 
their lifesaving and lifesustaining medications and pay far more than they should.  
 
When patients cannot afford their medications, they may ration or abandon their prescribed 
therapy, leading to painful and costly complications, or more tragic outcomes, worsening quality 
of life and driving up overall health care costs.     
 
I encourage  you to pass LD 1165.   
 
I am happy to answer any questions and can be reached at wmurphy@epilepsynewengland.org  . 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
Bill Murphy  
Director, Advocacy & Public Policy  
Epilepsy Foundation New England  
.  
 
 
 
 
 

650 Suffolk Street, #405  Lowell MA 01854 www .epilepsynewengland.org 
 
Our mission  is to help people  and families  affected  by epilepsy  in New England.  
We are an independent 501 (c)(3) nonprofit organization with tax identification # 22 -25058 19  
Senator  Donna Bailey  - Chair  
 Senator  Eric Brakey  
 Senator  Cameron Reny  
 Representative  Anne Perry  - Chair  
 Representative  Poppy Arford  
 Representative  Sally Cluchey  
 Representative  Scott Cyrway  
 Representative  Anne -Marie Mastraccio  
 Representative  Kristi Mathieson  
 Representative  Joshua Morris  
 Representative  Robert Nutting  
 Representative  Jane Pringle  
 Representative  Gregg Swallow  
  
 
CC: 
Edna Cayford  - Committee Clerk  
Lucia Nixon  - OFPR Analyst  
Colleen McCarthy Reid  - OPLA Analyst  
 
