March 30, 2023  
The Honorable Senator Donna Bailey  
The Honorable Representative Anne Perry  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
  
Re: Support for LD 1165 An Act to  Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescriptions Drugs  
 
Dear, Chair Bailey, Chair Perry and members of the committee,  
 
On behalf of all ALS patients, including the 33 patients we serve in Maine, I respectfully request your 
support for LD 1165, which will require Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) rebates to be passed through 
to patients at the point of sale     
 
Amyotrophic lat eral sclerosis (ALS), or ‘Lou Gehrig’s,  is a fatal progressive neurodegenerative disease 
that slowly robs a person’s ability to walk, talk, eat, and eventually breathe. The cost of care for someone 
living with ALS is astronomical, with annual out -of-pocket  expenses reaching over $80,000 per year. As 
with many people living with complex medical conditions, those with ALS must take various drugs to 
maintain their health. The out -of-pocket costs associated with prescription drugs significantly add to this 
crushing financial burden.  
 
As ALS progresses, most people lose their ability to work and can be terminated from their jobs due to 
their inability to perform to perform tasks. If the person with ALS is the primary working in the family - 
who provides health ca re coverage for their spouse and children, everyone in the family is left without a 
health insurance plan. While the person with ALS may be able to get Medicare if they are eligible for 
Social Security Disability, what they receive is not sufficient, and t hey still need to purchase Medicare 
supplemental coverage and pay for any out of pockets costs for Medicare.  
 
If there is a working spouse, that person can often become a working caregiver or may have to quit their 
job to provide the care services.   Family members must hope they can get coverage through the ACA 
health exchanges or go on Medicaid. While losing insurance may be one of the first financial burdens a 
person with ALS faces following their diagnosis, it is certainly not the last. Patients may lose their ability 
to pay for their house, food, and medical cost coverage – all of which impacts their families.  
 
Under the current insurance system, volume -based manufacturer rebates on pharmaceutical drugs are 
negotiated by PBMs in exchange  for formulary placement. Instead of passing these savings through to 
patients who desperately need to afford their prescriptions, these rebates are retained by the PBMs and 
health insurers.  This means that our most vulnerable citizens – those living with complex  conditions  like 
ALS,  do not benefit from the lower net price of their lifesaving and life  sustaining medications and pay 
far more than they should.  
 
With rebates  for branded drugs averaging 48% , patients are paying nearly twice  what their insurance 
company pays  for the same drug.  Sadly, when patients cannot afford their medications, they may ration or 
abandon their prescribed therapy, leading to painful and costly complications, or more tragic outcomes, 
worsening quality of life  and driving up overall health care costs.    
 
The ALS Association supports ending the current practice of overcharging consumers through 
health  plans in an effort to reduce the financial toll ALS takes on patients.  
Thank you for your time and your consideration of this critical legislation.  For all these reasons, we 
respectfully request your support for LD 1165.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Danielle Adams, MPH  
Managi ng Director, Advocacy, New England  
The ALS Association  
Danielle.adams@als.org   

