 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 1165: An Act to Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs 
 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 6th, 2023 
 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of LD 1165 An Act to Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs. Life with a mental illness, 
for one in four Mainers, can be a complex and difficult journey, full of significant barriers and obstacles. 
Mental Illness has roots in multiple biological and experiential factors, resulting in the need for a 
provider/patient-driven response that is dictated on an individual basis. Prior to COVID-19, the World 
Health Organization identified anxiety and depression as the leading cause of the world’s economic loss.  
These are also the two most common diagnoses in the nation, as well as our state. Since the onset of 
COVID-19, the number of individuals being diagnosed and treated for anxiety and depression has 
significantly increased. In the most catastrophic situations, untreated depression and anxiety can result 
in loss of work and relationships, lasting cognitive impacts, homelessness, incarceration, hospitalization, 
and even suicide. 
Although preferred medication policies have been put into place by insurance companies as a cost-
saving measure, it complicates treatment decisions that should not have to factor in financial decisions. 
Insurance companies utilize rebates from pharmaceutical companies to ensure that their medications 
fall within a preferred tier system, resulting in those decisions that are required to be made by the 
provider and patient that fall within the pre-selected choices based on insurance companies’ finances. 
Due to the sensitive nature of individual biological and genetics, making medication decisions must be 
thoughtful. When there is a cost-to-saving measure in place, individuals who are both paying for their 
insurance coverage and selecting medications based on the lists that are provided to them should be 
receiving the benefits of the rebates that are being provided, as they are the ones who are utilizing their 
already purchased services.  
As it stands now, the stigma and barriers surrounding mental illness results in individuals waiting an 
average of 10 years to seek treatment. Once an individual is able to step forward to seek treatment, 
utilizing their purchased services, they should benefit from the cost savings measures that have been 
put in place. We ask this committee to ensure that these barriers are removed to support the one in 
four Mainers living with a mental health diagnosis. 
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
