 
 
Maine State Legislature – Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
Testimony of Laura Hoch,  
Senior Manager, Advocacy, National Multiple Sclerosis Society  
LD 1165  – An Act to Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs  
 
 
Chair Bailey, Chair Perry and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services, thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on our support of LD 1165 , An Act to  
Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs,  and how it may affect those who live with 
multiple sclerosis (MS).  
 
MS is an unpredictable disease of the central nervous system. Currently there is no cure. Symptoms vary 
from person to pers on and may include disabling fatigue, mobility challenges, cognitive changes and 
vision issues. An estimated 1 million people live with MS in the United States. Early diagnosis and 
treatment are critical to minimize disability. Significant progress is bein g made to achieve a world free of 
MS. 
 
 When someone is diagnosed with MS, their clinician will typically prescribe a medication referred to as 
a disease -modifying therapy (DMT). DMTs are used to modify the disease course, treat relapses, and 
manage symptoms. Growing evidence indicates that early and ongoing treatment with DMTs is the best 
way to prevent the accumulation of disability and protect the brain from permanent damage due to MS.  
 
Despite more than 20 DMTs on the market for relapsing MS, incl uding some generics, the prices of DMTs 
continue to rise. The price of MS treat ment s has dramatically risen since the first DMT was approved in 
1993 and entered the market at approximately $11, 500. In 2013, the average price of MS DMTs was 
around $60,000 p er year; in 2016 the median price of bran d DMTs increased to $80,000; and just six 
years later in 202 2, the brand median price  was nearly $94,000 . Six of the DMTs have increased in price 
more than 200% since they came on the market, with nine  now priced at more than $100,000 per year. 
The continually escalating  prices of MS DMTs are creating barriers to people with MS getting these life -
changing medications. In a 2019 survey conducted by the National M ultiple Sclerosis  Society, 40% of 
respondents reported that they have altered the use of their DMTs due to cost by skipping or delaying 
treatment, taking less than prescribed, or even stopping their treatment altogether. Because of the 
financial burden placed on people liv ing with MS, many are forced to delay retirement or are less able to 
save and create a financial safety net for themselves as they age.  
 
Given how greatly out -of-pocket costs for drugs impact those living with MS, ensuring that 
compensation remitted on be half of the manufacturer is passed directly to a covered person at the point 
 
 
of sale to help reduce costs is critical. LD 1165 would help protect  Mainers from the overwhelming 
burden of drug costs in our current system  and ultimately allow them more financial freedom to support 
themselves , which could lead to cost  savings for the state . The Society supports LD 1165 an urges the 
Committee to vote ye s on this legislation .  
 
Please contact me if I can be of further assistance: laura.hoch@nmss.org  or (860) 913 -2550 X52521.  
  
 
 
  
 
 
