 
25 Braintree Hill Office Park,  Suite 20 0, Braintree , Massachusetts  02 184 
Tel.: 781- 444-7778    Fax.: 781 -444-7718   Email: aafane@aafane.org  
Web: www.asthmaandallergies.org  
 
 
     
 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS  
Jan Hanson, MA, President  
Giuliana Peguri, Clerk  
Matthew Chin, CPA, Treasurer  
 
Margee Louisias, MD , MPH   
Judi McAuliffe, RN  
Christina O’Brien, JD, MA  
Karen Roberto, RN, BSN   
 
HONORARY DIRECTORS  
Irving Bailit, MD  
Bette Barbadoro  
George Behrakis  
Cynthia Daley  
Joseph Ferney  
Hon. Gordon Martin, Jr.  
Robert Stoker  
Frank J. Twarog, MD PhD  
 
MEDICAL ADVISORY 
COMMITTEE 
Jennifer LeBovidge, PhD, 
Chair  
Lisa Bartnikas, MD  
Michael Pistiner, MD  
Nancy Rotter, PhD  
Susan Rudders, MD  
Elizabeth Tepas, MD  
  FOUNDING PRESIDENT  
Albert L. Sheffer, MD  
(1929- 2015)  
 
 
  
 
 
     
  
April  6, 2023 
 
The Honorable  Donna  Bailey   
The Honorable  Anne  Perry  
Members  of the  Committee on  Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House  Station  
Augusta, ME  04333 
                     
RE: LD 1165 Act to Enhance Cost -savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs  
 
Testimony  in Support  of LD1165 submitted  by: 
Leslie Scales  
Executive Director , Asthma  & Allergy Foundation of America,  New England Chapter 
(AAFA New England)    
    
Dear  Chairs  and Members  of the  Committee on Health  Coverage, Insurance  and 
Financial  Servic es: 
 
My name is  Leslie Scales  and I am Executive Director  of the  Asthma and Allergy 
Foundation of America,  New England  Chapter, (AAFA New England). I am  writing  
today on behalf of AAFA New England to  submit  my testimony  in support  of LD  1165, 
An Act to Enhance  Cost -Savings  to consumers  of prescription drugs  introduced by 
Representative Margaret  Craven.  
 
Approximately 10% of Maine’s population has asthma.  The use of prescription medications is an essential part of treatment plans for most of these individuals.    
Maine has one of the highest rates of asthma in the United States.  Children are the most 
vulnerable and are  at the highest risk for poor asthma outcomes. Health disparities 
disproportionately affect individuals  living in underserved communities who struggle 
with asthma and other respiratory diseases. We know asthma episodes  affect job 
performance, school performance and lead to emergency department visits and hospitalizations.   
 
The adherence to a treatment plan is highly correlated with affordability of prescription 
medications. LD 1165, sponsored by Rep. Margaret Craven , proposes to enhance cost -
savings to consumers of prescription drugs in Maine by requiring pharmaceutical manu facturers to provide rebates directly to consumers at the point of sale. Currently, 
under Maine law, rebates can go to either the “covered person at the point of sale” or to 

the carrier. By removing the carrier option and requiring that the patient receive s all of 
the savings, LD  1165 would allow consumers to immediately benefit from cost -savings. 
This could make prescription drugs more affordable and accessible, especially for those 
with conditions such as asthma and allergies that require ongoing medicatio n. By 
lowering the cost of these medications  with reba tes, individuals with these conditions 
could have better access to the medication they need to manage their symptoms, leading 
to better health outcomes overall.  
 
Reducing the costs and increasing access to medicatio ns is necessary to achieve better 
asthma outcomes for everyone. LD  1165 presents the framework for achieving 
additional cost savings for asthma medications and will assist patients  across the State of 
Maine who struggle with asthma .    
 
AAFA New England str ongly supports this bill and urges you to adopt LD  1165  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
       
Respectfully,  
 
                     
Leslie Scales  
Executive  Director,  AAFA  New  England  
 
