 
      April 6, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey  
The Honorable Anne Perry  
Members, Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1165 An Act to Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs; 
Opposed  
 Chair Bailey, Chair Perry  and Members of the Committee,  
 
My name is Sam Hallemeier, Director of State Affairs , and I am writing on behalf of the 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA). PCMA i s the national association 
representing America’s pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs). PBMs administer prescription drug plans and operate mail -order and specialty pharmacies for more  than 275 million  Americans with  
health coverage through large employers, health insurers, labor unions, and federal and state-
sponsored health programs.  
 PCMA  opposes  LD 1165 , which requires  that rebates negotiated by PBMs  on behalf  of health plan 
sponsors be applied to a patient’s cost-sharing at the point of sale. While we appreciate the 
legislature’s  concern with the rising cost of prescription drugs, LD 1165 is a one -size-fits-all 
mandate that will do little to address the increasing price of drugs and will only serve as a 
windfall to drug manufacturers.  
 
PBMs exist to  make drug coverage more affordable by aggregating the buying power of millions of  
enrollees  through their plan sponsor/payer  clients.  One fundamental  way PBMs  help consumers  
obtain lower prices for prescription drugs is by negotiating rebates  (discounts) with drug 
manufacturers. Negotiations between PBMs and manufacturers are the only tool to leverage 
competition and drive lower drug costs . Rebates  are typically  used to keep  costs down across the 
board as employers and other plan sponsors use the savings from rebates to lower  premiums  for 
everyone.  While  point -of-sale rebates  are possible  under  specific  plan designs, the decision to apply 
rebates at the point -of-sale or as a hedge against rising premiums is and should be determined by 
the plan sponsor.  
 
When considering mandatory  POS  rebates , it is crucial  to keep in mind  that:  
1. Rebates have consistently been shown to save consumers money: Recently, the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) found that a federal proposal for POS 
rebates in Medicare Part D would increase premiums by up to 25% and increase drug 
spending by $196 billion .1 
1 CMS  Office  of the Actuary,  “Proposed Safe Harbor  Regulation”  (August  30, 2018).  
 
 2. Under  the federal  proposal,  CMS  actuaries  predicted manufacturers  would keep  at least 
15% of what they  would  have offered in rebates and also found that drug  spending  would 
increase  by $137  billion  as they would  have little incentive  to lower  their  list prices .2 
3. Mandatory POS rebates under the federal proposal would provide drug 
manufacturers a $40-$100 billion windfall . 3 The fact that drug manufacturers 
applauded a federal proposal to restructure rebates should reinforce that manufacturers, 
not consumers, taxpayers, and employers, would be the real winners.  
 
Additionally, mandatory POS rebates would require releasing confidential information that 
inadvertently discloses actual rebate amounts. Eliminating this type of confidentiality of rebate 
levels and undermining the negotiating power held by payers, includi ng employers, would inhibit a  
PBMs’  ability  to negotiate a better  price  for consumers.  As CMS  noted in their  assessment  of a 
federal proposal, rebates would be reduced by 15%4, meaning consumers pay more. Finally, 
the FTC has long stated  that “if manufacturers learn the exact amount of the rebates offered by 
their competitors…the required disclosures  may lead to higher  prices  for PBM  services and 
pharmaceuticals.”5 
 
By disrupting competition in the prescription drug market, mandatory rebates, whether at 100% of rebates or less, ultimately will increase the prices that all pay for health care and prescription drugs.  
 
Please let me know if you have any questions or would like more information.  
Sincerely,  
 
Sam Hallemeier  
Pharmaceutical  Care  Management  Association 
(202) 579- 7647 
shallemeier@pcmanet.org 
 
 
 
 
2 A recent study, Reconsidering Drug Prices, Rebates, and PBMs , shows manufacturers alone set prices —independent of rebates. 
The study  highlights  top-selling  Medicare Part D  brand- name drugs  (with  steady  price  increases  and no change in rebate levels)  and 
Medicare Part B drugs, which have no negotiated rebates but extraordinary price increases  
3 CMS  Office  of the Actuary,  “Proposed Safe Harbor  Regulation”  (August  30, 2018).  
4 A recent study, Reconsidering Drug P rices, Rebates, and PBMs , shows manufacturers alone set prices —independent of rebates. 
The study  highlights  top-selling  Medicare Part D  brand- name drugs  (with  steady  price  increases  and no change in rebate levels)  and 
Medicare Part B drugs, which have no negotiated rebates but extraordinary price increases.  
5 FTC, “Statement  of the Federal  Trade Commission Concerning the Proposed Acquisition of Medco Health Solutions by  Express 
Scripts  

