April 6, 2023 
The Honorable Donna Bailey 
The Honorable Anne Perry 
Members, Committee on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services 
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 1165 An Act to Enhance Cost Savings to Consumers of Prescription Drugs; 
Opposed 
Chair Bailey, Chair Perry and Members of the Committee, 
My name is Sam Hallemeier, Director of State Affairs, and I am writing on behalf of the 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA). PCMA is the national association 
representing America's pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs). PBMs administer prescription drug 
plans and operate mail-order and specialty pharmacies for more than 275 million Americans with 
health coverage through large employers, health insurers, labor unions, and federal and state- 
sponsored health programs. 
PCMA opposes LD 1165, which requires that rebates negotiated by PBMs on behalf of health plan 
sponsors be applied to a patient’s cost-sharing at the point of sale. While we appreciate the 
legislature's concern with the rising cost of prescription drugs, LD 1165 is a one-size-fits-all 
mandate that will do little to address the increasing price of drugs and will only serve asa 
windfall to drug manufacturers. 
PBMs exist to make drug coverage more affordable by aggregating the buying power of millions of 
enrollees through their plan sponsor/payer clients. One fundamental way PBMs help consumers 
obtain lower prices for prescription drugs is by negotiating rebates (discounts) with drug 
manufacturers. Negotiations between PBMs and manufacturers are the only tool to leverage 
competition and drive lower drug costs. Rebates are typically used to keep costs down across the 
board as employers and other plan sponsors use the savings from rebates to lower premiums for 
everyone. While point-of-sale rebates are possible under specific plan designs, the decision to apply 
rebates at the point-of-sale or as a hedge against rising premiums is and should be determined by 
the plan sponsor. 
When considering mandatory POS rebates, it is crucial to keep in mind that: 
1. Rebates have consistently been shown to save consumers money: Recently, the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) found that a federal proposal for POS 
rebates in Medicare Part D would increase premiums by up to 25% and increase drug 
spending by $196 billion. ‘ 
1 
CMS Ofﬁce of the Actuary, "Proposed Safe Harbor Regulation" (August 30, 2018). 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association 
325 7th Street, NW, 9th Floor 
Washington, DC 20004 
www.pcmanet org
sa&PCMA 
2. Underthe federal proposal, CMS actuaries predicted manufacturers would keep at least 
15% of what they would have offered in rebates and also found that drug spending would 
increase by $137 billion as they would have little incentive to lower their list prices? 
3. Mandatory POS rebates under the federal proposal would provide drug 
manufacturers a $40-$100 billion windfall. 3 The fact that drug manufacturers 
applauded a federal proposal to restructure rebates should reinforce that manufacturers, 
not consumers, taxpayers, and employers, would be the real winners. 
Additionally, mandatory POS rebates would require releasing confidential information that 
inadvertently discloses actual rebate amounts. Eliminating this type of confidentiality of rebate 
levels and undermining the negotiating power held by payers, including employers, would inhibit a 
PBMs’ ability to negotiate a better price for consumers. As CMS noted in their assessment ofa 
federal proposal, rebates would be reduced by 15%“ , meaning consumers pay more. Finally, 
the FTC has long stated that “if manufacturers learn the exact amount of the rebates offered by 
their competitors...the required disclosures may lead to higher prices for PBM senrices and 
pharmaceuticals."5 
By disrupting competition in the prescription drug market, mandatory rebates, whether at 100% of 
rebates or less, ultimately will increase the prices that all pay for health care and prescription drugs. 
Please let me know if you have any questions or would like more information. 
Sincerely, 
AM Sam Hallemeier 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association 
(202) 579-7647 
shallemeier@pcmanet.orq 
2 A recent study, Reconsidering Drug Prices, Rebates, and PBMs, shows manufacturers alone set prices—independent of rebates. 
The study highlights top-selling Medicare Part D brand-name drugs (with steady price increases and no change in rebate levels) and 
Medicare Part B drugs, which have no negotiated rebates but extraordinary price increases 
3 CMS Office of the Actuary, “Proposed Safe Harbor Regulation" (August 30, 2018). 
4 A recent study, Reconsidering Drug Prices, Rebates, and PBMs, shows manufacturers alone set prices—independent of rebates. 
The study highlights top-selling Medicare Part D brand-name drugs (with steady price increases and no change in rebate levels) and 
Medicare Part B drugs, which have no negotiated rebates but extraordinary price increases. 
5 FTC, "Statement of the Federal Trade Commission Concerning the Proposed Acquisition of Medco Health Solutions by Express 
Scripts 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association 
325 7th Street, NW, 9th Floor 
Washington, DC 20004 
wwwpcmanet org
A 
With Point-of-Sale Rebates, Everyone Pays 
Except Manufacturers 
Rebates Lower Health Care Costs for Everyone 
Q Rebates have consistently been shown to save consumers money. Most recently, 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) actuaries found a federal proposal for 
point-of-sale (POS) rebates in Medicare Part D would increase premiums by up to 25% 
and increase drug spending by $196 billion. ‘ 
@ Negotiations between PBMs and manufacturers leverage competition and drive 
lower drug costs overall. Rebates also help keep health care costs down across the 
board, as employers and other plan sponsors use the savings from rebates to lower 
premiums for everyone. 
Q Mandatory POS rebates would reveal rebate amounts, thereby fostering tacit 
collusion, reducing plan sponsors ’ ability to negotiate lower drug prices, and 
raising health care costs for everyone. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 
found that “if manufacturers learn the exact amount of the rebates offered by 
competitors... the required disclosures may lead to higher prices for PBM services and 
pharmaceuticals. ” 
eee Rebates Won’t Help the iﬁajorty ei Patterns Who Take Generics er 
Lewes"-cost rands. Most brand drugs do not have rebates; only those that have one or 
more competitors within the drug’s class typically do.3 While POS discounts would lower out-of- 
pocket costs for some — patients paying for the 2.4% of brand drugs through coinsurancet — 
evidence5 shows these POS discounts would be lower than the current rebates they would 
replace. Moreover, two-thirds of patients with employer-sponsored insurance do not face any 
type of coinsurance for their prescription drugs? 
§ Current Rebate Model Point-of-Sale Rebate Model 
Rebates are used by 1» Rebates for a particular drug are estimated and factored into 1 
1 
employers and other plan patient coinsurance at the pharmacy. 
5 sponsors to '°Wer Were“ @ No rebates are factored into the premium, leading to higher 
i prem'umS_|°ad'"9 t° |°w°" overall drug spending and premiums for all plan enrollees.‘ 
d d h lth t . 
f;:'gVae':yoneea _ cafe cosS » Estimates suggest 10% of patients would save more on cost 
1 
sharing than they would spend on higher premiums —and 
I 
the other 90% would pay more overall. ’ 
‘ CMS Ofﬂce of the Actuary, “Proposed Safe Harbor Regulation." (August 30, 2018). 
2 FTC, “Statement of the Federal Trade Commission Concerning the Proposed Acquisition of Medco Health Solutions by Express Scripts. “ 
3 Milliman, "Prescription Drug Rebates and Part D Drug Costs." (July 16, 2018). mps:/lwww.ahin.orqmp-content/uploadsf2018/07/AHlP-Part-D-Rebates- 
20180716.pdf. 
4 According to an analysis by America's Health Insurance Plans of REDBOOKT “ drug pricing data. 
5 See, e.g., lbid., CMS (August 30, 2018) and Congressional Budget Ofﬁce, “Incorporating the Effects of the Proposed Rule on Safe Harbors for Pharmaceutical 
Rebates in CBO’s Budget Projections." (May 2019). 
6 Kaiser Family Foundation, “Employer Health Benefits: 2020 Annual Survey" (2020). Page 153, Qttp://ﬁles.kff.0rg/attachment/Report-Employer-Health-Benefits- 
2020-Annual-Survey.gdf. 
7 Pink Sheet, “Point-of-Sale Rebates in Part D: Study Highlights Trade-Offs for Medicare." (June 29, 2017). 
February 2021 
www.pcmanet.org
A 
PQS Rebates Weaid ﬁe téetiting ta Attttteee High Drag Prices... Under a federal 
proposal for POS rebates, CMS actuaries predicted manufacturers would keep at least 15% of 
what they would have offered in rebates. They also found drug spending would increase by $137 
billion as manufacturers would not lower list prices as a result of the policy change?’ The fact is 
manufacturers —and only manufacturers —set drug prices.9 
And Could impair Trarteitiort to Value»-based tteaith tiiare. Restrictions or 
requirements on use of rebates could limit the ability of plan sponsors and PBMs to develop and 
implement innovative benefit designs, like value- and outcomes-based payment models for 
prescription drugs. This is because the primary mechanism for reconciling payment based on 
past performance for value is a rebate. These models inherently rely on evaluating a drug’s 
performance after the fact and adjusting payment according to whether measures on quality, 
safety, and adherence have been met. 
Antitrust Case Law May Stilt ﬁeter "teenufecterere frern Qffering up-frent 
Dteeeents. POS requirements fail to address the fact that manufacturers could cite antitrust 
law (Robinson-Patman Act of 1936) and a related class action lawsuit as the reason not to give 
volume-based, up-front discounts. ln that case, there would be no viable alternatives to the 
current rebate system that manufacturers themselves created. 
manufacturers Weuld Receive A ﬁaiiettt. The fact that both PhRMA “applaud[ed] ”‘° 
and BIO “strongly support[ed] ”“ a federal proposal to restructure rebates should reinforce that 
manufacturers —not consumers, taxpayers, or employers —would be the big winners under 
mandatory POS rebates. Under the federal proposal, with manufacturers keeping 15% of the 
discounts they currently pay in the form of rebates, manufacturers stood to receive a bailout of 
between $40 and $100 billion over 10 years." 
By disrupting competition in the prescription drug market, mandatory POS 
rebates, whether at 100% of rebates or a lesser percentage, ultimately will 
increase the prices that all pay for health care and prescription drugs. 
8 lbid. CMS (August 30, 2018). 
9 A recent study, “Reconsidering Drug Prices, Rebates, and PBMs," shows manufacturers alone set prices—independent of rebates. The study highlights top- 
selling Medicare Part D brand-name drugs (with steady price increases and no change in rebate levels) and Medicare Part B drugs, which have no negotiated 
rebates but extraordinary price increases. 
1° Pharmaceutical Research Manufacturers of America (PhRMA). “PhRMA Statement on the Administration ’s Proposed Rule to Reform the Rebate System." 
(January 31, 2019). mps:l/www.phrma_orq1press-release/phrma-statement-on-the-administration-s-proposed-rule-to-reform-the-rebate-system 
“ Blot h ol lnnovationO ni at‘ n (Bl "BIO St te nt on New Pro osal for Lowerin Out of Pocket Costs for Medi ' 
s”(Janua 31 201 ec n ogy rga z IO O). a me p g - - cine. ry , 9). 
mps://www.bio.0rqLoress-releaselbiostatement-new-proposaI-lowerino-0ut-oocket-costs-medicines 
12 lbid, Op. cit. CMS (August 30, 2018). 
www.pcmanet.org
Pitfalls of Requiring Point-of-Sale Drug Rebates and 
Pharmacy Price Concessions 
Mandates to pass through rebates and price concessions at the point of sate 
(PCS) would increase premiums for families and costs for taxpayers, white 
providing a windfall for drug manufacturers. Requiring employers, labor unions, retirement 
systems, Medicare Prescription Drug Plans (PDPs), and other drug coverage sponsors to pass through 
negotiated rebates and pharmacy price concessions at the POS would be enormously costly and have 
serious unintended consequences. 
Requiring POS rebates in Medicare Part D would increase costs for most beneficiaries 
and taxpayers. CMS estimated that requiring 100% of rebates to be passed through at POS 
would, over 10 years, increase government costs by $82.1 billion and beneficiary premiums by 
$28.3 billion (or 11%)--and save drug manufacturers $29.4 billion. ‘ 
Medicare Part D already requires rebates and price concessions be used on behalf of 
beneficiaries to improve benefits or to lower premiums. 
i 
Employers and other drug coverage sponsors do the same, using "rebates in numerous 
ways — such as through reduced premiums and reduced coinsurance ” and also “to provide 
reduced cost sharing for participants and beneficiaries. ” 
Medicare Part D is voluntary for beneficiaries, just as employers and other drug coverage 
sponsors are not required to offer such benefits. Lower premiums encourage younger, 
healthier beneficiaries to enroll, just as more affordable drug coverage encourages the 
availability of these important benefits. 
Disclosure of negotiated pricing, through PCS rebates, raises drug costs. 
Public disclosure of confidentially negotiated pricing reduces negotiation leverage and 
undermines competition. Analysts have predicted disclosure would have a “dampening effect 
on the magnitude of rebates," potentially increasing brand drug costs more than 2 percent and 
Federal spending by $20 billion over 10 years? 
For example, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has warned of this for decades: 
; ln 2017: “May harm competition by hindering the ability of plans to negotiate... resulting 
in less aggressive pricing by, or even collusion among, manufacturers. “ 
In 2004: Whenever competitors know the actual prices charged by other firms, tacit 
collusion —and thus higher prices—may be more likely.“5 
Giving competitors knowledge of price concessions of others — whether rebates by 
manufacturers or concessions by pharmacies — will actually raise drug costs. Requiring 
certain percentage-based rebates at point of sale could increase costs and “undermine the 
ability of some consumers to obtain the pharmaceutica|s...they need at a price they can 
afford.”6 
‘ CMS. “Proposed Rule: Medicare Program; Contract Year 2019 Policy and Technical Changes to the Medicare Advantage, Medicare Cost 
Plan...” 82 Fed. Reg. 56336 (Nov. 28, 2017). 
2 American Benefits Council, “Letter to Aaron Zaiic. Re: Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor Protection for Rebates... ” (April 8, 2019). 
3 Moran Company. "Assessing the Budgetary Implications of Transparency of Prices in the Pharmaceutical Sector." April 201 7. 
4 FTC. “Letter to Larry Good, Executive Secretary, ERISA Advisory Council." August 19, 2014. 
5 FTC and the U.S. Department of Justice. “Improving Health Care: A Dose of Competition." July 2004. 
6 See Letter from FTC to Representative Patrick T. McHenry, U.S. Congress (July 15, 2005) and Assemblyman Greg Aghazarian, California 
State Assembly (September 3, 2004). 
www.pcmanet.org
Professional & Financial Re ulat H 
2021 Annual Report on Prescription Drug 
Compensation for the Benefit of Covered Persons 
Prepared by the Ivlaine Bureau of Insurance 
March 2022 
Janet T. Miils Anne L. Head 
Governor Commissioner 
Eric A. Cioppa 
Superintendent
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Under 24-A M.R.S. § 4350-A, carriers must file an annual report with the Superintendent, 
demonstrating how they used compensation from a pharmaceutical manufacturer, developer 
or labeler to benefit their members during the previous calendar year. This report is for January 
1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. 
The Bureau received responses from Anthem, Aetna Life Insurance Company, Aetna Health, 
lnc., the State of Maine health plan, Cigna Health and Life insurance Company, Community 
Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care and HPHC insurance Company (combined), United 
Healthcare, and Wellfleet Insurance Company (provides student health plans in Maine). To 
protect the confidentiality of company information provided, we have assigned each carrier a 
random letter as indicated in the charts below. 
STATUTORILY REQUIRED QUESTIONS AND CARRIER ANSWERS 
1) The total amount the company, as a carrier‘ , or a pharmacy benefits manager that the 
company as a carrier contracts with, received directly or indirectly from any pharmaceutical 
manufacturer, developer or labeler: 
S44,796,843.00 
S 3,225,525.91 Carrier A 
Carrier B 
Carrier C S 321,452.41 
Carrier D S 66,689.80 
Carrier E S 7,176,240.44 
Carrier F S28,657,957.57 
Carrier G S 4,316,812.00 
Carrier H S 6,850,901.75 
Carrier l S 1,968,956.96 
TOTAL $97,381,379.84 
2) The percentage of the amount that was remitted directly to a covered person at the point 
of sale and an explanation of the methods by which the company is providing this amount 
directly to covered persons: 
Carrier A 2.45% For claims where a rebate is generated, the allowed cost 
is reduced by the rebate prior to cost share 
determination. The cost share is applied to the reduced 
amount, therefore deductible claims get the full rebate, 
coinsurance claims get a share of the rebate, and copay 
claims may experience savings if the reduced allowed is 
less than the copay
1
Carrier B 4.00% At point of sale, rebates are applied to reduce the total 
cost of the drug before member cost share is calculated. 
Carrier C 5.00% At point of sale, rebates are applied to reduce the total 
cost of the drug before member cost share is calculated. 
Carrier D 0.00% Rebates are not applied at point of sale and provided 
directly to covered persons, but back to the plan to 
reduce claim costs. 
Carrier E 0.00% N/A 
Carrier F 0.00% N/A 
Carrier G 0.00% N/A 
Carrier H 0.00% N/A 
Carrier l 5.00% At the point of sale, a calculation is done to see if the 
member's liability per the members’ benefit is greater 
than the cost of the drug less an estimated rebate 
amount. lf it is, the member pays the cost of the drug 
less an estimated rebate in place of the normal member 
liability. 
3) The percentage ofthe amount that was applied to its plan design to offset premium in 
future years and an explanation of how the company is applying these funds to offset 
premium in future years: 
Carrier A 97.55% Assumed prescription drug rebates are included in the 
rate development process for the Individual, Small 
Group and Large Group segments and factored in asa 
reduction to claims (for the individual and small group 
markets) or a reduction in administrative expense (in the 
large group market) in developing premium rates. Both 
approaches result in a reduction of premium. 
Carrier B 96% in calculation of premium, the value of rebates is 
considered in the administrative component of the 
calculation. 
Carrier C 95% ln calculation of premium, the value of rebates is 
considered in the administrative component of the 
calculation.
Carrier D 100% Rebates are applied back to the plan to reduce claim 
costs. 
Carrier E 100% No explanation given. 
Carrier F 100% For the small group and individual markets, Rx rebates 
are credited as an offset to pharmacy claims directly in 
the rate development process thereby reducing 
premiums to all covered members. In our large group 
market, Rx rebates are reflected in the premium through 
the underwriting process. Note that when setting 
premiums, we project pharmacy rebates based on future 
expectations. This may not exactly match the pharmacy 
rebates received during the year. There is also 
uncertainty inherent in estimating pharmacy rebates ina 
given year. 
Carrier G 100% The rebate funds will continue to be used at 100% to 
reduce premiums through the pricing and underwriting 
premium development. 
Carrier H 100% We apply 100% of manufacturer compensation received 
by us and our PBM to individual and small group 
business to offset future premiums. Premiums in the 
pricing period are based on the claims experience in the 
experience period adjusted forward to the pricing period 
for trend, benefit and cost-sharing differences, changes 
in network contract terms, changes in membership 
demographics, retention, etc. For example, premiums in 
the pricing period 1/1/2022-12/31/2022 were based on 
claims experience from 1/1/2020-12/31/2020 with 
adjustments as previously mentioned. The claims 
experience in the experience period is net of pharmacy 
rebates received for the pharmacy claims incurred in 
that period. 
Carrier I 95% Rebates retained by the health plan are used as an input 
in determining what the premiums in the future years 
will be.
SUMMARY 
Five carriers applied 100% of the amount received directly or indirectly from any 
pharmaceutical manufacturer, developer or labeler to its plan design to offset future premiums 
Four carriers reported that less than 100% of the amount is applied to offset future premiums, 
but in each of those cases, the remaining amounts were applied to lower the cost of the drug 
prior to the sale to the consumer. 
For this report, carrier* was defined by 24-A M.R.S. § 4347 as follows: 
Carrier. "Carrier" has the same meaning as in sgec_tio_n/l3O _1-A, subsection 3, except that "carrier “ does 
not include a multip|e~employer welfare arrangement, as defined in section 6601, subsection 5, if the 
multiple-employer welfare arrangement contracts with a 3rd-party administrator to manage and 
administer health benefits, including benefits for prescription drugs. " 
Carrier" also includes the 
MaineCare program pursuant to Title 22, chapter_§_§§ and the group health plan provided to state 
employees and other eligible persons pursuant to
4
A 
PBM-Negotiated Rebates Reduce Costs for Plan Sponsors 
Price concessions, in the form of rebates, negotiated by pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) 
significantly lower the cost of drugs. According to researchers, PBMs, who are hired by plan 
sponsors to maximize the value of prescription drug benefits, help patients and payers save $941 
per enrollee per year in prescription drug costs,‘ equaling $654 billion over the next 10 years." Plan 
sponsors use these savings to benefit patients by lowering premiums, deductibles, and cost 
shanng. 
Drug Manufacturers Set Drug Prices; PBMs Work to Achieve the Lowest Net Cost for Drugs: 
It is always the drug manufacturer who decides what the price of a given drug will be. PBMs do not 
set drug prioes—rather, PBMs evolved as a means to lower the cost of drug benefits by negotiating 
price concessions with manufacturers and pharmacies on behalf of plan sponsors, such as large 
employers, government programs, and insurers. In addition, PBMs lower costs by encouraging use 
of generics, offering specialty pharmacy services, and helping patients with drug adherence. PBMs 
would not serve 266 million'" enrollees through all kinds of health plans if they did not bring down 
costs. 
Negotiated Drug Rebates Are the Only Practical Method to Apply Pricing Concessions: Drug 
manufacturers facing competition for their products are usually willing to negotiate on the price they 
initially set if a large purchaser can demonstrate that its enrollees account for a given market 
share. Because PBMs recommend and administer formularies that encourage enrollees to prefer 
some medications over others, PBMs, rather than insurers, negotiate with manufacturers. As 
benefit administrators, PBMs never take physical possession of a drug and thus a simple volume 
discount, which the manufacturer may give a wholesaler, say, is not possible. The only way a PBM 
can prove that its enrollees used a given drug -- its sales volume -- is through a tally of paid claims 
at the end of a period, which typically is quarterly. Based on the market share tally, the 
manufacturer pays the contractually agreed rebate. 
Rebates Drive Competition among Brand Drug Manufacturers: PBMs and health plan 
sponsors create formularies to give patients an incentive to take the most clinically appropriate and 
cost-effective medication. The formulary drugs are recommended by independent scientific experts 
who consider the latest clinical evidence. Ultimately, the PBM client determines which drugs will be 
in its formulary and how they are covered. When therapies are judged equivalent, PBMs can 
negotiate rebates from manufacturers for favorable positions on formularies. 
Plan Sponsors Decide the Portion of Rebates They Receive: PBMs are transparent to clients 
with respect to rebates, in accordance with contractual requirements. Nearly half of employer 
plan sponsors negotiating to receive manufacturer rebates elect to receive 100% of the rebate 
amounts” and pay administrative fees to the PBM. Other payers negotiate for their PBMs to 
receive a portion of the rebates. Payers may also negotiate to put drug inflation risk on the PBM by 
locking in a specific rate for their drugs. Plan sponsors may negotiate any combination of these 
payment methods and other provisions, and always have the right to audit their PBMs’ 
performance under their contracts. On average, PBMs pass back 90% of negotiated rebates from 
drug manufacturers, which payers use to lower enrollees ’ and their own health spending." 
www.pcmanet.org
A 
PBM-Negotiated Rebates Are Like a Sealed-Bid Contracting Process: A number of policy 
makers and other observers have called for revealing drug prices negotiated between PBMs and 
manufacturers, in the mistaken belief that this so~called transparency would lower costs. in fact the 
opposite is true. If rebates were made public, the companies giving the biggest rebates would likely 
stop giving them and costs would rise. Drug price negotiations operate more like sealed-bid 
auctions where bidders offer the lowest price they can in hopes of winning business. 
Revealing or interfering in Confidential Negotiations Undermines Competition, Raising 
Costs for Consumers and Plan Sponsors: Respected government bodies and universities have 
established that confidential negotiations result in more competition and lower costs for patients 
and plan sponsors: 
v The Federal Trade Commission has stated that, "[i]f pharmaceutical manufacturers learn 
the exact amount of rebates offered by their competitors then tacit collusion among 
manufacturers is more feasible Whenever competitors know the actual prices charged 
by other firms, tacit collusion — and thus higher prices — may be more likely.""i 
0 The FTC has also warned several states that legislation requiring PBM disclosure of 
negotiated terms could increase costs and “undermine the ability of some consumers to 
obtain the pharmaceuticals and health insurance they need at a price they can afford.”V" 
~ Additionally, the Department of Justice and the FTC issued a report noting that “states 
should consider the potential costs and benefits of regulating pharmacy benefit 
transparency ” while pointing out that “vigorous competition in the marketplace for PBMs is 
more likely to arrive at an optimal level of transparency than regulation of those terms.”"i“ 
0 Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania find that, “[t]ransparency requirements that 
attempt to set actual reimbursement for drugs at the pharmacy ’s or PBM’s actual cost or 
acquisition price may have unintended consequences, leading to higher real costs and/or 
manipulated prices.””‘ 
' 
Visante, inc. "The Return on Investment (ROI) on PBM Sen/ices," Prepared by Visante on behalf of PCMA, 
November 2016. https1//www.pcmanet.oro/wp-content/ubloads/2016/11/ROl-on-PBM~Services ‘FlNAL.pclf " 
Visante lnc., “Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs): Generating Savings for Plan Sponsors and Consumers," 
Prepared for PCMA, February 2016. httos://www.ocmanet.oro/wn-content/upioads/2016/08/visante-obm-savings-feb-2016.ocif 
f" PR Newswire, “PBMs Provide Policy Solutions to increase Competition, Reduce Rx Costs," Feb 04, 2016. “’ Pharmacy Benefit Management Institute, “PBMI Research Report: Trends in Drug Benefit Design," 2016. " 
Written Testimony of Joanna Shepherd, Ph.D, Emory University for the ERISA Advisory Council Hearing on PBM Compensation and Fee 
Disclosure, June 19, 2014, Citing J. P. Morgan, “Pharmacy Benefit Management, Takeaways from Our Proprietary PBM Survey," May 21, 
2014. "' 
_ U.S. Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, improving Health Care: A Dose of Competition (July 2004) V" 
Letter from FTC to Rep. Patrick T McHenry, U.S. Congress, (July 15, 2005); Letter from FTC to Assemblyman Greg Aghazarian, California 
State Assembly, (September 3, 2004). 
f"" US Federal Trade Commission & US Department of Justice Antitrust Division, “improving Health Care: A Dose of Competition," July 2004. "‘ 
Danzon, P. "Pharmacy Benefit Management: Are Reporting Requirements Pro or AntiCompetitive ’?" 
https://begp.wharton.upenn.edu/files/?whdmsaction=bublic:main.file&file|D=9696 
www.pcmanet.org
