A HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUsTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
€“*‘ TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Chad R. Perkins 
POB 251 
Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426 
Residence: (207)279-0927 
Fax: (207) 305-4907 
Chad.Perkins@legislature.maine. gov 
ll Feb 23 
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD 
SUBJECT: LD 215 Resolve, to Require the Commissioner of Public Safety to Conduct a 
Study Regarding Cadet Law Enforcement Officers Who Are Injured and Law 
Enforcement Officers Who Leave the Sponsoring Agency 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and my fellow members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
Thank you for allowing me to address you on LD 215 and I beg your indulgence in 
what is likely an unorthodox request. 
LD 215, a Resolve to Require the Commissioner of Public Safety to Conduct a Study 
Regarding Cadet Law Enforcement Officers Who Are Injured and Law Enforcement 
Officers Who Leave the Sponsoring Agency was the result of the requests by the heads of 
constituent law enforcement agencies to introduce and advance legislation that would 
require the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to make changes to policies to address 
perceived problems in the number of injuries sustained during the Basic Law 
Enforcement Training Program (BLETP) and how they affected the loss of qualiﬁed 
ofﬁcers from smaller departments to larger agencies. 
As the requesting agencies could not provide me with adequate data on the issue, I felt 
it more prudent and more conducive to the good order and operation of the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy to conduct a study to see if such legislation was warranted 
before it was introduced or pursued. 
However, after having spoken with Director Rick Desj ardins, we have identiﬁed 
statutory issues with Title 30 that would make any passage of LD 215 unlikely. In 
addition, we have found a path to gather some of the information that the bill sought 
without the need for legislation and without undue burden on the Academy. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Meaford, lllilo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
As such, I am longer supporting this bill and am requesting that the committee holda 
brief Work session at the earliest possible opportunity with a recommendation of Ought 
Not To Pass. 
I thank you for your polite consideration in this matter. 
Respectfully, 
pp/,<Z@%,c 
Rep. Chad R. Perkins 
District 31 
ATT: 
CF: 
Committee Chair Senator Beebe-Center 
Committee Chair Representative Salisbury 
Committee Members 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Meaford, Zllilo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
