 
  
 
 
 
LD 1308, An Act to Establish Municipal Cost Components for Unorganized Territory Services to Be 
Rendered in Fiscal Year 2023-24 
 
April 18, 2023 
 
Chair Grohoski, Chair Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is Stephen 
Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am 
writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in support of LD 1308. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 1308 establishes municipal cost components for state and county services provided by counties 
to Maine’s unorganized territories that is normally paid for by residents and landowners in such unorganized 
territories through an assigned mil rate, and with counties with unorganized territories calculating the necessary 
costs associated with providing county and state services. This bill reimburses counties a total of $12,978,589 
for fiscal year 2023-24 for services to be rendered. 
 
By way of background, Maine’s counties provide many essential municipal services to unorganized territories 
that require the expenditure of resources. These services range from public safety, to transfer stations, to the 
maintenance of local roads. These expenditures are necessary to maintain the health and safety of unorganized 
territories, and they represent a significant cost to the counties who provide these services. To the extent that LD 
1308 reimburses counties in fiscal year 2023-24 for costs associated with providing such services, we write in 
strong support. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
Cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
