W» 
»a‘ . 
Q' 
' 
l.-= '§...:~ .-‘ ‘I- 
Eric Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
LD 792 , "An Act to Provide a Turnpike Gasoline 
Fairness Credit for Maine Turnpike Drivers" 
Before the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Thursday, March 23, 2023 
Senator Grohowski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, l am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland 
and Durham. I am here today to present LD 792, "An Act to Provide a Turnpike Gasoline 
Fairness Credit for Maine Turnpike Drivers." 
Years ago, we were promised the tolls were temporary. It turns out that they're permanent. Butl 
am not here today to contest the tolls on the Maine Turnpike. l am here today to contest the gas 
tax we pay on top of those tolls. 
ln the Androscoggin County region, the Maine Turnpike runs right through our communities. 
Whenever we drive upon it, we pay a double tax. Tolls fund the Maine Turnpike. The gas tax 
funds every other road in the state (including the free highway that connects the more 
prosperous communities of Portland and Brunswick). 
For those on this committee concerned about economic injustice, please consider this question: 
Why should the people of Lewiston and Auburn subsidize the free highway for Portland and 
Brunswick, while we are required to pay tolls on the highway that serves our communities? Why 
should anyone pay the gas tax while driving on a road not funded by that gas tax? 
Today, thanks to the EZ Pass system, it is easier than ever to calculate your mileage on the 
Maine Turnpike. This bill proposes a simple formula that would allow all Turnpike drivers who 
file taxes in the State of Maine to claim a refundable tax credit, refunding them for the gas taxes 
they paid for fuel used while driving on this highway not funded by the gas tax. 
Turnpike Gasoline Fairness Credit (TC)= 
Turnpike miles driven (m) I Assumed MPG (40) * Maine gas tax (t) 
TC=ml40*t 
For the sake of simplicity, l have offered an assumed rate of 40 miles per gallon for all vehicles. 
According to federal requirements, all new cars are required to meet minimum fuel standards of 
at least 40 miles per gallon by 2024. That being the case, this seems a fair assumption for the 
formula, rather than having drivers attempt to calculate their variable fuel efficiency on the 
highway. 
Additionally, the gas tax varies slightly by fuel type. For common gasoline, the tax is $0.30/ 
gallon. For diesel, the tax is $0.312 I gallon. Whatever rate is appropriate would be used for the 
calculation. (It should also be noted that electric vehicles would not be eligible for this tax credit
as no gas tax is paid to run an electric vehicle.) 
You may be trying to do some math in your head to calculate what this could add up to for the 
average person. Let’s imagine a Maine person who commutes to work, utilizing the Maine 
Turnpike from Exit 75 in Auburn to Exit 42 in Scarborough, five days a week. That’s about 36 
miles each way (72 miles per day). Over the course of a year (260 work days), that’s 18,720 
miles on the Maine Turnpike. The driver will have paid $702 in tolls for the year ($1.35 for each 
trip), but then qualify for a “Turnpike Gasoline Fairness Credit” of $140.40 paid for from the 
Highway Fund. It is not the abolition of tolls the people of Maine were once promised, but it is 
something. 
It should also be noted that one would need to file taxes in the State of Maine to qualify for this 
tax credit. That being the case, visitors from out of state will continue paying the double tax, but 
Maine residents who utilize the Turnpike — especially those in regions who do not have access 
to a free gas tax funded highway —- will see a little relief and a little fairness. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. l would be happy to answer questions to the best of 
my ability.
