TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 23, 2023 
LD 792 — “An Act to Provide a Turnpike Gasoline Fairness Credit for Maine 
Turnpike Drivers” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee - good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 792, “An Act to Provide 
a Turnpike Gasoline Fairness Credit for Maine Turnpike Drivers. ” 
The bill proposes a new refundable income tax credit for Maine residents who 
drive gas powered vehicles on the Maine Turnpike, which is the portion of Interstate 
95 from Kittery to Augusta. Electric vehicles would not qualify for the credit. 
Speciﬁcally, the credit would be equal to the per-gallon fuel tax rate applicable to 
the type of motor fuel used in vehicles owned by the resident individual, multiplied 
by the number of miles that the vehicles are driven on the Maine Turnpike during 
the tax year, divided by 40. The credit would apply for tax years beginning on or 
after January 1, 2024. 
This credit would be complex for taxpayers and Maine Revenue Services— 
taxpayers claiming the refundable credit would have the burden of maintaining 
turnpike mileage logs for each vehicle owned and providing documentation 
supporting ownership of the vehicle(s). Additionally, the bill as currently written 
would allow an individual claimed as a dependent on another person’s income tax 
return to be eligible to claim the credit.
1
In addition to providing a credit, the State Tax Assessor would be required 
annually to notify the Treasurer of State regarding the amount of income tax revenue 
foregone as a result of the tax credit. The Treasurer would transfer that amount of 
money from the Highway Fund to the General Fund. The transfer to the General 
Fund is considered to be income tax revenue for purposes of State-municipal revenue 
sharing under 30-A M.R.S. § 5681. Because the Highway Fund is already stressed 
for revenue, transfers from the Highway Fund to the General Fund will only 
exacerbate the existing funding challenge. 
As drafted, the bill would afford a tax credit for certain business uses, in 
particular sole proprietors, and could result in large credits. It is unclear if such 
large credits are the intent of the proposal. Currently, business travel expenses, 
except commuting expenses, may be deductible from federal and Maine taxable 
income. However, the itemized deduction for unreimbursed employee business 
expenses, including travel expenses, is temporarily suspended by the federal Tax 
Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) for tax years beginning after December 31, 2017 and 
before January l, 2026. 
The Administration notes that restricting the income tax credit to Maine 
residents may raise potential U.S. Constitutional concerns. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
0 The bill does not limit the credit to amounts that are not otherwise 
reimbursed by the employer of the resident individual. 
0 The bill does not require that the motor fuel used by the resident 
individual be “purchased ” by the resident individual.
2
0 The bill should be amended to include a deﬁnition for “electric vehicles. ” 
For example, does the term include hybrid vehicles powered by both 
electricity and another fuel source‘? 
0 The annual transfer from the Highway Fund to the General Fund should 
be made by the State Controller, not the Treasurer of State. 
0 The bill should be amended to include a reference or deﬁnition to 
describe the term “per gallon fuel tax rate” (e.g., 36 M.R.S. § 2903(1) for 
gasoline and 36 M.R.S. § 3203(1-B) for other special fuels such as diesel, 
etc.). 
0 The bill does not address who may claim the credit in the case of motor 
vehicles owned by more than one person. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of approximately 
$3 to $5 million per year. 
The estimated administrative costs are $11,000 for ﬁscal year 2024-2025 for 
one-time computer programming to add an additional line on Form l040ME, 
Schedule A to accommodate the credit, update check stub messages and notices, 
make federal tape changes, and perform system testing. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
