TESTIMONY OF 
Deirdre Gilbert 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of .Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Opposition to 
LD 811 An Act to Create a Restricted Senior Lobster and Crab Fishing License 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Representative Perkins 
Date of Hearing: March 23, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, my name is Deirdre Gilbert, Director of State Marine Policy for the Department of Marine 
Resources, and l am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition to LD 811. 
LD 811 would establish a restricted senior and lobster and crab fishing license. Such a license would 
be available only to persons 70 years of age or older who previously held a Class l, ll, or Ill lobster and 
crab fishing license for at least 5 consecutive years. These license holders would be limited to no more 
than 100 traps, and no more than 100 restricted senior lobster and crab fishing trap tags could be 
issued to a specific vessel. 
Access to lobster fishing licenses is an ongoing topic of discussion and concern. Lobster is a limited 
entry fishery, and new entrants must complete the apprenticeship program in order to become eligible 
for a license. If an individual does not complete the apprenticeship program and meet certain other 
requirements before reaching the age of 21, then upon completion of the apprenticeship program, 
they are placed on the waiting list for the Zone in which they apprenticed. 
Zones are authorized to determine the exit to entry ratio for their Zone, as well as whether entry is 
based on trap tags retired or licenses retired. Currently, the Zones have selected the following ratios: 
0 Zone A (Canadian border to Schoodic Point): 3:1 licenses 
0 Zone B (Schoodic Point to Newbury Neck): 3:1 licenses 
0 Zone C (Newbury Neck to Cape Rosier): 1:1 licenses 
0 Zone D (Cape Rosier to Pemaquid Point) 5:1 tags 
1 Zone E (Pemaquid Point to Small Point, Phippsburg) 5:1 licenses 
0 Zone F (Small Point, Phippsburg to Two Lights, Cape Elizabeth) 5:1 tags 
0 Zone G (Presumpscot River Bridge to Maine/NH border) 5:1 tags 
Currently there are nearly 200 individuals on the seven Zone Council waiting lists, some of whom have 
been waiting as long as 15 years. Upon reaching the age of 70, an individual who has completed the 
apprenticeship program becomes automatically eligible for a lobster license.
The Department's concerns with the proposed legislation include the fact that there is no way to 
estimate or account for the new entry that would result, even at a reduced trap limit of 100 traps. As 
a result of the federal regulations for the protection of the North Atlantic Right Whale, Maine is likely 
to be facing a significant reduction in trap limits to achieve the required risk reduction. Most recently 
the Take Reduction Team discussed a 400 trap limit for Maine. While that was delayed by the 6-year 
pause obtained through the Omnibus bill, it remains a very strong likelihood that reduced trap limits 
will remain a component of future management measures. 
Any additional entry that results from the proposed legislation will mean that existing license holders 
currently relying on this ﬁshery for their livelihoods face deeper cuts. Beginning with the next round 
of Zone Council meetings, DMR will be raising the issue of new entry in light of the likelihood of future 
lower trap limits. DMR does not agree that it is an appropriate time to liberalize more entry and 
activity in the lobster fishery, given that the ongoing existence of the fishery remains in jeopardy. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
