Committee Chairs Senator Cross and Representative Hepler 
Members of the committee 
l am Jeffrey Cross. At present I live in Dover-Foxcroft 
l thank you for the opportunity to testify today and to offer my support for LD 811. 
Present Maine statute provides that individuals who have attained the age of 70 may be 
issued a commercial lobster and crab fishing license 
after they have completed a specified term as an apprentice in the fishery.' 
LD 811 promotes the fact that an individual who has attained the age of 70 and has had at 
least 5 years of licensed commercial lobster and crab fishing 
should not need to serve as an apprentice in order to be issued a restricted commercial 
lobster and crab fishing license. 
The premise behind this is that filling bait bags and banding lobsters: the tasks that befall the 
apprentice, in no way enhances the ability of an individual who has previously 
tended their own gear nor does it better prepare them to enter the fishery. They have run their 
own boat and hauled their own traps. After at least 5 years, they know the 
nature of the industry. 
LD 811 also restricts the number of traps to 100 that such a license would permit an individual 
to fish. 
While this might seem an arbitrary number it is based on 2 concepts: 
(1) Lobster and crab fishing is basically a closed fishery with a long waiting list of individuals 
who desire licenses. There is a restriction of the number of traps that an individual may 
submerge at any one time 
and as I understand it, there is discussion to reduce the number of traps an individual may 
ﬁsh to below the present number. 
Since there is no way to determine how many individuals would choose to apply for a license 
under the provisions of this bill it seems reasonable to restrict the number of traps that may be 
fished under such a license 
so as not to significantly add to the amount of gear that would be in the water. 
(2) Many individuals who have attained the age of 70 and who would apply for the license 
provided under this bill, myself included, 
would opt to fish for lobsters and crabs as a means of supplementing their retirement income. 
100 traps is a significant number to tend and properly fished would provide such a means. 
I thank you, 
Jeffrey Cross
