 
 
 
Maine Lobstermen’s Association  
 
Against  
 
LD 811 An Act to Create a Restricted Senior Lobster and Crab Fishing License  
 
March 23, 2 023 
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and members of the Marine Resources Committee, my 
name is Patrice McCarron , and I am the policy director for  the Maine Lobstermen’s Association. 
The MLA opposes LD 811 to create a restricted senior lobster license .  
 First, the lobster  industry is current ly bracing for massive risk reductions to comply with future 
whale rules  that threaten the survival of many lobstering businesses. The National Marine 
Fisheries Service (NMFS) has issued a mandate for the Maine lobster fishery to reduce its 
already minimal  risk to endangered right whales by 98% by the year 2030.  
 As an initial step to achiev e this risk reduction, NMFS drafted a proposal in December 2022 
which would have required a 400 -trap limit for Maine  lobstermen , nearly full adoption of 100% 
weak rope for the majority of lobstermen , a single endline  on federal waters  trawls (or possibly 
a very weak tagline) , and new seasonal closures. These measures would have put many 
lobstermen out of business. Fortunately, with strong support from Maine’s governor and entire 
congressional delegation, Congress passed a law giving the industry a 6 -year pause before any 
new whale regulations are put in place. Given the tremendous pressure the Maine lobster 
fishery is facing to rem ove gear and risk from the water to protect right whales, the state of 
Maine cannot support any changes that result in more fishing effort.   
 
Second, those who meet the criteria to obtain a new restricted lobster license (limited to 100 
traps) would be  exempt from the lobster fishery’s strict entry requirements. An applicant would 
need only to be 70 years or older and have fished for five consecutive  years in the past. By 
contrast, all other persons wishing to enter lobster fishery (regardless of their experience  in the 
fishery) must complete an extensive apprenticeship  program after which the apprentice  must  
wait for a certain number of lobster licenses to be retired in the lobster zone they wish to enter. 
This exit -entry ratio is determined by each lobster zone to control effort in the fishery.  
 
It would  not be fair to those currently in the apprentice program or on the waiting list to create 
a new license that circumvents this entry program.  
 
The MLA urges you to vote ought not to pass on LD 811.  

