Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 340
    Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler and Honorable Persons of the EUT 
Committee
  LD 340 gives you the opportunity to help your fellow citizens gain some relief from high 
electric bills. There is no doubt that the chase for zero carbon is a factor in current ratepayer 
costs.
  It is not the time to accelerate the 'Chase". It is time to review Maine's Renewable 
Portfolio Standard Goals as the Conservation Law Foundation (CLF)did in 2017 
while addressing public policy.  CLF declared "Maine is on target to meet its 2017 
and 2025 RPS requirements without the need for additional resources or 
transmission."   nescoe_submission_public_policy_transmission_upgrades.pdf 
(iso-ne.com)  See Memorandum from Mark Vannoy, Sections C and D.
  A suspension to inclusion of the "greenhouse gas reductions" directive to the PUC is
a good faith effort, but a serious action that would truly give Maine people relief from
the high electric costs would be a temporary suspension of: Net Energy Billing", " 
Long Term Renewable Energy Contracting" EMT funding procurements from 
Investor-Owned Utility customers, RGGI participation. 
  
A PUC Commissioner Has Concerns
  CONCURRENCE. There is no question that the projects proposed by LS Power and 
Longroad will advance Maine’s renewable energy and climate goals, while providing 
important economic benefits for northern Maine communities. However, my concern 
is the financial effects of this decision when combined with all the other costs 
imposed upon Maine ratepayers by recent public policy decisions. See, e.g., Maine 
Public Utilities Commission, Investigation Regarding Management and Sale of 
Transmission and Distribution Supply Portfolios, Docket No. 2022-00221, Order at 
3-4 (noting the generating capacity under contract through Net Energy Billing and 
long-term contracts). 
Over the past two years, supply costs have surged due to the rise in natural gas prices. Costs
for transmission and distribution have increased in recent years and will likely continue to 
increase in the coming years due to (a) load growth associated with beneficial electrification 
of the transportation and heating sectors; and (b) enhancements meant to increase the 
reliability of the grid with respect to increasing storm frequency and severity. Further, the Net 
Energy Billing Program will shift hundreds of millions of dollars onto Maine ratepayers. 9 This 
is in addition to the ratepayer costs associated with past renewable energy procurements the 
Commission has been directed to undertake, as well as additional, future procurements the 
Commission may be required to undertake (including an offshore wind procurement the 
Commission is currently evaluating). 10
 Any individual public policy program, when evaluated in isolation, may have reasonable 
costs. But when considered together, the combined costs are high. By choosing to fund these
programs through electricity rates, which are by nature regressive, we impose a tremendous 
burden on Maine’s low-, moderate-, and fixed income residents.
 I fully support the State’s efforts to transition away from carbon-based energy systems. It is 
the imperative of our time. And as we pursue public policy programs to help us achieve these 
goals, we must make progress in the most cost-effective way. If a   program or new 
investment is worth pursuing, and I believe this one is, we must consider how to fairly fund it. 
If we have the conviction to do what is necessary to fight climate change, then we must also 
have the conviction to do what is right when paying the costs of the clean energy transition. 
We should seek ways to fund these projects through general revenues, a statewide bond 
issuance, or some other mechanism in which the costs are more fairly distributed. We should 
not bury these costs in electricity rates that disproportionately impact ratepayers, particularly 
the most vulnerable ratepayers who are already struggling to pay their bills
  9 In November of 2020 the Commission reported to the Legislature that, based on the 
number of Net Energy Billing Agreements that were pending at that time, there would be $160
million in lost revenue to Central Maine Power and Versant Power that would have to be 
recovered from ratepayers on an annual basis. Maine Public Utilities Commission, Report on 
the Effectiveness of Net Energy Billing in Achieving State Policy Goals and Providing Benefits
to Ratepayers at 10 (Nov. 10, 2020). Both Central Maine Power and Versant file regular 
reports with the Commission that provide updates on the projected lost revenue from Net 
Energy Billing, which must be recovered from ratepayers. See Maine Public Utilities 
Commission, Net Energy Billing Evaluation, Docket No. 2020- 00199.
    10 See New England Aqua Ventus, Request for Approval of Long-Term Contract 
Pertaining to New England Aqua Ventus, Docket No. 2022-00100
  Use the power you have to give the suffering Maine people a break without burdening 
paying customers.
