, STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTlLlTlES COMMISSION 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 340, An Act Regarding the Purpose and Responsibilities of the State Regulatoryl 
System for Public Utilities 
" 
February 14, 2023 . 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for nor 
against LD 340, An Act Regarding the Purpose and Responsibilities of the State Regulatory System for 
Public Utilities on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission (Commission). 
The Act addresses the Cormnission ’s purpose, contained in its authorizing statute, which is driven by_ 
four regulatory priorities: (1) ensuring safe, reasonable and adequate service; (2) assisting in 
the cost of energy available to the State’s consumers; (3) ensuring that the rates of public 
utilities subject to rate regulation are just and reasonable to both consumers and public utilities; and (_4)" 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions to meet the greenhouse gas emissions reduction levels set forth in 
Title 38, section 576-A. The last priority was added to the Commission ’s purpose during the 130th 
Legislature in Public Law 2021, chapter 279. LD 340 removes the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions from the purpose section and replaces it with educating consumers to make independent and 
informed utility choices. 
While the Commission is not opposed of adding this new priority to our purpose, we would like to take 
this opportunity to provide the Committee with some information on our current activities related to 
educating consumers. As part of its mission, the Consumer Assistance and Safety Division (CASD), is 
responsible for educating the public about consumer rights and responsibilities and other utility-related 
consumer issues. In 2022, the CASD had over 9,000 consumer contacts. The Cormnission ’s websiteA 
contains many resources to assist consumers, including a “frequently asked questions ” page, a consumer 
ﬁnancial assistance page and instructions on how to participate in Commission activities and 
proceedings. 
In addition to the activities of the CASD, the Commission rolled out an ad campaign in December 2022 
to inform Mainers of Where they can go to get help paying their electric bill, remind them to look for 
Ways to conserve energy, to be conscious of neighbors Who may need help and not know Where to go, 
and to talk about getting help, which is something many families have never done before. The campaign 
consists of two public service announcements that will run on traditional television and tv streaming 
apps, social media, and digital video platforms through April 2023. In conjunction with this campaign the 
Commission also launched a W6l)Sl'[61 to assist consumers faced with rising electricity prices and included 
1 
Maine Electric Help = www.maineelectrichelp.com 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony — LD 340 February 14, 2023 
a page where people participating in a DHHS means-tested program can enroll in the statewide electric 
Low Income Assistance Program. 
In reference to the repeal of the priority of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to meet the greenhouse 
gas emissions reduction levels set forth in Title 38, section 576-A, the Commission ﬁnds it is useful to 
have this explicit language in statute. Prior to the enactment of P.L. 2021, ch. 279, the Commission ’s 
regulatory practices were not inconsistent with this priority. Furthermore, other areas in current law 
also reference greenhouse gas emissions reductions. For example, the law2 that directs the Commission 
to initiate a proceeding every ﬁve years to identify priorities to be included in a grid plan to be ﬁled by 
investor-owned transmission utilities deﬁnes a grid plan as a 10-year integrated grid plan designed to 
improve system reliability and resiliency and enable the cost-effective achievement of the greenhouse 
gas reduction obligations and climate policies. The Commission ’s enabling law?’ also includes a climate 
requirement, Whch speciﬁes in executing its duties, powers and regulatory functions under Title 35-A, 
the Commission, while ensuring system reliability and resource adequacy, shall facilitate thei 
achievement by the State of the greenhouse gas emissions reduction levels set forth in Title 38, section 
576-A. C‘ ‘V 
~ C' 
It may be helpful to have an example from the proponents of how the Commission might be expected 
to apply the directive proposed in the Act to better understand what in addition to the Commission ’s 
current activities regarding_consumer education is expected with this new priority. An example could 
provide both the Commission and its stakeholders with a better practical understanding of the 
legislative intent and may inform the Committee in considering how best to incorporate that intent into 
law.- 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
2 35-A M.R.S. § 3147 
3 35—A M.R.S. § 103-A
2
