L HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
, 
_ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
‘Z .,J"' -~“*”i}}" AUGUSTA MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440F 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
John “Jack” E. Ducharme III 
34 Heald Street 
Madison, ME 04950 
Cell: (207) 431-0775 
Jack Ducharme@legislature.maine. gov 
TESTIMONY IN FAVOR OF LD 340 
FEB. 14, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, 
My name is Jack Ducharme and I represent District 71 - which includes the 
towns of Cornville, Madison, and Norridgewock - in the Maine House. I am 
here today to present LD 340, and An Act Regarding the Purpose and 
Responsibilities of the State Regulatory System for Public Utilities. 
The history and purpose of the Public Utilities Commission in Maine has 
been one to ensure that consumers are getting reasonable and just rates from 
utilities who have a certain level of monopoly power over "utility" markets 
Where there is little or no competition. At the time of its creation in 1913, 
that charge was not something universally held by Mainers — in fact, the then 
new law creating the PUC faced a people’s veto in 1914, one that was 
ultimately overcome. In the years that have followed, Maine has updated this 
law numerous times. 
The Commission currently regulates approximately 430 electric, telephone, 
water, and gas utility companies and districts. For these companies, the 
Commission establishes rates, grants utility operating authority, regulates 
utility service standards and monitors utility operations for safety and 
reliability. 
My bill would reassert and enforce that the primary purpose of the Public 
Utilities Commission is to ensure safe, reasonable and adequate service, to 
assist in minimizing the cost of energy available to Maine consumers and to 
ensure that the rates of public utilities subject to rate regulation are just and 
reasonable to customers and public utilities. 
District 71 
Cornville, Madison, and Norridgewock
In recent years, the PUC has been busy handling rate requests, new project 
requests and other issues. Adding the need to "reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions" to meet the State's greenhouse gas reduction goals outlined in 
Title 38, section 576-A, seems like the Legislature is adding another 
dimension to the work of the PUC that they may not be equipped to 
handle. It is one thing to analyze cost structures and pricing, to review 
projects for their compliance with established rules and regulations. It isa 
signiﬁcantly different mission in my view to task them with "reducing 
greenhouse gases" to meet State climate goals. The State has the Maine 
Climate Council in the Ofﬁce of Policy Innovation and the Future and others 
that are responsible to working on the State’s Climate goals. 
That is Why I propose eliminating that section and to replace it with the 
following,“ ...and educate consumers to make independent and informed 
utility choices. ” Instead of veering into lanes belonging of other policy- 
making agencies in our State, the Public Utilities Commission should return 
its focus to that the regulatory system that protects and educates consumers 
to make independent and informed utility choices. It is critical in this time 
of rising energy prices that the one body that can impact those costs for 
Maine people be laser focused on their stated mission of “ensuring that 
Maine citizens have access to safe and reliable utility services at rates that 
are just and reasonable. ” 
I appreciate your consideration of this proposal and would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have. Thank you. 
District 71 
Cornville, Madison, and Norridgewock
