—_ 
126 Sewall Street O 0 
@4330-@822 Mame Equaljustlcc Alex Carter 
TTY/Voice: (207)_632_-9438 Poncy Advocate 
www ma|neequal]ust1ce.org . . acarter@meJp org 
People Policy S0lL|‘l;lOl"lS 
Testimony in Support of LD 1584, 
An Act to Provide Funding for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
May 1, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Alex Carter, l use she/her 
pronouns, and lam a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit civil legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. One of my 
focus areas at MEJ is food security and l am therefore pleased to testify in support of LD 1584. 
We applaud Representative Stover’s responsiveness to the needs of her constituency by 
introducing this emergency bill. Many of us here today who work directly with clients and 
community members are hearing the same thing from across the state—we're hungry. The 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is of particular importance to our low- 
income clients as their first line of defense against hunger and one of the only systemic, and 
statewide interventions that addresses food insecurity. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Congress increased SNAP benefits through what are known as 
‘Emergency Allotments ’ (EAs) in an effort to combat the economic impacts of the pandemic and 
a deepening hunger crisis. The EAs brought all SNAP recipients up to the maximum benefit level 
for their household size or provided an additional $95 in monthly benefits for those with the 
lowest incomes who were already receiving the maximum am0unt.1 This proved to be 
transformational for the low-income families we work with, many of whom noted this was the 
first time they could adequately meet their nutritional needs through the SNAP program. 
A national study conducted by Northwestern Universityz estimated that, during the height of 
the pandemic, the EA payments reduced the likelihood that a household experienced food 
insufficiency (a measure of food hardship) by 9%, and another analysis from the Urban institute 
1 https://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/temporary-pandemic-sna p-benefits-wilI-end-in-remaining-35-states-in- 
march 
Zhttps://www.ipr.northwestern.edu/documents/reports/ipr-rapid —research-report-snap-emergency-allotments —impact-27- 
january-2023.pdf
2 
showed that the EAs kept 4.2 million people out or poverty in the fourth quarter of 2021.3 
These affects were even greater for Black and Hispanic households, helping to reduce 
entrenched racial disparities. 
However, in the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2023, Congress voted to terminate the 
extra SNAP payments after the final issuance in February 2023 for all states still participating. 
This resulted in a drastic $19,186,574 reduction in total beneﬁts to all Maine SNAP households 
between February 2023 and March 2023.4 Many people have returned to the pre-pandemic 
minimum benefit of $23 a month for a household of 1 or 2 which is scarcely enough to 
supplement a single visit to the grocery store. This is what we mean by a hunger cliff. 
While the federal Public Health Emergency is coming to a close, the underlying needs have not 
gone away. Nationally, food prices have reached historic highs and are predicted to increase by 
another 7.5% over the course of 2023.5 Many of our clients with low income are struggling to 
put food on the table between the high costs for other basic necessities such as rent, childcare, 
heating, and health care costs. In the absence of adequate SNAP benefits, the burden has now 
shifted to our charitable food system with some pantries reporting a 25-30% increase in 
demand since the end of the EAs along with frequently empty shelves. This is not only 
unsustainable, but charitable giving also limits people's access and choices to meet their 
nutritional needs while doing nothing to address the root causes of hunger. 
LD 1584 would provide a meaningful, short-term boost in benefit levels to all those who 
currently meet SNAP eligibility requirements and utilize a step-down approach to reduce the 
extra payments more gradually ——something that the federal EAs severely lacked. This would 
most importantly put more food on the plates of low-income people, but it would also provide 
a clear timeline for budgeting and planning--for families and service organizations alike—to 
better prepare for the need to seek supplemental food resources. It is also a signal to our 
Congressional delegation that we recognize the severity of hunger in our state and encourage 
Congress to take action in the upcoming Farm Bill Reauthorization to improve SNAP benefit 
adequacy. For all these reasons, we support LD 1584 and encourage you to vote ought to pass. 
I would be happy to answer any questions and thank you for your attention. 
3 https://www.urban.org/research/publication/effect-reevaluated-thrifty-food-plan-and-emergency-allotments-supplemental 
4 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline-files/March%20Geographic%20Distribution.pdf 
5 https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-price-outlook/summary-findings/
