 
 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
Testimony of the Office for Family Independence  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services  
 
In Opposition to LD 1584 An Act to Provide Funding for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program to Temporarily Restore Benefits Being Reduced by the Federal Government  
 
Hearing Date: May 1, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is  Anth ony Pelotte, and I serve as Director of the Office 
for Family Independence  (OFI)  in the Department of Health and Human Services.  I appreciate 
the opportunity to prese nt testimony on LD 1584 , An Act to Provide Funding for the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program to Temporarily Restore Benefits Being Reduced by 
the Federal Government .   
 
This bill proposes use of over 50 million dollars in General Fund over a six -month period to ease 
the effect of the end of federal funding , as a result  of the Consolidated Appropriations Ac t of 
20231, which was used to provide emergency maximum SNAP benefits during the National 
Public Health Emergency.   
 
The Department is committed to our role in reducing food insecurity and improving the health of 
people in Maine, and we do not take it lightly. Unfortunately,  it is not feasible for OFI to 
implement these expanded, state -funded benefits during the period t hey are intended to cover . 
For th is reason, OFI respectfully objects to  the passage of LD 1 584. 
 
The stated purpose of the bill is to continue emergency SNAP benefits for six months, starting in 
March, while gradually decreasing in amount to provide recipi ents the opportunity to adjust to a 
lower level of benefits. However, considering it is now May, the timeline provided in the bill and 
the logistical considerations of the time needed to train individuals, to update technology, and to 
implement these benef its is unfortunately unattainable.   
 
The last month of federally funded SNAP emergency benefits was February 2023. Recipient 
households have received their budgeted normal benefit amounts for March and April 2023  and 
have  started to adjust to these new benefit levels. In anticipation and response to the impact this 
change would have on families, the Department has compiled and shared information around 
 
1 See Pub. L. 117 -164 § 503(b)  
existing nutritional supports that can help ease families’ transition t o their budgeted regular 
SNAP benefit amount .2 
 
Maine has other nutritional supports , including the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) 
Program , and access to universal free school lunches,  that are assisting families in their 
transition . Additionally, OFI and M aine’s Department of Education  (MDOE) continue to work to 
issue Pandemic E lectronic Benefits Transfer ( P-EBT) benefits to school aged children as well as 
children under age six receiving SNAP . MDOE and local school districts will also be offering 
summer meals programs. Finally, local food pantries and commodity programs  are working hard 
to support older Mainers  in need.  
 
Please do not hesitate to  contact us if further discussion  would be helpful.   Thank you for your 
time, and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
 
 
2 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/blog/help -food-costs -extra -covid -snap-funds -end-2023 -03-08  
