Erica Haywood
Farmington, Maine
LD 1584
Good afternoon, esteemed committee chairpersons and members,
My name is Erica Haywood. I am a member of and have served as the manager of the 
Farmington Farmers' Market Association. I am also a Master Gardener and involved 
with the Master Food Preservers programs with the University of Maine Cooperative 
Extension. As a nursery owner, a farmer, and apothecary shop owner I provide plants,
medicine, and food for my community. I run a community garden at my farm to give 
local people access to land upon which to grow their own food as well.
This bill, LD 1584, will help the SNAP program recipients in our community by 
restoring some of their benefits to access local, fresh, healthy foods. Every day at 
market and at my own farm and shop I talk with people for whom local farms are a 
literal lifeline. SNAP benefits feed hungry families in ways that our local food 
security systems including gleaning projects, community kitchens, and food pantries 
can't address alone. It gives dignity to our neighbors experiencing food insecurity to 
be able to shop at any store or farmers market with their SNAP benefits on a discreet 
EBT card. At our market info booth, we welcome all shoppers by greeting them with 
the phrase "Are you a card shopper or a cash shopper today?" This means people 
shopping with credit cards are using the same clipboards as people with EBT cards 
and SNAP benefits in order to browse each booth to make their selections. Market 
vendors and farmers like me love the clipboard system because we sell more food 
when the info booth is up and running and we can process cards for all of our 
potential customers. The numbers from the transactions processed at our market info 
booth support the assertion that the SNAP program absolutely helps create equal 
access to local healthy foods from local farmers and food makers in our community. I 
know people with SNAP benefits who have had to reduce the amount of local healthy 
foods they can access at market because of the recent reduction in benefits due to 
reduced federal funding. Please help us continue to help our neighbors access 
locally-grown and locally-made healthy foods at our farmers markets by passing LD 
1584, providing emergency funding from our state funds to this program. Thank-you.
