M . HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
-t 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
_ <20"/)2s7 1400 
Holly Stover TTY: (207) 287-4469 
71 Dover Rd. 
Boothbay, ME 04537 
Phone: (207) 633-5979 
Holly.Stover@legislature.mainegov 
May 1, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Holly B. Stover presenting 
LD 1584, An Act to Provide Funding for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
to Temporarily Restore Benefits Being Reduced by the Federal Government 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. I am Holly Stover, and I proudly serve as the representative of 
the Towns of Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, Southport, South Bristol and Westport 
Island. I am here to present LD 1 5 84, An Act to Provide Funding for the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program to Temporarily Restore Beneﬁts Being Reduced by the Federal Government. 
Food insecurity is the limited or unknown availability of nutritional and safe foods for everyone 
in a household to meet their basic needs. In my County, Lincoln County, it is estimated that 
13.4% or 4,853 people do not have enough food to eat every day. While my community hasa 
few programs and services to address food insecurity, more solutions are needed. Maine’s rates 
of food insecurity are generally higher than in other parts of New England. As a result, a higher 
percentage of Mainers are eligible for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), the 
federal food supplement program. 
For nearly three years, under the federal Families First Coronavirus Response Act, the federal 
govermnent provided emergency beneﬁt allotments through the SNAP program. LD 1584 would 
provide a one-time appropriation that will allow for an extension to the emergency beneﬁts 
previously provided with federal dollars. This bill would extend the beneﬁt for six months but on 
a decreasing basis. By decreasing the allotment gradually rather than ending the program 
abruptly as has happened in the past, families are better able to prepare. The impact for an 
individual or a family is so dramatic that I think it is responsible that we think through the 
ramiﬁcations of what these changing beneﬁts will mean to people in communities across Maine. 
I ﬁrst became aware of the signiﬁcant impact these changes have when an 82-year-old woman 
came to my ofﬁoe in late January. She had a letter outlining that in March 2023, she would lose 
the $265 monthly SNAP beneﬁt she has relied on for the past three years. Her beneﬁts would 
drop back down to $27 a month. She was already visiting our local food pantry and living in 
subsidized housing and questioned how she would survive on that level of assistance. 
District 89: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol (part), Southport and Westport Island l 
5: 
I
I 
Y1
\
2
0
l
S
As we think about the impacts that the end of pandemic assistance will bring, we must also 
consider the total loss to the economy. For three years, Maine retailers could count on people 
spending those SNAP dollars. Now, they face a $17 million per month loss in revenue. 
We will see dramatic responses over the next several months as the ﬁscal impact of the SNAP 
reductions take hold. It could increase inﬂationary costs on basic food items as stores struggle to 
remain open and keep people employed. Unfortunately, there was no planning put into place to 
phase out SNAP beneﬁts for individuals or for Maine stores. It is not feasible to simply return to 
a pre-pandemic state and ask retailers to just absorb a loss of $17 million per month. 
I am the Director of a nonproﬁt agency that offers eight different programs to help our neighbors 
in need. In October 2022, we opened a “Community Fridge” program, a 24/7 food access point 
with a refrigerator, freezer and shelves. Since we are unlocked and have no “ﬁxed” hours, we are 
not eligible to participate as Good Shepherd Food Bank members. Because of this, we must 
source food through donations and our local food insecurity hub. It is a help-yourself shed, and 
even though we source and place food there daily, We cannot keep it stocked consistently. Just 
last month, we saw a signiﬁcant increase in demand. 
This bill is a late answer to our state’s signiﬁcant food insecurity crisis. It would have beena 
proactive and thoughtful discussion one or two years ago, but that did not happen. We are 
reacting rather than preparing, which is certainly not the best way to set good public policy. 
I also know that as Mainers and as lawmakers, we can do better for our most vulnerable children 
and adults. There are other DHHS-sponsored food programs; if those were sufﬁcient, we likely 
would not be considering other options to help keep Mainers fed. 
In closing, I encourage the Health and Human Services Committee to think about other creative 
ways to address food insecurity in this State. It is clear that a general fund request of nearly $50 
million is a big reach, and I respect how difﬁcult this discussion and decision may be. 
We know this is a signiﬁcant problem in our state and not something we can ignore or accept. 
Thank you for your time and attention, and I am available to answer any questions you might 
have. 
District 89: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb. South Bristol (part), Southpoit and Westport Island
