l 
A U G U ST A ., E\/lAll\ ‘ E U43 3 3-(3002 tr» I 
(2%)?) 287-l44() 
Ga ry A. Drinkwater MAIN E RE LAY '7}1 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Z STATE HOUSE S’"l”ATl(f)l\§ 
:¢\ lzancmzti !)1'i~e 
€\'li§%k>:"{i. lviii (1446,? 
(l1tE'\.l}¥ ‘!ill§\\LiltI3"§i'1 l»;e;slatur<:.¢mzz11c.:n 
Rcsiclcnccz £187)“ T '\"‘>’?< 
Senator chipman and distinguished members of the transportation 
committee I'm Gary Drinl<waterfrom district 27 representing the 
people of Alton Argyle Township Bradford Corinth and my hometown 
of Milford. 
I'm here to present LD 1030 an act for requirements for school bus 
drivers. 
lvlarch 6, 23 Bangor Daily News, Washington County struggles with 
chronic school bus driver shortage, April 11, 22, Portland Press Herald, 
In Maine, finding enough school bus drivers has been a problem for 
years, September 13, 21 News center l\/laine, Maine school districts 
temporarily cancel buses due to driver shortage. 
ln the 129th while serving on the education committee we heard a bill 
to fix the school bus driver shortage, we explored many options none of 
which would come close to fixing the problem. 
In December of 2022 l met with l\/like Cyr from John T Cyr bus 
company. For those that don't know, Cyr bus is a big player in the 
school bus business. 
While meeting with Mike and his team it was brought to my attention 
all the obstacles, they face in order to hire, train and get licensed a 
school bus driver. 
While exploring the problem and talking to others l\/ISAD 60a 
community of eight schools and a fleet of 40 buses contacted me and 
District Z7 Alton. Bwldford. (‘ ririmlu Hudson and l\“lill“ or(l and the unorganized territories 01' ; Argyle Townsllip 
§~’l'i21b:tl on :'»:c> (E;
wanted to share the problems they were facing. Fannie-Lynn Winship 
reached out to other schools and asked them to e-mail me. Here are 
just a few of communities I've heard from Fort Kent, St. Agatha, 
Frenchville, lVIadawasl<a, Oxford hills, Westbrook, Spruce Mountain, 
Camden Rockport, Lewiston, and many more. 
On February 22nd Cyr bus, I\/ISAD 60, and I held a meeting with SOS 
Bellows, deputy SOS Curtis and director of driver license services 
Christopher Ireland. 
After listening to the people who are responsible for school bus 
services the department was receptive to continue meetings and 
finding fixes to the identified 13 roadblocks. 
Here's a sampling of problems; SOS Bellows made it clear the 
department will not jeopardize losing federal funds that risk our roads 
and bridges. 
The legal age to obtain a CDL in I\/Iaine is 16, the federal age 
requirement is 19. I\/Iaine is out of compliance with federal law, does 
that mean we are losing federal money? The Secretary of State's office 
is going to reiterate that their office will not jeopardize losing federal 
funds, I would encourage the committee to inquire what funds would 
be in danger, and how do we know? 
Federal waivers are available for specific requirements one such isa 
waiver for under the hood End Quote. Cyr bus and IVISAD 60 both told 
director Ireland that the hiring, background check, paying, training a 
new hire is very expensive and once the new employee gets their 
commercial driver's license many of them leave for a full-time job. They 
estimated it costs between 5 to 6 thousand dollars per hire.
They also pointed out that the burdensome material they must teach 
takes months and many senior citizens who are retired and want to 
earn extra money simply say it is too much and walk away. 
The time it takes to apply for a test from the state is too long and if the 
employee fails, it could take months to retest. These are just a few of. 
the issues that we discussed and with the agreement of deputy SOS 
Curtis and director Ireland it was agreed that these issues need to be 
explored, and a pathway found. We need solutions, this problem has 
been going on for 20 years, and it's getting worse, drivers are reaching 
retirement age which will only make it worse. 
We have Director of Training, lvlelanie Van Aken from Cyr Bus, and 
others who will speak about the problems they are facing. 
I'm asking the committee to hold off the work session as long as 
possible so the parties can come back with recommendations. 
l would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Thank you. 
Gary Drinkwater
