LEWISTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS
36 Oak Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
www.lewistonpublicschools.org 
March 23, 2023
RE: DRIVERS NEEDED
Hello,
This morning during the 5:00 AM hour I was up  to gather information about available drivers to let
our community know what rides will not be running today. This is a daily routine. We gather the information
on the shortages, we try to arrange for coverages to spread the school access interruption. We cancel 1, 2, 3,
or more rides over 95% of days. These rides are the only form of transportation to and from school for many
of our students - including our most vulnerable. After we work through the daily rides to cancel to and from
school, we look at afterschool programming. All too often we have to cancel after school enrichment and
academic support because there is no transportation. Last night I took a call from our Athletic Director that
shared the extreme shortage of transportation for our students to get to competitions. When our transportation
can not provide a ride to games or other co-curricular events we seek out quotes to charter transportation.
These quotes come back at 3 or 4 times the amount of typical rides.
This is not sustainable.
When we cancel a ride - we take away access to school. We keep parents out of work. The impacts
from continuity of education, consistency in the classroom and learning, to the economic factors including
wage and labor - all due to driver shortages.
In the current set of expectations the requirements for being licensed are cumbersome to say the least.
Our first priority is student safety. But I would add that professionals from the field have said the training
process and credentials are more rigorous than necessary. Too often those trained leave for other fields like
construction because the credentials are similar.
I request you consider the proposed language to ease the requirements to be licensed to drive a bus.
Our kids need us to do better. The shortage is an everyday disruption.
Sincerely,
K. Jake Langlais
Superintendent

