 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msm aweb.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1030  
 
AN ACT RELATING TO REQUIREMENTS FOR SCHOOL BUS DRIVERS  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative  William s and members of the Transportation Committee.  I am Victoria 
Wallack , director of government relations and communications  for Maine School Management Associ ation, 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Associat ion, in support of L.D. 1030 . 
 
The cost of training and the difficulty of  locatin g interested drivers of school buses has been a problem across 
the state, not just for this year, but for some time no w. For som e candidates , the training period can be from  
three to six months, and a CDL license is  require d in addition to training on and testing out on a school bus.  
The trai ning can be  very expensiv e, viewed as  $5,000-$8,000 for som e. Part of the training requirement 
includes a skills  testing  assessmen t known a s an “under the hoo d” componen t, as part of the pre -trip vehicle 
inspectio n. Lengt h of training, cost, and  applicabil ity of the current examination have all been seen as barriers 
to attracting and  retainin g the number of  school bus  driver s districts need to transport students to and from 
school, as well as to the many  after school activities that are so important to all invol ved. 
 
L.D. 1030  provide s a pathway to attract and secure more individuals to drive school buse s. There are many 
school bus drivers w ho will have no interest in transferring to drive a  truck  tractor  with semi trailer, heavy 
trucking equipment or other  large vehicles  where a CDL license is require d. 
 
L.D. 1030  stipulates that the examination to drive a school bus or vehicle of comparable ty pe, would not be an 
exam that would also provide  the ability to drive a truck tractor with semi traile r. This would be  a bus specific 
examinatio n. 
 
Both Associations appreciate and value th e involvement of the Secretary of Stat e in seeking the waiver of th e 
requirement of the “under -the-hood” examination requiremen t, were the federal waiver not already in plac e, 
as well a s any  other waivers that may  be determine d unnecessary . 
 
We urge the Transportation Committee to vote in support of L .D. 1030 . 
