Aimee Labbe
Poland
LD 3
Dear Senators,
I am writing to urge you to reconsider LD3 Emergency Funding for Housing 
BEFORE the holiday break. As you are likely aware, the incidents of homelessness 
have risen in recent months due to inflation, heating costs, increasing rent, and many 
other factors. I have personally seen an exponential increase in the number of 
unhoused folks along Lisbon Street in Lewiston (where I work) in the last 6 months. 
As we enter a season of bitter cold and snow, I am deeply concerned for my neighbors
and fellow Mainers, many of them including families with young children, who will 
be forced to sleep in vehicles, tents, and worst of all -- on the streets -- due to full 
shelters and already stretched-thin and limited resources. It truly breaks my heart, 
most especially because I know this will mean some of these folks will die from the 
elements. 
I believe that a safe and warm home is a basic human right, and should be a 
non-negotiable for every single person in our country, and certainly in our state. 
Rather than meeting folks who are struggling, for a variety of reasons, with judgment 
and shame, I urge you to dig deep and find empathy for your fellow neighbors. To 
imagine what it would be like if you, in your deepest time of need, were helped and 
supported by your community and your leaders. What a difference that would make 
for our entire state and EVERY ONE of us if that sort of kindness and humanity was 
spread. 
I have two young boys, ages 5 and 2. We talk a lot about helping our neighbors and 
those who may be struggling. They see unhoused people asking for money or balled 
up in sleeping bags on the doorsteps of businesses and ask what we can do to help. I 
tell them we can donate money to organizations helping these people, we can make 
kits with gift cards and handwarmers to hand out. But the truth is, we all, and I, could 
do more. What I haven't done yet and what has been the hardest for me to do is to 
reach out to our state leaders to advocate on behalf of these folks who desperately 
need our help. If I am being honest, it's because I'm cynical about politicians, and I'm 
not sure it would do any good—to take the time out of my busy life to write an email 
that may never actually reach you, and may not change your mind. But deep in my 
heart, I choose to believe that you have entered into public service because you truly 
care about Mainers—ALL Mainers—and you chose this path because you want to 
make their lives better. So, here we are. I'm asking you to put aside party and politics 
and reconsider this bill before Jan. 4, which is three weeks away. Our neighbors do 
not have the luxury of waiting three weeks for a lifeline. And while I'm here, I'm also 
asking you to support this bill, and any other measures that ensure our neighbors have
access to a safe and warm place to live. I am not naive and know this is a complex 
issue that will require a complex solution. But we cannot throw the baby out with the 
bathwater by refusing to offer ANY help to people who are suffering while we debate 
longer-term solutions. 
Public service is difficult and I don't envy your job, but it's one you were elected to 
because people in our state believe you have what it takes to make our state a safer, 
healthier, and better place to live. I respectfully ask you to appreciate the urgency and 
importance of this situation and take action. Your constituents are counting on you 
now more than ever. 
Thank you,
Aimee and Christopher Labbe
Poland
