Testimony in support of LD  3: An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program 
to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
 
December 20, 2022  
 
 
Dear Senator Jackson, Representative Talbot Ross,  
and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee:  
 
Here it is, just a few days before Christmas, on the day when we observe the Solstice and step into another winter 
in Maine, and I am writing in support of LD 3: An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to 
Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program.  
 
Both the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures remind us that one of the roles a nd responsibilities of government is to 
provide for the common good — to care for th ose who are struggling, who are experiencing  vulnerab ility, who 
struggle to make ends meet. As we brace ourselves  for another Maine winter, in a time of rising costs and 
financial hardship, we must do everything we can to ensure that the residents of our state have access to the very 
basics of shelter , heat,  and food . 
 
As you know, some of the people who are facing the very real and very terrifying possibility of homelessnes s are 
families who have fled their home countries , who have found safety and refuge in Maine . Over the past 10 or 12 
years,  I have heard many of their horrifying, heartbreaking stories of rape, torture, violent threats, and loss of life, 
often perpetrated by agents of their own corrupt governments. Time and time again, I have also witnessed their 
incredible faith, their resilience, their hope for the future. I see their passion, their resolve, their desire to live 
productive, contributory lives. Our immigra nt neighbors are a blessing to our state.  
 
Immigrants and Maine -born neighbors alike, all over this state, from Portland to Presque Isle, from Bethel to 
Bangor, from Madawaska to Machias, from Lewiston to Lubec, from Kittery to Kingfield, our neighbors are  
struggling to afford heating oil to provide for their safety and comfort this winter. All over this state, our 
neighbors are at risk of eviction, as rent increases, as the cost of food and heat increases, as economic insecurity 
increases. You have the abi lity to make a tremendous difference — to provide relief and security and stability 
when Mainers need it most. There is no question — this is the morally and ethically right thing to do.  
 
Those who are struggling, who are terrified of  homelessness and the inability to heat their homes,  are our 
brothers , our sisters , our siblings . They are made in the image of God, just as you and I are. Regardless of where 
they were born, today they are here — Maine residents, living in our cities and towns, participating in our faith 
communities, going to our schools, forming social connections, volunteering their time, and contributing to our 
communities in myriad ways to help make Maine a stronger state. Some of our neighbors have  needs, but all of u s 
have  assets  to share, as well . Providing assistance today will pay enormous dividends in the future.  
 
As a nonprofit and religious leader, let me be clear: While churches and other charitable organizations do what we 
can, we are already stretched nearly to the breaking point. There is absolutely no way we would be able to 
respond if a flood of families are suddenly unable to pay their rent or heat their homes  in an emergency. The 
scope of the need before us is much too big for Maine’s faith communities an d nonprofits to handle on our own.  
 
Denying our sisters and brothers assistance will not make their need for heat  or shelter evaporate; it will simply 
leave them homeless, hungry, and destitute. The results would be catastrophic. Please do the right thing:  pledge 
your support for LD 3. I am praying for you as you deliberate.  
 
 
 
 
Rev. Allen Ewing -Merrill  
270 Brighton Avenue, Portland  |  207 -400-6262  |  allenewingmerrill@gmail.com  
