 
 
 
 53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202   |  Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: 866 -554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY: 877-434-7598  
 aarp.org/ me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarp maine  
 facebook.com/ aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
December  20, 2022  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 3 An Act to Establish the Winter Energy 
Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to 
Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
 
Greetings, President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross and Honorable members of the 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. I am Bridget Quinn, Associate State 
Director of Advocacy and Outreach for AARP Maine. On behalf our more than 200,000 
members statewide, thank you for the opportunity to share testimony in support of LD 3 
today.  
 
The devastating economic effects of COVID -19 continue to jeopardize Mainers finances. 
Now many are at risk of not being able to adequately heat their homes this winter o r afford 
their housing costs.  
 
I would like to call your attention to PART A of LD 3 which will  help fund critical emergency 
housing . In 2023, AARP predicts nearly 1,300 individuals will experience homelessness 
from all age s, nearly 609 of those individuals will be 50+. Further, approximately 2,160 
individuals will be evicted from their homes with 964 of those individuals being 50 or 
older.  
 
People of all ages need safe, decent, and affordable housing. Em ergency housing  programs 
have provided a lifeline to Mainers since the start of the pandemic. It is critical LD 3 is 
passed  to support those individuals and avert a crisis.  
 
Next, I would like to address PART B of LD 3. Utility rates are an ess ential pocketbook issue 
for Maine residents 50 -plus and their families, many of whom struggle to pay their utility 
bills along with other household expenses like food and medicine.  
 
In Maine, approximately 21% of our 355 thousand Social Security Beneficiaries rely on the 
program for 90% of their income. Nearly, 53% of beneficiaries rely on the program to be 
50% of their family’s income. Those on a limited income cannot afford to heat their homes 
this winter with rising costs and need support .  
 
 
Price increases have a greater impact on older consumers and households with lower 
incomes. When home energy prices are high or unpredictable, older adults may be unable 
to adequately heat th eir homes. Such exposure can lead to a host of adverse health 
outcomes. These can range from the aggravation of chronic health conditions to even 
premature death.  
 
LD 3 will provide much needed relief to Maine Families , particularly those  who live on low 
and fixed incomes. We are advocating that this relief be allocated equitably . The current 
thresholds for annual income for relief is much higher than it needs to be .  
 
Household with a low income are at risk of suffering all winter. We apprecia te the work of 
this committee and members of the legislature to develop this relief program. Relief must 
be equitably distributed supporting Mainers at the highest risk of harm first.   
 
We urge this committee to  support LD 3 to provide suppo rt to Mainers as we enter our 
coldest months. We emphasize the need to ensure equity in th is pro cess .  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testified and for this Committees continued work.  
 
If you have any questions, I can be reached at bquinn@aarp.org or at 207 -272 -8563.  
 
Bridget Quinn  
AARP Maine  
Associate State Director of Advocacy and Outreach  
 
