 
 
82 Running Hill Road  Suite 400  South Portland, Maine  04106 -3218  
Phone:  (207) 773 -5841    Fax:  (207) 773 -1302    Toll Free:  1 -800-287-5841   www.deadriver.com  
December 21, 2022  
 
LD 3, HP 5  An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Program to Aid Residents with  
   High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment  
   Program  
 
Attention:    Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
 
Written Testimony of:   CASEY CRAMTON        
    President & CEO of Dead River Company  
    Resident of Gorham  
 
Position:  Supportive  
 
Senator Jackson, Representative Talbot Ross, and members of the Joint Standing Committ ee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, I write to you as the leader of Dead River Company in support of LD 3, HP 
5.  Specifically, we are  supportive of providing additional funding to help Maine residents heat their homes 
this winter as they struggle with higher energy costs.  We are  also supportive of expanding income level 
thresholds as proposed so that more Maine residents are eligible for heating assistance.  
 
As a member of an industry committed to delivering energy and providing warmth to our customers, we have 
been hearing concerns from across Maine about the impact higher energy costs are having on Maine’s families 
and businesses .  A confluence of macro -econ omic events beyond our control over the past year have led to a 
global calamity as it relates to energy supply and costs, and these pressures are especially being felt in the 
Northeast.  LD 3, HP5 will provide immediate relief for Mainers by providing a mu ch-needed increased level of 
heating assistance this winter. With continued uncertainty in global energy markets, Maine can take steps 
now, here at home, to ensure every Mainer feels a bit more secure this winter.   
 
On behalf of citizens across Maine, we urge favorable action on this legislation.    
 
About Dead River Company in Maine:  
 
With over one -hundred years of service to Mainers, Dead River Company is an industry leading heating and 
energy company deeply rooted in Maine’s community and economy.  With over 850 employees, many of 
whom are military veterans, and with 44 retail stores throughout Maine, Dead River Company delivers energy 
and peace of mind to Mainers from Fort Kent to Kittery  and from Rangely to Calais.     
