Colin J.  C. Windh orst, Ph.D.  
Eastp ort Labor of Love , GEECA  Inc.,  
137 Co unty Road, P.O. Box 147  
Eastport , Maine 04631 
 
Colin J.C. Windhorst,  cjcw@myf airpoint.ne t / (207) 726-3905 / www.eastp ortlaborofl ove.org  Testimony presented  to a Public Hearing on LD-3 An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief 
Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic 
Relief Payment Program, before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs of the Maine S tate Legislature , December  21, 2022, at 1 p.m.  
 
Honorable Members of the Committee : 
 I am speaking  in qualified suppor t of the  propose d legislation  in LD- 3, An Act to Establish 
Winter Energy Relief , cited above.  
 In support, because of the unprecedented level of need for home heating  assistance 
amon g the low-income ho useholds most affected by  the skyrocketing  fuel costs this winter.  
 My support is qualified  in that  the need  is being experienced  disproportionately  by 
those who must apply for the Federal Fuel  assistance  program known as LiHEAP but  are unable  
to receive it in a timely  manner because  of a complete misunderstanding of  those agencies 
processing their application s. 
 Creating a winter fuel relief  payment program without addressing how to distribute 
these funds effectively and  efficiently is a recipe for disaster that no -one wants to see.  
 Here in Washington County , our County Action Agency , Downe ast Community Partners, 
which only beg an proces sing applications after Labor Day, is currently  scheduling  appo intments 
for heating assistance  in late March and April which ensures that federally provided fuel  
assist ance will not reach qualified  recipients  for four to five months , when it will be  too late .    
The de sperate need is NOW , as winter se als its icy grip on those  who  are being forced to make 
drastic choices to avoid freezi ng in the coldest months that lie ahead.  
The recent move to make online applications available  through mainehousing.org  is 
open only  to those who have not already made an appointment  by phone to submit their  
paperwork.  Those who applied  earlier  must wait.  
An across -the-board  payment o f $450 to a majority  of qualified  household ers in the  
State  earning less than $200,000 /150,000 a year is of no use in keep ing low-income families  
from free zing this winter ! 
A wise r, and far more  compassionate  response is to open the online application process 
to all who are in immediate  need , creat e a review process  that can recognize the most pressing 
circumstances , and speedily  act on them.  
Colin J.  C. Windh orst, Ph.D.  
Eastp ort Labor of Love , GEECA  Inc.,  
137 Co unty Road, P.O. Box 147  
Eastport , Maine 04631 
 
Colin J.C. Windhorst,  cjcw@myf airpoint.ne t / (207) 726-3905 / www.eastp ortlaborofl ove.org  Our small community charity  operates  a community emergency fu el fund to do just that 
for the greater Eastport area.  We are usually  able to provide relief within hours for th ose in 
eme rgency situations.  
On November  17, we wrote a letter to the Governor asking for her help  in meeting the 
need of the most vulnerable  of our citizens , which  I have attached for your infor mation.  A wise, 
disciplined,  and immediate response  to bring relief to those who need it most will save lives, 
preserve families , and rescue  those whose health  and welfare is most at ri sk. 
 Please do all that you can to get help  to those who need it most  and soone st. 
 I would be  pleased to answer any q uestions you might  have.  
 Thank you. 
 
    Colin Windhorst, Board  Member,      
    Greater Eastp ort Ecumenical  Churches Association,  GEECA Inc . 
     
     
 
  
 
