Senator Jackson, Representative Talbot Ross and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee:
My name is Corliss Davis, I live in Belfast, and I am a member of the Unitarian-Universalist Church of 
Belfast. I am writing in support of LD3 An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to 
Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program.
The principles of my Unitarian-Universalist faith teach me to remember the dignity and worth of every 
human being, to respect one another, to realize our interdependence, and to work for a world of justice 
and equity.
For over ten years I have been the local coordinator for Window Dressers ( www.windowdressers.org ) in 
Belfast.  We organize volunteers to make interior window inserts to keep households warmer and 
reduce their fuel bills.  We give 25-30% of our inserts free to residents who can’t pay for them and a high 
percentage of our customers are over 65 (72% in 2022).  We struggled this year to cap our workshop at 
500 new inserts for households in Waldo County. In fact, we had to close to new orders in late July. It 
seems clear to me that there is a strong need for help in keeping our Maine homes and people warm.
LD3 contains a package of aid including rental assistance, housing aid, and heating assistance that I 
believe is hugely needed this winter. However, while my husband and I are retired public servants in our 
mid-70s, it disturbs us to see proposals to send aid out to Mainers with household incomes as high as 
$200,000 per year.  Our combined income is moderately more than half of that and we do not need or 
want assistance. We have given every such state aid check to charity, and we will do that again this time 
unless the maximum income levels are dropped. The amendment proposed by Sens. Grohoski and 
Bennett strikes me as being targeted very appropriately.
I urge you to provide temporary assistance to the neediest among us this winter.  Please step up and do 
the right thing.
Corliss C. Davis
5 Park St.
 Belfast ME 04915   
