Good afternoon President Jackson, Speaker Talbot-Ross, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is David Bibber, and I live in Charlotte, Maine.  Thank 
you for giving me the opportunity to testify before you.  I would like to make it clear I fully support 
assisting those who are in need during difficult times, but I do not support the way LD 3 is currently 
being proposed.  I have been blessed with a good career and a decent retirement so I can survive during 
these rather difficult times of high fuel and food prices and support assisting those less fortunate.  
However, these difficult times not only affects them, but affects me as well as others. Therefore, for 
several reasons, I question LD 3 as to whether it is fair and well thought out.  
First, I do not feel it is good business practice for the State to spend money on projects with revenue 
projections particularly during these difficult financial times.  I hate to use the old adage, “If a frog had 
wings, it wouldn’t bump its rear end every time it jumps.”  However, what if the projections fail to 
materialize? What if there is no surplus? Will the State increase taxes?  Federal income taxes; state 
income and sales taxes; county taxes and local property taxes have just about taxed everyone out.  
Second, there are many landlords who rent residences/apartments and provide heating expenses in the 
rent.  If this is the case, why should the tenant who does not pay for heat receive this windfall?  
Wouldn’t it be a better idea for the landlord to receive this money which they would then apply towards 
heating expenses? The State could provide a voucher to the individual who in turn would give it to their 
energy provider or in the case of heat being provided by the landlord turn the voucher over to the 
landlord.    
Third, the salary limitations are unfair to large families.  If a family with 1 child and 1 parent working 
earns $149,999, they qualify for this stipend.  If a family with 4, 5, 6 or whatever number of children 
with both parents working earns $200,001 they do not qualify.  Is this fair? 
Fourth, should the person/family who pays little to no taxes receive this stipend while the person or 
family who works 2 or 3 jobs and/or earned or built a decent retirement income be denied some 
support after all the taxes they have contributed to the system?  I have no problem with assisting those 
with a need but at a minimum shouldn’t those who have paid significantly more be eligible for at least 
the same amount as the less fortunate?   
Finally, what about the case of an individual managing to acquire a small investment over the years 
which they now use to help family members by giving each of them $15,000 a year for expenses.  This 
may put the individual in a higher tax bracket and prevent them from being eligible for LD 3 benefits.  Is 
this fair to someone not receiving any benefits in return for paying more in taxes? 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to voice my concerns.  I wish you the best with your 
discussions regarding LD 3 and hope you have a very Merry and Blessed Christmas.  
 
 
