David Gibson
Morrill
LD 3
Senate President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross, and members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs: 
This bill recognizes an urgent need in the community, but fails to address the root 
cause of the problem. While Maine families need assistance urgently, we need to be 
pragmatic and ensure that the solution actually addresses the problem. As drafted, this
bill offers a temporary fix but doesn't solve the underlying problem. High energy 
costs are a complex and long-term quandary. They are caused by inefficient buildings,
widespread dependence on fossil fuels, and the price volatility of global energy 
markets and international events.
I would strongly encourage you to allocate a portion of the funds towards K-12 
energy education. Occupant behaviors can be a significant contributor to high energy 
bills. Most people don’t know that turning down the thermostat 1 degree will reduce 
energy use (and costs) by 3-5 percent. Turning down the thermostat 5 degrees will 
save 15-25% on heating bills. Every student (and adult) should understand this fact, 
and other ways that they can reduce energy consumption. K-12 energy education is 
critical to have better informed energy consumers, and to develop future clean energy 
workers.
I am currently organizing a professional development workshop for 25 K-12 teachers 
in Maine next summer. This training will utilize award-winning energy efficiency 
curriculum developed by the non-profit Envirolution in Reno, Nevada. Teachers will 
be provided all of the materials to lead all the lessons in their classrooms. However, 
we are still seeking $150,000 to bring this to fruition. It seems shocking that we 
would spend $450 million on a one-time heating cost payment, but not 1/3,000th that 
amount to teach the next generation how to avoid these problems in the future.  
Once this bill is passed, checks will be written, and it is gone forever. What happens if
heating oil costs $8/gallon next winter? I would also encourage you to make these 
funds available to Maine residents as a 0% interest loan. That will help people to 
avoid the immediate struggle, while maintaining the source of funding in the state for 
future emergencies as loans are repaid. With heating oil prices now in decline (down 
from $5.71 to $4.50/gallon), is this really the biggest emergency we’ll face in the next
decade, and best use for these one-time funds?
Thank you,
     David Gibson, Morrill
