December 18, 2022
To: Joint Standing Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs
RE: 'An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with 
High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program’
Greetings to the honorable members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee,
My name is Dianna Leighton and I am a resident of Fort Fairfield. I am writing to you today 
in support of the Energy Relief Act, for it would positively impact our state’s most vulnerable 
residents, including working families with children, those experiencing homelessness, and 
recent asylum-seekers. My stance hinges upon the following points:
1. LIHEAP is a critical program for serving our community's most-vulnerable residents, but 
during a time of inflation, there are many working, middle-class families that do not meet 
LIHEAP guidelines. For a family of 4, that means earning LESS that $59,349. These 
guidelines mean that the program serves many of those in-need, but it is important to 
consider that heating oil is currently $1-2 higher than it was this time last year. If one were 
to apply that to 5 gallons/day in the winter, they would find Mainers of all incomes paying 
$300 MORE per MONTH than last year. 
2. I live in central Aroostook County, which is in the midst of an ongoing homelessness 
crisis. The causes of homelessness in each case is as varied as the individuals and families 
experiencing it, but it is impossible to ignore the number of local working families that are 
one medical bill (or less) away from possible homelessness themselves as is. 
For those currently experiencing homelessness, including families with children, the aid 
provided in this bill can insure that they are offered safety and security. There's a lot of 
misinformation regarding those experiencing homelessness, but make no mistake that 
many of these folks are local individuals and families. Typically, about 25% of homeless 
Mainers are under the age of 18.
I understand that southern Maine is also experiencing a similar crisis that includes not only 
local Mainers but recent asylum-seekers. I have been frustrated and discouraged by the 
false and negative characterization of these individuals and families from abroad (mostly 
Syria, Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Sudan) who are here legally as they seek a 
better opportunity to work and live here in Maine. Regardless of one’s political stance on 
immigration policy, there is a moral imperative to make sure that all people in our state are 
given an opportunity to be safe, fed, and warm with dignity. 
3. In my part of the state, being part of a working family does not mean being comfortably 
settled in the middle-class of our parents’ or grandparents’ lifetimes. Instead, there are 
working families…many of whom working several jobs….who live paycheck-to-paycheck 
and still don't qualify for LIHEAP assistance. This is due to the rising costs on things such 
as food, medical costs, child care, gas, and electricity....essential commodities needed for 
households to run safely. For these tax-paying families, being able to receive relief and 
make financial decisions now can be critical for moving into the depths of winter. 
Respectfully submitted,
Dianna Leighton
Fort Fairfield, ME
