$ for HEAT & HOUSING!Public 
Hearing 
Today 
1pmSENATOR SENATOR SENATOR
& INSIDE & INSIDE & INSIDE
Tax the 1%, Use some Savings, Borrow at low ratesSign up by 12:30pm 
R a i n y
D a y  F u n d
 
$ 9 0 0 M 
$ 6 0 0 M  
s u r p l u s  
l a s t  y e a rA a 2  A A  
R a t i n g s
N o  T a x  o n  
B i z  S e r v
$ 5 2 0 M  
L o s sFMI: https://www.mainelegislature.org/testimony/
Elizabeth  Capone-Newton
Portland
LD 3
-There is enough money to meet everyone's basic needs. Public documents show that 
the State of Maine has many sources of income and funding underutilized:
a) taxes not collected on the wealthiest individuals and businesses costs hundreds of 
millions per year in lost income to the State, and therefore lost services to the People 
of Maine. We should collect more from those we have the ability to pay, and less 
from those struggling - and most of the people in Maine are struggling in some form.
b) $900,000,000 or $900 million sits in the state's Stabilization or "rainy day" fund - 
let's call this a COLD DAY fund and get to spending some of it to keep our people 
with and without homes WARM;
c) the State of Maine spent $600,000,000 or $600 million LESS than it collected for 
income or revenue - ran a "surplus" while half or more of the population of our people
suffers economically, without the food, housing, transit, adequate schooling, and 
health care that we all need and deserve, our legislators are choosing not to spend 
money that Maine has in its hands - that's not right;
d) like any large business or large organization or person with assets (resources we 
own), Maine is in a great position to borrow money at low interest rates to fund the 
types of investments in our communities that we all deserve. The State of Maine is 
rated well as a responsible borrower, and that will still be true even if we spend some 
"rainy day" funds and do not run such a high budget "surplus".
In summary, we can afford to collect more from those with more and spend it to 
prevent human suffering, collect less from those with less, spend some savings on 
important things, and borrow the rest for the common good of us all.
-Our suffering is real, and it hurts. We deserve to be partners in this democracy - we 
have a right to know about the money being kept from us while we struggle so hard. 
Our stories are sacred. They are not for highlighting only when it is convenient to 
politicians or the media, and then forgetting about the rest of the year. [Share a story 
if you want -- including a story about a super rich person or super rich business who 
has so much extra, or has the ability to borrow giant amounts of money and buy giant 
amounts of property. Contrast it with how the people we love live, if you want. Never 
share a story of suffering if it doesn't feel right in your gut.] We are learning that our 
suffering is not our fault. We are tired of the excesses of the rich being considered 
normal and even something to aspire to, while it is implied that we created our own 
problems. Personal failings are in the eye of the beholder - why are we not talking 
about the person failing of legislators who lack the courage to invest in keeping 
Mainers warm and fed and housed? Why are we not talking about the personal failing 
of the super rich who "buy off" the legislators with their campaign donations, or the 
rich who own the media and control the narrative to divide us from each other? In 
most religions and moral codes, it is a grave personal failing to be greedy and 
divisive. We want the meek to inherit the earth now, while we are still alive.
-We will want to see amendments to this bill. Why are we investing so little money 
for heat and housing with this bill? Why aren't we helping the 75% of Mainers who 
need it, according to their relative need? We do not want to pitted against our 
neighbors and scapegoated by them. Help them too, so they do not become jealous or 
vengeful towards us. Why aren't we investing in short-term fixes AND long-term, 
dignified solutions to lack of housing at the same time? How can we help renters buy 
their homes? How can we help renters be able to get Efficiency Maine energy saving 
benefits so that our rent or energy costs can be lower? Where is our real, bold plan to 
stop homelessness, to stop relying on the streets and warming centers and shelters -- 
our people need permanent housing that we can call our own. We want to be partners 
with you in making these solutions - not the paid lobbyists, not the elite party 
networks. Look to us for the solutions, because we live in, with, and through these 
problems everyday. We know best, especially if you get honest with us, the public, 
about understanding the money (both cash and borrowing potential) that the State of 
Maine is sitting on. Where there's a will, there's a way. No one knows that better than 
those of us who suffer everyday. With our creativity and skill at penny pinching (we 
can't afford to waste resources!), all those dollars could be invested very, very well.
