Testimony in Support of LD 3
An Act to Establish the Winter  Energy Relief Payment Pr ogram to Aid Residents with
High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Pr ogram
From: Elsie Flemings, Executive Dir ector , on behalf of Healthy Acadia
To President Jackson, Speaker Ross, and Honorable Members of the Appropriations and
Financial Affairs Committee,
I am writing in strong support of LD 3, An Act to Establish the Winter Ener gy Relief Payment
Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief
Payment Program. This LD is critical to ensuring the health and safety of Mainers this winter .
We know that many families and individuals throughout our region and across Maine are
struggling with high costs of housing, heating, electricity , food, and more, and they are facing
impossible choices this winter to make ends meet. With the passage of LD 3, we can help ensure
that those who are in vulnerable situations are able to keep themselves and their families safe,
warm, and healthy .
Healthy Acadia is a community and public health coalition devoted to our mission to empower
people and or ganizations as we build healthy communities together . We have been working since
2001 with hundreds of partners and thousands of community members to address a wide range of
local health needs. We serve Washington and Hancock counties, and we provide additional
community health support and partnership across Maine.
As a part of the broad range of programming we coordinate, we have been working significantly
with partners to address the emer gency housing crisis that has been growing across Hancock and
Washington counties, and we know how critical it is, especially as the cold weather sets in, to
bring more resources into our communities to protect vulnerable families. We are confident that
LD 3 - to support both emer gency heating and housing - is essential to help families and
individuals in Downeast Maine and across the state. We are lucky in our region to have strong
collaboratives working together on this issue, and
LD 3 will significantly aid the
on-the-gr ound efforts to keep people alive, safe, and healthy this winter .
Please do all you can to support rapid passage of LD 3, including emer gency housing and heating
assistance. Every day Mainers are struggling with homelessness, cold, and fear of what the
winter will bring. The passage of LD 3 will bring significantly needed supports to our
communities, protecting those who are most vulnerable and supporting the health of our whole
communities.
Respectfully submitted,
Elsie Flemings
Executive Director
Healthy Acadia

