Gail Phetteplace
Scarborough
LD 3
Dear Sir/Madame: I am against LD3 - Winter Energy Relief.  I don't believe 
previously appropriated funds for Mainecare Section 21 and 29 should be used for a 
new program when these programs are not being fully funded.  These are not "Newly 
available funds".  They are funds that have not been used because they are inadequate 
to cover the services that they were appropriated for.  Children and Adults with 
intellectual disabilities are going without qualified services because they are not 
funded enough.  No BHP is going to work for $14 to $16 dollars an hour when they 
can log into Care.com and make $30 an hour doing the same job, with less 
paperwork.  We as parents are being forced to pay these rates out of pocket, which we
can't afford, because the State will not adequately fund these programs and we cannot 
survive both physically and mentally without help.  That money should continue to go
towards services it was appropriated for.  This seems to have become a pattern where 
the legislature is not fully funding badly needed services so when those services can't 
be rendered because of wage limitations families like mine do not get the help we 
qualify for and desperately need.  At the end of the year it is transferred into the 
General Fund where you can spend it on other programs such as this proposed LD3.  
As a citizen, taxpayer and mother of three beautiful boys, two with level 3 Autism, I 
am extremely disappointed that you have proposed to use these funds for new 
programs instead of using the funds to provide services and eliminate waitlists for 
current underfunded programs.  We are now going on year 3 of receiving less than 5 
hrs weekly of inhome support for my 13yr old son with nonverbal severe autism who 
qualifies for 20 hrs.  My 20yr son has not yet received any inhome supports since 
becoming an adult.  We are currently on a waitlist for his voucher.  It is misleading to 
say that this will not take from the disability community.  Since oil prices have come 
down and you continue to not meet your obligations to the disability community, 
funds should instead be used to start addressing wait list and work force inadequacies.
Thank you for your consideration.
