 
Testimony in Support of LD -3, “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program 
to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment 
Program”   
 
December 20, 2022   
  
 
Dear Representatives,   
 
Maine Mobile Health Program (MMHP) is a Federally Qualified Health Center supporting 
migrant and seasonal farmworkers and seafood processing workers and their families across 
the state of Maine.   Today we are compelled to add our voice to the dozens, if not hundreds, of 
agencies and individuals supporting  LD-3 this December. This bill is absolutely necessary to 
keep Mainers housed and safe this winter.   
 
The purpose of our health center is to provide accessible healthcare to Mainers who work in 
industries that are largely seasonal, including wild blueberrie s, lobster processing, Christmas 
wreaths, and others. Even though their labor forms the foundation for some of the multi -million 
dollar industries iconic to Maine, the seasonality of this work means their households’ income 
takes a sharp downturn precisely  when heating costs are highest and the consequences of 
eviction are riskiest in our state. Inflation has made it even harder for seasonal workers to 
budget for the winter when there is little or no seasonal work available. The measures in this 
bill will a ssist seasonal workers and their families in the short term and support the strength of 
Maine communities overall.   
 
With regard to housing security, patients in our program have directly relied on the emergency 
rental assistance program funded by federal a nd state initiatives to prevent evictions. In some 
cases, we learned that this support literally made it possible for families to remain living and 
working in Maine, contributing to our collective culture and economy in ways that are vital, but 
all too oft en invisible or unrecognized. In addition to the impact on our patients, this program 
has limited the number of people experiencing homelessness across the state of Maine. Allowing 
the funding to run out without further action would put people directly at risk during the coldest 
months of the year.     
 
Over the past few years, patients in our program have participated in local heating assistance 
programs in order to keep their families warm. This winter , inflation will likely make the heating 
the most expensive utility and local programs can only cover so much. Seasonal workers would 
directly benefit from relief payments to heat their homes and create stability for their families 
and communities. This bi ll addresses the urgent need for immediate assistance and also 
demonstrates the importance we give to pulling together in tough times and recognizing each 
others’ contributions to the communities in our state.  
 
Furthermore, we would like to voice our solidarity with those Mainers relying on this bil l who 
do not happen to be patients of our health center. We support our colleagues who work with 
recently arrived refugee populations in Southern Maine, unhoused populations in our cities, and 
survivors of domestic violence across the state. Our hearts are  with all who have experienced 
or witnessed the avoidable near -death and fatal tragedies that this bill is designed to prevent.   
  
Thank you for including our thoughts in your consideration of this bill.    
  
Sincerely,   
Maine Mobile Health Program   
