   
 
 
131st Legislature  
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 32    
Senator Henry Ingwersen  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
Office (207) 287 -1515  
Henry.Ingwersen @legislature.maine.gov  
 
 
 
 
   
December 21 , 2022  
 
Testimony in support of  LD 3 “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment 
Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic 
Relief Payment Program ” 
 
President  Jackson , Speaker  Talbot Ross,  and distinguished members of  the Legislature’s 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee , my name is Henry Ingwersen  and I proudly 
represent the people of Senate District 32  which includes Arundel, Biddeford, Dayton, Hollis and 
Lyman.  
 
I am here today to testify in support of LD 3,  an emergency measure that provides direct heating 
and housing relief to Mainers who need it most during our coldest months  of the year . The fact is 
Mainers, our constituents, need help with rising heating costs. And they need that help right no w. 
To say that time is of the essence is a drastic understatement. On top of that, many Mainers are 
confronted with the possibility of eviction with the emergency rental assistance program coming 
to an end  earlier this year . There are hundreds  of households in my district alone that benefitt ed 
from this program and are  in dire situation s at this very moment. Not individuals, households.  
 
In my eyes, there are no choice s or options to consider, we must act.  Mainers have a long, proud 
history o f looking after one another and being there for our neighbors, especially as we endure 
the winter months . To abandon our neighbors in this moment of great need would be to abandon 
that longstanding tradition , and to abandon our humanity .  
 
Beyond the urgen t need, this measure has strong bipartisan support and is rooted in compromise , 
as all good bills are. I urge the committee to vote ought to pass so that when we convene in 
January we can do the right thing and deliver for the people of Maine.  
 
Thank you.  
 
Henry Ingwersen  
State Senator  
 
