ijtot.un of rsrunst.utck, ;fflatne 
INCORPORATED 1739 
TOWN COUNCIL 
85 UNION STREET 
BRUNSWICK, MAINE 04011-2418 
SUBMITTED VIA LEGISLATIVE PORTAL 
December 21, 2022 
Members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
Augusta, ME 04333 TELEPHONE 207·725-6659 
FAX 207-725-6663 
Re: LD 3 -An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with 
High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program 
Dear Committee Members: 
I am writing on behalf of the Brunswick Town Council, which voted unanimously to send this 
communication expressing our support for the enactment of LD 3. 
Mainers across our state, and many of our friends and neighbors in Brunswick, are facing the 
crushing cost of heating their homes. Many are also facing the consequences of the housing crisis, 
with costs rising beyond their reach. Existing programs designed to help provide heat and shelter 
are inadequate to address the enormous needs we are seeing. One of these programs, the federally 
funded Emergency Rental Assistance program, will not be funded past the end of December. 
General Assistance, the locally administered program that provides emergency relief to our most 
vulnerable residents, is not designed to address the heating and housing needs of the magnitude we 
are now witnessing. Our General Assistance administrator reports that the number of inquiries and 
applications has never been greater. This is echoed by our many community partners, and social 
service agencies. 
LD 3 is an emergency bill that, if enacted, would provide immediate, desperately needed, relief to 
thousands of Mainers. Clearly, by any definition, the current heating and housing crisis, presenting 
during the coldest months of the year, is an emergency, demanding immediate action. The funding 
proposed in LD 3 would provide the measure of relief the heating and housing crisis demands. Our 
friends and neighbors need help now. We urge you to support enactment of LD 3. 
Cc: Town Council, Town Manager 
Senator Daughtry, Representatives Ankeles, Arford, and Golek 
www .brunswickme.org 
