  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Greetin gs President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee  on Appropriations and Financial Affairs.  
 
My name is Jess Maurer and I’m the Executive Director of the Maine Council on Aging  
(MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135  organizations,   
businesses , municipalities, and community members working to ensure we can all live  
healthy, engaged, and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in  
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 3. 
 
In recent months , we have convened discussions with providers and older people  to hear  what 
challenges older Mainers are currently facing . In the se conversations, w e are consistently hearing 
that older  people  are facing challenges in heating their homes this winter. Remarkably, we are 
also hearing that there is a significant rise in the number of older people w ho are experiencing 
housing insecurity and homelessness.  We, therefore , support LD 3 as it is a step forward in 
addressing  these issues .  
 
According to Efficiency Maine’s Home Heating Costs Estimator , it will cost between $4,000 and 
$6,000 to heat one’s home this winter  if using heating oil  – but these costs are not felt equall y 
across Maine.   A report issued earlier this year on the  Economic Security of Older Wo men in 
Maine  finds that  Maine women aged 65+ are twice  as likely as men to live alone , and they 
consistently have less income than older men who live alone.  At least  half of the older women 
who live alone in Maine , about 25,000 older women,  do not have enough money to meet their 
basic needs ; they live at or belo w a median income of $22,059.  In addition, twice as many 
women 80+ than men live in  poverty .  This is the result of a lifetime of gender -based wage 
disparities.  At these incomes, t hese older women cannot afford to pay $4,000 to $6,000 in 
heating costs  and need additional heating assistance if they are to make it through the winter.  
 
As the Economic Status of Older W omen report highlights, there are significant barriers to 
measuring racial, sexual orientation and gender identity income disparities because of a lack of 
data and difficulty disaggregating data in small sample sizes.  However, applying national data to 
what we ’ve found related to older women suggests older people who have experienced other 
forms of bias  and discrimination across their lifetimes  are much more likely  to be economically 
insecure later in life .  For instance, nationally, and in Maine, w hite w omen over 80 experience 
poverty at a rate of 12%.  However , women of color who are over 80 experience a rate of 
poverty of 20%.    Written  Testimony  of Jess Maurer  on Behalf  of 
the Maine  Council  on Aging  
to the Joint  Standing  Committee  on 
Appropriations  & Financial  Affairs  
 In Favor  of LD 3 – An Act to Establish  the Winter  Energy  
Relief  Payment  Program  to Aid Residents  with  High  
Heating  Costs  and to Finalize  the COVID  Pandemic  Relief  
Paym ent Program  
 
Submitted  via Testimony  Portal  on December  21, 2022  
 

 
We offer this information to support the idea that many lower income older people i n Maine 
have experienced a lifetime of wage disparities and discrimination in housing, finance, education 
and healthcare.  They already struggle to meet their basic needs every day.  This is an equity 
issue and j ustice requires when we experience unprecedented  increases in costs , we must act to 
ensure lower income older people get help in meeting their essential needs.   
 
In addition to helping alleviate the financial concerns of many Mainers as we look to keep warm 
in the coming months, LD 3 also alloca tes funds to support emergency housing and emergency 
shelters to prevent people from experiencing homelessness this winter. In multiple recent 
discussions concerned stakeholders and support service providers have highlighted  the rise in 
homeles sness and cases of eviction against older Mainers across the state . We’re hearing that 
people are being evicted not because they cannot pay their rent, but because they cannot afford 
or find home care or homemak er services.  We must focus some of our emergency housing 
assistance on solving this challenge and keeping the se older people  housed.   
 
We urge you to vote in favor of LD 3 . The relief payments offer a lifeline of suppo rt and security 
to thousands of older Mainers in need , and the  bill takes  steps to address homelessness by 
supporting emergency housing and emergency shelters .  
