Joyce Schelling
Orland
LD 3
Please support LD 3, an Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid 
Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment 
Program.  
Please support increased heating assistance.  Every neighbor on my street is concerned 
about the cost of keeping their home warm this winter.  My next door neighbor is a good 
example  He lives in a trailer.  He said his last delivery was double his first one and he had 
less than $90 left to pay the rest of his bills and get food.  He is a Mainer with a lot of grit, who
lost his wife about 10 years ago.  He’s been working on trying to get more insulation around 
his house, a job which threatens his health.  He is just one example of the fear and threat to 
their safety that people are feeling.
Please vote for housing relief to stop evictions this winter.  Friends of mine live in one of the 
apartment buildings, whose requirements to rent to low income people is expiring.  They have
been told they need to be out by the end of this year.  The family consists of a single mother, 
her high school daughter and her high school boyfriend.  The mother works two jobs.  The 
teens walk to school and to their place of work downtown.  They are able to be self-sufficient, 
succeed at school, at their place of work, and work toward their goals.    If they are evicted, 
the teens lose the stability that has allowed them to improve their grades at school, have 
hope and succeed.  If evicted, as threatened, the family will be thrown into chaos.  The 
students will lose ground at school.  Without living downtown, they will not be able to continue
working, since they will have no transportation.  
Stable housing is crucial for our children and teens to take their place in the workforce as they
age.  It’s also crucial for the parents to continue working without the trauma that comes 
without having a safe, secure home for their family.  
This is a decision that goes far beyond this year in terms of the good it can do.
Please support LD 3.
Thank you.

