City of Portland | City Council
Kate Snyder,
M a y o r
To:
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
From:
Mayor Kate Snyder , City of Portland
Date:
12/21/2022
Re:
LD 3
Testimony in Support of An Act to Establish the Winter  Energy Relief Payment Pr ogram
to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief
Payment Pr ogram
Senator Jackson, Representative Talbot-Ross, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs:
I join you today to testify on behalf of the City of Portland in support of LD 3, An Act to
Establish the Winter Ener gy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs
and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program.
As we head into the winter months amid near record-high ener gy prices, it’ s important that we
take measures to provide assistance to help Maine people and families stay warm, safe, and
secure. If passed, LD 3 will provide relief to thousands in the city of Portland and across the
state.
According to the Maine State Housing Authority , 1,070 Portland households were determined
eligible for the Home Ener gy Assistance Program in 2022. If passed, this legislation would
provide $40 million to HEAP  to help sustain that program during a time of high heating costs.
Additionally , the bill contains $21 million in emer gency housing assistance to help people who
are about to lose federal COVID-era rental and housing assistance. 873 Portland households
were benefiting from ERA  funding and could use continued assistance. City-operated shelters
are at capacity; if demand for emer gency shelter suddenly increases as a result of the
discontinuation of this funding, we are deeply concerned for the residents who will be af fected.
Portland City Council’ s Legislative/Nominating Committee ur ges you to pass this legislation to
help ensure that our most vulnerable citizens are able to stay warm this winter .
Thank you for your consideration.

389 Congress Street, Portland, Maine 04101 | 207-874-8300 |
info@portlandmaine.gov
