 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
Neither For Nor Against  
LD 3, An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with 
High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
 
December 20, 2022  
 
 
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross,  and members of the Appropriations & Financial 
Affairs Committee .  My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting testimony  “neither for nor 
against ” LD 3  on behalf of the 70 municipal leade rs who were  elected by their peers to serve on 
the Association’s Legislati ve Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position  on 
bills of municipal interest.   
MMA is offering “neither for nor against” testimony  on LD 3 , as there is an element of 
the initiative  municipal officials support, one that causes some concern , and an observation 
regarding a  third section  of the bill municipal officials  offer for your consideration.   
Support.  Municipal officials support Part A of LD 3 appropriating $71 million to 
supplement existing heating and emergency housing assistance program s.   
Not only will an investment of this nature protect Maine’s most vulnerable residents , but 
it may also diminish  the risks to public health and safety that arise when  residents revert to 
nontraditional  and unsafe means for heating their homes when resources are unavailable.   
Additionally, over the last several mont hs, communities of vary ing populations in all 
areas of  Maine have experienced increases in request s for financi al support  through  the General 
Assis tance  (GA)  program .  The concern  among municipal leader s is that the onset of the cold 
weather  season  combine d with increasing fuel cost s will shift additional tax burden s onto other  
property owners  facing similar heating and financial challenges . This appropriation  will reduce 
some of the pressure placed on GA programs , which  are funded, in part, with property ta x 
revenues .   
Concern.   Some municipal officials raised issue s with the provision found in Part E  of 
the b ill authorizing the Department of Environmental Protectio n, under prescribed 
circumstances , to suspend the sulfur content requirements for liquid and solid fossil fuels , 
without public comment.  The concern among these officials is with the unintended adverse 
impacts this poli cy could have on the en vironment .  At the very least, proposed amendments  to 
sulfur content levels should benefit from public input.   

Observation.   While municipal officials  believe the Legislature  is better suited to 
determine  the standards of eligibility for the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program established 
in Part B of the bill, a subset of municipal officials  believe the income limits should be adjusted 
to better target the relief to those in greatest need and toward programs designed to provide  direct 
heating and housing assistance.    
Thank you for the opportunity to share the municipal perspective on LD 3.  If you have 
any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 1-800-452-8786.  
