December 20, 2022
I am writing at the direct request of my mother-in-law, Jane T. McMurray who was born and 
raised in Farmington during the 1920s/30s.  Jane is a veteran who served fellow Mainers as a 
hospital nurse for 35 years before retiring over 30 years ago, living alone for 45 of the past 60 
years in the same simple home in Brunswick. This past weekend, Jane celebrated her 97th 
birthday and as her custom from October through March whenever her son/my husband and I 
arrive for our weekly visit, she asked for us to check the level on the furnace. No matter her 
physical hurdles and knee pain to remain independent in her beloved home, what is always top 
of mind this time of year is ensuring there is heat in her home. I know there are thousands of 
“Janes” right now in Maine who live almost if not entirely on social security and who just spent 
nearly $1,000 more in past 3 months than a year ago on obtaining heating oil at 100 gallons at a 
time to keep their homes at 68 degrees…just 2 weeks ago, Jane spent $660 for 100 gallons 
which she hopes will carry her through this month. That amount represents a whopping 33% of 
her monthly fixed income.  While LD-3 cannot wave a magic wand and return prices to last 
year’s (still high) levels, it most certainly offers immediate relief to elders like Jane in our state.
Jane asks that you remember all those struggling to heat their homes right now and that you 
pass LD-3 without delay.
I, too, am a resident of Maine and as someone active in a faith community in Portland, also 
urge passage of LD-3 not only for the relief to all individuals and families hardest hit by home 
heating prices but also for the moral imperative to address the need for emergency rental 
assistance for our state’s newest as well as longer-time residents. During this time of year, 
when multiple religious traditions light candles to signify hope in darkness, it is time to literally 
light a candle of temporary relief for the unhoused in the hope that sustainable, long term 
solutions can be enacted in the coming legislative session.
Kathy Strand of Portland
and Jane McMurray of Brunswick
 
Kathy Strand
Portland
LD 3
(in case file attachment doesn't come through....)
I am writing at the direct request of my mother-in-law, Jane T. McMurray who was born and 
raised in Farmington during the 1920s/30s.  Jane is a veteran who served fellow Mainers as a
hospital nurse for 35 years before retiring over 30 years ago, living alone for 45 of the past 60
years in the same simple home in Brunswick. This past weekend, Jane celebrated her 97th 
birthday and as her custom from October through March whenever her son/my husband and I
arrive for our weekly visit, she asked for us to check the level on the furnace. No matter her 
physical hurdles and knee pain to remain independent in her beloved home, what is always 
top of mind this time of year is ensuring there is heat in her home. I know there are thousands
of “Janes” right now in Maine who live almost if not entirely on social security and who just 
spent nearly $1,000 more in past 3 months than a year ago on obtaining heating oil at 100 
gallons at a time to keep their homes at 68 degrees…just 2 weeks ago, Jane spent $660 for 
100 gallons which she hopes will carry her through this month. That amount represents a 
whopping 33% of her monthly fixed income.  While LD-3 cannot wave a magic wand and 
return prices to last year’s (still high) levels, it most certainly offers immediate relief to elders 
like Jane in our state.
Jane asks that you remember all those struggling to heat their homes right now and that you 
pass LD-3 without delay.
I, too, am a resident of Maine and as someone active in a faith community in Portland,
also urge passage of LD-3 not only for the relief to all individuals and families hardest
hit by home heating prices but also for the moral imperative to address the need for 
emergency rental assistance for our state’s newest as well as longer-time residents. 
During this time of year, when multiple religious traditions light candles to signify 
hope in darkness, it is time to literally light a candle of temporary relief for the 
unhoused in the hope that sustainable, long term solutions can be enacted in the 
coming legislative session.
Kathy Strand of Portland
and Jane McMurray of Brunswick
 

