Testimony of Kelt Wilska, Energy Justice Manager, Maine Conservation VotersBefore the Appropriations and Financial Aﬀairs CommitteeIn Support of LD 3An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costsand to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment ProgramDecember 21, 2022
Good afternoon Senator Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross, and honorable members of the Appropriations andFinancial Aﬀairs Committee. My name is Kelt Wilska and I am the Energy Justice Manager at MaineConservation Voters, a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to protecting Maine’s environment, democracy,and climate future. LD 3 aligns strongly with our commitment to fostering equitable public policy thatprotects Maine’s most vulnerable. We are proud to support this bill and we urge you to do so as well.
Maine is facing a heating crisis, with energy prices ballooning as a result of global supply disruptionsfrom the Russian invasion of Ukraine. At a time of simultaneously rising inﬂation, scarce housing, and awaning state pandemic assistance program, Mainers with low income face a terrible choice of whether toput food on their families’ tables or keep their homes warm.
At the root of this issue is our global dependence on dirty fossil fuels, which not only pollute ouratmosphere with carbon emissions and are a leading contributor to climate change, but also are subject tothe whims of global markets as a function of their limited supply. When Mainers struggle this winter toaﬀord oil and natural gas to heat their homes, it will be because of this global reliance on fossil fuels.
We applaud Governor Mills’ eﬀorts to send direct checks and provide other funding mechanisms toalleviate the economic pain caused by oil and gas dependence, and we applaud her administration’scontinued leadership over the past four years in guiding Maine towards a prosperous clean energy future.By heavily incentivizing the adoption of electric heat pumps and directing the procurement of solar andwind energy, the Mills Administration and the Maine Legislature have begun charting a path towardslong-term price stability and a future in which Mainers heat their homes with renewable, aﬀordable, andreliable electricity.
Maine is well on its way to reducing its fossil fuel dependence for heating, but we still have a way to go.Please support LD 3 because it protects Maine’s most vulnerable and alleviates economic pressurescaused by volatile oil and gas prices. Maine is steadily and surely transitioning to a clean energy future byharnessing the power of the sun and the wind, at an aﬀordable price. In the meantime, this legislation isnecessary to help low-income Mainers aﬀord to heat their homes this winter.
For these reasons, Maine Conservation Voters urges you to support LD 3. Thank you for your time.

