 
 
    
Helping communities thrive and p rosper in the Greater Portland and Lakes Region  
970 Baxter Blvd. , Suite 201      Portland , Maine, 04103       Tel. (207) 774 -9891        www.gpcog.org   
 
Testimony of the Greater Portland Council of Governments in Support of Portions of LD 3, An Act to Establish 
the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID 
Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
 
December 21 , 2022  
 
President Jackson, Speaker Ross and m embers of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs  Committee I am 
Kristina Egan, Executive Director of the Greater Portland Council of Governments (GPCOG). I am submitting 
this writte n testimony  in support of portions of LD 3, An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment 
Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment 
Program . 
 
GPCOG serves twenty -five municipal members, from S ebago Lake to Casco Bay, and the County of 
Cumberland. We staff the region’s Metropolitan Planning Organization which allocates over $ 30 million dollars 
annually in federal transportation funds to regional priority highway and public transportation project s, 
extending our service territory into York County, including Saco and Biddeford.  
 
GPCOG also serves as the Portland region’s Economic Development District, as designated by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, and we support numerous programs like Maine Cle an Communities and the Maine 
Broadband Coalition, along with the ever -changing needs of our member communities.  
 
Like the rest of the state, our region is suffering from a wide -ranging housing crisis. Working families, retirees, 
young people, and everyone  with low -to-moderate income are struggling to find housing they can afford in 
the places they want to live.   
 
Today, we offer our full support to LD 3 ’s provisions that provide  relief to unhoused persons in our region, and 
to those facing the imminent loss of housing.  
 
Part A, Section A -3 of LD 3 authorizes the transfer of $21,000,000 from  the General Fund to the Maine State 
Housing Authority ’s Emergency Housing Relief Fund Program  to provide funds for short -term emergency 
housing. The Maine State Housing Authority will prioritize these funds for use in addressing emergency 
housing needs occurring between  December 1, 2022 and April 30, 2023, for those households that were 
experiencing  homelessness or housing instability in the State prior to December 1, 2022.  
 
Our region, and the entire state, urgently needs this additional funding to meet the immediate housing crisis 
facing so many people this winter. We urge your unanimous support so t hat this new funding can secure 
critical housing for those most in need.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and please let me know if GPCOG can help you with your 
important work on LD 3.  
 
