 
Laurie Osher, PhD  
13 Mayo Street   
Orono, ME 04473  
Phone:   (207) 944 -6743 
Laurie.Osher@legislature.maine.gov   
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 
 
District 25 : Orono (part)  
 
December 21, 2022  
 
Testimony of Rep. Laurie Osher regarding  
LD 3,  An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents 
with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
 
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross and Members of the Committee:  I am Representative 
Laure Osher  of Orono , Maine.  I am here to speak in favor of LD 3 an d support the suggested 
changes proposed by Senator Rick Bennet and Senator Nicole Grohoski  that offer important 
changes to the bill.  I am grateful for your scheduling this extraordinary public hearing so that the 
impacts of this bill may be better known  and considered.  Many Maine people  are in urgent need 
of heating and housing relief . It is incumbent on us to  help them and also to act responsibly with 
state funds.  The emergency relief should  be targeted to those in need. Spending all of the surplus  
now leaves no funds available  to deal with the many other pressing issues , including but not 
limited to our opioid epidemic, our failing nursing homes, and the dire shortage of direct care 
workers for people who have been promised services . 
 
The proposed ame ndment  by Senators Bennet and Grohoski t argets meaningful relief on a 
sliding scale to people facing a high energy burden, based on data . 
 
 It leaves the windfall from federal Medicaid money untouched so that it can be used to 
serve chronic funding shortf alls in needed programs;  
 It reduces total cost of checks by nearly 50% to $210 million ;  
 It provides up to $1,200 per family in funds to those in need who are not eligible for the 
check program or don’t qualify for LIHEAP; and  
 It encourages energy efficiency throug h education and incentives for long -term benefit.   
 
It leave s untouched the roughly $160 million in Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP) 
funds so they may assist the needs they are intended for – such as mental health, nursing homes, 
developmental services,  and services for individua ls with brain injuries . 
 
 
District 25 : Orono (part)  Families in my district and across the state have suffered from chronic underfunding of these 
programs and the low compensation rates for direct support professionals that have made it 
difficult to recruit people f or these challenging jobs.  This has created emergency situations, 
often exacerbated by the stresses of the pandemic.  When considering emergency spending of 
this magnitude, the focus of the aid  should be on assisting those who are in the greatest need.  
Sending money to every taxpayer  who earns $100,000 a year (or couples earning up to $200,000 
per year) is a misuse of funds.  
 
LD 3 has impacts beyond the energy emergency many Mainers are facing.  The bill before you 
propose s to spend all available surplus at the very beginning of a difficult winter and a 
challenging legislative session, where other needs will  present themselves, some known  and 
some unknown.  Please consider lowering the income thresholds for the payments and the other 
suggestions in the am endment proposed by Senators Bennett and Grohoski.  Thank you.  
 
