My name is Leonid Eichfeld, I am a citizen of Portland, and I am here to testify in support
of LD3. Maine people are in a crisis. I am sure you know the staggering number of evictions
being served, and people who are unhoused across our state, so I won't talk about those
numbers right now.
I need to talk to you about someone I care about. Last month I met a woman named
Kayla, who is unhoused, when I was out walking my dog. She was very upset, and she
accepted the help I offered. As we walked together downtown we got to know each other. I think
we both needed company at that moment, it was healing to shop and eat together. We spoke of
what makes a healthy community, paying kindness forward, and how important support is in
order to be able to take care of others too. I think if everyone in our community had support and
compassion, then Maine would be thriving. But that's just not the reality of how things are right
now.
I am scared to think that Kayla has nowhere to be but out in this cold. I am speaking
today because I am very scared. It is so cold outside right now. Many cannot avoid eviction,
shelters are vastly overwhelmed and incapable of housing everyone who needs it, and anything
but a warm building is not humane. Everyone, no matter who they are, deserves safe housing.
Last year I remember the grief myself and my community felt as we heard memorials of people
who had froze to death. There is an incalculable heartache of people surviving without safe
housing right now. Urgent support and relief is needed. Immediate action is necessary. Please,
vote to pass LD3. Thank you for your time.
Leonid Eichfeld
Portland
LD 3
My name is Leonid Eichfeld, I am a citizen of Portland, and I am here to testify in support of 
LD 3. Maine people are in a crisis. I am sure you know the staggering number of evictions 
being served, and people who are unhoused across our state, so I won't talk about those 
numbers right now. 
I need to talk to you about someone I care about. Last month I met a woman named Kayla, 
who is unhoused, when I was out walking my dog. She was very upset, and she accepted the
help I offered. As we walked together downtown we got to know each other. I think we both 
needed company at that moment, it was healing to shop and eat together. We spoke of what 
makes a healthy community, paying kindness forward, and how important support is in order 
to be able to take care of others too. I think if everyone in our community had support and 
compassion, then Maine would be thriving. But that's just not the reality of how things are 
right now. 
I am scared to think that Kayla has nowhere to be but out in this cold. I am speaking today 
because I am very scared. It is so cold outside right now. Many cannot avoid eviction, 
shelters are vastly overwhelmed and incapable of housing everyone who needs it, and 
anything but a warm building is not humane. Everyone, no matter who they are, deserves 
safe housing. Last year I remember the grief myself and my community felt as we heard 
memorials of people who had froze to death. There is an incalculable heartache of people 
surviving without safe housing right now. Urgent support and relief is needed. Immediate 
action is necessary. Please, vote to pass LD3. Thank you for your time.

