Lisa Wesel
Bowdoinham
LD 3
President Jackson, Speak Talbot Ross and members of the committee:
I am here to testify neither for nor against LD 3, in principle, but in opposition to the 
way it is being funded.
My name is Lisa Wesel. I live in Bowdoinham with my husband and our 26-year-old 
daughter, who has intellectual and developmental disabilities and epilepsy. She lives 
with us not because she wants to but because she has no choice. She is among the 
more than 2,000 Maine adults who are languishing on the Sec. 21 waitlist, a waitlist 
that the DHHS seems to have little motivation to address.
So imagine my dismay when I learned that $35 million would be taken from Home 
and Community Based Services to send heating assistance checks to households 
earning as much as $200,000 a year. I understand that the $35million in state money 
will be swapped out for $35 million in federal money, so on paper it looks like a 
wash. But it doesn’t feel that way from where I’m sitting. For families like mine, this 
is the latest in a series of clear messages from the state that funding for people with 
disabilities is a very low priority, that we should be satisfied for the scraps we beg for 
each year because scraps are better than nothing. The system of care for people like 
my daughter is in crisis. That $35 million dollars in federal money could have been 
used to start addressing that crisis rather than to simply maintain the inadequate status
quo.
To be clear, I am not arguing against providing heating assistance for those who truly 
need it. No one in Maine should go without heat, or food, or a home. This is not an 
“us vs. them” argument. It should be noted that many households with a disabled 
family member likely qualify for heating assistance, as they are unable to work 
because they are caring for that family member with little or no support from the 
state. 
But that $35 million represents a fraction of the total funding for heating assistance. 
Please consider funding it without taking away the small chance the disability 
community had to improve their system of care, maybe by lowering the income 
ceiling, which would still allow the families with the greatest need to get heating 
assistance. Please consider the proposal put forward by senators Grohoski and 
Bennett instead of LD 3.
Thank you.

