Maine Unitarian Universalist 
State Advocacy Network
PO Box 8 Augusta ME 04330
www.muusan.org
info@muusan.org
December 20, 2022
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross and members of the Committee on Appropriations & 
Financial Affairs
My name is Lynn Ellis and I live in Brunswick.  I would like to express my deepest gratitude for 
your leadership and for bringing this critical bill back again for a vote. 
I speak in support of LD3, particularly Part A, that will allocate funds for emergency 
housing to prevent people from experiencing homelessness during the winter months and to 
assist low- income Mainers struggling to pay for heating. 
I speak as a member of the Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network. 
As Unitarian Universalists we affirm the worth and dignity of all people, and promote justice, 
equity, and compassion in human relations. Part of our mission is to work together and in 
collaboration with others to promote the health and wellbeing of all Mainers. 
As I prepared this testimony I was reminded of a time while working as a hospice social 
worker, when I was referred to the home of a woman dying of metastatic breast cancer. Often my 
job included assisting with preparing advance directives; gathering family members to say their 
goodbyes. When I entered the modest double wide mobile home the first thing I noticed was how 
cold it was. I spoke with the woman’s husband who led me to a small side room where his wife 
was lying in a hospital bed. Barely 90 pounds, she was wearing a light cardigan covered by a 
thin blanket. On her head sat a stocking cap. I asked them about the temperature. The husband 
said “we need to keep the heat down to conserve usage. We can only afford 100 gallons at a 
time and it doesn’t last long. Since my wife fell ill and hasn’t been able to work we don’t always 
have enough money.” This couple were in their early 70s. I spent some time with her and she 
asked me not to worry; that she would be fine as she lay shivering. I was able to access 
community resources and get 100 gallons of fuel delivered. At least for a time she would be a bit 
warmer in her dying days. 
I will never forget this nor the many other stories we hear these days. Evictions are on the 
rise Funds for emergency housing in motels housing asylum seekers is running out and the cost 
of heating a home continues to rise. That, in addition to the cost of groceries puts many more 
Mainers at risk of homelessness and threatens their lives. I was born and raised in Maine. I was 
fortunate to have a home to go to every day where I felt safe and comfortable. I was warm and 
never went hungry. I wish this for every single person in my home state. Please vote to pass this 
emergency bill and provide the means for surviving a cold winter in Maine. Thank you. 
Lynn S. Ellis
Brunswick
Co-Chair of HealthCare Issue Group/MUUSAN
