Maggie Hoffman
Hampden
LD 3
To the honorable and esteemed chairs and members of the appropriations and 
financial affairs committee:
I'm Maggie Hoffman and I am against LD 3 as currently proposed. 
As the parent of a 35 year old adult with intellectual & developmental disabilities and 
autism, I am deeply dismayed that critical funding for home and community-based 
services are once again on the chopping block. Further, this legislatively constructed 
coliseum, pitting underserved gladiators in the form of people with significant 
disabilities who have been left out of the funding to provide essential life services 
against those who are threatened with unheated shelter. This is an unfair and 
inhumane equation.
Those of us who have family members have been existing on the unfulfilled promise 
of adequate home and community-based services were finally going to experience 
desperately needed improvements. Removal of $35 million in state funds because 
they will be back-filled by federal dollars is consigning unserved and underserved 
people to barely treading water in the seas that are our broken services for people with
IDD. The federal funds were earmarked to improve the service system that had been 
dismantled more than a decade ago and has never recovered.  
My son Jake only sees 4 hours a week of the 36 hours he is eligible for and 
desperately needs. We were so hopeful that the addition of Self-Directed Services 
would make it possible for him and all of those unable to acquire community support 
to finally receive flexible, person-centered care. However, my family and dozens of 
others have been stymied in our attempts to use this waiver option, as the Fiscal 
Management Service provider does not respond to case managers. When the folks at 
the state were made aware of the situation, we learned that the Fiscal mgmt services 
were the ONLY provider in the nation will to take Maine's impossibly low rate. 
Maine should not be proud of offering a service that they can't fund properly. 
I urge you to defeat this proposal. 
Your work is so difficult and I appreciate the minefields you travel. Please consider 
the alternative proposal from Senators Bennett & Grohoski.
