   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  Tel: 207.622.7381  
  www.mecep.org  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 3, An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid 
Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
 
December 2 1, 2022  
 
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross, and distingu ished  members of the Committee on Appropr iations and 
Financial Affairs , my name is Maura Pillsbury and I am an analyst  at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
here to testify in support of  LD 3, An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents 
with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program . LD 3 would address  the 
urge nt and dire need  for heating  and housing assistance in our state .  
There is ample evidence that urgent relief is needed. According to data from the US Census Bureau’s Household 
Pulse Survey,i four in ten Mainers are feeling “very stressed” about recent price increases. The war in Ukraine, 
reduced refi ning capacity in the wake of the pandemic,ii and profit -seeking by oil and gas companies  have  
increased heating  costs dramati cally .iii In the wake of these  and other  price increases, people are cutting back on 
heating costs — one in four Mainers say they are trying to spend less on energy and utilities because o f inflation. 
Unfortunately, for many people that comes on top of existing hardship. Last winter, before the increase in oil 
and gas prices, one in six Maine adults said they regularly couldn’t pay their energy bill. This winter will be even 
worse.  
Federal  Emerge ncy Rental A ssistance is running out , leaving 8500 families in Maine without h ousing assistance .iv 
According to the Governor ’s office, 3,000 families are at risk of eviction .v This includes asylum se ekers in Maine, 
who cannot earn income due to work authorization  restricti ons. This leave s their options limite d, and their 
prospects for su rviving the Maine winter dire . The $21 million in this bill for emergency rental assistance is a 
lifeline  for families who will otherwise  lose the ir housing . But this money is  likely to run out qui ckly; under the 
federal program, Maine has been spending $500, 000 per day  on emer gency rental assistance .vi This proposal  
doesn ’t go far enough  in ad dressing  this crisis . We urge you to increase  the amount of funding  for emer gency 
rental assistance.  
Mainers need direct and urgent heat ing relief wi thout adm inistrative barriers. The waiting list for new applica nts 
to LIHEAP is typically months long.  Direct payments would be the faste st way to get relief to  Mainers struggling 
right now to pay for heat . In addition , state officials expect existing LIHEAP funding to be inade quate due  to 
increas ed heating costs .vii The state needs added LIHEAP funding to bolster the existing pr ogram. According to 
the National Energy & Utility Affordability Coalition , only 21 percent  of the total eligible population  in Maine 
received LIHEAP in 2020.viii We need to reach as many Mainers  in need as possible as  quickly as we can ; existing 
heating support is in sufficient . 
We also know that while all Mainers are dealing with the impacts of  inflation , some are able to weather  
increased costs better than others . We urge the committee to consider lowering the qualifying income cap  to 
ensure payme nts are  focused on households who most urg ently need support . Data from the US Census 
Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey covering the per iod Sept 14 -Nov 14, 2022  shows heating hardship in Maine is 
especially concentrated among Mainers with low income. In the past year , single adults earning under $25,000 a 
year and married couples earning under $50,000  were three to four times as likely to forfeit other necessities in  
order to afford heating bills . Among single filers making $75,00 0-$100,000 per year  and married filers making 
$150,000 -$200,000 , one in ten or less reported suffering heating hardships . Reducing the income eligibility limit 
to $50,000 for a single filer and $100,000 for a married co uple would free up almost $50 million dollars which 
could be used to increase the check size for the most vulnerable Mainers or support other urgent needs such as 
housing.  
We applaud Pres ident Jackson and Speaker Talbot Ross for putting  forward  this bill . We  urge the Legislature  to 
address the urge nt need for heating and housing supports by passing this bill , and to consider  lowering the 
income ca p for relief payments and instead put that money toward  additional emergency rental assistance.  
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
Contact information: maura@ mecep.org  
 
i All statistics are from weeks 49 -51 of the survey, covering the period September 14 – November 14, 2022.  
ii https://www.cnbc.com/2022/10/30/diesel -market -in-perfect -storm -as-prices -surge -and-supplies -dwindle.html   
iii https://www.mecep.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/06/Feeling -the-Pinch -Inflation -and-corporate -consolidation.pdf   
iv https://www.mainepublic.org/maine/2022 -10-31/municipalities -warn -of-impending -crisis -for-8-500-maine -households -
with -rent -relief -nearing -an-end  
v https://www.bangordailynews.com/2022/12/19/news/state/3000 -mainers -evicted -pandemic -prog ram-ends/   
vi https://www.mainepublic.org/maine/2022 -10-31/municipalities -warn -of-impending -crisis -for-8-500-maine -households -
with -rent -relief -nearing -an-end  
vii https://www.mainepublic.org/politics/2022 -12-12/maine -housing -director -says -emergency -fundi ng-definitely -necessary -
for-heating -assistance   
viii https://neuac.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/Maine -State -Sheet -2022.pdf   
