225 Western Avenue, Suite 4, Augusta, Maine 04330    207 -287-4213    800 -244-3990    www.maineddc.org   
December 19, 2023  
 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against "An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to 
Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program  
 
Senator Jackson , Representative Talbot -Ross , and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs  Services:  
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental Disabilities 
Council. Councils on Developmen tal Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities 
Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating for 
individuals with developmental disabilities for nearly 50 years.  The DD Council is a feder ally funded, 
independent organization with members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, 
family members, and representatives of public and private agencies which provide services and/or 
funding for services for individuals with develo pmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are 
involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals 
with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated and involv ed in their 
communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
 
Please accept this testimony in Neither for Nor Against  LD 3.  
 
MDDC is not opposed to assisting Maine residents with heating relief,  but, we are opposed that close 
to 35 million dollars of the initiative is to be paid for by money originally allocated to adult 
Developmental Disability Home and Community Based Waiver Services.  This Committee will hear 
about how m any people with Developmental Disabilities i n Maine are struggling sitting on waitlists for 
services or struggling with only part of the services available.  You will also likely hear about the s taffing 
crises due, in part, by low wages  
 
It is possible that this re-allocation of dollars is thought to be one -time COVID money that needs to be 
spent on one -time endeavors.  If that is the case MDDC agrees that creates some limitations  on what 
the money can be used for.  MDDC would prefer, however, to take this investment and improve the 
system of care.   
 
Maine was one of the last in the nation to begin implementing the Home and Community Based 
Settings rule.  We are still late to the game on coming into compliance and ensuring that people with 
DD have what they need to live in the community.  Perhaps th at is where this 35 million dollars should 
be going .  MDDC is concerned that the appropriation committee will learn  that more money is needed 
to improve this system .  We must not “beg from Peter to pay Paul.”  MDDC is not opposed to heating 
relief but is o pposed to paying for it by removing money ear -marked for people with Developmental 
Disabilities.  

225 Western Avenue, Suite 4, Augusta, Maine 04330    207 -287-4213    800 -244-3990    www.maineddc.org   
MDDC recently published www.shadowsofpineland.org  which records the history of DD in Maine 
including the peri od of institutionalization in Pineland.  A social media campaign publicizing the 
website was run stating “We Can’t Go Back.”  Thousands of Mainers recently visited the website and 
commented agreement.  But there was a great deal of concern that things for people with 
developmental disabilities are poor because.     
 
MDDC asks you to hold Maine accountable to the promise of Home and Community Based Services.   
 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify.  
 
 

