Testimony in Opposition to LD 3,
“An Act to Establish
the Winter Energy
Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to
Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program”
Senator Jackson, Representative Talbot-Ross, and the distinguished members of
the Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs, my name is Nick Murray and I
serve as director of policy for Maine Policy Institute, a nonpartisan, nonprofit
organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic freedom in Maine.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 3
.
The fact that this hearing is occurring is important. We are thankful that legislative
leadership has shown that it is willing to bring the people’s voice and concerns to the
discussion regarding how to spend nearly a half billion dollars in the first month of the
new legislature, even if they initially expected lawmakers to roll over and blindly accept
it.
Calling this bill an emergency measure is a case of false and misleading advertising.
MaineHousing has said that LIHEAP is fully funded through the winter. Sending
another round of checks will not solve our long-term issues. The only true emergency
dealt with in this package is soon-to-be-lapsed emergency rental assistance (ERA) which
could throw hundreds of families into homelessness. Lawmakers should present a clean
bill to deal with this emergency, but the rest of the funds proposed to be spent here
should be put toward tax reform in biennial budget negotiations, not for another round
of giveaways.
Also, if the governor sees this as an emergency, why didn’t she call a Special Session last
September or October, when MaineHousing said the ERA would soon run out? The
struggles of this coming winter were known well before this legislature was sworn into
service. Wouldn’t that have been the right time to deal with this problem? If this
spending is truly an urgent solution, the governor could have made the case and brought
legislators in to deal with it before the winter. The reason why she did not should be
obvious.
Instead, two weeks ago, a brand new crop of lawmakers, immediately after being sworn
in, were cajoled to support a massive spending proposal without any public deliberation.
We all were mistaken to have called this legislation, since there was zero intention from
proponents for it to be treated as such.
As Sen. Brakey explained, the Legislature is a co-equal branch of government.
Legislators are not sworn in to rubber-stamp whatever the chief executive wants. Even a

minority of one deserves the right to ask simple questions about how a half-billion
dollars will be spent.
Mainers can feel that their government takes too much from them in taxes. It's obvious.
Over the last 18 months, General Fund revenues, both projected and realized, have been
about 10% higher than expected. Lawmakers must remedy this by first lowering taxes
before entertaining any other spending. It is silly to keep calling this type of spending
“one-time” as it has come around several times in the last two years.
Whether in the form of permanent, direct rebate checks, or a plan to ratchet down
actual tax rates commensurate with excess revenue, Mainers deserve to be able to plan
for the future. They should know that they will have more money in their pockets from
one year to the next. They should have confidence that they can move to Maine to
successfully start their family or run their business.
Inflation has been punishing for residents of this state. Not only does it punish those
who plan ahead and save money, it means that the government gets even more of our
earnings.
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
reported
in September 2021 that
every 1% increase in inflation brings a 1.1% increase in income taxes.
Every day, Mainers are being financially squeezed from all sides, while the state has
more in the bank than ever before. Why is the state doing better than its people? Our
purchasing power on average is
46% less
than that
of our neighbors in New Hampshire,
and they pay
58% less per capita
in taxes than we
do. Something is seriously wrong.
A
recent report
showed that a Maine household can
bring in more money by taking
advantage of all available state and federal welfare programs: nearly $72,000 per year,
than they can by working full-time at $20/hour. No wonder our labor force participation
rate has been lagging since the beginning of the pandemic, and especially so compared
to our neighboring state.
Please clean up this bill to deal with the pressing emergency of right now: the lapse of
emergency rental assistance, and finally face the tough truth that Maine needs real fiscal
reform for its future. This should be a fundamental reality of this session’s budget
negotiations. Thank you.
