Ladies and Gentlemen of the Senate,
My name is Patrick Eisenhart, Commander, U.S. Coast Guard (ret).
I am a conservative, here today to support LD 3, a bill to provide $450 from Maine 
surplus funds to help 880,000 Mainers meet the skyrocketing coast of heating oil 
and gas.  
The $450, if passed will barely cover the cost of a half of the standard capacity oil 
tank.
I am also here today to support the 123 representatives in the House and the 21 
members of the Senate who voted to immediately pass LD 3 without amendment. 
This bill is being held up by 8 Senators who either didn’t show up for the last vote 
or have allegiances to organizations which have goals not in the best interests of 
hard-working Maine people.
In the words of Representative Sawin Millet, a budget hawk and veteran 
Republican lawmaker widely regarded as one of the state's foremost budget 
experts and who formerly served as the state’s top financial official, he said he was 
comfortable with what were mostly one-time expenditures using surplus revenue or 
unbudgeted sources.
Recently on public radio, he urged you all to realize that you will own this one way 
or another and you need to be honest with your constituents when you go back 
home."  https://www.mainepublic.org/politics/2022-12-07/senate-republicans-
squash-emergency-bill-giving-mainers-nearly-500-million-in-energy-assistance
I question how and why a minority of minority oy 8 Republican senators would 
block the will of such a large majority in both houses and in so doing, neglect the 
immediate needs of their constituents.
Perhaps I can offer some answers to those questions.
The answer to the first is the 2/3 vote requirement which obstructs the immediate 
passage of this emergency bill as well as those of the future. The 2/3 requirement 
should be amended to read a majority vote in each house. 
The answer to the second, is the lack of representation on the part of State 
Republican Senators Timberlake and Pouliot who failed to show up for such a 
critical vote affecting the lives of so many Maine people.
Next, I would like to address the motivations of the “No” votes cast by Republican 
Senators Stewart and Harrington, both members of the national ALEC (American 
Legislative Executive Council) organization with State Chapters in most States. 
According to their financial disclosures, each received travel and lodging expenses 
paid by the national ALEC organization.  ALEC has a long history of saying NO to 
minimum wage increases; unions striving to get fair wages and benefits; U.S. jobs 
in favor of “free trade” agreements that ship jobs to developing nations that pay 
workers less than subsistent wages; and injured worker’s compensation claims.
Stewart was quoted as “We need transparency and accountability in that process, 
and that necessarily involves feedback from the Maine people. And that has not 
yet happened. And I can't underscore that enough.”
Does he not think the 144 colleagues and members of the House were incapable 
of providing that accountability and transparency?  Who exactly were they 
representing with their “NO” votes????
Their outcry for “transparency and accountability” was parroted on TV by 
Libertarian Senator Brakey, newly re-elected to Senate and funded by large donors 
as far away as Colorado, Nevada, Florida, and Pennsylvania. In addition to out of 
state donors, he received a large donation from the Maine Prosperity Alliance 
dedicated to protecting employers according to its website.
Brakey is the former state director for the failed Libertarian Ron Paul for President 
Campaign.  His financial disclosure form lists his employment as national 
spokesman for the Young Americans.  The organization was part of a coalition that 
filed 25 bills defending peoples’ rights against Covid-19 protocols, a proven highly 
effective means of ending the Pandemic.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young_Americans_for_Liberty
With his Libertarian past, all the out of state money and support for employers, I was 
not surprised at all by his “NO” vote and lack of direct support for Maine people.
In closing, I would ask that you follow Representative Sawin Millett’s counsel, reject 
outside influences, and return $450 dollars from the state’s surplus to help a Mainer 
buy half a tank of heating oil.  Thank you for giving me this opportunity to express my 
view.  
Patrick Eisenhart, CDR, USCG (ret)
