Statement by
Penny Morrell
To Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs
Regarding
LD 3 "An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating 
Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program"
December 27, 2022
Sen. Jackson, Rep. Talbot-Ross, and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to present before you. I am Penny Morrell, taxpayer and citizen of Belgrade, Maine.
This bill encapsulates a huge amount of money to spend. Accountability for funds spent is needed. The title 
leaves out an important part of the request for funds, which being homelessness.
The bill states that the president of the U.S. declared emergencies for the COVID-19 virus health crisis, 
increased energy prices, and “homelessness or housing instability”. Hasn’t the president’s agenda caused 
these crises, as has our governor?
Dr. Fauci is being investigated for his connections to the Wuhan Lab where the COVID virus started in China.
When ANWAR opened, America was the leading supplier of fossil fuels. The president shut it down making us 
dependent on foreign oil.
Our southern borders were closed, and we were building a wall to keep illegal aliens out so immigrants could 
come in only the right way and stand in line. The president has torn down that wall, threatened lawsuits 
against any governor trying to build a wall, and does not allow our border patrol to do its job.
Portland, Maine has declared itself a sanctuary city. Therefore, that city should raise and appropriate the 
funds it needs to supply their decision. The responsibility should not fall on the rest of Mainers who know 
better than to break the law and declare themselves sanctuaries for illegal immigrants.
This bill can’t even qualify as a band-aid because it adds to the pain of taxpayers by spending huge amounts of 
money without solutions.  It just exacerbates the problems.
The president and our governor are doing harm to the citizens and taxpayers of our state. LD 3 adds to the 
burden already placed on us and does nothing to correct these situations.
I urge this committee to vote “no” on L.D. 3. Thank you.
864 Manchester Road
Belgrade, ME  04917
(207) 495-3550
Pmorrell2@roadrunner.com
