Date:  Dec 21, 2022  
               Dear Senator Troy Jackson , Representative  Rachel Talbot Ro ss and the  assigned Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs .  
My name is R ay Thombs  (Toms)  from Union Maine, House District 44 and Senate  District  12. I am Mainer 
raised &  Married 35 years to my 7th grade  sweetheart . We  have 2 living children. One Son -In-Law and One 
16-year- old granddaughter.  I am a Retired Military member and  Business Own er. I represent the voice of 
four hundred  thousand Main e voters who desire to see M aine flo urish.  
I stand in opposition to LD3. From my perspective  moving forward with this ACT basically  incarcerates  
wisdom  and throws  away the keys . Additionally, p assing this ACT only continue s to set the standard for an 
increasing  frequency of declaring emergencies  that I believe  is unwise.  Govern ing is meant to be slow and 
methodical and benefit  the general welfare  of its citizens . 
The general  welfare  of our citizens would be violated  by passing LD3. The  ‘General  Welfare ’ stateme nt is 
not about welfare  as it has become known t oday. General welfare  is about the common GOOD of the 
citizens . LD3 is not a  ‘Common Good’ ACT due to its enormous  price tag . If you take the total cost of this 
ACT and divide it u p between  all senators and representatives , it wou ld be aprx 2.5 million dollars per 
person.  Imagine attempting to raise those kinds of funds  from your districts  to pay for this ACT ?! 
It is not the duty of th e Maine government nor the  Federal government  to use the potential  projected 
overages in tax dollars , to fund this spending.  Many of the citiz ens we desire to help with th is ACT  have 
already  obtain ed or can obtain th e aid th ey need. Most communities already have funding mechanisms  
and organization s in place to assist .  
I would urge all our Senators and Representatives  to dig deeper into  how  this ACT  is being funded . I 
recommend  a thorough  review  be undertaken of the 35-page  STRESS  TESTING MAINE GENERAL FUND  
REVENUES & RESERVES  from Oct ober 2022 and the 94-page  REPORT OF THE MAINE STATE REVENUE 
FORECASTING COMMITTEE  from Dec 2022 . Dissect  these reports to see how the projected tax rev enue , 
the 6.2% increase in  emergency funds, the revenues collected above and beyond the revenues budgeted 
for, and the recessionary  predictions  of our  2023 to 2027  tax revenues. See  how  these items will  affect  our 
future  economy  and financial standing in the US.  Thus far, I am only a few da ys into examining this data 
but I’m beginning to draw a conclusion that we will painfully regret th e decision  to implement  this ACT  if it 
goes to the House floor.  
Instead,  I leave you with these 3 Recommendations  to implement in Ja nuary:  
- Suspend all fuel taxes until May 1 , 2023 
- Suspend  all sales taxes  for the same time  period  
- Pay back  the current ‘overages ’ to those  business es and citizens  through their 2022 tax Returns   
Warm Re gards  
 
Ray Thombs  
710-3939 
Rthombs6 6@gmail.com  
