Renee Fortin
Lewiston
LD 3
Dear Committee Chairs and members, 
My name is Renee Fortin, my husband Dan and i live in Lewiston.  We have lived in Maine all
of our lives, we have worked hard and we pay taxes. We are becoming increasingly upset at 
the injustice and unlawfulness, of taxation without representation. We believe that legal Maine
residents who are truly in need, like disabled or elderly, should receive help to heat their 
homes.  We are sick and tired of the twisting of truth that we see in media, and constant 
blame and labeling, being put on conservatives, as though they do not care for the poor.
We also understand that heat assistance through (HEAP) is funded till July. Winter happens 
every year in Maine!  Heating a home, this winter, is not a crisis, unless of course a crisis has 
been created, which we believe has happened. Through the nefarious agenda of many to 
push covid, many have lost their livelihoods, creating this problem. The other agenda being 
used to destroy us, is the religion of worshipping mother earth or Gaia, which has lead to 
stopping domestic oil production and the re-opening of pipelines. A few years ago we were 
exporting oil and now we beg other countries for fuel.
This is ridiculous since the U.S. has the cleanest oil production anywhere. 
The housing crisis being pushed upon us, is another issue that could have been easily 
resolved. Because of the policies of open border promoters, an onslaught of new arrivals of 
illegal immigrants to Maine cities, has ensued. These policies led by Democrats have now put
many life long Mainers in dangerous and unfair positions. Thousands of Mainers, including 
Veterans have been on waitlists for housing for many years. This issue has nothing to do with
emergency heating, and will not be fixed with a bandaid. $21 million was allocated with short 
term housing support and now $ 22 million is to be added.  This is our tax money! Have we 
been asked about how it should be spent? $43 million to make a slight dent, while the root of 
the problem is not addressed, is infuriating. Maine people are not fools but we are fed up! We 
do not want California in Maine. Those who promote these ideas are robbing hard working 
people from having any hope of a future! 
Giving so called free money to people who can go out and work to gain $450, or $900, is 
another ridiculous ploy to maintain a voting base. Any money in the LD 3 should be used for 
heating vouchers and nothing else.  Please consider removing the pork from this bill and 
radically amending it! It should not pass as is! NO to LD3 formerly LD 1
