 
131st  Legislature  
State  of Maine  
Senate District 18 
 
    
Senator Richard A. Bennett  
                                                           3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
 Office (207) 287 -1505  
Cell (207) 592-3200   
  Richard.Bennett@legislature.maine.gov  
 
 
 
Testimon y on LD 3 
by Senator Rick Bennett  
December 21, 2022  
 
President Jackson, Sp eaker Talbot Ross and Memb ers of the Committee:  
 
I am Senator Rick Bennett from Oxford , Maine , and I have the honor of serving 14 towns in 
western Ma ine in the Maine Senate.  I am he re to speak in favor of LD 3 and , along with my 
colleague Senator Nicole Groho ski, to offer  import ant changes to the bill .  I am grateful for your 
sche duling this ext raordinary public hearing so that the impacts of this bill may be better known 
and considered.  
 
Many of our neighbors are in urgent need of heating and housing relief , and I believe it is our 
duty to both help and act responsibly with state funds.  
 
I have heard from many of the people I represent who believe that the emergency relief ought to 
be targeted to those in need . Furthe rmore, many Maine fa milies have emergenc ies that are not 
energy related .  Spending ou r surplus accounts dry leaves no money to deal with other pressing 
issues including but not limited to  our opioid epidemic, our failing nursing homes, and the dire 
shortage of direct care workers for people who have been promised services.   
 
I want to thank my colleague Sen. Grohoski , who worked with me to pro pose an alternative 
approach  that seeks to address th ese concerns .  She is here to discuss in detail our proposal 
and its rat ionale for  more targeted relief che cks.  I will address our  concerns over total cost of 
the bill, including other priorities and the framework for our proposed amendment . 
 
Our proposed amendment : 
 
- Target s meaningful relief on a sliding scale to people facing a high energy burden,  
based on data ;  
- Leaves  the windfall from federal Medicaid money untouched to serve chronic funding 
shortfalls in needed programs ; 
- Reduce s total cost of checks by nearly 50% to $2 10M; 
- Provide s up to $1,200 per family in funds to those in need who are not eligible for 
check program or don’t qualify for LIHEAP ; and 
- Encourage s energy efficiency through education  and incentives for long -term benefit . 
 
As indicated an important part of our approach is to better target t he direct relief checks to leave  
untouched the roughly $160 million in Federal Me dical Assistance Percentage (FMAP) funds so 
they may assist the needs they are intended for – such as mental health, nursing homes, 
developmental services, and services for brain injured.  
 
 
131st  Legislature  
State  of Maine  
Senate District 18 
 
    
Senator Richard A. Bennett  
                                                           3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0003  
 Office (207) 287 -1505  
Cell (207) 592-3200   
  Richard.Bennett@legislature.maine.gov  
 
 
 
Like most other legisl ators, for years I have heard from families in cri sis in our district who have 
suffered  from chronic underfunding of these programs and the low  compensation rates for direc t 
support pro fessionals that have made it difficult to recruit people for these challenging jobs.  
This ha s created emergen cy sit uations, often e xace rbated by the stre sses of the pandem ic. 
 
Here is one  of many messages I have received about th e importan ce of not deallocating  the 
FMAP money:  
 
“Thank you especially for proposing that LD 1 drop the deappropriation from Maine  
Care -funded home and community -based services (HCBS) for adult Mainers with 
disabilities ( Maine Care  sections 21, 29,18, and 20 for adults with autism, intellectual 
disability, brain injury, and other related conditions).  
 
“I understand that, from the governor's point of view, f ederal FMAP contribution to Maine  
Care goes up and goes down, and the state appropriates or deappropriates general fund 
money in the state budget to cover the balance. But if the federal FMAP had gone down, 
I'm pretty sure that the governor's LD 1 proposal wouldn't have tried to fill that hole --that 
would've been deferred to a budget bill. So when federal FMAP goes up, LD 1 shouldn't 
take advantage of that to lower apparent cost of sending $ out for heating --because that 
would be sending $ out on the backs o f Mainers with disabilities  
 
“Mainers with disabilities have endured years -long wait lists because of inadequate 
funding from the state. And even Mainers with disabilities who aren ’t on wait lists 
sometimes go without support because underfunding  MaineCare causes direct support 
professional wages to be uncompetitive in today's labor market . 
 
“My own son, who is on the Section 21 HCBS waiver, went SEVEN MONTHS without a 
SINGLE HOUR of HCBS -funded support. ” 
 
LD 3 has impacts beyond the energy emergency many Mainers are facing. The bill before  you 
proposes to spend all available surplus at the very beginning  of a difficult winter and a 
challengin g legislative session, where other needs will present themselves , some know n like the 
one I cite, and some unknown.   Thank you. 
 
