 December 21, 2022 LD 3 - An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program Appropriations and Financial Aﬀairs Committee, My name is Samantha Brown. I am legislative chair for the Libertarian Party of Maine.    The Libertarian Party holds its roots in economic theory where its decisions are derived.  We want all members of society to have abundant opportunities to achieve economic success. The only proper role of government in the economic realm is to protect property rights, adjudicate disputes, and provide a legal framework in which voluntary trade is protected. All eﬀorts by government to redistribute wealth, or to control or manage trade, are improper in a free society. Therefore the Libertarian Party of Maine opposes LD 3. This expensive bill has small short term gains with long term consequences without policy reform attached. The higher tax collection, the higher severity of burdening individuals and businesses, therefore damages the economy as a whole.  Taxation increases the poor population as it pulls from the middle working class. Taxation hurts the poor as it reduces opportunity given by the upper class in a burdened economy and creates a non achieving dependent society.  Inﬂation is at its historic high due to out of control money printing and spending at the federal level, which reduces purchasing power. Tax collection further lowers purchasing power, increases costs that negatively aﬀects the poor and middle class.  For years, Libertarians have been warning against government spending, taxation, and bailouts; which would create the unfortunate fate we are now ﬁnally seeing today. The shut down of our economy, government spending, money printing, and expanding government programs does not help the poor, it makes the problem worse, and today we are experiencing the results. Legislators who created the problem are now asking for more bailouts at the expense of the people. This burden falls upon the middle class, and the class that oﬀers job opportunity and consumption spending within the community.  The problem is here. It’s severe. It’s horrifying, and it will get worse until the spending and taxing programs are reformed; by freeing the economy, it’s fruits of its labor, and its markets.  

The Libertarian Party of Maine refuses to normalize biannual welfare for all. We will take a bold stand and continue to speak out about the damaging policies that continue.  While we agree that any surplus should be returned, but only after it’s used towards tax and spending reform, while stabilizing and creating a healthy unburdened and ﬂourishing economy where abundant opportunities are available to everyone equally. Without tax reform, let’s call it what it is. Welfare checks.  In conclusion, I understand that this message will not be taken into consideration by many. As a libertarian, I call upon lawmakers to think about a diﬀerent approach after multiple emergency checks become the normal. I ask that you consider that these policies are not working and people are still suﬀering and struggling to ﬁnd ﬁnancial opportunity to better their situations and that the answer lies within freeing the people instead of punishing them with tax obligations.  Thank you for your time and consideration  Samantha Brown Libertarian Party of Maine- Legislative Chair 
