December 21, 2022
President Troy Jackson
Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony Against “LD 3 An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid 
Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program” 
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross, and Distinguished Members of the Committee, 
My name is Sarah Trites and I live in Sabattus. I am a person who lives with a disability.  I am testifying against 
LD 3 today.  
I do think that heating is important but the money should not come out of services that people with disabilities 
get.  This is going to make waiting lists even longer. Because right now I am on section 19, but I am waiting for 
Section 18 services.  This is a very limited slot already and it is going to make it even longer for me to wait to 
get the services I need.  There are many people who are waiting for waiver services in Maine and the money 
could be used to help serve more people. 
It would be nice to be able to get out in the community. Right now on Section 19 I am not allowed to go in the 
worker’s car.  There is a problem with gas, mileage and liability.  I do like the services I am getting in my 
home, I just can’t get out in the community.  I get seven hours a week but only at my home.  My worker can do 
the shopping and errands for me, and help me shower and cook, I just can’t get to go out with her.  
People feel isolated when they cannot go in the community.  It would be nice to be able to access the 
community and work on different goals I have in my life.  I am really grateful for what I am getting, but I think 
it can be better if I am in the community.  I had to give up my homemaker services in order to get the section 19 
services.  This helps out my mom because she doesn’t have to worry about helping me with as many things.  
I think people with disabilities get the short end of the stick. Some people might not understand or know that 
these services are as important as it is.  There should be enough money for everyone to get heat, I have electric 
heat, which is very expensive.  I do get LIHEAP, and I apply every year to get help with my heating.  It varies 
sometimes and it has been based on my income. Sometimes I get more, sometimes I get less but it always helps.  
Addressing the home heating cost problem in Maine should be a priority, just not at the expense of people living 
with disabilities.  
Thank you for your time.
Sincerely,
Sarah Trites
Sabattus, ME 
