131st Legislature 
Senate of
Maine
Senate District 11 
Senator Chip Curry
Senate Majority Office
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME  04333-0003
(207) 287-1515
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov
Testimony in Support of LD 3, "An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief 
Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize 
the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program."
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs
December 21, 2022
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot Ross, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, I am Senator Chip Curry, and I represent 
the 26 rural, coastal, and island communities of Waldo County. As a State Senator, I have had 
the privilege of meeting and listening to the concerns of my constituents all across Waldo 
County. And I can tell you, without a doubt, that high heating costs are a burden that weighs 
heavily on many of our neighbors.
 
I am here today to voice my strong support for LD 3, “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy 
Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID 
Pandemic Relief Payment Program.” In a year when global forces have dramatically increased 
the costs of oil, propane and electricity, this bill offers a literal lifeline to those who are 
struggling to keep their families warm and safe this winter. It is our duty as legislators to do 
everything in our power to help our fellow Mainers during these extraordinary times.
 
All over Waldo County, people are volunteering their time and donating their scarce resources to 
make sure their neighbors and loved ones can safely get through this winter. I’m certain the same 
is happening in your districts as well. But it’s not enough. Our communities, our seniors, those 
living on fixed incomes, and those working hard but not making enough need us to act now. The 
provisions of LD 3 are truly a blessing for those in need. The one-time emergency energy relief 
payment of $450 will provide much-needed relief to an estimated 880,000 eligible Maine 
residents. In addition, the supplemental funding for the Home Energy Assistance Program and 
the emergency home heating oil, combined with local initiatives, will help stretch our resources 
so that, hopefully, no one freezes inside their homes this winter.
LD 3's short-term housing support will help prevent homelessness in rural areas like mine, which 
is often overlooked but affects many of our neighbors. Ask any of our faith-based leaders, 
general assistance administrators, public health nurses, and social service providers in rural 
Maine and they'll tell you the same. The Emergency Housing Relief Fund has been a critical part 
of providing emergency housing and emergency shelters. The additional funding from LD 3 will 
allow this vital program to continue its important work through this winter. Without this support, 
many of our neighbors could find themselves evicted and living in cars or worse, facing a bitter 
and dangerous Maine winter without a roof over their heads.
131st Legislature 
Senate of
Maine
Senate District 11 
Senator Chip Curry
Senate Majority Office
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME  04333-0003
(207) 287-1515
Chip.Curry@legislature.maine.gov
During this holiday season, I’m praying for our neighbors who are facing the challenges of this 
winter with few resources. I’m praying for a mild winter, I’m praying for the price of oil and 
propane to drop, and I’m praying that we can come together to pass this emergency life-saving 
legislation as soon as possible. Let's pass LD 3 and show the people of Maine that when they ask 
us to come to Augusta and work for them, we deliver.
 
Thank you for your time today. I am happy to answer questions.
