Jill Duson           THE MAINE SENATE           3 State House Station
Senator, District 27                 131st Legislature          Augusta, Maine 04333
December 21, 2022
Testimony in support of LD 3 “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment 
Program to Aid Residents with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic 
Relief Payment Program”
President Jackson, Speaker Talbot-Ross, and honorable members of the Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs Committee, I am Senator Jill Duson and I proudly serve the people of Senate District 27, which 
includes parts of Westbrook and Portland.
Like everyone else in this room, I’ve spent months speaking with and listening to good folks around my 
district about their hopes and concerns. And just like all of you, I heard over and over again just how 
worried Maine families are about being able to afford the basic necessities: Putting food on the table, 
keeping the lights on, and keeping a roof over their heads. In the Portland area, the need for emergency 
housing assistance is constant, with the massive increase of housing costs. Dedicated staff and volunteers 
at nonprofits around the city help individuals, families, veterans and even children find a safe place to 
stay and a filling meal to eat. More than that, they help folks get back on their feet and find stable 
employment and housing.
A constituent wrote to me saying, “I am writing to you now from the domestic violence shelter I work in, 
and I can say with great sadness that the situation is grim. Every day there are continuous calls from 
members of the community who have never faced this kind of situation before, suddenly unhoused for the 
first time in their lives with no support and nothing to fall back on. They have no money saved, as they 
have had it taken from them by controlling partners, or they were not allowed to work at all in their 
abusive relationship. They are calling in with children who they want to keep safe but finding that this 
uphill battle of affording housing and heat alone is so insurmountable that they are forced to settle into 
dangerous situations.”
Our constituents need help now. Winter is already here, and we must do something, especially now that 
the snow is firmly on the ground. I truly feel this is the kind of work my constituents sent me to these 
hallowed halls to do. I stand in firm support of the motion before us, and I hope that my newly sworn-in 
colleagues will follow my light.
Thank you.
