TESTIMONY OF SUSA NNA RICHER  
IN SUPPORT OF  L.D. 3, “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with High Heat ing 
Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program ” 
Committee On Appropriat ions & F inancial Affairs,  
December  21, 2022  
Senator  Jackson, Representative Talbo t-Ross, and honorable  members of the AFA committee,  
I was deeply disappointed to watch the Senate vote on L.D. 1.   I hope this public hearing will provide you with enough  
feedback from Maine citizens to  meet the burden  of proof required to  pass L.D. 3 immediately .   
If there is any dou bt that th e prop osed emergency housing and heating  funds are desperately  needed, I invite you to spend a 
few hours walking around the streets of Portlan d.  Everywhere I look, there are  people living in tents. They are camped out in 
parking lots, on  wooded trails, in the parks and sometimes tents are set up right on the city sidewalks. I have  also encounter ed 
people  living outside with no form of shelter at all.  The knowledge that so many citizens  are outside in  the rain, cold and snow 
weighs heav ily on my mind .  
Up until a few days ago,  there were approximately 10 people living in the Falmouth Walmart parking lot.  Most were staying  in 
vehicles, but  one couple  was living in a tent .  On Sunday, the police gave the “campers ” notice to leave  the premises .  On 
Monday , almost all of them had disappea red.  I saw the young couple that was  living in the tent, standing o n Route 1 with 
what belongings they could carry, trying to figure out where to go.  Having no form of transportation, they were forced to le ave 
their tent and some belongings behind.   Where will they go?  How will they stay dry in the upcoming storm s without their tent?  
Seeing my neighbors live like this fills me with sadness and feelings of hopelessness.   
A recent  article in the Portland Press Herald  feature d a disabled U.S. veteran, a single father with two children, living in a 
school bus in Androscoggin County.  He lost his apartment because of a leak that went unfixed for over a year.  The landlord 
ignored  requests to repair, and  the leak became severe enough that  the father  had no choice but to call code enforcement .  
This action resulted in his family's eviction and eventually led to a disabled veteran  and two children living  on a bus .  This is 
unacceptable.   
Housing and heating  should be  a human right.  Leaving people unhoused  and cold is not only inhumane , but expensive and a 
burden on taxpayers.   Studies have shown  that providing housing with support services  is less expensive than the shelter, 
criminal justice, health care, emergency room, and behavioral  health costs  government  agencies incur  caring for those who 
are unhoused . 
Over the next few days,  while enjoying  safety  and warm th at home , I hope everyone on this committee will take time to really  
think about those living outside  or without heat  as another  major  storm hits ou r state.  
Thank you for your time and consideration . 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, Maine  
 
Sources:  
A bus for a home: ‘If it’s cold, I’m up checking on the heater all night long’ , Portland  Press Hera ld, 12/18/2022  
https://www.pressherald.com/2022/12/18/a -bus-for-a-home -if-its-cold-im-up-checking -on-the-heater -all-night -long/  
Study Data Show that Housing Chronically Homeless People Saves Money, Lives  
https://endhomelessness.org/blog/study -data-show -that-housing -chronically -homeless -peopl e-saves -money -lives/  
