 
   
                              State of Maine  
                      Office of the Public Advocate  
                      112 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0112 
         (207) 624 -3687 (voice) 711 (TTY)   
         www. maine.gov/meopa  
  
                                          Janet T. Mills  
                                                     GOVERNOR  
 
                               William  S. Harwood  
                               PUBLIC ADVOCATE  
 
 
 
1 
 Testimony of Public Advocate William Harwood In Support of  
LD 3, “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents 
with High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program ” 
December 21 , 2022 
 
President Jackson , Speaker Talbot Ross  and distinguished m embers of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs , 
 My name is William Harwood  and I am the Public Advocate , here today to testif y in support 
of LD 3, “An Act to Establish the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program to Aid Residents with 
High Heating Costs and to Finalize the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program .” 
 On January 1st Standard Offer  prices will increase by approximately 49% for CMP ratepayers 
and 35% for Versant ratepayers. These increases are on top of increases of more than 80% in 2022. 
While these increases are on the supply portion of the bill; CMP and Versant have both proposed 
increases of over 30% on the Distribution (delivery ) portion and there are likely future increases in 
the Transmission and Stranded Cost portions.  This will certainly add to this winter’s misery as Maine 
consumers, especially low -income consumers, face energy prices that are extraordinarily high.  
 The Offi ce of the Public Advocate is in full support of this emergency legislation. We must 
lessen the financial burden for Mainers trying to stay warm this winter as quickly as possible. This 
bill is a step in the right direction and will provide relief  for those who need it the most during these 
difficult months.  
Thank you for your time, attention , and consideration of this testimony. The Office of the 
Public Advocate looks forward to work ing with the Committee on LD 3 and will be available for  the 
work session to assist the Committee in its consideration of this bill.  
 
Respectfully  submitted , 
    
William S. Harwood  
Public Advocate   

