l am here today to speak against LD 1008 and the implementation of a book rating system. At its 
core, a rating system is a violation of the First Amendment. Under the First Amendment, 
individuals have the right to publish and access information without fear of persecution. A 
rating system by its very nature would restrict access to certain materials, and thus, violate the 
First Amendment. 
Proponents of a rating system may argue that it is necessary to protect children from 
inappropriate material. They believe that by labeling books parents and educators can make 
informed decisions about what children should read. However, this argument fails to 
acknowledge that a rating system is not a suggestion but a form of regulation that ultimately 
restricts access ofthe books students often most need to read. Dr Rudine Sims Bishop has 
written extensively about the power of reading to develop understanding and empathy. She 
asserted that books act as "mirrors, windows, and sliding glass doors" which allow students to 
see themselves and affirm the value of their identities and also to develop empathy for others’ 
experiences. Limiting students ’ access to books limits their ability to see not only themselves 
but also to develop an understanding of other identities and experiences. This runs directly 
counter to the goals of l\/laine schools and the learning standards, which requires students to 
experience literature that represents a diverse range of experiences. 
Furthermore, the idea of what is "appropriate" is subjective. What one person deems 
inappropriate another may view as perfectly acceptable. The implementation of a rating system 
creates a slippery slope where a third party is given the power to decide what is acceptable and 
what is not. This is highly problematic. Who gets to decide what is harmful or controversial? 
Why should their opinion of the book's content have more value than someone else’s? 
Finally, parents already have the tools they need to make informed decisions about what their 
own children should read. Libraries often have sections designated for children and for young 
adults. Educators, especially librarians, have specialized training in gauging what materials will 
be relevant to their students and spend signiﬁcant time getting to know their students and their 
interests to best guide them to books they may enjoy. A rating system would undermine not 
only the role of parents, but the training and expertise of educators and librarians. 
To conclude, implementing a book rating system is a violation of the First Amendment in 
addition to being impractical, subjective, and running counter to the standards set here in 
Maine for public education. Additionally, it denies students, parents, educators and librarians 
the right to decide what is relevant for them, their children, and their students. I urge you to 
please vote against this bill. Thank you. 
Abigail Thompson 
School Librarian 
RSU 78, Rangeley Lakes Regional School 
Rangeley, l\/laine
