“There are lots of stories about people behaving badly that teach us how to behave 
differently,” my younger friend said this evening when I told her about this act, and she is right. 
Reading is one of the safest ways for children to learn about life and about the world. The 
alternatives are either trial and error – in real life situations with real hazards – or ignorance in 
those same real life situations with real hazards. Reading is always preferable.  
 It is difficult to see whose rights a law like this would protect. Children are guaranteed 
an education in this country, and an education means access to information and resources. For 
this reason, school libraries provide books. A law diminishing that access would not affect those 
children who have access to a public library or the resources to buy books of their own: it would 
affect the children who cannot get to a public library, whose parents cannot provide books, and 
do not have the resources for purchasing their own books. It would take the access to 
education that is granted to them now via school libraries, and which would remain available to 
peers who did have these resources, and it would diminish it considerably in unequitable and 
unjust ways. 
 My cousin’s family has shown me that such a law would also infringe on parents’ 
abilities to determine what their children do and do not read by limiting this access: their child 
is gifted and able to healthily process material written for older readers, and would be severely 
unenriched by a diet of books that fall only into the PG category here. Though they want her to 
read widely, their work schedules make it impossible for them to bring their child to the local 
library with any regularity and so they rely on the school library to provide their child with the 
range of reading material she needs. Such a law would strip them, and countless families like 
them, of a needed resource, and hold their child back from reaching her full potential.  
 Students who read widely have better learning outcomes than students who do not, 
and, in turn, better test scores and college admissions rates. By creating barriers to which books 
students can access, and, consequently to how widely they can read, such a law would damage 
students’ academic chances. In the internet age, it is also unlikely that such a law would 
effectively prevent students from accessing sexual or violent content indefinitely. What it 
would do however, is decrease the opportunities for them to encounter this material in well-
thought-out, responsibly-written, or literary ways. To return to my friend’s assessment, there 
are lots of examples of behaving badly that don’t teach us how to behave better, and many can 
be easily found in sources that would not be restricted by this law, such as the internet, 
advertisements, or the news. It is most often stories, especially children’s stories, that 
transform those topics and behavior into learning that does, in fact, inspire students to behave 
their very best. If we take away the helpful material, only the destructive examples of the topics 
will remain, and kids will have no guides to help them navigate them.  
Frequently, too, children’s lives do not mirror this rating system. Though it is not what 
we want for them, the reality is that children’s experiences often do contain violence, and may 
contain exposure to the presence of sexuality as well. Restricting their ability to encounter 
these topics in such safe places as books increases the risks they face in real life, and the sense 
of isolation, as well.   
Ultimately, books are one of the safest places to be a young person, far safer than the 
real world. With book access limited, the real world remains, only without the resources that 
could equip young people to navigate it.  
Anna  Logowitz
Sedgwick 
LD 1008
“There are lots of stories about people behaving badly that teach us how to behave 
differently,” my younger friend said this evening when I told her about this act, and 
she is right. Reading is one of the safest ways for children to learn about life and 
about the world. The alternatives are either trial and error – in real life situations with 
real hazards – or ignorance in those same real life situations with real hazards. 
Reading is always preferable. 
It is difficult to see whose rights a law like this would protect. Children are 
guaranteed an education in this country, and an education means access to 
information and resources. For this reason, school libraries provide books. A law 
diminishing that access would not affect those children who have access to a public 
library or the resources to buy books of their own: it would affect the children who 
cannot get to a public library, whose parents cannot provide books, and do not have 
the resources for purchasing their own books. It would take the access to education 
that is granted to them now via school libraries, and which would remain available to 
peers who did have these resources, and it would diminish it considerably in 
unequitable and unjust ways.
My cousin’s family has shown me that such a law would also infringe on parents’ 
abilities to determine what their children do and do not read by limiting this access: 
their child is gifted and able to healthily process material written for older readers, 
and would be severely unenriched by a diet of books that fall only into the PG 
category here. Though they want her to read widely, their work schedules make it 
impossible for them to bring their child to the local library with any regularity and so 
they rely on the school library to provide their child with the range of reading material
she needs. Such a law would strip them, and countless families like them, of a needed 
resource, and hold their child back from reaching her full potential. 
Students who read widely have better learning outcomes than students who do not, 
and, in turn, better test scores and college admissions rates. By creating barriers to 
which books students can access, and, consequently to how widely they can read, 
such a law would damage students’ academic chances. In the internet age, it is also 
unlikely that such a law would effectively prevent students from accessing sexual or 
violent content indefinitely. What it would do however, is decrease the opportunities 
for them to encounter this material in well-thought-out, responsibly-written, or 
literary ways. To return to my friend’s assessment, there are lots of examples of 
behaving badly that don’t teach us how to behave better, and many can be easily 
found in sources that would not be restricted by this law, such as the internet, 
advertisements, or the news. It is most often stories, especially children’s stories, that 
transform those topics and behavior into learning that does, in fact, inspire students to 
behave their very best. If we take away the helpful material, only the destructive 
examples of the topics will remain, and kids will have no guides to help them 
navigate them. 
Frequently, too, children’s lives do not mirror this rating system. Though it is not 
what we want for them, the reality is that children’s experiences often do contain 
violence, and may contain exposure to the presence of sexuality as well. Restricting 
their ability to encounter these topics in such safe places as books increases the risks 
they face in real life, and the sense of isolation, as well.  
Ultimately, books are one of the safest places to be a young person, far safer than the 
real world. With book access limited, the real world remains, only without the 
resources that could equip young people to navigate it. 

