Beth  Carlson
Kennebunk Maine
LD 1008
May 4, 2023
“Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Beth Carlson and
I am an English teacher at RSU21 and a member of the Maine Council for English 
Language Arts. I am writing because I oppose LD 1008.
 
Here in Maine we pride ourselves on local control.  We also have traditionally had a 
culture that valued a live and let live sentiment.  This law goes against both of these 
values.  My three towns’ values are different, I’m sure than Houlton’s or Rangely’s.  
Each town should be free to fill their school and classroom libraries with books that 
reflect their values.  In addition, most if not all schools have opt out policies that 
parents can exercise.  I teach students who come in with different backgrounds, 
experiences, identities, and interests.  What one parent deems offensive is not 
offensive to others.The practice of rating books violates students’ and parents’ 
freedoms and could cause harm to students who identify with historically 
underrepresented groups. Please consider the following:
Maine schools have a duty to serve all their students, inclusive of their race and skin 
color, abilities, religion, national origin or ancestry, gender (including gender identity 
and expression), and/or sexual orientation (Maine Title 5, Chapter 337-B) Rating 
books that feature characters who exhibit any of those protected identities or content 
related to those identities pathologizes them by “red flagging” them or labeling them 
as “controversial” or “inappropriate”(NCTE Position Statement Regarding Rating or 
“Red-Flagging” Books). Thus, labeling of books in such a manner causes harm to 
students who identify with those identities.
Rating books requires that some individual or group makes a “value-judgment” about 
the content of the books (ALA Position Statement on Labeling Practices, p. 2). This is
highly problematic. Who will get to decide what is harmful or controversial? Why 
should their opinion of the book’s content have more value than someone else’s?
Books are tools for understanding complex issues. Limiting young people's access to 
books does not protect them from life's complex and challenging issues; in fact, books
help them navigate the complexities they will face.  Dr. Rudine Sims Bishop has 
written about the power of reading. She asserted that books act as “mirrors, windows, 
and sliding glass doors” which allow students to see themselves and affirm the value 
of their identities and also to develop empathy for others’ experiences (In Praise of a 
Scholarly Force: Rudine Sims Bishop). Limiting students’ access to books because of 
the content of those books also limits their ability to see themselves reflected in the 
books they read and to develop an understanding of other people’s identities and 
experiences. This runs counter to the goals of Maine schools and our learning 
standards, which require students to experience literature that represents a diverse 
range of experiences (Maine Department of Education 2020 Reading Standards)
Because of the reasons above, I am asking you to please unanimously vote not to pass
LD1008.
Sincerely, 
Beth Carlson
bcarlson@rsu21.net

