1 
  
 
MOTION PICTURE ASSOCIATION, INC.  
15301 Ventura Boulevard, Building E  
Sherman Oaks, California 91403  
 
 
Kathy Ba ñuelos               Phone: (818) 935 -5850  
Senior Vice President, State Government  Affairs      E-Mail: Kathy_Banuelos @motionpictures.org  
             
March 1 5, 2023  
 
Chairs Senator Joe Rafferty  and Representative Michael Brennan  
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
Cross Office Building, Room 208  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Sen. Rafferty , Rep. Brennan , and th e Joint Committee On Education  and Cultural Affairs : 
 
I write on behalf of the Motion Picture Association1 (“MPA”) and its member studios  to 
convey opposition to LD 1008 , which  would mandate using  the MPA’s rating system on books  
and materials distributed to  Maine ’s public schools and libraries.  As detailed below, this 
legislation poses two  issues : 1) it would violate the MPA’s rights in federally registered 
trademarks  it holds for its rating symbo ls (“G,” “PG,” “PG -13,” “R,” etc.)  and 2) it violate s the 
First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U .S. Constitution , as courts  have repeatedly held when 
striking down laws that seek to incorporate the MPA’s ratings into law . 
 
I. The Use of MPA’s Ratings on Books Not Rated by CARA Would Violate MPA’s 
Trademarks . 
 
The Classification and Rating Administration (“CARA”), a division of MP A, awards the 
familiar G, PG, PG -13, R , or NC -17 ratings to motion pictures. CARA was established in 1968 
by the motion picture and theater industries to provide moviegoers and parents with advance d 
information about the content in rated films, to help them determine which motion pictures may 
be appropriate for their children. The MPA, having celebrated its 50th anniversary,  CARA is a 
notable  example of responsible industry self -regulation, obviating any perceived need for 
intrusive ( not to mention unconstitutional) government censorship.  
 
1 The MPA is the trade association for the leading producers and distributors of motion 
pictures, television programs, and streaming productions for exhibition in theaters, on broadcast, 
pay, cable and satellite television, and on the internet. MPA’s members  are Netflix Studios, LLC, 
Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc., Paramount Pictures Corporation, Universal City Studios LLC, 
Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.  
 

2 
  
The M PA is the owner of all trademarks in the rating symbols and designations used with 
that system, including RATED G (Reg. No. 1439618), RATED PG (Reg. No. 1439617), 
RATED PG -13 (Reg. No. 1439619), and RATED R (Reg. No. 1436926)  (collectively, the 
“Rating Mar ks”). All the MPA Rating Marks are widely known and famous throughout the 
United States as designating motion pictures rated by CARA. Thes e Rating Marks  may only be 
used with permission and authority of the MPA and only in connection with motion pictures that 
CARA has rated .  
 
The application of the  Rating Marks to books not rated by CARA , as mandated by  the 
proposed  legislation,  would constitute a n infringement of MPA’s tradem ark rights, leading to 
widespread confusion  among students, parents, as well as library patrons , and the public , about 
whether CARA indeed rated those books . Moreover, using  the CARA ratings in such a manner 
would violate the MPA ’s rights under the Federal Trademark Dilution Act , 15 U .S. §1125(c) . 
 
Should the proposed legislation be enacted into law, any public or private entities (e.g., 
book publishers) that affix the Rating Marks on books not rated by CARA would potentially be 
liable for traditional trademark infringement and dilution , among other things . 
 
II. Courts Have Consistently Struck Down Laws Incorporating the MPA’s Ratings 
into Law . 
 
The propos al would establish a rating system mandated by the government, distinguished from 
the voluntary system established by the motion picture and theater industries. As such, it would 
violate the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Courts throughout the U .S. have rev iewed other 
attempt s to codify or incorporate the MPA ratings and have consistently invalidated such laws  as 
unconstitutional . For example : 
 
• In Swope v. Lubbers , 560 F.Supp. 1328 (W .D. Mich. 1983), a publicly funded state 
college refused to allow college funds to be used for the showing of a motion picture that 
had been rated “X” (the predecessor to “NC -17”) by CARA. The court held such action 
to violate the First Amendment:  
• In Engdahl  v. Kenosha , 317 F. Supp. 1133 (E .D. Wisc.  1970), the court held that 
an ordinance adopted by the City of Kenosha that prohibited a minor, 
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, from being  admitted to a motion picture 
rated “R” or “X” was unconstitutionally “vague, indefinite, incorporates unknown 
standards, and is  an improper prior restraint on the exercise of their rights under 
the First Amendment to the Constitution.” Id. at 1135.  
 
 
Given this prece dent, requiring publishers  to use the MPA rating system to rate books would 
similarly be found to be unconstitutional.  
 
The MPA and our members are sympathetic to your interest in ensuring children are not 
exposed to age -inappropriate material. Indeed, that is the very purpose of t he rating system we 
established over 50 years ago. However, the strength of the rating system and its legality  flows 
3 
 main ly from the fact that it is administered by a private organization, not the government. Given 
this background, we respectfully must opp ose the proposed legislation that seeks to incorporate 
MPA’s  rating system into law.  
 
Please do not hesitate to contact me or the MPA’s advocate in Maine , Charles Soltan , 
should you have any questions or wish to discuss this matter further.  
 
Sincerely , 
 
 
 
Kathy Bañuelos  
 
 
 

