Cidney Mayes, Teacher Librarian 
Portland Resident 
Testimony for Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
Good afternoon, 
My name is Cidney Mayes and I am a middle school teacher librarian. l have a Master's degree 
in Library Science, and a Bachelor's degree in Secondary Education, English. I am here to 
stand with other library professionals and testify against LD 123, LD 1008, and LD 618 as all of 
these proposals are harmful to our students, teachers, schools, and communities. 
I am here, also, to give a voice to my students. The practice of rating books violates their 
freedom, and could cause harm to students who identify with historically underrepresented 
groups. in a recent survey at the middle school, 20% of students stated that the library was their 
favorite place in the entire school. Many said that this is because the library is a warm and 
welcoming place, where students are encouraged to be themselves, and can ask questions, find 
answers, and iearn more about themselves in a safe and nondiscriminatory environment. 
One student was adamant that l share the following with you today. “Hi, l’m a student at Ms. 
Mayes's middle school. There are books [in our library] that show what young people of the 
LGBTQ community go through, with being cast out of society, finding who they are, and dealing 
with their own guilt and fear that they will never be accepted. We already don't have a lot of 
books in our library that shows the LGBTQ community, why take away the few?” 
The books in our libraries act as “mirrors, windows, and sliding glass doors” which allow 
students to see themselves and affirm the value of their identities and also to develop empathy 
for others’ experiences (ln Praise of a Scholarly Force: Rudine Sims Bishop 
https:/Ilibrary.ncteorq ﬂournals/LA/issues/v85-2/6175). Limiting students ‘ access to books 
because of the content of those books also limits their ability to see themselves reﬂected in the 
books they read and to develop an understanding of other people's identities and experiences. 
This runs counter to the goals of Maine schools and our learning standards, which require 
students to experience literature that represents a diverse range of experiences (Maine 
Department of Education 2020 Reading Standards 
I .0’ inn ll¢l'!l 0.0-- -. ||q 0| ‘I- -. -.10.-. 0. --Ale
Let's call this what it is: a systemic and targeted attempt to erase narratives from historically 
underrepresented and oppressed groups for our society. 
Maine cannot let a small group's discomfort over any single book become censorship of all. The 
right to read is a constitutionally protected right. Access to information is not a privilege, and it is 
our job as educators and curators of information to ensure that our students have the tools they 
need to think critically for themselves about the information that is available to them. We want 
our schools to be safe spaces for our students, where they are empowered to make decisions 
about their own reading, grow their critical thinking skills, and grow as people. l strongly oppose 
this legislation, as they grossly overstep and will severely limit the books available to our 
students. 
Thank you.
