Emily Connelly
Portland
LD 1008
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, I am a parent and I work in 
the public library. I am writing today against LD 1008, An Act to Establish a Rating 
System for Books in School Libraries. This bill would be a huge waste of time and 
resources, and would unfairly target books written about LGBTQ+ people and 
histories. 
I am a parent of children in our public schools in Portland. I want them to be able to 
access accurate books without restrictions imposed by other parents or some hastily 
established governing body. I trust my children’s excellent school librarian to help 
them find and enjoy books that will help them learn and have fun, and we absolutely 
don’t need added barriers preventing kids from accessing great learning materials. I 
volunteer in the school library, and they have an excellent collection full of books 
about kids from different backgrounds, excellent stories for kids looking for 
adventure books or books that will make them laugh, and great nonfiction books to 
help support their learning. They don’t need any barriers around those books — they 
need the freedom to explore the library and ask for help when they need it. 
Rating books would violate the student’s freedoms, and could harm students who see 
books with characters who are like them being labeled too “obscene” for their school 
and removed. Who would be making these judgements on these books? Who is 
getting paid to read the thousands of books across our many school libraries — or are 
you not even suggesting anyone bothers to read them? Limiting students access to 
books because of their content would limit the students’ ability to find books about 
others like them, and prevents them from learning about those different from them. 
According to our state reading standards, students should experience literature that 
represents a diverse range of experiences. This bill goes against that standard. 
Please rule against LD 1008. Thank you for the opportunity to share my opinion 
today.
