Jessie Goodwin
Portland
LD 1008
I have serious concerns about the practicality of this bill as it is written. I am the 
parent of a 6th grader who attends a public middle school. I also have been working in
libraries since 2001, have a Master's Degree in Library and Information Science, and 
work as a school librarian.
As written, this bill would require publishers to label a book's "rating level" and 
would prohibit school libraries from purchasing books with certain ratings, as well as 
prohibit having books on the shelves that don't include these publisher designated 
rating labels. There are numerous problems with what you propose.
-What if publishers do not comply with Maine's rating system? Can schools then not 
buy any books at all? Schools do not just buy materials from book companies who 
publish only for the school market. Purchases can be made from various book 
distributors that serve a number of markets, not just schools, and books are also 
purchased directly from local bookstores. Libraries also receive many wonderful book
donations from community members, organizations, and authors. 
-Is this bill retroactive? My school library has nearly 11,000 books that have been 
purchased over many years with taxpayer dollars. Are you saying that they need to 
throw out an incredible collection worth literally hundreds of thousands of dollars 
because the books have no label? Will this happen all over the state, to the tune of 
millions of dollars of taxpayer money? This is unbelievably wasteful.
-Are you suggesting that schools no longer have the freedom to go to a local 
bookstore and purchase well-reviewed, bestselling, age-appropriate titles to add to the
collection because they lack a certain publisher's label? What about book donations of
age-appropriate titles from our families or civic organizations, can we no longer keep 
those because they lack this rating sticker?
-Having publishers set their own ratings internally means that we would have no idea 
why something is rated what it is. What if the publisher decides that content OTHER 
than "profanity, violence, or sexual themes" means the book gets a higher rating? 
What if they are a vegan-owned company, and any books about hunting or eating 
animals get a "Mature" sticker? What if they determine that all books about the 
Holocaust will be  "BK 13", despite the fact that in upper elementary and middle 
school they teach units on that topic and there are many age-appropriate resources?
-Most middle schools include students up to age 14. Do older, more advanced readers 
not deserve to have books at their reading level in 8th grade? My son already reads at 
a high school level. I don't want him completely prohibited from young adult 
literature based on a publisher's sticker. What about classics, which are often written 
at a higher reading level or can include more challenging content?
-Content can be subjective. What is right for my 12 year old might not be right for 
yours. This is why librarians and teachers read multiple review sources, get to know 
students and their families, and read as many of the books in their collections as they 
possibly can. They craft collections that support the curriculum, reflect their students 
and their families lives and experiences, and provide education as well as reading 
enjoyment for students. They also work with parents to find alternative options if a 
book doesn't fit their family rules. This law takes away the flexibility to serve 
individual students in these ways. 
I trust the teachers and librarians at my son's school to choose age-appropriate 
materials for their classrooms and libraries. Indeed, I trust them with my child's life 
every day! 
Frankly, I wish that you in the legislature would re-examine your priorities--I am far 
more concerned that my son might encounter gun violence at school than I am about 
anything he might see on school library shelves. I urge you to vote no on this short 
sighted and poorly thought-out bill. Thank you for taking the time to consider my 
testimony.
