EDUCATE 
MAINE 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: My name is Kaitlin Young, Policy 
and Program Manager of Educate Maine. I represent a business-led education advocacy 
organization, with two-thirds of our board of directors from the business sector. Thank 
you for the opportunity to testify in opposition to L.D. #618, #1008, and #123. Educate 
Maine's mission is to ensure that Maine people are prepared to succeed in education 
and career and that all Maine people reach their greatest educational and economic 
potential to power a vibrant, globally competitive Maine economy. 
L.D. #618, a proposed bill prohibiting teaching critical race theory in K-12 public 
institutions, would limit students ‘ potential and deprive them of the necessary skills to 
succeed in the workforce and life. It is important to address that critical race theory isa 
nuanced and complex field of study typically reserved for higher education. Based on 
our work with educators across the state, we are unaware of any K-12 public institution 
teaching Critical Race Theory. However, social and emotional learning (SEL), diversity, 
equity, and inclusion (DEI) are essential components of a comprehensive education that 
promote critical thinking, empathy, and a deeper understanding of complex social 
issues that impact our communities. SEL programs canmpositively impact student 
achievement and contribute to healthy well-beinggagnd safe schools, while DEI efforts 
promote mutual respect, fairness, and appreciation of differences. These concepts are 
essential for enabling all students to succeed in postsecondary education and the 
workplace. Employers are looking for employees who can communicate effectively, 
work well in diverse teams, and understand the needs and perspectives of their 
customers. One McKinsey institute study of 18.000 people across 15 countries found 
that 75% of skills employers look for in their employees are cognitive, interpersonal, 
and self-leading capabilities. By prohibiting these teachings from our curricula, we limit 
our students ‘ ability to comprehend and navigate the world around them, hindering 
their capacity to be college, career, and community ready. We urge lawmakers to reject 
LD 618 and support the inclusion of SEL, DEI, and other essential concepts in school 
curricula to ensure that all Maine people have the necessary skills to thrive in the 
workforce and life. 
482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101 - 207-347-8638 - inf0@educatemaine.org
Furthermore, we stand with Maine educators and librarians in affirming the 
responsibility to ensure and protect students ‘ rights to intellectual freedom. Therefore, 
we strongly oppose L.D. 1008, which would mandate creating a rating system for library 
materials. Access to and choice of a wide range of reading material is vital to 
developing perspectives and insights that prepare students for participation in a global 
society. All Americans, specifically young people in our educational institutions, are 
guaranteed access to information and ideas from various points of view under the 
Freedom of Speech in the First Amendment. Rating systems present distinct challenges 
to intellectual freedom principles, assume that individuals or groups can determine 
what is appropriate or inappropriate for others, and potentially restrict access to 
information. it is important to recognize that local policies and procedures are already 
in place to address any issues that may arise in school libraries. Additionally, librarians 
and educators are trained professionals who research, evaluate, and select appropriate 
materials for their students. Censorship of any kind is a danger to our state and nation's 
ideals. It is our responsibility to protect students ‘ intellectual freedom and provide 
them with the tools they need to become informed and engaged citizens. 
Finally, we oppose L.D. #123, which has the potential to take decision-making power 
away from local school districts and place it in the hands of political appointees. 
Teachers and parents in local school districts are better informed about the educational 
value of curriculum and should decide what is appropriate for their students and 
community. The subjective nature of what constitutes "obscenity" could lead to 
censorship of educational resources, stifling critical thinking and agency in students. 
Additionally, this bill could create confusion and uncertainty for educators, limiting 
their ability to provide the best possible education for their students. We urge 
lawmakers to support local school districts in making informed decisions about what is 
best for their students and communities. 
In conclusion, we urge the Committee to oppose L.D. #618, #1008, and #123 in order 
to preserve the right of local districts to decide what is best for their communities, 
prioritize our students ‘ intellectual freedom and support ongoing efforts to prepare our 
students to be college, career, and community ready. Thank you for considering our 
perspective on these critical issues.
