 LD 123 “An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors in Public Schools” 
 LD 1008 “An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries” 
 LD 618 “An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social Emotional Learning and Diversity, 
 Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula” 
 Testimony by Karen Silverman, Dresden Maine 
 I am AGAINST LD 123. 
 I am AGAINST LD 1008. 
 I am AGAINST LD 618. 
 LD 123 “An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors in Public Schools” 
 As a veteran librarian with 40 years professional experience, I can attest to the fact that 
 librarians do NOT distribute or promote obscene materials as defined in Maine Code and 
 decades of Supreme Court case law. We absolutely do NOT promote, possess, or distribute 
 pornography to children. 
 School librarians are professionally trained and professionally credentialed. We are highly 
 skilled in selecting materials for the population we serve. Books serve as helpful tools for 
 helping students gain an understanding of complex issues. Simply limiting access to books does 
 not protect students from life's complex and challenging issues. 
 A major problem with this bill as written is that it would move decisions best made at the local 
 level to the state. The citizens of the state of Maine and a thriving democracy always favor local 
 control and less government whenever possible. 
 This bill is unnecessary and would further burden an already backed-up court system which is a 
 waste of taxpayer money and resources. 
 Please vote no and kill this bill. Thank you for your consideration. 
 LD 1008 “An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries” 
 As a veteran librarian with 40 years professional experience, I am strongly opposed to 
 censorship. The  National Council of Teachers of English  has taken a strong position against 
 rating books  (https://ncte.org/statement/rating-books/), adding content warnings to books, and 
 all forms of “red-flagging” as these are blatant forms of censorship. Labeling books has two very 
 negative outcomes. First book labels lead to restricting students from being able to choose 
 books to read based on their interest. Secondly, there is a real concern for privacy as labels can 
 be seen by others. All labeling of books – from reading levels to problematic (to whom?) content 
 – is simply not appropriate. 
 School librarians are professionally trained and professionally credentialed. We are highly 
 skilled in selecting materials for the population we serve that are age appropriate. 
 The burden this bill will have on publishers is extensive and will likely lead to schools finding it 
 difficult to obtain books. 
 Book rating systems are an unnecessary bureaucratic burden and a total waste of taxpayer 
 money and resources. 
 Please vote no and kill this bill. Thank you for your consideration. 
 LD 618 “An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social Emotional Learning and Diversity, 
 Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula” 
 The bill is deeply flawed and inaccurate as it posits a definition of critical race theory, social 
 emotional learning, and diversity, equity, and inclusion curricula that is simply not true. First 
 things first, critical race theory is NOT taught in public schools. Critical race theory is an 
 academic and legal framework used primarily in law schools. The Collaborative for Academic, 
 Social, and Emotional Learning (CASEL) defines social and emotional learning (SEL) “ as an 
 integral part of education and human development. SEL is the process through which all young 
 people and adults acquire and apply the knowledge, skills, and attitudes to develop healthy 
 identities, manage emotions and achieve personal and collective goals, feel and show empathy 
 for others, establish and maintain supportive relationships, and make responsible and caring 
 decisions.” Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion” are ideals that focus on equity for all not by 
 discriminating against anyone based on their race or gender.  Harvard Business Publishing has 
 prepared this primer on DEI 
 (https://www.harvardbusiness.org/start-here-a-primer-on-diversity-and-inclusion-part-1-of-2/). 
 School curricula does NOT teach that… 
 ●  one race or  sex  gender is inherently better than another race or  sex  gender 
 ●  by virtue of the individual's race or  sex  gender, an individual is inherently racist, sexist or 
 oppressive, whether consciously or unconsciously 
 ●  an individual should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment solely or 
 partly because of the individual's race or  sex  gender 
 ●  members of one race or  sex  gender cannot and should not attempt to treat others 
 without respect to race or  sex  gender 
 ●  an individual's moral character is necessarily determined by the individual's race or  sex 
 gender 
 ●  an individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish or any other form of psychological 
 distress solely because of the individual's race or  sex  gender 
 ●  meritocracy or traits, such as having a work ethic, are racist or sexist or were created by 
 members of a particular race to oppress members of another race. 
 …because this is simply NOT TRUE. 
 Banning CRT (which is NOT taught in public schools) clearly  denies the truth  about our nation’s 
 history. To be discriminated against for one’s race is far more damaging and hurtful than to be 
 accused of possibly being racist. As a cisgender, caucasian person, I know that I am constantly 
 striving to be actively anti-racist and that I am certain I have had racist thoughts in the past. 
 Banning SEL will have a  direct negative impact on the psychological health of our students  who 
 are still struggling with emotions and learning deficits caused by the global pandemic from which 
 we are still recovering. 
 Banning DEI would serve to  continue to treat people differently based on their race and gender  . 
 Being aware of how we interact with others who may not be like us and taking steps to include 
 everyone, will only serve to build a better society and community. 
 As a veteran librarian with 40 years professional experience, I am always thinking of the best 
 way to support students – especially thinking of their SEL and DEI needs.I strive to curate a 
 diverse collection of books in my library collection to serve those needs. Books can help with 
 this. Dr. Rudine Sims Bishop has written about the power of reading. She asserted that books 
 act as “mirrors, windows, and sliding glass doors” which allow students to see themselves and 
 affirm the value of their identities and also to develop empathy for others’ experiences (  In Praise 
 of a Scholarly Force: Rudine Sims Bishop  https://library.ncte.org/journals/LA/issues/v85-2/6175  ). 
 This bill to ban CRT, SEL and DEI from our curriculum runs counter to the goals of Maine 
 schools and our learning standards, which require students to experience literature that 
 represents a diverse range of experiences (  Maine Department  of Education 2020 Reading 
 Standards  https://www.maine.gov/doe/learning/content/ela/standards/reading). 
 Please vote no and kill this bill. Thank you for your consideration. 
