1 
 Testimony of Mary L. Bonauto, GLAD Attorney 
 
RLD 123, An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors in Public 
Schools, and LD 1008, An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries –  
Ought Not to Pass 
 
Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
May 4, 2023 
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
 
Good afternoon. I regret that I cannot attend in person today to deliver this testimony in 
opposition to LD 123 and LD 1008.  I am an attorney at GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
and work in Maine, New England and nationally to protect the rights of LGBTQ+ people and 
people living with HIV across all communities.   
 
GLAD wishes to draw the Committee’s attention to the legal challenges inherent in these 
bills apart from the excellent testimony of our colleagues at the ACLU of Maine and others. 
 
As to LD 123, it is important to state the obvious:  people who devote themselves to 
public education work hard to ensure that students have quality and age- and pedagogically-
appropriate materials available to enrich their learning and lives.  Teachers, librarians and 
Superintendents engage in an extensive vetting and approval processes before books come into 
the school library.  If a parental question arises as to whether a book is obscene (or improper for 
other reasons), schools have processes for parents and community members to request review 
about whether the book should remain on the shelves and at what grade levels. See e.g. Bangor 
Public Schools, Policy IIA, Selection of Library and Instructional-Media Materials, at 
https://www.bangorschools.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/IIA-Pol-Selection-of-Instructional-
Library-Media-Materials-10-22-19.pdf1  
 
1  The “Challenged Materials” portion of the policy provides as follows:  
Despite the care taken to select materials for student and teacher use and the qualifications of the persons 
who select the materials, the Bangor School Committee recognizes that objections may be raised 
occasionally by students, parents, school staff, or community members. In the event a complaint is made, 
the following procedures will apply:  
A. The complaint shall be heard first by the person providing the materials in question.  
B. If the complaint is not resolved, the complainant shall be referred to the building Principal and 
requested to fill out the “Instructional and Library-Media Materials Challenge Form.” A copy of the form 
will be forwarded to the Superintendent.  
C. The Superintendent shall appoint a committee composed of the following persons to review the 
complaint: one Principal at the appropriate grade level; one librarian/media specialist; one classroom 
teacher; the department head in the subject area of the challenged materials; one community member.  
D. The review committee shall: read and examine the materials referred to them; check general 
acceptance of materials by reading reviews; weigh values and faults against each other and form opinions 
2 
  
The title of this bill - “An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter in 
Public Schools” (emphasis added) repeats the baseless assertion that schools are disseminating 
obscenity at school to students despite the fact that teachers, librarians, and Superintendents use 
detailed protocols in assessing what books are appropriate for young people.  
It would insert a new subsection of the Revised Statutes entitled “3.A. Public Schools,” 
the only entity singled out in this criminal statute.  The new 3.A. would retain the existing 
process by which the Attorney General or a local district attorney may petition a Superior Court 
when they “reasonably believe[]” obscene material is disseminated, followed by a jury trial.  17 
MRSA §2911(3)). If such a trial found there was dissemination of obscene material, the 
amendment calls for a new “cease and desist order” to be issued by the Attorney General or local 
district sattorney, but not a criminal charge since the amendment rightly retains the “public 
school, private school, or institution of learning” exemption from criminal prosecution in 17A 
MRSA sec. 2911(2). (sponsor’s amendment)   
LD 123 as amended is a nuisance, unnecessary, and harmfully invites law enforcement 
into a situation where educator expertise and existing protocols – protocols and policies which 
include parental involvement - are the best fit. The original bill and the amendment both fuel the 
politicization of libraries, selection of curriculum materials, and perhaps other matters.   It tacitly 
invites political officials, the Attorney General and local district attorneys, and their constituents, 
to pursue or press for obscenity investigations at local schools based on personal objections to 
material, and with the hope of having a jury trial. Both versions of the bill would cast a pall over 
teachers, librarians by suggesting that law enforcement should be weeding out books or policing 
the school environment based on parental objections or discomfort even though other parents 
want those books and materials available to their children.   
 
In evaluating whether or not to pass this bill as amended, it is also important to note that 
“obscenity” is measured by law, not individual sensibilities. The standard for determining 
obscenity set by the US Supreme Court in Miller v. California , 423 U.S. 15, 24-24 (1973), asks:  
(1) whether ‘the average person, applying contemporary community standards’ would find that 
the work, ‘taken as a whole,’ appeals to ‘prurient interest’, 
 
based on the material as a whole and not on passages or portions pulled out of context; meet to discuss the 
material and to prepare a written report on it.  
E. The report of the committee shall be forwarded to the Superintendent who will inform the complainant 
of the results.  
F. No materials shall be removed from use until the review committee has made a final decision.  
G. The review committee’s decision may be appealed to the Bangor School Committee. The School 
Committee may set aside a portion of a regular meeting or call a special meeting for the purpose of 
receiving testimony from representatives of the various points of view. The material in question shall be:  
1. Reviewed objectively and in its full content;  
2. Evaluated in terms of the needs and interest of students, school, curriculum, and community;  
3. Considered in the light of differing opinions; and   
4. Reviewed in light of the criteria for initial selection and purpose as provided herein.  
The School Committee will announce its decision in writing not later than the conclusion of the next 
regular meeting of the Bangor School Committee following its receipt of said testimony.   
3 
 (2) whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct 
specifically defined by the applicable state law, and  
(3) whether the work, ‘taken as a whole,’ lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific 
value.   
The answer to all three questions would have to be “yes” to consider denominating 
material handed out or made available at school as “obscene.”  Moreover, passages of books 
cannot be cherry picked to claim a legal violation.  Works must be “considered broadly, as a 
whole,” which has been the standard for ninety-plus years.   United States v. One Book Entitled 
Ulysses , 72 F.2d 705, 707 (2d Cir. 1934) (in challenge to James Joyce’s Ulysses, noting that 
selections from “Aristophanes, Chaucer, or Bocaccio, or even from the Bible,” could be vulgar if 
“printed by themselves.”).  This bill is another attempt to micromanage schools and detracts from 
the primary focus of our educators:  keeping students safe and helping them learn what they need 
to grow and succeed.   
Switching gears, LD 1008 would institutionalize barriers to getting quality books into 
Maine school libraries and impose a reductionist metric for how books are selected.  First, it 
would require publishers to adopt its proposed rating scheme before books could be sold or 
distributed to public school, and any unrated books would be excluded from schools, as has been 
proposed in Texas. This will limit the books available to young people.   Second, it would 
require the Department of Education to review the ratings of such books and pursue any 
disagreements with the publisher.  This is unnecessary and utterly disregards the competence of 
those entrusted to follow a rigorous and child-centered protocol in selecting library books.  
 
Finally, the rating system is vague and burdensome. Would a picture book like Who’s in 
a Family by Robert Skutch, https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/198155/whos-in-a-
family-by-robert-skutch/  involve prohibited “sexual themes” in an elementary school library 
because one page of this picture book depicts a same-sex couple and their children washing their 
dog? No standards describe “sexual themes,” and it is obvious that there are people who would 
shrink the humanity of LGBTQ people’s existence and families into a box of “sexual.” No 
guidelines are set to distinguish when “violence” or “profanity” is “frequent” or “infrequent,” 
“moderate” or “intense.”  What is the line between “sexual dialogue” – permissible for a middle 
schooler, and “intensely sexual dialogue,” available only in high school?  This rating system is as 
clear as mud.    
 
We urge you vote ought not to pass on LD 123 and LD 1008. Thank you for your 
consideration.  
 
Truly yours, 
Mary L. Bonauto 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
Sr. Director of Civil Rights & Legal Strategies 
257 Deering Ave., #203 
Portland, ME 04103 
 
