MAURICE T. CUNNINGHAM, JD, PhD 
43 BEACH LANE 
DAMARISCOTTA, MAINE 04543 
 
        May 4, 2023 
Re: LD 123, “An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors in Public 
Schools”; LD 1008, “An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries”; and 
LD 618 , “An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social Emotional Learning and Diversity, 
Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula.” 
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
I am a retired professor of political science and the author of Dark Money and the Politics of 
School Privatization. You will be receiving a great deal of testimony about the danger to a 
democracy of banning books. I agree with those sentiments and wish to add something from my 
ongoing study of attacks on public school systems.  
You will be hearing about the efforts of groups like Moms for Liberty (M4L), No Left Turn in 
Education (NLTE), and Parents Defending Education (PDE) to substitute their reactionary views 
on literature for those of professional librarians. My research shows that these groups and others 
like them do not represent “parents” or “moms.” Rather they are the well-financed obedient 
franchises of extremist political operations. A tell-tale sign is an operation that has nothing and 
then suddenly is bursting with cash. PDE raised over $3,000,000  in its first year of operation. It 
is tied to Leonard Leo, a hardline operator who controls over $1.6 billion in dark money (large 
sums whose true donors are hidden from the public—and from you). NLTE had nothing and then 
was awash in over $500,000  in its first year. M4L had gross receipts exceeding $500,000  in its 
first year. Its Florida PAC received $50,000 from Julie Fancelli, a Publix heiress who also 
donated $3 million to the organizers of the January 6 rally. It is heavily tied into  the presidential 
ambitions of Florida governor Ron DeSantis.  
You will also hear testimony from teachers and librarians who feel threatened and harassed by 
individuals connected to PDE, NLTE, and M4L. The threats and harassment are a foreseeable 
consequence of the activities of these extremist groups. I have seen this over and over across the 
country. They know what they are doing. 
Don’t be fooled by testimony you may hear from Mainers in favor of these bills. Anti-book 
rhetoric filters down from the top. Book ban campaigns are being instigated and orchestrated by 
a hierarchy of religious fundamentalists and plutocrats.  
You can soundly reject book banning in Maine. I hope you do. 
        Sincerely, 
             
        Maurice T. Cunningham  
Maurice Cunningham
Damariscotta
LD 1008
MAURICE T. CUNNINGHAM, JD, PhD
43 BEACH LANE
DAMARISCOTTA, MAINE 04543
May 4, 2023
Re: LD 123, “An Act to Prohibit the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors in 
Public Schools”; LD 1008, “An Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School
Libraries”; and LD 618, “An Act to Eliminate Critical Race Theory, Social Emotional
Learning and Diversity, Equity and Inclusion from School Curricula.”
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
I am a retired professor of political science and the author of Dark Money and the 
Politics of School Privatization. You will be receiving a great deal of testimony about 
the danger to a democracy of banning books. I agree with those sentiments and wish 
to add something from my ongoing study of attacks on public school systems. 
You will be hearing about the efforts of groups like Moms for Liberty (M4L), No Left
Turn in Education (NLTE), and Parents Defending Education (PDE) to substitute 
their reactionary views on literature for those of professional librarians. My research 
shows that these groups and others like them do not represent “parents” or “moms.” 
Rather they are the well-financed obedient franchises of extremist political operations.
A tell-tale sign is an operation that has nothing and then suddenly is bursting with 
cash. PDE raised over $3,000,000 in its first year of operation. It is tied to Leonard 
Leo, a hardline operator who controls over $1.6 billion in dark money (large sums 
whose true donors are hidden from the public—and from you). NLTE had nothing 
and then was awash in over $500,000 in its first year. M4L had gross receipts 
exceeding $500,000 in its first year. Its Florida PAC received $50,000 from Julie 
Fancelli, a Publix heiress who also donated $3 million to the organizers of the January
6 rally. It is heavily tied into the presidential ambitions of Florida governor Ron 
DeSantis. 
You will also hear testimony from teachers and librarians who feel threatened and 
harassed by individuals connected to PDE, NLTE, and M4L. The threats and 
harassment are a foreseeable consequence of the activities of these extremist groups. I
have seen this over and over across the country. They know what they are doing.
Don’t be fooled by testimony you may hear from Mainers in favor of these bills. 
Anti-book rhetoric filters down from the top. Book ban campaigns are being 
instigated and orchestrated by a hierarchy of religious fundamentalists and plutocrats. 
You can soundly reject book banning in Maine. I hope you do.
Sincerely,
Maurice T. Cunningham

