Ray Vensel 
Vice President, Maine Chapter of the Freedom from Religion Foundation  
 
LD 1008 
 
Members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, this is testimony AGAINST LD 
1008.  
Maine schools have a duty to serve all students regardless of race, abilities, religion, national origin 
or ancestry, gender, and/or sexual orientation. Rating books that feature characters who exhibit any 
of those protected identities or content related to those identities will label them as “controversial” or 
“inappropriate”. Thus, labeling of books in such a manner causes harm to students who identify with 
those identities. 
 
A content rating system will lead to the exclusion of certain books or written materials from school 
libraries, which will prevent students from accessing a diverse range of ideas and perspectives. This  
will damage students’ ability to develop critical thinking skills.  
 
The proposed LD will lead to understocking of school libraries, thus making a barely tolerable 
situation worse. Publishers will be less likely to distribute books or written materials with certain 
ratings because it would not be profitable. This will result in a limited selection of books in school 
libraries, which could negatively impact students' learning and education. 
 
Rating books requires that some individual or group makes a judgment about their content. Who will 
decide what is harmful or controversial? Why should their opinion of the book’s content have more 
value than someone else’s?  
 
Parents should have the right to determine what their own children can access or read. Removing access 
to certain books takes this right away from parents by eliminating their ability to choose books for their 
own children, since what one parent finds offensive is not offensive to others.  
In addition, the proposed LD would create administrative burdens for school librarians and staff. The 
process of assigning ratings to each book or written material would be time-consuming and costly 
and would take away from other important duties. 
  
The LD doesn’t protect children from potentially harmful content. It would limit access to diverse 
ideas. It would violate the freedoms of students and parents.  
Please protect public education and vote AGAINST this bill. Thank you.  
 
