Regina  Leonard
Hermon
LD 1008
More than two years ago I started looking into what materials may or may not be in 
our Hermon School system after seeing what was happening and being discovered in 
neighboring towns and across our nation. When I first started this journey, it was to 
prove that they were NOT here in Hermon. I said, “There is no way this stuff is here 
in our little Hermon Community”. Well folks, let me tell you what, it took me about 
an hour of research to see that it sure was, and that is where my journey and the 
journey of many others started. 
Immediate questions I had:
How are the books being selected?
Who is responsible for putting them in the library?
Who is overseeing this process?
My first call was to Mr. Grant (middle school principal at the time), we had, what I 
thought, was a good and honest conversation. He told me he was aware of what was 
happening elsewhere and assured me it wasn’t here in Hermon. He stated that it 
wasn’t the job of the schools to teach “Pop-culture” and that all books went through 
him. I felt pretty good after that phone call, but I kept looking because I still didn’t 
have factual proof. Within minutes I had the library catalog pulled up and started 
searching and found many books I questioned. I connected with other Hermon parents
with the same concerns and realized one parent had started to process a book appeal 
for the book “Milk and Honey”. So, I started going to meetings and participating in 
the book appeal process. It was done appropriately and through the proper channels. 
We followed the process of an appeal, but that didn’t work, but the truth is, it never 
will. It does NOT address the issue with these books and future books/material being 
brought into our schools. The issue is CONTENT and the lack of a proper standards 
rating system so there are only age-appropriate materials available to our children. 
This brings me to the OPT-OUT option that they claim is what works and what we 
need to do moving forward. As parents, why should we be expected to read every 
single book in the school library to know what we need OPT OUT of? As a parent, I 
should be able to know and trust that my child will not be exposed to inappropriate, 
graphic, hyper-sexualized material while at school. If our school had a proper 
standard and content rating system, the problem would be solved. WHY is asking for 
STANDARDS for our children such an area of contention and something that all 
parents can’t get behind?
In January a group of us got together and worked to present a solution to the school 
committee as a starting point to create a standard and appropriate rating system for 
our school. Hundreds of hours of work were put into this effort, work that the School 
Committee should have done on their own. They had been asked for a year and a half 
to do something about the materials and not only did they do nothing, but they also 
ignored questions and concerns from parents. The Committee was presented with a 
plan, a starting point, an olive branch if you will. They were all given a binder with 
the information and research gathered by our group. They were asked to take policy 
IJJ back to the table, look at it again, and add standards. The information presented to 
them was just a sample of what could have been done, it wasn’t us telling them they 
had to do it exactly like we did. Guess what they did with that? NOTHING!!!! In fact,
they rolled their eyes and pushed our binders away, and continued to pass IJJ as it 
was, without any standards. Materials and books that glorify sex acts, prostitution, 
drug use, bestiality, sex trafficking, and more, have NO place in our 
schools……PERIOD. The only way we solve this issue is to create a standard system 
for our schools. Appealing books, opting out…….IT WILL NOT SOLVE THE 
ISSUE. 
We need you to pass LD 1008 and hold the schools, publishing companies, and 
librarians accountable for what they are providing to our children. Some of this 
material is in fact pornographic and in any other setting, it would be unlawful. Please 
Pass LD 1008 and protect our children in this State. 
Thank you. 
