Savannah Sessions
Maine Library Association
LD 1008
To the Committee on Education and Culture,
On behalf of the Maine Library Association and our many members who reside and 
vote in every legislative district of Maine, I am writing to oppose bill LD1008, “An 
Act to Establish a Rating System for Books in School Libraries.”
The Maine Library Association membership includes school, academic, and public 
libraries and library workers. Our members represent communities from every corner 
of the state of Maine, with unique qualities and characteristics. 
Letter ratings, content warnings, and other forms of labeling have no place in school 
or any other type of libraries. These labels are censorship and have negative 
implications for students and educators. Labeling books limits students' ability to 
choose books based on their interests and infringes on their privacy, as labels can be 
seen by others opening a door for judgment, harassment, or worse.
It is unrealistic to expect publishers - who serve national and international audiences 
with vastly different values, beliefs, and world views - to apply blanket ratings such 
as those proposed in LD 1008. In addition, publishers are private entities in a free 
market. Were this bill to pass, would all libraries be forced to remove any not-rated 
materials purchased previously? This would be an enormous waste of taxpayer 
dollars. Would publishers be expected to retroactively rate all books they have ever 
published? How would such an expectation be enforced? Who would check that 
publishers ratings are aligned to community standards? 
School librarians are professionals who are there to connect students with the 
materials they need and want to learn, grow, and thrive in an ever-changing world. 
By labeling books, we remove - carte blanche - materials that are content and age 
appropriate and have already been purchased without a rating. This is a violation of 
students’ First Amendment Rights, is censorship, and is a waste of tax dollars
Only parents and guardians have the right and the responsibility to determine their 
children’s - and only their children’s - access to library resources. Parents and 
guardians who do not want their children to have access to specific library services, 
materials, or facilities should address that with their own children and leave other 
families to make decisions for themselves.
We urge you to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1008.
Sincerely,
Savannah Sessions
Legislative Advocacy Chair
Maine Library Association

