Shawn McBreairty
Maine Source Of Truth 
LD 1008
Anyone who doesn’t want a rating system to keep the grossly hyper-sexualized 
materials from being in our K-12 public schools is simply willing to groom children.  
It’s very basic.  You can’t show a PG minor at school without parental notice, but you
can provide them hardcore anal sex books, as 2022 teacher of the year, Kelsey 
Stoyanova from RSU22, Hampden has?  
It’s like showing a XXX movie at school.  
The book All Boys Aren’t Blue was a book Stoyanova promoted on the wall of the 
classroom to 11 years olds and she and principal Susan Thibedeau pushed it on 
middle school kids with daily incentives, prizes and announcements.  
I’d dare anyone on the committee to read these passages out loud at a playground:
Described in promotional literature as “a primer for teens eager to be allies as well as 
a reassuring testimony for young queer men of color” (emphasis added) includes 
content like this: o Page 201: “You were fully erect at this point. You can’t tell 
anyone, ok? I promised. You grabbed my hand and made me touch it”. o Page 202: 
“By now we were both touching each other. Tried my best not to enjoy it because you
were my cousin. We were crossing a line that family shouldn’t’ cross”. o Page 204: 
“You told me to take off my pajama pants, which I did. You then took off your shorts 
followed by your boxers. Then you stood in front of me fully erect and said, Taste it. 
At first, I laughed and refused. But then you said, come on Matt, taste it. This is what 
boys like us do when we like each other. I finally listened to you. Then you got down 
on your knees and told me to close my eyes. That’s when you began oral sex on me as
well”. Pages 204-205: “You then laid me on the ground and got on top of me. You 
began humping me back and forth. You got up off me and told me to come to the 
bathroom. You began stroking yourself in front of me. Then you began to moan 
slightly. You ejaculated into the toilet”. o Pages 267-268: “I got behind him. For the 
first few minutes, we dry humped and grinded. I was behind him, with my stomach on
his back as we kissed. After a few minutes, he got up and went to this nightstand, 
where he pulled out a condom and some lube. He then lay down on his stomach. I 
knew what I had to do even if I had never done it before. I had one point of reference 
though, and that was the 7+ years of watching porn. I remember the condom was blue
and flavored like cotton candy. I put on some lube and got him up on his knees and I 
began to slide into him from behind. I eased in slowly until I heard him moan. I 
finally came and let out a loud moan to the point where he asked me to quiet down for
the neighbors”. Pages 270-271: “We took each other’s clothes off, fast but deliberate. 
After he told me to lie down on the bed. He asked me to turn over while he slipped a 
condom on himself. There is a fear as with most things you are doing for the first 
time. But this was my ass and I was struggling to imagine someone inside of me, and 
he was big.”
The sexualized grooming of children is what our public schools have become.  
Pass this bill please and provide parents hope that these awful schools can be saved.  
