§“$§'f,'§L 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330I 
ms a BOARDS Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATE5 e S1te' www'mSmaWe 'c0m Maine 5&‘|\00lS\1p\?l"Il\lt ‘I\(lEI\lSA§0CiMI0l1 
TESTIMONY REGARDING 
L.D. 6l8—AN ACT TO ELIMINATE CRITICAL RACE THEORY, SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL 
LEARNING AND DIVERSITY, EQUITY AND INCLUSION FROM SCHOOL CURRICULA 
L.D. 1008—AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A RATING SYSTEM FOR BOOKS IN SCHOOL LIBRARIES 
L.D. 123——AN ACT TO ELIMINATE THE EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES EXCEPTION TO THE 
PROHIBITION ON THE DISSEMINATION OF OBSCENE MATTER TO MINORS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association on three bills being heard today. 
MSSA and MSBA were both opposed to L.D. 618 and L.D. 1008. Regarding L.D. 123, MSBA was opposed 
and MSSA was neither for nor against. 
Regarding L.D. 618, our opposition stems from the strong belief that having our students understand and 
appreciate diversity, equity and inclusion is a necessary component of our educational platform, if we are to 
educate the next generation to understand the world around them. We want to promote a curriculum that 
supports critical thinking, problem-solving, communication, collaboration, and applications of knowledge to 
real-world problems. 
Social-emotional learning (SEL) is the process of developing the self-awareness, self-control, and 
interpersonal skills that are vital for school, work, and life success. People with strong social-emotional skills 
are better able to cope with everyday challenges and beneﬁt academically, professionally, and socially. For 
decades, schools have used The Responsive Classroom as a way of supporting our students social and 
emotional needs. The Responsive Classroom is a student centered, social and emotional approach to teaching 
and discipline. The emphasis is on helping students develop their academic, social, and emotional skills ina 
learning enviromnent that is developmentally responsive to their strengths and needs. 
The Maine Learning Results social studies standards include four content areas one of them being history that 
include performance expectations. Our learning results state that without knowledge of the geography and 
economics of earlier times, history offers only lists of people, events, and dates. Without knowledge of 
history, the institutions of American government and the dynamics of today’s global economy are difficult to 
understand. Linked below are the standards and performance expectations and I would encourage you to 
speciﬁcally look at the History strand. 
https://www.maine.gov/doe/learning/content/socialstudies/standards/history 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA EX¢¢\lliV¢ Dirﬂrlﬂf MSSA Executive Director
Regarding L.D. 1008, we are opposed to a rating system for material in school libraries that 
disregards the professionalism of school librarians and the wisdom of teachers who create 
reading assigmnents or lists for our students. There are certiﬁcation requirements for school 
librarians, just as there are for teachers, and we need to let them do their jobs. 
Books and reading materials are so different for different children. Children grow and mature so 
differently, and placing an age rating on particular reading materials doesn’t automatically 
equate to when a book might be appropriate for any particular student. This is best determined by 
a professional school librarian, student (and parent) who know the content, the student and the 
appropriateness of these materials. 
When we reviewed L.D. 123, regarding the Educational Purposes Exception to the Prohibition 
on the Dissemination of Obscene Matter to Minors, we had initial concems with the bill as 
written, and those concerns were not abated by the amendment. Both represent a form of 
censorship and neither recognizes the process we have in public schools when it comes to our 
selection of reading material for students. 
We have both superintendents and boards engaged in the process of what we teach and the 
materials we use. 
Title 20-A, §l005; Superintendent; powers and duties, outlines this process. It reads: The 
superintendent is responsible for carrying out the policies of the school board established 
pursuant to section 1001, subsection l0-A for the selection and purchase of all educational 
materials. 
We are mindful of age-appropriate reading requirements in the classroom and in our school 
libraries. If parents come to us concerned about their child’s reading list, we attempt to 
accommodate them.
