gDv_ ' " 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coaiition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
@O End DOl'l'¥95 ﬁ€ Vl°lBl’\C9 207_43O_8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
Neither for Nor Against LD 1024: “Resolve, to Study the Impact of Divorce, Child Support 
issues and Custody Issues on Children, Parents, Health, Poverty and Housing lnsecurity. ” 
Wednesday, March 22, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, l am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV) regarding LD 1024, “Resolve, to Study the Impact of Divorce, Child 
Support issues and Custody Issues on Children, Parents, Health, Poverty and Housing 
lnsecurity. ” 
The Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence serves and represents a membership 
of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers in Maine‘ as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 12,000 
victims of domestic violence in Maine. Many of the advocates working within these 
programs are survivors themselves. We deeply appreciate that this proposal recognizes the 
importance of including domestic violence advocacy perspective in this important 
conversation and provides an opportunity for the participation of an advocate with 
experience working with survivors of domestic violence. We would respectfully request a 
small amendment of Section 2, subparagraph 5 so that it reads, “One member appointed by 
the President of the Senate who is a representative of a statewide coalition of domestic 
violence resource centers, ” which is consistent with prior enacted language concerning the 
participation of domestic violence advocates. 
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this important conversation. 
Contact lnformation: _ 
Andrea Mancuso, 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 430-8334, Email: andrea@mcedv.o[g 
1 
Caring Unlimited, serving York County; Through These Doors, serving Cumberland County; Safe Voices, 
serving Androscoggin, Oxford and Franklin Counties; New Hope Midcoast, serving Sagadahoc, Lincoln, Knox 
and Waldo Counties; Next Step Domestic Violence Project, serving Hancock and Washington Counties; Partners 
for Peace, serving Penobscot and Piscataquis Counties; and Hope and Justice Project, serving Aroostook 
County. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
