Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the committee, 
» 
My name is Ben Leeman and I am a disabled Navy combat veteran. Back in May of 20 l3 I came 
home from a year long deployment in Afghanistan to a more than unfortunate marital situation. WhereI 
learned that my wife had found someone else and wanted a divorce. To no fault of my own I was faced 
with this devastating newsand had no choice in the matter. Preceding the divorce, I realized very quickly 
that I could no longer afford our mortgage and pay child support for three children at the same time. So, 
we decided to sell our house in Bath, Maine that we had only purchased a few years prior. At this point 
we both became homeless and had to move in with family while sharing custody of our children. If not 
for our families taking us in, I do not know what would have happened us and our children. Then in 
August of 2013 we went through our divorce at the West Bath District Court House where I was ordered 
to pay spousal support, child support and medical insurance for our children. The child support alone was 
more than what our mortgage was. My children ’s mother did not work at the time. So, the calculation was 
100% my income vs 0% her income. After this, neither party could afford to live on their own. Again, we 
had to live with someone or become homeless. Thankfully, for both of us, our families graciously let us 
stay with them. In July of 2014, my children ’s mother remarried someone who had a substantial income 
and to this day has chosen not to work." Since being divorced, I decided to end my military career at l0 
years that way I would never have to be deployed again and not lose any more time away from my 
children. This was a very difficult decision for me to make, because I wanted to continue serving our 
country in the armed forces. Then I transitioned into a new civilian career. Still not being able to afforda 
home of my own Habitat for Humanity 7 Rivers in Topsham, Maine picked our _ family to do a veteran 
home build in Brunswick, Maine. Where I worked with them to go through the process of building a new 
home for my children and I. We ﬁnally moved into our new home in October of 2015. This was the first 
time my children and I had an actual home that was our own in over 2 years. After we got settled into our 
new home I eventually went back to college. While still working full time and going back to school I was 
able to ﬁnish my bachelor ’s degree in business in January of 2019. The goal of completing my degree 
was to open more work opportunities, which could potentially provide more income for our family. My 
primary motivation for, doing all these things Was to improve the lifestyle of my-children ’s home life, 
because they had suffered enough since going through divorce. 
I am not only here to share my story, but to urgently request that you all approve of LD 1024, 
Resolve, to Study the Impact of Divorce, Child Support Issues and Custody Issues on Children, Parents, 
Health, Poverty and Housing Insecurity. Because my family is by far not the only family to be completely 
devasted by divorce. Changes need to be made. The Great State of Maine has created a system that puts 
families going through divorce into poverty, making them homeless, which has negatively impactedA 
parents and their children ’s mental and physical health. We can do better; our people deserve better and 
by moving forward with this legislation. We can make changes together that will change the lives ofI 
future Maine generations to come.I
_ 
Thank you for your time and consideration in this matter. 
Sincerely,I 
Benjamin R. Leeman 
(207) 319-6948 
Brleeman@yahoo.corn -
