Leo St. Peter  
99 Webb Road 
Waterville, Maine  
     
March 22, 2023  
 
 
L.D. 1024 – Resolve, to Study the Impact of Divorce, Child Support  
Issues and Custody Issues on Children, Parents, Health, Poverty and Housing Insecurity  
 
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and esteemed  members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary , my name is Leo St. Peter . I am a resident of Waterville, Maine.  
 
I am a proud father of three children who have fallen victim to the devastation of a broken family.  The deterioration of their well-being has resulted in behavioral problems at school, fear of showing affection, 
an inability to communicate , and a plethora of other behaviors .  I am here today to urge you to support 
L.D. 1024  and to consider modif ications to the make up of this proposed commission . 
 
While I am grateful for Representative Arata’s work to bring this issue forward, the proposed commission 
lacks the voices  of parents , children, guardians , and teachers.  While one  could assume that the 
fourteen members identified in the language of this bill  may be parents or grandparents , this i ssue is too 
critical to not focus on intentional representation .  I urge the sponsor and members of this distinguished 
committee  to incorporate those voices that are navigating the impact of divorce on a daily basis.  
 
I am not here today to present my own story as sadly, the damage done to my children is not unique.  All 
of us in this room have been impacted by the dysfunction of the current  process either personally or  
through the eyes of family and friends .  Exorbitant legal fees , excruciating court delays, and the daily 
inability to help those you love takes an immeasurable toll .  These are just some of the facets of divorce 
and custody issues that are prevalent in the existing divorce process  in Maine . These issues can and must 
be presented  by those that are living with them daily . 
 
Please consider  my genuine frustration with the system in place.  P arents are left to decipher com plicated 
court decisions  that seemingly  defy reason.  Parents incur costly , never -ending legal fees to u phold  their 
rights  in an effort to support their children.  When you sha re custody with a former spouse, you have  no 
tools to  uphold the court’s orders .  If a parent fails to honor the custody schedule, law enforcement is 
unable to assist  unless there is a critical threat.  When too many violations occur, parents are left to return 
to court, again depleting family resources to pay for additional legal fees.   
 
This is an ongoing , catastrophic, and mostly ignored crisis in our state.  I believe this proposed 
commission is a positive step towards hearing the voices of the children who are languishing in 
debilitating  situations , but it’s important to remember that divorce does not discriminate.  Children from 
indigent families as well as children from financially secure families suffer from the same emotional 
distress that stems from divorce.   
 
I want to thank you for  the opportunity to share my support L.D. 1024, and I  urge each of you to vote 
Ought To Pass with the recommendations noted above .  I welcome any questions you may have.  
 
Sincerely,   
 
Leo St. Peter  
Arbor Technologies  
arbortechnologies@gmail.com  
207-877 -4128  
