Maine Sheriffs ’ Association  
“One Team, One Mission”  
 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President  
 
Sheriff Scott Nichols , 1st Vice -President, Sheriff William King , 2nd Vice -President – Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary –  
Sheriff Todd Brackett , Treasurer – Sheriff  Troy Morton, Immediate Past President –  
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President -at-Large - Mary -Anne LaMarre, Executive Director  
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
 
March 22, 2023 
 
L.D. 1024 –  Resolve, to Study the Impact of Divorce, Child Support Issues and Custody 
Issues on Children, Parents, Health, Poverty and Housing Insecurity  
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judic iary, my name is Mary -Anne LaMarre and I have the privilege of working 
for the Maine Sheriffs Association as their Executive Director. I am submitting this testimony on their behalf.  
 As elected officials, sheriffs have unique and cherished relationships w ith the people they serve 
and protect.  They are deeply invested in the wellbeing of those citizens entrusted to them.  Sheriffs are charged with multi -faceted responsibilities and too often are witness to the 
devastating impact of neglect, poverty, and a plethora of other damaging events that impact the lives of our youngest citizens.  
 
Earlier this month, the Maine sheriffs invited former Senator Bill Diamond to speak at our 
monthly board meeting.  Senator Diamond’s presentation was estimate d to take fifteen minutes 
of discussion, though an hour went by before their engaged discussion concluded.  Sheriffs connected with the mission of Senator Diamond’s non- profit, created to bring together Maine 
people to  find better solutions to protect children in our state. We believe that L.D. 1024 is a 
positive step in that direction.  
 The sponsor of L.D. 1024 presented this bill to  create a study commission with one seat allocated 
to law enforcement.  We want to commend the sponsor, Representative Arata,  for seeking the 
input of law enforcement on this study commission.  In our support, we offer to either serve on the study commission or assist  the commission as their work begins.  
 None of us are  immune to the impact of child endangerment.  We can and must  work together to 
implement better outcomes for Maine’s most vulnerable community, our children.  
 Maine sheriffs want to thank you for the opportunity to share our support L.D. 1024, and they 
urge each of you to vote Ought To Pass.  Sincerely,  
 Mary -Anne LaMarre  
Executive Director  
Maine Sheriffs Association  
mlamarre@mainesheriffs.org  

