,,_ /., 
A‘ .\ 
Maine Sheriffs ’ Association 
2;, “One Team, One Alission” 
‘§'1;I§"‘; ~‘ 
.- 
Sherlff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, 1s‘Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"“ Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President-at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
March 13, 2023 
L.D. 674 — An Act to Allow Bail Commissioners to Carry Firearms in 
Correctional Facilities and Jails 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Jason Trundy. I am the Sheriff of 
Waldo County and here on behalf of the Maine Sheriffs Association. 
Maine sheriffs discussed this bill and voted unanimously to oppose L.D. 674 — An Act to Allow 
Bail Commissioners to Carry Firearms in Correctional Facilities and Jails. Maine Sheriffs ’ 
legislative policy committee met and discussed this bill and voted unanimously to oppose L.D. 
673. 
Maine sheriffs are entrusted to serve and protect Maine citizens, and it’s an honor and privilege 
we do not take lightly. We feel that allowing bail commissioners to carry ﬁrearms in our jails is 
an unnecessary and dangerous proposal. 
Jails can and must be a safe place for all, including bail commissioners. Their duties and 
responsibilities can be challenging but they should not cause such fear that the need for a ﬁrearm 
is appropriate. Each facility can provide protection should a bail commissioner feel anxious 
about walking to or from their vehicle and this is provided upon request at each of Maine’s 
ﬁfteen jails. 
There are a plethora of scenarios that were discussed by Maine sheriffs when discussing this bill. 
Tragic accidents can and should be avoided and we urge members of this committee to vote 
Ought Not to Pass on L.D. 674. 
I Welcome any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Sheriff Jason Trundy 
O/B/O Maine Sheriffs ’ Association
