 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 674, An Act to Allow Bail Commissioners to Carry Firearms in Correctional Facilities and Jails   
 
March 13, 2023 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in opposition  to LD 674. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Under LD 674, a bail commissioner would be permitted to possess a firearm in a correctional 
facility or jail while performing official duties, subject to the approval of the chief administrative officer of the 
correctional facility or the jail administrator. Very simply, this is not acceptable for jails or correctional 
facilities. 
 
Currently, guns are not allowed in jails. That applies to the county sheriff, deputies, and other correctional 
officers. There is a very simple reason for this: safety. Having a gun in a jail poses a risk to other prisoners, and 
it poses a risk to the personnel working in the jail.   
 
With this backdrop, it is completely inappropriate to allow anyone to have a gun in jail, including bail 
commissioners. For this reason, we oppose LD 674.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
