Testimony of Brian Smith of Machiasport to Joint Standing Committee on Fisheries and Wildlife 
  
In Opposition to (LD – 728) An Act to Amend the Bag Limit for Turkey  
 
Good Afternoon Senator LaFontaine, Representative Landry and distinguished members of this 
Committee. I am Brian Smith here in opposition to LD-728. I’ve been a wild turkey hunter of 37 years 
and former Regional Director of the National Wild Turkey Federation for New England and Atlantic 
Canada. I spent 10 years as a volunteer raising money to restore our greatest game bird in Maine 
through research, habitat improvement and trap and transfer of Wild Turkeys throughout Maine. 
Thanks to great efforts by NWTF volunteers and the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife, Wild Turkeys thrive in Maine and we have one of the best quality hunts in the country. We 
are still trying to improve turkey populations in parts of Maine, educate farmers and landowners and 
insure that we have a safe and ethical hunt every year.   
 
The Wild Turkey population is less than 1/10th of the Ruffed Grouse population in this state and 
cannot withstand a similar bag limit. A few years ago as a member of the IF&W Advisory Council, we 
approved a very liberal bag limit of 5 turkeys per fall season. That is a higher bag limit than any other 
Northeastern State. Farmers and landowners can obtain permits from IF&W to shoot what they 
perceive to be nuisance turkeys and local populations can be managed through that method. A four 
turkey per day bag limit would devastate our population ruining 45 years of restoration efforts.  
 
Several states that I have hunted have stopped their fall turkey hunts or greatly reduced bag limits due 
to drastic population declines. If this were to happen in Maine, it would impact the hundreds of spring 
and fall turkey guides and their clients. I urge you to vote “Ought not to pass” on this short sighted bill. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify and for your service to the outdoor community in Maine. 
 
Respectfully submitted;  
 
Brian Smith – Machiasport 
255-1000 – bowhunter@mgemaine.com 
Brian Smith
Machiasport
LD 728
I am opposed to this bill. 
