 
 
 
 
770 Augusta Road  Edgefield, SC 29824  1.800.THE.NWTF (843.6983)  www.nwtf.org  
 
April 24, 2023  
 
The Honorable David LaFountain  
The Honorable Scott Landry  
Co-Chair s, Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
Maine State Legislature  
Cross Building, Room 206  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Dear Senator LaFountain  and Representative Landry , 
 
The Maine State Chapter of the National Wild Turkey Federation (NWTF -Maine) would like 
to express our opposition to LD 728 An Act to Amend the Bag Limit for Turkey .  
 
In 2017, the Maine Legislature made the commendable decision to grant the Maine 
Departmen t of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) authority over the season setting and 
harvest of wild turkeys. That decision gave  authority to the agency best suited to make 
science -based dec isions in the interests of both the wildlife resource and stakeholders. 
This approach is consistent with the North American Model of Wildlife Management in 
which two key tenets are that wildlife are managed as a public trust, and management is 
guided by the best available science. NWTF -Maine strongly supports this approach and 
urges the Legislature to defer to IFW on matters concerning the harvest and 
management of the wild turkey in Maine.  
 
The restoration of the wild turkey remains one of the greates t conservation successes in 
history.  Today, Maine enjoys abundant turkey hunting opportunities in both the spring 
and fall.  The proposed changes to link the turkey harvest bag limit with the ruffed grouse 
bag limit would be devastating and unsustainable for our turkey population.  The 
differences in habitat use, life history, and animal behavior  between these two species  
necessitate individual harvest management strategies .  The se strategies should prioritize 
the long -term health of wild turkey  populations , and then secondly , for recreational use 
such as hunting and wildlife watching.  When implemented correctly , these season 
frameworks provide the appropriate balance between hunter satisfaction, population 
health, and social carrying capacity.   
 
We greatly appreciate IFW’s completed and planned research focused on managing wild 
turkey populations in Maine.  We feel any future changes to ME’s turkey hunting seasons 
should be driven  by research  and monito ring efforts to ensure the best outcomes for all 
stakeholders.  For these reasons, we ask the Committee to report this bill as ‘ought not to 
pass.’  
 
 
Yours in Conservation,  
Adam Tibbetts  
Adam Tibbetts  
President, NWTF -ME 
 
