TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 728 
"AN ACT TO AMEND THE BAG LIMIT FOR TURKEY" 
SPONSORED BY: Senator Timberlake of Androscoggin 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Senator Black of Franklin and 
Representative Lyman of Livermore Falls 
Representative Wood of Greene 
Representative Mason of Lisbon 
DATE OF HEARING: April 24, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Director at the Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to L.D. 728. 
This bill provides that bag limits for wild turkey established by rule by the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife must be the same as bag limits for ruffed grouse. 
While we appreciate the intent of this bill and the desire to simplify hunting regulations, aligning 
bag limits for turkey and grouse would potentially threaten the sustainability of our wild turkey 
population, or significantly reduce hunting opportunities for ruffed grouse, wild turkey, or both 
species. Although wild turkey and ruffed grouse are game birds, they are distinct species with 
unique life history traits, management considerations, habitat needs, and social tolerance. The 
wild turkey has a limited distribution in Maine due to habitat availability and impacts of severe 
winter conditions that occur in northern, western and eastern Maine. Turkey populations can 
be impacted by overharvest, particularly when females are harvested in the fall. In contrast, the 
ruffed grouse has a robust statewide population , with population levels primarily driven by 
spring and summer weather, which can affect young-of-the-year survival. Unlike with turkeys, 
hunting mortality has been shown to have very little influence over grouse numbers, even in 
marginal habitats. 
The Department recently went through an extensive planning process to develop wild turkey 
management, goals and objectives. This process included multiple opportunities for public 
input, including a scientific survey of public attitudes towards wild turkeys. That effort
identified several wildlife managements districts (WM Ds) that were approaching or exceeding 
social tolerance and in need of population stabilization. To address this issue, in 2019 the 
Department established a season framework with liberalized fall bag limits in those specific 
Wi\/lDs to stabilize populations through the harvest of females. However, in many northern 
WMDs the wild turkey population is small and very vulnerable to overharvest. 
Currently, total bag limits for wild turkey in the fall range from 1 to 5 turkeys, with several 
WMDs closed to fall hunting completely. Bag limits for ruffed grouse are set at 4 per day, 
statewide. if the Department was required to implement this bill, we would have to either 
increase the bag limit of wild turkey to match those of ruffed grouse, reduce the bag limit of 
ruffed grouse to match those of wild turkey, close hunting seasons for one or both species in 
some WMDs, or adjust the bag limits for both species to align them with each other. We 
suspect that any of these options would be met with significant opposition from ruffed grouse 
and/or wild turkey hunters. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
