Hello my name is Daniel Cellucci, and l appreciate the opportunity to speak with you all 
here in support of this Bill today. l come here today realizing that many of my colleagues within 
this industry are split on how to feel and whether they trust the language of any bill that goes 
through legislation in regards to this industry. 
l think this mistrust comes from a place where we feel beaten down, working harder more now 
then ever to literally make less than ever, and in most cases make nothing at all. You see, we 
can talk about parallels of other industries, but in reality many of us feel we are the gatekeepers 
and cultivators to A sacred connection between cannabis and human culture. This makes 
being completely objective very difficult because we are so emotionally tied to this industry 
with our lives and livelihoods. This is not lust another investment in our portfolio, rather this is 
a wayof life, and one where l hope carefully think about how we craft its future. 
We must always keep room for those who work to manifest a more ecologically sustainable, 
cottage industry full of unique complex family owned operations, that make up the lifeblood of 
business here in Maine, and within This Country 
l have thought long and hard about whether this Bill supports that, perhaps there are nuances 
that i am unaware of that could be exp‘oited to meet someone’s agenda that goes against the 
greater good, but we have tried this ‘ulﬂcapped market’ for years now And it has brought us 
face to face with the sobering reality of simple economics. l realize the complexity of solving 
an entire industry ’s issues can not be simplified to one single solution. However it does not 
matter how many times you fix the rudder, if there is a massive hole sinking our ship, we must 
prioritize our problems and work through this together to get safely to shore. 
As an operator and farmer in Adult Use" , I know this market is saturated, there is not a single 
oultivater in this state that that could argyze when l say the market is not just saturated but well 
beyo _nd_,over satuiation. Farmers drowning, and Perhaps they have different solutions on 
how to wade through these rising waters, but l have read through this law and believe it to bea 
fair start on how to allow the rebalancing of the supply and demand, while simultaneously 
ensuring we do not completely close the doors on our brothers and sister farmers who still 
wish to enter Adult Use in the future. 
Other states have enacted similar measures with success in compounding sustainable growth. 
This law should not be looked at as experimental nor misguided, I believe this to be a step in 
the direction of calming the tides of a fiooded market. lt will help Maine continue leading the 
way in creating an exemplary Cannabis Industry for our Country to model around. 
Lastly I just want to reiterate, lt is very important to understand that the law itself does not cut 
off people from entering the adult use market, henceforth and forever, rather it assesses market 
pricing and saturation. every 4 months and simply slows the faucet rather than allowing for the 
pouring in of an unreaiisticamount of operators. l realize The promise of doing well in any 
business or indust: y is never guar;-_“i,teta¢i' . However I would argue that, to fight upstream 
against the laws of supply and denltilnd in this current level of saturation is nearly impossible 
unlesswe stabilize what we currently have or unless new businesses have no intention of 
operating within the bounds of our legitimate market. 
Thank you for your time and I hope you consider consider my testimony when making your 
decisions. Thank you. 
_ ,. 
“arr
