   
 
 
 
 
 
Legislative Document 1391 : Cannabis Industry Price Fixing Is Not 
Conducive to an Orderly Market  
 
Prepared for:  Chair man Craig Hickman , Maine Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
  
Prepared by: Geoffrey Lawrence, Director of Drug Policy, Reason Foundation  
     
Date: April 10, 2023  
 
 
Legislative Document 1391  Would Restrict Supply in Attempt to Fix Prices  
 
Dear  Chair man Hickman  and members  of the committee:  
 
On behalf  of Reason  Foundation,  thank  you for accepting  these  comments  and making  them  part of the public 
record.  Reason Foundation is committed to ensuring that state -regulated marijuana markets are 
competitive, offer widespread opportunities for entrepreneurship, and can successfully transition commerce 
away from dangerous illi cit markets and into the legal market.  
 
Legislative Document 1391 authorizes regulators to impose a moratorium on the issuance of new cultivation 
licenses and even renewals of existing licenses if the wholesale price of cannabis declines by more than 20% 
in any two consecutive fiscal quarters or if the aggregate statewide quantity of cultivated cannabis is three 
times greater than aggregate retail sales over any 90 -day period. While sponsors are motivated by a desire to 
protect existing licensees from finan cial struggles due to falling prices, we believe market forces are most 
appropriate for regulating supply and demand.  
 
Maine does not attempt to restrict the supply of turnips or radishes  in order to ensure price stability. Instead, 
the owners and managers of agricultural enterprises assume financial risk by operating within those markets 
and must plan their purchase or production decisions to align with forecasts of consumer demand. Canna bis 
markets are not fundamentally different from markets for turnips, radishes or other commodities in this 
respect. Risk of loss is a fundamental component of a market economy. The use of production quotas to 
manage prices could prevent new and innovative  companies from emerging. These new companies could 
produce goods consumers value more highly than what the market currently offers. Consumer welfare also 
benefits from increased competition and falling prices, even if incumbent firms dislike falling profi t margins.  
 
Moreover, supply limitations that focus only on the aggregate incorrectly assume that all marijuana products 
are equal in quality. This is manifestly untrue, and a number of publications within the industry, such as High 
Times  or Dope Magazine,  devote regular space to review and praise cannabis products and brands that 
differentiate or offer greater value than their competitors. Even if some brands cannot sell any products 
during a period of depressed aggregate demand, their competitors  may still face demand that exceeds their 
supply capacity.  
 
We urge the committee to reject proposals to command and control the cannabis industry to achieve any 
Commented [SS1]: Does Maine attempt to restrict other 
types of farming or cultivation, though, to protect 
incumbents? That might be a more accurate comparison.  
Commented [GL2R1]: Good point.  
Commented [SS3]: Is it worth mentioning here that 
artificially keeping prices high encourages consumers to 
keep buying from illegal sellers?  
Commented [GL4R3]: Maybe, but I think it's 
unnecessary. Telling them not to act l ike Soviets should be 
sufficient.  
   
 
 
 
form of price fixing. Members should instead encourage free and open competition to improve co nsumer 
welfare and overall market development.  
 
Thank you,   
  
Geoffrey Lawrence   
Managing Director of Drug Policy, Reason Foundation   
 
