 
22788659.v1 Public Comment Before the Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs In Support of L.D. 1391 
 
Hannah E. King, Esq. 
April 10, 2023 
 
Senate Chair Hickman, House Chair Supica, and members of Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee: 
 
My name is Hannah King. I am a partner in the Cannabis Practice Group of 
Dentons, a global law firm with offices in Portland, Maine.  I have practiced 
cannabis law in since 2015 and represent hundreds of clients in the cannabis space, 
most of whom operate in Maine.  I have been an active participant in legislative 
and regulatory changes to Maine’s medical and adult use cannabis laws and 
regulations since 2016.  I was appointed to two terms on the Marijuana Advisory 
Commission as a representative of the adult use cannabis industry. I am here to 
speak in support of L.D. 1391.  
 
L.D. 1391, An Act to Limit Cannabis Cultivation Licenses to Protect the 
Cannabis Market, would give the Office of Cannabis Policy the authority to stop 
issuing adult use conditional cultivation licenses if certain metrics demonstrating 
oversupply are met.  While most state business licenses are not capped, the state 
does institute caps where there are unique, industry specific policy reasons to do 
so. For example, last year this legislature adopted a limitation on commercial 
pogie-fishing licenses. Likewise, there is a cap on the number of agency liquor 
store licenses the state can issue.  
 
Restrictions on the number of adult use cultivation licenses is necessary 
because, unlike any other businesses: (1) cannabis businesses cannot market or sell 
their product outside of the state of Maine (2) they do not have access to 
bankruptcy protections, (3) there is a robust illicit market that oversupply could be 
diverted to; and (4) adult use cannabis is an emergent market that started two years 
ago, meaning it is difficult for prospective operators to assess demand in building 
their business models or deciding whether to enter the market.  For these reasons, 
many states that legalized cannabis capped cultivation licenses at the outset 
including Illinois, New Jersey, Connecticut, Georgia, and Ohio.  In fact, the 
citizens’ initiative that legalized adult use cannabis in Maine in 2016 include a cap 
on cultivation licenses, prohibiting the state from issuing licenses for more than 
300,000 square feet of flowering canopy.  That cap was removed by the legislature 
 
22788659.v1 when it overhauled the citizen’s initiative before the program was rolled out.  
Recently, states such as Oregon, Washington, Oklahoma, and Michigan, that did 
not have caps on licenses initially, have amended their laws to restrict the issuance 
of additional cultivation licenses to address the adverse impacts of oversupply on 
businesses and consumers.  Other states, such as Massachusetts, who is facing 
massive cultivation business failures that are threatening to destabilize the entire 
market, are also considering a moratorium or limit on cultivation licenses.   
 
 Maine’s adult use cannabis market, which has 89 licensed cultivation 
facilities and only 119 licensed adult use retail stores, produces more cannabis than 
retail stores can absorb.  The companies that are being harmed by this oversupply 
are the small, standalone cultivation facilities.  Larger vertically integrated 
operators, who have their own sales outlets and do not have to rely on wholesale 
sales, can weather the storm.  It is the small farmers—the Maine businesses and 
families that invested their lifesavings in their operations—that are struggling the 
most as a result of the oversupply of cannabis in the market. Maine prides itself on 
craft industries and locally owned, small family-run businesses.  Without limiting 
new cultivation licenses in the state, these types of businesses will likely fail at a 
proportionally higher rate than larger companies, consolidating cultivation among 
the large vertically integrated operators.  These family businesses will not have 
access to bankruptcy protections, so the financial implications for the business 
owners could be significant and long lasting.  The closure of small craft businesses 
will also harm consumers, reducing the diversity of products available and, with a 
small number of businesses controlling all aspects of the industry, increase prices.  
 
For the foregoing reasons, I urge you to consider supporting L.D. 1391.  
 
