l\/laine State Legislature 
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
19 Union Street 
Augusta, ME 04330 
April 10, 202 
Public Testimony — LD 1391 - Opposed 
Good Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members of the 
joint committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Joel Pepin, l ama 
resident of Standish, and l am Co-Founder and Owner of JAR Cannabis Company, a 
vertically integrated company that operates in both the medical and adult use 
cannabis programs here in Maine. 
lam opposed to LD 1391. I have always been in support of an open and free 
cannabis market in the State of Maine, going back to the efforts and support JAR 
contributed to the Yes on 1 campaign back in 2016 that ultimately passed and 
became the catalyst for launching our current adult use cannabis program. 
This bill attempts to limit cultivation and supply of cannabis in the adult use 
program. Instead of trying to limit the supply, l think all stakeholders should be 
trying to increase the demand and the size of our market. 
Per capita, i\/laine has the highest concentration of talented cultivators out of any 
state in the country. The strongest asset to Maine's cannabis program is the legacy 
cultivators, extraction artists, culinary experts who day in and day out produce 
nothing but the highest quality cannabis products consistently. These legacy 
operators have given Maine an extremely strong reputation as a market with great 
quality cannabis at fair prices. Some of these legacy operators haven't entered 
the adult use market yet — this bill would prevent many of them from doing that.
Some of these operators are in the adult use market and are in the process of 
expansion. 
My company is expanding and plans to continue to expand as we open more retail 
stores. To be stopped by from doing that by this legislation would be a deathblow 
to my company. Yes, the supply side in the adult use market is ﬂooded, but not 
for all operators. Just because some cultivators over built their facilities and aren't 
selling wholesale cannabis doesn't mean all cultivators are in that same boat. 
Please do not pass this bill. 
Sincerely, 
Joel Pepin 
Co-Owner 
JAR Cannabis Co. 
joel@jarcannabis.com
