Testifying in favor of LD1391 
John Emery 
62 lntervale Road, Freeport ME 04032 
Emery Agency LLC 
Thank you for the opportunity to voice our support. of this bill. 
My name is John Emery, and l'm an entrepreneur who moved from Massachusetts to Maine over the 
pandemic. t closed our company in Massachusetts to re—open as a Maine LLC, and l employ Maine 
residents in my marketing agency. 
My family comes from a long line of Chebeague island residents, lobstermen, and school-teachers. 
My wife and I, wtth our 3 children, have so enjoyed the way of Maine, and what this state stands for. 
The regenerative "agriculture, the working waterfront, the incredible Freeport schools... we haven't 
missed Massachusetts at all. 
l do have a vested interest in this as a small equity owner of a cannabis farm here in Maine, but more 
so an advocate of wisdom, in how we operate - and learning from states that have gone before us. 
Those states that have gone this route, and seen their legal cannabis industry collapse, are offering 
us a lesson ~~ a short—cut, if you will... to-avoid the misery of an oversaturated market. Wisdom is 
learning the lesson without having to experience the pain first~hand. 
I'd implore us to observe the great states of Colorado and California, so that we don't repeat history, 
and see the next 3-5 years be a graveyard for Maine's entrepreneurs. 
This industry has created a promise for many people —— to come out of the shadows and be dignified 
in their craft, perhaps for the first time in their lives. Maine has voted to create that ecosystem of 
opportunity for these people. it would be a shame to have it all be a flash in the pan —- a short 3-4 
year run — and have those people retreat back to the shadows. 
l recognize there's temptation on the part of the State to collect the revenue from added licenses, 
but barreling forward without iearning from those that’ve gone before us seems antithetical to what 
l've seen Maine stand for. Maine provides infrastructure and support for honest, hard—working 
people. Farmers, fishermen and craftspeople. This state is and can continue to be a bastion of 
honest hard work, and innovation, while not drifting too far from the simple things in lite. 
l'm not sure what happens whenever this is federally legalized, and the state lines open up, but if we 
want large, successful cannabis companies to be headquartered here in Maine, we have to do 
everything we can to support cultivators in the near-term. While we have the protection of state lines 
being closed, we have to be smart to not overproduce product for an underperforming retail market. 
As these smali companies are squeezed and inevitably go out of business, this will ultimately result 
in reduced revenue for the state and of course -— a less sustainable industry overall. 
l can tell you that no one is rushing to Colorado or California to open a new cannabis cultivation 
company. We don't want that to be true of us. 
l believe this bill is necessary to ensure the loniyterm sustainability of this industry. We have the 
unique opportunity to set a new standard for future states legalizing recreational cannabis to learn, 
and beneﬁt from.- 
Thank you.
