A STATE OF MAINE 
OFFICE or CANNABIS POLICY msreu Lc FIGUEROA 
162 STATE HOUSE STATION °°~"“ISS‘°"E*‘
' 
_ 1'}? 19 UNION STREET i 
FIRST FLOOR OFFICE or CANNABIS roucv 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0162 
JANET T. MILLS JOHN l-IUDAK 
GOVERNOR DRECTQR 
April 10, 2023 
Re: LD 1391 -An Act to Limit Cannabis Cultivation Licenses to Protect the Cannabis Market 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
I am John Hudak, Director of the Office of Camiabis Policy (OCP) and I am before you today to 
provide testimony on behalf of our office in support of LD 1391. We appreciate the sponsor 
bringing this issue forward for discussion and welcome the opportunity to examine what tools 
are necessary to prevent the collapse of the adult use cannabis economy due to overproduction of 
cannabis. This is critical to ensure the health of the hundreds of businesses, and their employees, 
operating in the adult use program. 
Right now, Maine is experiencing a healthy decline in the average price per gram of adult use 
cannabis ﬂower.‘ This decline is indicative of a maturing cannabis market that poses signiﬁcant 
competition for the illicit cannabis market. What concerns us is that issues of oversupply have 
come on quickly in other statesz , causing markets to collapse over the course of one or two ﬁscal 
quarters. 
Frankly, we need not even look to other states for examples of the dramatic economic impacts of 
oversupply — Maine’s medical cannabis market — which ended 2021 with 6 times more medical 
carmabis than medical cannabis patients were using3 — saw 1353 registered caregivers exit the 
medical program over the course of last year. To better understand this exodus, earlier this year 
our ofﬁce developed a brief survey that was sent to every caregiver who did not renew their 
caregiver registration from January l, 2022 through January 3 ls‘ of this year. The survey, which 
was sent via e-mail to each former registered caregiver, collected responses from 117 former 
‘ See OCP’s adult use open data dashboard at wwwmaine.gov/dafs/ocp/open-data/adult-use that includes annual 
price per gram ﬁgures ﬁom market-launch to present, as well as month-over-moth price-per-gram ﬁgures for the 
most recent 12 months. In 2020, when the adult use cannabis program launched in Maine, the average price per 
gram of adult use cannabis was $15.83 based upon retail sales data reported in the state’s inventory tracking system. 
At the end of 2022, that ﬁgure had dropped to $8.18/gram. 
2 See e.g. the Recreational Marijuana Supply and Demand Legislative Reports of the Oregon Liquor and Cannabis 
Commission, 2023 report available here: https://'www.oregon.gov/olcc/Docs/reports/2023 —Supply-and-Demand 
Repoitpdf and Schaneman, Bart “Cannabis growers report bumper harvest amid overproduction, low prices”, 
MJBiz Daily, November 7, 2022, available at: httpszf/mjbizdaily.com/cannabis-growers-report-bumper-harvest 
amid-overproduction-low-prices! 
3 See Maine Ofﬁce of Cannabis Policy Cannabis Markets & Associated Outcomes - Survey Findings and 
Implications available at: httpszz‘/wwwmaine.gov/dafs/ocp/sitesfmaine.gov.dafs.ocp/ ﬁles/inline- 
ﬁles/Maine%20OCP%20AHP%20Report%2006~22.pdf, published Spring 2022. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/ ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES
caregivers, around 8.7% of the 1339 former caregivers Whose e-mails did not bounce back. The 
vast majority (83.3% of respondents) reported engaging in cultivation activities either for sale 
directly to patients or for Wholesale. 
When We asked former caregivers to share with us their top ﬁve reasons for leaving the medical 
cannabis program, the most frequently identiﬁed was “oversupply of product/lower prices” , with 
58.1% of respondents citing those issues as a contributing factor to their departure. We look 
forward to sharing the full results of that survey with this committee in the weeks to come. 
As we have seen in states like Oregon, it can take years for cannabis economies to recover from 
these market shocks. In learning from the lessons from other states, We have determined that 
OCP needs tools like the ones included in this bill, to manage overproduction in the market 
proactively. The commonsense measures included in LD 1391 will give OCP the ability to 
ensure that the production capacity of the adult use market does not outstrip consumer demand. 
As always, we thank you for your time and we’ll do our best to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Phone: (207)287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.g0v/dafs/ocp/
