
Jordan Smith
Pownal
LD 1391
To whom it may concern,
I have reviewed the current language regarding LD 1391 and I think there are some 
components to this that are not fully taken into consideration in this bill. The most 
important thing is that I do not see any distinction between medical cannabis and 
adult use cannabis. (I believe this has been changed Ince I last read the bill) I assume 
this bill refers to adult use but this component needs to be clarified. And we all know 
that changes in the adult use rules are typically used later as examples of what should 
be done with the medical program. The bill sounds like it is meant to protect the 
Industry but I believe it is meant to bail out the very companies that have caused the 
problem it claims to address. Another concerning aspect is the constant lobbying to 
eliminate or merge the medical and adult use program by the state and by corporate 
lobbyists. This bill could be used as a steppingstone to put thousands of caregivers out
of business with no ability to get and adult use license. This bill could be used by 
certain entities to intentionally drive prices down for two consecutive quarters 
triggering a moratorium on new licenses. The state has more than enough data from 
the adult use program participants via metrc and sales tax info that this bill could 
easily be changed to not allow expansion of poorly performing companies and not just
automatically restrict everyones ability to get a license or expand based on the 
average performance of every company. This would make much more sense and 
would eliminate the opportunity for price manipulation by those trying to limit the 
growth of their competitors. 
 
Price decreases: This is an industry wide phenomenon especially true with large 
producers who are using practices to maximize the amount of product they are 
manufacturing. EG only growing high yielding varieties with little smell or flavor 
grown with chemical fertilizers in sterile growing medium which almost guarantee a 
poor quality product. Or growing large outdoor crops that are poorly tended. People 
bought these products and knew, cared little about if they were good or from who 
they are purchasing them early in the program. Customers are much more educated 
now and know what they want. A lot of companies entered the market with essentially
or literally no experience growing cannabis and are now taking out their problems on 
other growers who were better prepared and seeking to restrict their competition by 
any means possible. The Program rewarded those with the deepest pockets and most 
lawyers and the least scruples. Prices are indeed falling in some cases but in some 
cases prices are going up for more desirable products produced by desired growers. A 
couple years ago producers were able to sell a seemingly unlimited amount of 
mediocre product to an eager uninformed customer base. I hear often from growers 
who are sitting on a large inventory of unsold product that can’t seem to sell it at any 
price but I also hear from growers who can’t keep anything in stock and are getting 
very high prices. I know some are getting around $600 per lb. wholesale while others 
over $2500. The difference is quality. A $6 bottle of wine and a $60 bottle of wine 
can be produced within miles of one another and a lot of people would be hard 
pressed to tell the difference between the two but there are many differences that 
effect the value of each. Mainly quality and reputation. Would it be appropriate to 
limit the production of the farm producing a higher quality product because the farm 
with the lower quality product is not selling as well? The obvious answer should be a 
resounding no. cannabis is not a commodity like grain or soybeans. The value is 
determined by so many factors that using the average price is not a good way to limit 
the production. In some cases even more extreme discrepancies exist with pounds 
selling for $100 while some growers are getting close to $2000 per ounce (yes 
OUNCE!) Market correction is in full effect and we don’t need to legislate it. Will we
be stopping people from opening new restaurants because there is already “enough 
food” since there is already a Macdonalds and a taco bell on the corner? ….. 
definitely not…. We need to stop treating cannabis so differently from other 
businesses and let the free market dictate. 
The Product demand issue is basically one in the same. A lot of well funded grows 
with good business experience and very little cannabis experience are creating a glut 
of mediocre cannabis that nobody wants to buy. Preventing new participants from 
entering the program furthers the monopoly of the best funded groups with the worst 
cannabis exasperating the problem. What they want is for customers to legally be 
required to buy only their products so they can charge outrageous prices for low 
quality product again. This is the MO for all large MSOs (multi state operators) and 
some non MSO companies... Sell at a low price until much of the competition is 
driven out of business, buy up their licenses so they hold the majority of them and 
then raise prices once customers have no other legal option to buy. In most States they
are so successful at making the regulations so restrictive via lobbying that they have a 
monopoly immediately with zero competition from smaller operators right out of the 
gate. In these monopoly states they are  charging astronomical prices for inferior 
products. They have been trying to to chip away at the cannabis program in Maine for
years in order to have this same sort of monopoly, they do not care about Maine 
citizens. Their tactic here has been to try to undercut smaller farms until they can put 
them out of business. They will intentionally loose money to put others out of 
business and this bill is the perfect tool for them to do that more effectively. The 
money they do make is not going to stay in the state to help Maine citizens. If and 
when they do get a monopoly on the program they will then lobby to eliminate the 
excise tax and pesticide regulations so they can more easily make money. These 
companies have scores of incredibly smart lawyers and lobbyists and use bills like 
this in combination with dozens of others over time to get what they want. They will 
often get sponsors from legislators who actually are anti cannabis by playing into their
fears of an “under regulated” system. Or worse trick cannabis advocates into 
believing they are working in their favor. They manipulate everyone for one end goal 
of total domination of the market. 
Please review the attached chart showing the stock performance of some of the top 
MSOs in the country. Some of these companies operate in Maine and are the same 
ones complaining about unfair treatment and falling prices when they are the ones 
destroying the market. This is very much intentional. Even the huge “losses” they are 
posting often represent acquisitions of competitors to gain more market share and 
avoid taxation. Yes they may have “lost” 90% of their value but they are more 
invested than ever in taking over the market. They are actively buying more licenses 
in Maine as you read this. These are the companies we need to prevent from gaining 
more licenses or expanding ones they already hold. Limiting new licenses will only 
make it easier for these companies to buy up existing ones because of the deep coffers
they have at their disposal. Capping the number of licenses will commodify the 
existing licenses and they will go up for sale to the highest bidders which will not be 
the people who really deserve them. These large companies will stop at nothing to 
grab every dollar on the table. 
         Many may recall that Amazon lost money every year for a very long time and 
we all know how that story ended up. More specifically some may recall the 
diapers.com fiasco where Amazon sold the same product at a loss after the proprietor 
refused to sell to amazon eventually putting them out of business and then 
immediately jacking up the prices once diapers.com went out of business. This is 
exactly the sort of business tactics at play with these companies except they have law 
enforcement in their pocket to arrest the people they force out of the legal cannabis 
business. In this industry there are so many layers to seemingly simple issues. Almost 
none of it can be taken at face value. Please consider the livelihood and wellbeing of 
the great people of Maine and the hard working cannabis farmers who started our 
cannabis program. This would be a great opportunity to give streamlined adult use 
licenses to some of the long time medical growers as was promised when we passed 
the adult use laws. They are the ones who truly have suffered because of these bloated
grow facilities that are crashing the market. And they are the ones who actually have 
experience producing quality products. 
     I can tell you I have visited many shops and its always the smaller more passionate
growers making the best products and keeping prices strong. We need to help these 
individuals not the huge corporations producing thousands of pounds of low grade 
irradiated garbage and cutting the throats of their competitors. 
        We have lost 800 of 3000 caregivers in Maine this year and many adult use 
businesses are also closing their doors. In California approximately 50% of farms 
have not renewed their licenses this year. Some because of poor prices, many due to 
ever growing regulatory requirements that favor only the largest, best funded 
companies. My point is licenses are already limiting themselves. What we need is less
greedy companies flooding the market with low quality product. This is the true cause
of the market crash. In some shops you will see ounces selling for under $50. If it’s 
this price at retail and the producers are paying over $300 in excise tax plus the cost to
grow, process, test, package and distribute it than it is simply a way to limit sales of 
other companies because there is no way they are making any money at these rates. 
These companies will NOT be effected by this bill as they already hold the largest 
canopy size licenses if not several licenses and they will continue to drive prices 
down. 
Thank you so much for taking the time to read my statement on this subject. please do
not hesitate to contact me with any questions.
Very Best,
Jordan Smith
207-939-3093
