My name is Joshua Ferranto. l am one of the founders and chief cultivation officer of Silver Therapeutics. 
Our Company has three stores in Maine and a cultivation facility in Brunswick. 
i am a believer in capitalism and a free market, however with the so-called green rush of money and investing that 
has accompanied cannabis, There has been a pattern that has repeated itself in every state that has legalized 
cannabis without a cap on the number of licenses and square footage for cannabis cultivation. 
I can use Massachusetts as an example where we operate as a retailer. We were the 1'ith recreational store to open 
in Massachusetts in April of 2019 and for the first year it was a challenge to source product in order to keep our 
shelves stocked. 
At times we were paying upwards of 4800 a pound for cannabis and there were cases of large companies buying at 
6800 a pound which is essentially what you would charge retail just in order to satisfy the demand at their stores. 
Of course everyone took notice and 'l00s of millions of dollars poured into Massachusetts and massive facilities 
started popping up everywhere and many others were slated to be built. The glory days lasted a while but the price 
surely started to come down to more realistic numbers of around 2600 a pound. However about 6-9 months ago and 
seemingly overnight, the price cratered and you can now purchase pounds for $900 or less which is a company 
selling at a loss. 
When an entity starts selling at a loss in order to pay their debts and to try and make payroll, it disrupts the price 
structure throughout the state and starts a race to the bottom. in Massachusetts there have been many series of 
layoffs and companies declaring bankruptcy and folding. This is usually a messy process with employees and 
contractors such as electricians and plumbers not getting paid. Landlords will stop receiving rent, vendors will not get 
paid for their goods and services, and then the lawsuits start. 
in Massachusetts there are multiple entities still under construction or awaiting llcensure that are going to enter this 
very depressed market. Due to law of inertia and the funding that's already been allocated they will open into this 
very competitive arena and will have a hard time getting any shelf space anywhere and have a very high probability 
of failing causing more pain and suffering to everyone in and close to these organizations. 
This same scenario has played out in multiple other states such as Colorado and Oregon. There are areas in these 
states where you can pass one defunct operation after another. It was a total waste of resources, capital, and 
materials to build these now defunct facilities. In Maine, cannabis has been a major factor in the lack of and 
exorbitant prices for viable commercial space. This makes it hard for other small businesses to operate when rents 
are sometimes 3-5 times higher than they were ten years ago. If cannabis businesses build out a facility or storefront 
and fail they oftentimes have altered the building in a way that makes it difﬁcult for another business to use the space. 
l would hate to see vacant viable commercial space littering Maine due to failed cannabis businesses. 
We are a smelt state with a small population and I believe only about 10% of towns opting in for retail cannabis 
sales. Silver Therapeutics has a small grow to support our stores and sell a bit of wholesale. We have found that 
even with realiy top quality products, it is difﬁcult to sell cannabis externally due to the fact that most of the busy 
stores are vertical and have their own cultivation. l can only imagine the difﬂculty new licensees will have entering 
this market. The cannabis industry seems to have a hard time self regulating on the supply side. The state could 
really help everyone involved in the industry including those considering entering the market by supporting LD1391. 
Thank you for your time, 
Joshua Ferranto
