 
To The Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
April 10th , 2023  
Mark Barnett  
125 Granite St  
Auburn, ME 04210  
LD 1391  OUGHT NOT TO PASS  
Good morning. My name is Mark Barnett. I'm a resident of Auburn, the owner of a medical retail 
store and coffee shop in Portland called Higher Grounds of Main e, and the Executive Chair 
and Policy Director for the Maine Craft Cannabis Association. I am testifying today in  strong  
opposition to LD 1391, which might  instead be titled ‘An Act to Enrich  the Largest Companies  in 
the Cannabis Market ’. We recognize a need to act to prevent a massive supply glut in this 
market, but this  bill is the wrong policy . MCCA has  drafted a forthcoming bill that proposes  a 
better direction, to shrink  the canopy allowed under each license and  total canopy that can be 
contr olled b y any entity in both the Adult Use market and for the currently unlimited Medical 
Dispensary grows . We believe that  approach is philosophically  more egalitarian and more likely 
to be effective in controll ing market abuse by  large, w ell-funded interests which have gutted  
smaller local competitors  in other  markets across this country  and intend to do the same here . 
There is no doubt that the Maine cannabis markets, both Adult Use and Medical , are struggling 
with a glut of c annabis due to cultivation  overinvestment , lower than forecast demand , and a 
small number of grow  facilities that are simply too large for our market . For reference, at Adult 
Use market open, forecasts for that market averaged $275 -350 million per year. At year -end 
2022, th e real figure was under $160 milli on. Man y investors, including but not limited to some 
of the world’s largest corporate cannabis operators , aggressively built out their cultivation 
expecting  a market s hort on product. As with  all industrialized commercial  models  like our  Adult 
Use pr ogram, these players also knew that  they could  be ‘loss leade rs’ due to their piles of cash 
and could wait out and bury small bus inesses competing with them by dumping low-quality 
industrial cannabis at low prices even at negative  economic  returns .  
Further, our AU program set an excessively  large canopy size for the Tier 4 license of 20,000 
SF with annual increase of 7,000 SF —meaning a facility could now be 41,000 SF —so those  
with greater access to capital have a  significant advantage over smaller operators, the latter of 
which represents  the majority of Maine -owned  businesses . Of the 89  active  cultivation licenses 
listed on the OCP ’s Open Data website , only 12 are tier 4 and of those  12 a simple web search 
reveals at least 4 are outright owned by out -of-state entities or indirectly controlled by such.  
We believe this bill will primarily benefit these 12 licenses  while blocking  many  talented 
cultivators in our medical program who didn’t  have the resources to launch at Adult Use market 
open but should have a n equal  chance to pursue a less -restricted customer base if they choose. 
This becomes clear if you follow the chain of events this bill sets off:  
1 – No new licenses could  be issued due to the existence of these t ier 4 facilities  
 
 
The 12 tier 4 licenses  could alone produce enough cannabis for the entire Maine  Adult Use  
market roughly four times over. Conveniently, that  could trigger  the policy in this bill. Further, 
most of them are vertically -integrated, which further insulates them from competitive forces. We 
base our ‘four times ’ scenario  off of the following  rough  assumptions : 
ASSUMPTIONS  
-Canopy square feet / tier 4  license = 27,000 SF  (assume one  renewal adding 7,000 SF)  
-Active Tier 4 license count = 12  (current OCP Open Data figure)  
-Harvest / year = 5  (industry averages vary)  
-Grams / square foot / harvest = 50  (industry averages vary)  
-Maine market size 2022 = $159 million  (current OCP Open Data figure)  
-Retail $ / gram of cannabis flower = $8 (current OCP Open Data f igure)  
ANALYSIS  
If just these 12 facilities  produced at the assumptions above, they could produce 81 million 
grams of cannabis flower (or 178,574 lbs), which at $8/gram would equal  roughly $645 ,000,000 
worth of canna bis sold at retail. Maine sold $158 million of total cannabis  products in Adult Use 
in 2022. While you could  change these assumptions and arrive at modestly different outcomes, 
we hope this example  illustrates  the real nature of the problem we face —the size of existing  
facilities . Note that these  12 facilities  alone  could  easily  trigger the  provision s in this bill .  
2 – Industrial cultiva tion has massive economies of scale, crushing small operators  
Already, it is extremely difficult for small operators to participate in the Adult Use program as 
developing a f acility, training staff for complex compliance , pointlessly tracking and testing every 
product , complying with overbearing packaging requirements, running a farming  business,  
paying more than any other b usinesses for basic services,  and c ompeting for customer attention 
via limited market ing channels all create an  artificially high cost of starting and running a 
business  that prohibits smaller aspirants from launching in the Adult Use market. Red tape and 
restrict ions from towns  add to the  complexity and challenge . 
Sadly, t his is by design . Our Adult Use market design is the result of a deliberate strategy  of the  
politically -connected lobbyists for Maine’s multi -state operators  (MSOs)  and their copycats and 
of the drafters of Maine ’s Adult Use rules  (Freedman & Koski , who had financial ties to the 
state’s mandatory tracking system  METRC and whose principal now leads  CPEAR, a coalition 
of giant  tobacco , alcohol,  and retail distribution monopolists  pushing for federal policy that would 
devastate small cannabis businesses all across America ).  
By design , all of these costs are better borne by huge facilities  with higher output  
to cover the startup and operating expenses. Also, such facilities are likely to have significant 
ongoing financial backing that most small operators could never dream of. Some of these large 
facilities are owned by publicly traded companies that have the ability to raise huge sums of  
 
 
money . None of them are owned by people of less -than-extraordinary means . Collectively, 
these  are the benefactors of the artificially high co st of doing business in cannabis, and t his bill 
will further empower them in our market.  
3 – Existing ‘large ’ facilities  can manipulate the market price of cannabis  
By now, we are no strangers to market  abuses  by large, well -funded players like regulatory 
capture  and product dumping (selling product below market value or below viable economic 
returns  in order to destroy less well -capitalized competition ). These tactics become amplified in 
a license -limited market where inefficiencies / market failur es can’t attract new participants to 
offset their  impact on the overall market. Large  companies can freely dump products, driving 
down wholesale cannabis prices  (keeping licenses limited per the provisions of this bill , even if 
the num ber of licenses shrinks ). Customers in Adult Use are  primarily tourists and most, like any 
consumer,  have no way of knowing where products come from and are generally unaware of  
what is happening  ‘behind the curtain ’. So, they buy these cheap er products . Until… 
4 – Without piles of cash to burn, smaller operators close their doors  
As th e economies of scale and the subsequent ‘race to the bottom ’ take over the market, more 
and more small operators give up th eir businesses , leading to market consolidation, further 
narrowing who controls the growing capacity highlighted in point  1 above. This is not from fair 
‘free market ’ competition  (which doesn ’t exist in cannabis  anyway due to  huge legal and 
regulatory hurdles ) but due to artificial market contro l by large vertically -integrated cultivators .  
5 – Existing Tier 4 facilities control market and are sol d to highest  bidder  
Existing Tier 4 licenses would  become extremely valuable and their sale would  enrich  those  
large, well-funded players . And w ho could afford to acquire a  large  limited -license  
‘grandfathered ’ cultivation facility? Certainly not small Maine businesses . Even locally-controlled 
licenses would be sold given inflated valuations from ‘limits’ and Maine ’s Adult Use market 
would become  a wasteland of out -of-state corporate cannabis companies who, importantly, will 
instantly abandon cu ltivation in our state as soon as federal legalization occurs,  decimating local 
communities  by importing more -cheaply grown  factory  flower from elsewhere . They will 
assuredly continue to  control retail stores, effectively throttling much  of Maine’s local legal 
cannabis industry  and the wealth  it creates here .  
Crucially, we believe this is already the future that Maine ’s cannabis market is heading towards. 
This bill would in our analysis accelerate  and intensify that process . There are far bette r ways to 
address this problem than helping  a small group of large vertically -integrated cultivators cement 
control of our industr y. Please,  consider instead  removing  or greatly shrinking  Tier 4 from Adult 
Use (with a compliance window for existing Tier 4 to right -size) and adding protection for our 
medical cannabis industry by limitin g medical dispensary grows to a similar size—they are 
currently unlimited , greatly endangering our local businesses in the  medical program as well . 
Sincerely,   
Mark Barnett  
