‘* 
Teresa Pl€I‘C€- THE SENATE 6 Waitgg Landing Rgad 
Senator, District 25 l3 l st Legislature Falmouth, ME 04105 
Testimony of Senator Teresa S. Pierce introducing 
LD 1391, An Act to Limit Cannabis Cultivation Licenses to Protect the Cannabis 
Market 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and esteemed members of Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Teresa Pierce, and I represent Senate District 25, which includes Falmouth, 
Cumberland, North Yarmouth, Yarmouth (majority), Gray, and Long Island. Today, I am pleased to 
introduce LD 1391, An Act to Limit Cannabis Cultivation Licenses to Protect the Cannabis Market. 
Last November, I was approached by a constituent of mine, who has a cultivation facility in 
Brunswick and is hoping to open a storefront soon. He brought up a number of issues about how 
certain aspects of our cannabis laws are negatively affecting his small business. One of those 
elements is the current over supply of product in the market. 
When the adult use cannabis law went into effect in 2019, there was no set limit on the number of 
cultivation licenses. In theory the free market was the model. But we have learned over the years 
that because this product is unable to be sold across state lines this lack of limitation has put a burden 
on the system, costing our small business thousands of dollars and in some cases might lead to them 
closing their businesses. In addition, the overabundance of product could potentially lead to 
diversion. There is an oversupply of product in the market as reported in MaineBiz last November 
“Cannabis growers report bumper harvest amid overproduction, low prices” , MJBiz Daily, November 7, 2022, available 
at: httpsI//mjbizdailvcom/cannabis-growers-report-bumper-harvest-amid-overproduction-low~prices/ 
For your consideration, I have suggested language that could address this issue by giving the 
Department of Financial Service the ability to analyze the price of cannabis and make adjustments 
based on that data by limiting the number of new cultivation licenses or renewing a cultivation 
license for a tier with a greater area of authorized plant canopy. Before our Adult Use market was up 
and running We did not have the data to analyze price or how much product might be available. With 
the maturing of the adult cannabis industry in Maine, we now have data available to make these 
determinations. 
As a legislature, we review and adjust the law that govern our businesses as needed for a number of 
reasons, safety, health, and to address issues that might be hindering the industry. This is one of 
those moments. 
Thank you for your consideration, I’m happy to answer any questions the committee may hay to the 
best of my ability. 
Chair, Committee on Housing * Education and C ultural Ajfairs Committee 
Cell: (207) 415-8631 * Stale House (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Teresa. Pierce@1egfslatw"e. maine. gov * fegislamre. n1aine.g0v/{senate
