Travis Lebrun — Living Matter 
LD 1391, SP 0558 - An Act to ijmit Cannabis Cultivation Licenses to Protect the Cannabis Market - Opposed 
Good morning, Chair Senator Hickman, Chair Representative Supica, and other respected 
members of the Veteran and Legal Affairs Committee. 
My name is Travis Lebrun. I am a Lewiston native and proud graduate of the University of 
Maine at Orono, where I received a degree in business, and in my free time, learned how to 
cultivate cannabis. l have been operating as a caregiver in the medical cannabis market 
since 20 18. 
Our brand, Living Matter, has been thriving through these poor market conditions by 
consciously scaling up and focusing on product quality and innovation. We are of the few 
indoor facilities across the country who operate with zero cannabis waste by utilizing 
organic living soil methods. Maine is one of the only states where we can make this claim 
because of the hard work stakeholders and everyone here at the committee has done to 
ensure we are set up to succeed and not be overrun with unnecessary regulations 
inﬂuenced by large out-of-state corporations.\. 
We strongly oppose LD 1391 because it would limit the opportunity for Mainers, like 
ourselves, to enter a competitive marketplace. Our plan is to expand into the Adult Use 
market by relying on funding through friends and family, as well as, investing everything 
we have back into our business. We have not taken shortcuts by seeking venture capitalist 
funding and feel we deserve a seat in both markets. 
Limiting and delaying licensing, in either market, would cause a financial burden we cannot 
afford to endure. We are not equipped to burn cash while we wait for large operators to 
clear out inventory that consumers do not demand. A free marketplace allows consumers 
to choose who should be cultivating cannabis. Large operators who are revenue first, 
rather than margin first, seek to block competitors by limiting licenses. 
Competition has forced us to become better growers and to offer a better product to 
consumers. Our state can be one of the last standing craft marketplaces across the country 
before federal legalization. It is our duty to invest in our people by giving newcomers and 
small operators the opportunity to compete if they have the means to do so. 
One solution may be to track inventory of existing license holders in the Adult Use market 
and limit cultivators who are producing more than the market demands, rather than 
allowing those cultivators to wedge themselves with current licenses to create a market 
with little competition. Thus, forcing a product on consumers they do not demand. 
Thank you for your time. 
Travis Lebrun 
/§a_/
