age? F130 , . 
ﬁg g. 
V.
_
W 1*a">u"%"a 4 if/5 »z "’ 
_,, "' 
\,;:.::r, '3??? *3'"
= 
.=_ 3 g 
Q so 
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive. Angus/u, Maine 0-I33!) 
Tel. (20.7) 622-9 
(207) (>22-<16 75 
l”i.s‘1'I our weh.s'i!@.' mt _ti_ /z_1¢y' i2ci;1/vi/>._gr;q 1’ V’? 
4 ¢ u 4» u ' 
“ "5 
. ii 
4+» av 
1; 3:~ . 
President Vice President Sec/‘eta/jy Treasurer 
Qvnthia Phinney Pat Carleton Doug Born 
Testimony of Maine AFL-(‘IO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Support of 
LD I53‘), “An Act to Promote a Diverse, More Experienced Construction Workforce and 
Ensure High-quality Careers by Increasing Registered Apprenticeship Programs ” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of Labor & Housing Committee, my name 
is Adam Goode. l’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 
40.000 working people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working 
conditions of our members and all working people. We testify in support of LD 1539. 
Registered apprenticeship programs train workers across the United States to become highly- 
skilled, construction workers through a debt-free, technologically-advanced education who earn 
a solid wage to support their family. In the construction industry, registered apprenticeship 
programs help recruit, train and retain workers with progressive wage increases, apprenticc-to- 
journeyworker ratios that promote safety, uniform standards, safety training and eligibility 
requirements for instructors. 
ln this tried and true “earn while you learn” model, apprentices work on the job under a skilled 
worker and also receive classroom instruction. Apprentices earn great wages and beneﬁts, a top- 
notch education without incurring any debt and secure a great career with family sustaining 
wages and beneﬁts. 
LD 1539 is about improving standards on publicly funded apprenticeship programs to ensure that 
Registered Apprentices are diverse. receive industry-appropriate training. and are fairly- 
compensatcd upon graduation. There are three core components of the bill. 
First, to be eligible for state funding for a registered construction apprenticeship program, the 
program must graduate apprentices into jobs that lead to family-sustaining wages with strong 
health and retirement beneﬁts so that workers can support their families. A wage paid without 
benefits, or a deduction of wages to pay for benefits, means a depressed wage and a job that 
doesn’t reflect Maine’s values, which is particularly important when we are talking about 
taxpayer dollars. We should limit state funding to construction apprenticeships that culminate in 
a joumey worker wage and beneﬁt package of at least $40/hr. 
Second, there needs to be more funding for programs in the construction industry that graduate 
the traditionally underrepresented populations of women and people of color; a minimum of50%
of which must be distributed as a direct stipend for the learner upon graduation. The Department 
of Labor and the Maine Apprenticeship Council should support registered apprenticeship 
programs that recruit and graduate traditionally underrepresented populations in the trades. 
speciﬁcally women, African Americans, indigenous workers and other people of color by 
incentivizing programs that demonstrate effort and success, and providing a direct beneﬁt to 
those learners to support their success in the industry. 
Lastly, we support the increase in minimum allowable training hours for construction 
apprenticeships from 2,000 on the job to 3,000 on the job and from 144 in the classroom to 300 
in the classroom. Construction is dangerous and increasingly complicated work. Ensuring 
registered construction apprentices get the full safety training they need to be successful in the 
ﬁeld is the right thing to do. 
For programs that are working to increase their standards, the bill provides an option for 
provisional status and a year to comply with the rules. There is also the option for the 
Department of Labor to grant a 6-month waiver if there is a hardship preventing compliance. 
We would end by reminding the committee that everyone wants the jobs we support with 
taxpayer dollars to be attractive and to provide the workers with a shot at a decent life. 
Guardrails that make sure taxpayer dollars do not fund journey worker jobs that provide little 
benefits essentially reduce spendable wages and tiejourney workers to a reliance on government 
assistance. Public investments in training programs should be marked by high standards for 
hiring and training from underrepresented populations, good wages and beneﬁts, and training 
requirements that reﬂect the realities, dangers and complexities of thejob. 
For these reasons we ask that you support LD 1539.
