Grant Provost
Brunswick
LD 1539
LD 1539: An Act to Promote a Diverse, More Experienced Construction Workforce 
and Ensure High-quality Careers by Increasing Registered Apprenticeship Programs 
Good Morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee.  My name is Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent for 
Ironworkers Local 7 and a member of the AFL- CIO Executive Board.  I come before 
you in support of LD 1539: An Act to Promote a Diverse, More Experienced 
Construction Workforce and Ensure High-quality Careers by Increasing Registered 
Apprenticeship Programs.
      When I was in high school, I had no idea what a Registered Apprenticeship 
Program was, how to apply for one or how they were run.  I had no knowledge of any 
alternative to a 4-year college degree or what programs existed for high school 
graduates whom wouldn’t be moving on for more socially excepted education.  The 
year I graduated I joined the Ironworkers, I started working that summer and was 
enrolled into their 4 year registered apprenticeship program.  Not knowing what an 
opportunity had presented itself to me I felt as though I was less than and was still 
planning to move on.  I worked hard and did well as I learned the trade, I enjoyed the 
time outside, the comradery and the change of scenery.  After each job was completed
a new one in a new location in Maine would begin.   As my skill level matured so did 
my pay and as I entered into my first year of apprenticeship I learned a vast amount of
applicable information about the trade which helped me in the field.   I was able to 
work 40 hours a week or more and still attend school at no cost to myself.  
     24 years later I set before you miles ahead of the majority of my schoolmates.  My 
annuity is substantial, I have been able to bank up to almost 30 pension credits, I have
a beautiful family, live in an amazing home in Brunswick and see a dignified 
retirement on the horizon.   I watch as my friends an ex-classmates struggle with 
mountains of debt still left 20 years after their college graduation dates and I am 
thankful to have such a successful path laid before me by the Ironworkers high quality
apprenticeship program.
      This bill sets up all Mainers who are lucky enough to find themselves in one of 
Maine’s many high quality Registered Apprenticeship Programs.  To demand high 
standards for all apprenticeship programs who receive State Funding is an important 
step to ensuring Mainers that do not fit the 4 year college mold can succeed.  Instead 
of dragging down high-quality apprenticeship programs such as the one I attended by 
letting low paying and short-term programs be funded with taxpayer dollars.  Let us 
say we expect better for Mainers by raising the standards of the apprenticeship 
programs we do fund.  Let us set a higher minimum amount of time for the 
apprentices to learn about each trade or career they choose!  Let us improve our 
diversity, equity and inclusion by rewarding apprenticeship programs that represent 
Maine’s minority populations.  From new Mainers trying to find a foothold here and 
participate in our local economy, to residents that have been in the State we call 
Maine for more than a millennium.  We need to lift up and not hold down our 
apprenticeship standards and that is why I rise in favor of this bill.  I respectfully 
encourage the committee to vote out to pass.  

