 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 1539  (“An Act to Promote a Diverse, More 
Experienced Construction Workforce and Ensure High -quality Careers by 
Increasing Registered Apprenticeship Programs ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 21, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and members of the Joint Standing  Committee on 
Labor and Housing , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government 
Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade 
association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow 
Maine’s economy and build M aine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers 
involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also 
includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspector s, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 1539 . The bill provides an improved 
pipeline for apprenticeships in the construction industry. There is a significant need for 
construction trade -workers  as Maine struggles to increase housing supply . The shortage of 
trade -workers contributes to  delays in construction , and the overall vitality of the housing 
industry in Maine . We cannot solve the affordable housing problem without building more 
units.  To do that , we need more skilled trade -workers, and this bill aims to streamline that 
process and make access to training and apprenticeship  easier for those looking to enter  the 
trade industry.  
 
We support this bill because it focuses on  accessibility to training for the construction industry 
and encourages  job training and apprenticeship in the field.  We do not have enough 
affordable homes in Maine and need to build more – either through entirely new homes or 
by modifying existing structures.  This bill would positively impact the housing industry and 
incre ase the number of available skilled workers who will be essential to building more 
housing supply.    
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 1539  and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
