Maine Administrators of Career & Technical Education
1022 Waterville Rd, Waldo, ME 04915 
mainecte@gmail.com
Executive Director Treasurer Executive Committee
David Keaton David Morse Amy Boles
Nicholas Gannon
President Business Manager Paulette Bonneau
Julie Kenny Joya Maynard Rob Callahan
Ralph Conroy
President Elect Robert Deetjen
Kevin Stilphen
TESTIMONY REGARDING
L.D. 33
An Act to Expand Access to Career and Technical Education Opportunities for 
Middle School Students
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee. I am Dave Keaton, executive director of Maine 
Administrators of Career & Technical Education, testifying on behalf of the
CTE Directors of the Maine Administrators of Career & Technical Education (MACTE). 
The CTE Directors Association is in support of this bill.
This bill allows the expansion of the allocation of money to career and technical 
education centers/regions for career and technical education exploration 
programs for middle school students. Our MACTE CTE Directors are in support of LD 
33 within the premise of extending the previous pilot funding for Middle Level 
experiential CTE training. 
Due to the pandemic, most Maine CTEs had limited opportunities to expose Middle 
Level students to CTE careers and training. With this ME DOE funding extension, it 
will enable more CTE opportunities for more Middle Level students throughout 
Maine. We believe that the more opportunities for exposing Maine students to 
needed Maine careers, the better-informed Maine students will be able to make 
important decisions, when choosing their secondary curriculum pathway.
We also felt it is important to convey some of our concerns with CTE expansion:
1. The overall funding amount, for this bill, is not adequate for Maine CTEs to 
expose all Maine Middle Level students to appropriate career exploration 
and exposure. 
2. To fulfill this undertaking, Maine CTEs need to be able to determine suitable 
planning and implementation as some CTEs are working with as many as 17 
or more separate Middle Schools.
3. There should be funding to allow each CTE to have a dedicated staff 
member to coordinate Middle School CTE exposure and training effort.   
We look forward to discussing this matter with all of you in future work sessions.
Yours in education,
Dave Keaton
Dave Keaton, MACTE Executive Director 
