Heather Manchester, MSAD 17, President
Niki Chan, RSU 24, President Elect
Deb Taylor, RSU 12, Treasurer
Joanne Dowd, RSU 23, Secretary 
Debra McIntyre, Executive Director
Testimony of Debra McIntyre, Executive Director, on behalf of the members of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association, testifying neither for nor against LD 33 An Act to 
Expand Access to Career and Technical Education Opportunities for Middle School 
Students.
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Debra McIntyre, and I am the Executive Director of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association. On behalf of the 97 public school districts across the state 
represented by our membership, MCLA, while in theory supports LD 33 An Act to Expand 
Access to Career and Technical Education Opportunities for Middle School Students, cannot 
fully support this proposal without additional information and clarity regarding fiscal implications.  
Therefore, MCLA is neither for nor against LD33.  
Conceptually, we are supportive of the idea of offering career and technical exploration 
programs at the middle level, as students would benefit from early career exploration in a 
hands-on learning environment. Students would be exposed to career opportunities and 
pathways at an earlier age, which we feel would benefit our future workforce and capture 
student interest in careers they may have not previously considered.
However, the wording of the bill states the commissioner may establish an allocation. It is 
unclear if this programming would be an additional allocation sum and if so whether it would be 
to the school or technical center, or would this be a grant application process?  Furthermore, it 
is not clear if there would be funds available to hire additional staff as many current technical 
centers may not be able to provide the staff necessary to successfully implement this program.  
In addition, some districts are a long distance away from their regional technical center which 
may provide additional barriers to implementation. We are supportive of offering access to 
students either through the school district or in conjunction with the regional technical center if 
this is fully funded with additional funds (not coming out of current allocations).   Finally, would 
this be a requirement that all middle schools implement a program, or would it be an option if 
school districts opted to participate?  All the answers to these questions will be critical to moving 
this proposed program forward. Due to these questions, we still have, we are neither for nor 
against LD 33. - Thank you for your time. 
