188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
    
 
February 23, 2023  
 Senator Rafferty  
Representative Brennan  
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs   
100 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333   
 
RE: AGC Maine Supp ort for LD 33 , “An Act to Expand Access to Career and Technical Education Opportunities for Middle 
School Students ”  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and Distinguished members of the Education and Cul tural Affairs C ommittee, 
my name is Matt Marks, and I am  a Principal at Cornerstone Government Affairs . I’m  submitting comments  on be half of 
my client  Associated General Contractors of Maine (AGC Maine).  
 AGC Maine supports LD 33 and the i nvestment in the future of our skilled workforce in Maine. The construction industry 
has made a tremendous resurgence  in Maine ’s workforce in recent years.  However, the  industry is continu ally rebuilding 
as many craft workers face retirement  at a rapid pace. In terms of meeting the demand, many avenues exist  for new 
constructors. AGC Maine has built a workforce program with industry partners to  design , supervise and assist companies 
with apprenticeship training programs  to help with this ongoing challenge .  
 
Additionally , AGC Maine ha s continued to grow their education foundation , helping aspiring constructors reach their 
career goals.  To continue both apprenticeship and traditional post -secondary education it ’s imperative to reach students 
as they start to explore their care er interests. In the past, we’ve provided comments on the modifications to programs 
that included industrial art  progr ams. Those skills int roduced students to math , and science by using their hands to build 
and that had  a substantial impact on students who might not have prior knowledge of basic tool skills .  
 
By expanding career a nd te chnical education opportunities the state is providing an investment in the future of our 
infrastructure de velopment and the lives of students who pur sue those ca reers. In a 2022  survey
1 by AGC A merica, 85% 
of construction firms in  the Northeast reported  that they are having a hard time filling all or some craft positions. They 
also collected data on the types of crafts, and unlike previous years the need was broad , providing an open door for a 
variety  of craft applicants.  
 
While Maine has finally su rpassed construction workf orce employment numbers since the 2009 great recession, it’ s 
clear that the workfor ce has hampered the ability of the industry , suppressed  growth , and contributed to the lack of 
bidders on projects.  
 
This year AGC Maine will embark on a pro ject to introduce construction crafts throu gh a student pro gram. But we are 
confident that an “ all hands on  deck ” approach is necessary to reach more st udents and build a strong future for Maine . 
AGC Maine encourages the Comm ittee to pass this bill and invest in our future.  
 
 
 
  
 
1 AGC America and Autodesk  Northeas t Workforce Survey: 
https://www.agc .org/sites/default/files/users/user21902/2022_Workforce_Survey_Northeast_M%20(1).pdf  
