33 McAlister Farm Rd. 
Suite 102
Portland, ME  04103
info@mainemfg.com
P: 207-747-4406
www.mainemfg.com 
Manufacturers Association of Maine
9 February 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and honorable members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.  
My name is Michael Paradise, I am the Financial Controller for 
Confluent Medical Technologies, a resident of South Portland and I 
offer this testimony on behalf of the Manufacturers Association of 
Maine.  
We testify today in support of LD 33, An Act to Expand Access to 
Career and Technical Education Opportunities for Middle School 
Students. 
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a non-partisan 
501(c)6 non-profit grounded in service to its membership, 
providing a network of resources designed to support the strategic 
business growth needs of Maine manufacturing entrepreneurs.  
Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, employing almost 
60,000 individuals in military and defense, aerospace, metal 
fabrication, paper, boat building, semi-conductor, wood products, 
aquaculture and biotech, medical device, composites and bio-
plastics, as well as the food and beverage industries.  These 
businesses represent almost 10% of Maine’s annual GDP and 
14.5% of all the wages paid in the state on a weekly basis.  MAME’s 
mission is to help manufacturing grow and succeed and supports 
Maine’s development of future manufacturing associates with 
scholarship programs, career connections for students and job 
seekers, networking opportunities and educational events that 
expose young people to the workings of an industrial world, in 
hopes of sparking their interest in a manufacturing career.2022 Executive BOARD
Chair of the Board 
Judith Borelli
Texas Instruments
Vice Chair of the Board, &
Legislative Chair
Dave Fortin 
Kennebec Technologies
Treasurer & Investment Chair
Samantha Pedersen
Albin, Randall & Bennett
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair
Neal Prescott
Prescott Associates
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair
Alan LaPoint
The Strainrite Companies
Executive Director
Mike Roughton
Document1
Page 2MAME has long supported career and technical education.  In fact, 
last session, the legislature passed LD 313 which directed the 
Department of Education to convene a work group to explore 
innovative approaches to advancing career and technical 
education opportunities for middle and high school students.  
MAME supported that legislation in 2021 and later, former 
Executive Director Lisa Martin, served as member of that group as 
the representative from a trade association. 
As previously noted, MAME and its members support the 
development of our future workforce either through scholarship 
programs or career and networking opportunities for students.  I 
believe most agree that the more students are exposed to Maine 
careers and educational opportunities, the better informed those 
students will be to make these important decisions when choosing 
classes and pathways. This is particularly true for middle school 
students choosing high school classes.  
The bill before you aims to help increase those opportunities for 
middle school students by expanding the allocation of money for 
CTE exploration programs.  The right state resources combined 
with business support, can be a very effective way for kids to 
explore their interests and possibly make some career choices 
attending a CTE school along the way.  For that reason, the 
Manufacturers Association strongly supports this legislation and 
asks the committee to unanimously vote the bill Ought To Pass.  
