State of Maine 
State Board of Education 
Testimony of Paulette Bonneau, Vice Chairman of the State Board of Education and Member of 
its Career and Technical Education Committee 
In Support of: L.D. 33 
An Act to Expand Access to Career and Technical Education Opportunities for Middle School 
Students. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Sen. Rafferty of York 
Co-Sponsored by: Rep. Woodsome of Waterboro 
Date: February 9, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Paulette Bonneau. I am the Vice-Chair of the State Board of Education anda 
member it its Career and Technical Education Committee. I am here today on behalf of the State 
Board to speak in support of L.D. 33 An Act to Expand Access to Career and Technical 
Education Opportunities for Middle School Students. 
The State Board of Education (SBE) is intended to act as a body with certain policy—making, 
administrative, and advisory functions. Speciﬁcally, Title 20-A §405, sub-§7 recognizes the 
SBE as the designated state agency to “develop a state plan to administer any federal funds 
received for the beneﬁt of career and technical education and programs in the State.” 
Under this authority and in conjunction with the CTE division of the Maine Department of 
Education (MDOE), the State Board of Education has been actively involved in setting a 
roadmap for the future of CTE in Maine using the federal Perkins V state planning process and 
SBE’s strategic goals. 
In 2020, after a year-long review, the State Board received federal approval for a new ﬁve-year 
plan for CTE as required under the recently re-authorized federal Strengthening Career and 
Technical Education for the 21st Century Act (a.k.a. Perkins V). That plan highlights the 
importance of workforce development for Maine’s economy. 
0 It echoes 20-A MRSA §830l-A, sub-§2-A, defining career and technical 
education as “a course or program of education designed to create or improve job- 
related skills that is part of a secondary school or middle school level curriculum 
approved by the commissioner. ”
0 The Plan’s seven key areas which outline CTE needs include “career exploration 
and career awareness with a focus on middle school that continues through 
postsecondary education. ” 
0 The Plan further indicates “part of the current focus for Maine CTE is extending 
opportunities to younger students through a new middle school CTE initiative and 
through efforts to augment programing to students grades 9 and 10. It is the 
“intention of ensuring ALL students, middle school through post-secondary, 
receive access to career development opportunities suited to their unique 
interests, skills and future goals.” 
Since 2016, the State Board of Education ’s Strategic Plans have placed a priority on developing 
and supporting middle school exploratory pro gramming. 
0 The SBE’s Strategic Vision for Education in Maine (2016-2021) CTE Goal #1 was 
“strengthening and enhancing the delivery of Career and Technical Education programs 
in the State of Maine.” This included “introducing and supporting CTE exploration 
programs for middle school level students. ” 
0 In 2017,.following the passage of LD 1576, the State Board of Education ﬁlled an initial 
ﬁscal year ftmding gap by providing $500,000 of Perkins federal funding for initial 
implementation of the program. 
Q The State Board’s current 5-Year Strategic Plan (2022-2026) is to “continue its efforts to 
build robust, high quality, and comprehensive educational offerings that advance career 
and technical education opportunities including career exploration and career awareness 
with a focus on middle school that continues through postsecondary study.” 
o The State Board of Education ’s current Strategic Plan speciﬁcally supports “the 
renewal/expansion of middle school exploratory funding. ” 
We wish to acknowledge and direct the Committee ’s attention to the important contributions of 
the LD 313 Working Group’s “Report to the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee ” (March 
16, 2022) and MEPRI’s May 2022 “Summary Report to the Maine Department of Education on 
Essential Programs & Services Career and Technical Education Component Review.” 
The need is great for a statewide CTE capacity that can truly address our present and future 
workforce needs, including conforming with nationally recognized best practices such as middle 
school exploratory programming. LD 33 provides an important step forward towards maintaining 
and growing that capacity. 
The State Board of Education strongly supports L.D. 33 An Act to Expand Access to Career and 
Technical Education Opportunities for Middle School Students. 
I would be happy to answer any questions the Committee may have. The State Board will be 
available for work sessions on this bill.
