MAINE ‘*3; 
T A l‘F"e 
, . _. 
(‘f)i‘\/il\/l.i£R('jE
' 
_,___-W Ht.“ a.__;.a,,_ . .1“ W.’ 
The voice of Maxine buszrzess 
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce In Support of 
L.D. 33 An Act to Expand Access to Career and Technical Education Opportunities for Middle 
School Students 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I represent the Maine 
State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association made up of both large and small 
businesses, here to provide you with my testimony in support of expanding access to CTE for 
middle school students. 
Through input from our members and partners the State Chamber has developed policy 
positions around workforce and education that encourages CTE and experiential learning. This 
bill aligns with our priorities and our members’ needs by expanding opportunities at the middle 
school level. While expanding and developing these programs at any level is encouraged, we are 
particularly pleased to see the opportunities growing in earlier education levels. Extending these 
opportunities to earlier levels with give students a greater opportunity to engage in career 
exploration, develop skills that cannot be learned outside of these programs, and be more 
prepared for life after graduation. Growth in these programs is a critical part of the solution to 
Maine’s current workforce challenges. This legislation will prepare students for reliable careers 
with real personal economic potential and help us keep our students here by showing them the 
great job opportunities that lay ahead here at home. 
For this program to be successful there should be sufficient funding for all middle school 
students to have access to this expansion. For the program to be implemented effectively there 
should also be funding that allows for the creation of a dedicated staff member at CTE centers to 
implement a plan for the centers to expand to middle schools. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.
