Frank O. Stred Building I 30 Association Drive I PO Box 190 I Manchester, Maine 04351
TEL: 207-622-3374   I  FAX: 207-622-3332   I  www.mainemed.com
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect  I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
SUPPORT Maine Physicians    ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine    PROMOTE the health of all Maine People
 TO: The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate 
DATE: Wednesday, February 15, 2023
NFNA – LD 228, An Act to Require Substance Use Disorder to Be Disclosed as a Cause 
of Death on Death Certificates. 
The Maine Medical Association, Maines largest Physician Organization, submits comments 
nether for nor against LD 228. The bill would require a death certificate to include substance 
use disorder as a factor in the cause or proximate cause of death and identify the substance 
underlying the disorder if substance use disorder is a factor in the cause of death. 
The Maine Medical Association recognizes the intent of the bill to further address the rising 
number of lives lost to drug overdose. However, we would like to raise some concerns. 
Deaths from drug overdose are a significant public health problem.  The factors that 
contribute to such deaths are often complicated and challenging to evaluate. Moreover, it is 
important to note the providers filling out the death certificates may not have the individual’s 
full history as they are not their regular providers. Meaning, they may not have the ability to 
properly diagnose or flag a death caused by substance use disorder. Additionally, any death 
suspected to be unnatural is assigned to the Medical Examiner for further investigation. 
Lastly, physicians and health care providers licensed by the State of Maine hold a 
professional and ethical obligation to provide care that is evidence-based, individualized, safe 
and medically appropriate. Any legislation requiring or mandating a physician in the practice 
of medicine threatens the ability to provide this level of care and expertise. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments. Please reach out with any questions. 
For more information call:
Dan Morin 
Mikenzie Dwyer
207-838-8613
Frank O. Stred Building I 30 Association Drive I PO Box 190 I Manchester, Maine 04351
TEL: 207-622-3374   I  FAX: 207-622-3332   I  www.mainemed.com                 
