 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
February 15, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health  and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 228 – An Act to Require Substance Use Disorder to Be Disclosed as a Cause of Death 
on Death Certificates  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee:  
 
This letter is to provide information as the Committee considers LD 228 – An Act to Require 
Substance Use Disorder to Be Disclosed as a Cause of Death on Death Certificates , and the 
potential impact of the proposed leg islation , if enacted. The Maine Center of Disease Control and 
Prevention (Maine CDC) is neither for nor against  this bill  and offers the following comments 
for consideration.   
 
This bill requires that if substance use disorder is a factor in the cause or t he proximate cause in 
the death of a person, the death certificate must include substance use disorder as a factor in the 
cause or proximate cause of the death and identify the substance underlying the disorder.  
 
Vital records in Maine are collected by Maine CDC - Data, Research, and Vital Statistics 
(DRVS). The U.S. Standard Death Certificate is used  by the certifier to record the immediate 
cause of death and up to three diseases, injuries or complications that are a sequence of events 
that lead to the immediate cause. Alcohol and drug use are often indicated in these fields. The 
death certificate also c aptures significant conditions that may be present , but do not directly lead 
to the death, and it includes a question which asks whether  tobacco use contributed to the death. 
If the record is certified by a medical examiner  as an overdose , the drug(s) will be listed  in the 
field for the cause of death , and,  if alcohol was involved , that will be noted on the death 
certificate as well.  
 
Except when the death falls under the jurisdiction of the medical examiner (ME), t he certifying 
physician , nurse practitioner or physician assistant  must have attended the deceased before death, 
although not necessarily for the reason of the illness or condition which resulted in death. The 
cause of death need not be a condition for which the patient was specifically  treated by the 
certifying physician if the stated cause  is reasonable and consistent with the general state of 
health of the patient and the circumstances surrounding the death.  
 
 
 There are some inconsistencies in classification and certification of death s caused by or 
suspected to be caused by a substance of use . Deaths , including  drug toxicity , are complicated 
and a  certifying physician may have no knowledge of a decedent’s substance  use or to suspect  a 
substance use disorder . The bill language is broad as ‘substance use disorder’ can encompass 
several  substances. As written, it is not clear whether a certifier  must report drug s, alcohol and 
nicotine as factors in the cause of death .  
 
The medical certifier is expected to use th eir best professional judgment. DRVS staff assumes 
this to be true and that the cause is determined after an assessment of the events of the death and 
the information available to make the determination. While some certifiers are already reporting 
these da ta as required , if a substance use disorder is not reflected on a death record, i t may be  
because it was  determined that i t was not  a factor, it was omitted, or the certifier did not access 
medical records and  had no knowledge of the decedent’s substance abuse disorder . For these 
reasons, t he substance use disorder data reported is inconsistent and not reliable . DRVS  does not 
have the capacity to follow up on all certificates timely to confirm whether the certifier reported 
this field accurately. Health  care providers who fail to complete the medical certification of the 
cause of death  fully,  may be reported by DRVS to the respective professional licensing board , 
and, a dditionally, should there be a need for correcting an error , the existing  law provides fo r a 
process for amending the record.   
 
Thank you for your consider ing these points  in your determination of the final outcome of the 
proposed legislation . The Maine CDC is available to provide additional information  at the 
Committee’s request and to participate in future sessions.   
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Deputy  Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

