Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
Immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
_\ﬁ‘.§€:i¥i;E‘3..?Liﬁi?§;_@l§~£§l € Maine Chapter 
INCORPORATED IN MAINE 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
DEDIISATED TO TIIF, rrmirrii or ALL Clill.DREN° i 
“L 
Testimony in Support of LD 231, ‘An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and 
Behavioral Health Partnership Program’ 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Dr. Alyssa Goodwin. l am a pediatrician, incoming member of the Board 
of Directors for the Maine AAP, and l live in Brunswick. l am testifying in support of LD 231. 
We are in the midst of a pediatric mental health crisis. The terrifying trends you may have read about 
nationally are affecting Maine youth, families, schools, and communities every day. l have beena 
primary care pediatrician living and practicing in Maine for almost 20 years. Over my practice lifetime, 
the mental health needs of my patients have increased exponentially. The Pandemic ampliﬁed these 
issues and highlighted deﬁciencies in our current systems of care for kids and adolescents with mental 
health concerns. 
The 2021 Maine integrated Youth Survey provides some compelling data on the scope of childl 
adolescent mental health in Maine. The survey found that 20% of middle school students and 18% of 
high school students had seriously considered suicide in the past year. This means nearly one in5 
high school students had seriously considered suicide in the past year. 11% of high school girls and 
6% of high school boys reported they attempted suicide at least once in the past 12 months. Suicidal 
ideation, intent, and attempts are mental health emergencies in pediatrics, but when one in 5 high 
school aged patients have seriously considered suicide and one in 10 have attempted suicide the 
scope of the issue becomes unmanageable in the primary care setting without additional resources 
and programming. 
There are not enough childl adolescent psychiatrists in our state to address the acute and rising need 
of our youth. Wait lists for psychiatry are often 4-6 months long if providers are even accepting new 
referrals. For many children, the only way to obtain a direct psychiatric evaluation is through the ER 
and inpatient hospitalization. This places an unreasonable burden on our emergency rooms and 
inpatient psychiatric hospitals. it also creates a situation in which mental health issues escalate until 
the child hits a threshold severe enough to warrant this high level of care. There are so many 
opportunities for inten/ention before things get this far. 
As a primary care pediatrician, l have sought out every opportunity l could to further develop my 
counseling and psychiatric management skills. Despite this l regularly see patients who are beyond the 
scope of my clinical knowledge. The Maine Pediatric Behavioral Health Partnership allows me direct 
access to a child psychiatrist to review these complex cases and receive immediate recommendations 
and support. In addition, these opportunities to discuss complex psychiatric cases with a specialist 
enhance my knowledge and ability to provide cane, thus taking some of the burden off the 
ovenivhelmed referral system. 
LD 231 is critical to ensure funding continues for this key program. Allowing the Maine Pediatric and 
Behavioral Health Partnership to remain fully funded is critical to its sustainability, equity, and success. 
Continuation and expansion of this program will continue to build competencies, access, and timely 
mental health care for the future of Maine, our children. This is why l am asking for your support of 
LD231, an Act to support the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership. l am happy to answer 
any questions today or in the future should you have any.
