My name is Andy Hinkens and I'm a child and adolescent psychiatrist 
from Portland.  I’ve practiced my entire career in Maine, since 1986.  
The shortage of psychiatric providers for children and families is not 
new.  However over the past 40 years the number, as well as the 
acuity, of children in need of psychiatric care have both dramatically 
increased.  Even with the addition of psychiatric nurse practitioners 
to the provider ranks we cannot keep up with the growing need for 
psychiatric outpatient care.   
Children may wait a week or longer in hospital emergency rooms for a 
bed in a psychiatric hospital or crisis stabilization unit.  And while 
some have outpatient services in place, many have never seen a 
behavioral health provider prior to arriving to the emergency room. In 
many cases, more timely access to outpatient care could have prevented 
a crisis.  The key is to create a statewide system of care, starting 
at the primary care level, as outlined in LD231. This will provider 
earlier treatment in the community through collaboration between 
psychiatry and primary care.  
Primary care providers are the first point of care and therefore must 
increasingly initiate and maintain behavioral health treatment while 
their patients wait for an appointment with a specialist.  The level 
of comfort primary care providers have for diagnosing psychiatric 
disorders and prescribing medication varies with personal experience 
and practice location. 
I have found that most primary care providers are eager to collaborate 
with behavioral health providers. Education and support are needed to 
increase the “comfort zone” of the primary care team.  This includes 
real time consultation by phone or video conferencing, chart review 
with specific recommendations, and didactic teaching sessions on 
specific topics.  
With our help, treatment can be started by the primary care provider 
while the child is waiting for an appointment with a psychiatrist or 
psychiatric nurse practitioner. Exchanging clinical information also 
helps with the referral process ensuring that the higher acuity 
patients are seen by specialists while the lower acuity patients 
receive effective treatment from their primary care provider.  
In summary, we do not have enough behavioral health specialists to 
meet the demand and realistically never will.  However by partnering 
with our primary care colleagues we can address this pressing need and 
help the children and adolescents of Maine. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Andy Hinkens MD MPH 
 
