 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony In Support of LD 231, ‘An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral 
Health Partnership Program’  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Dr. Brian Youth, a pediatrician and resident of Scarborough, 
Maine.  I currentl y serve as Vice President of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of 
Pediatrics. I am testifying in strong support of LD 231.  
 
This consultation program has been in existence since  receiving grant funding in 2018  and has 
been helping youth across the  state by allowing pediatricians to consult about specific 
patients with a team of individuals including psychiatrists, behavioral health counselors, and other pediatricians, with the goal of giving PCPs suggestions for immediate management of psychiatric issues their patients are facing.  This has resulted in more immediate management 
for patients, helping to fill a critical gap in care given the very long wait lists to get patients in to see a psychiatric professional or to receive more intensive psychiat ric care in our State.  
 Among the patients I care for, there are a number of teenagers with serious mental health issues, many of whom are on waiting lists to get in with a child psychiatry provider.  As a participant in this program, I want to share one experience that I had that speaks to the importance of continuing funding for this program.  
 
I’d like to tell you about one of my patients, a 15 -year -old male struggling with PTSD, 
substance use disorder, aggression, and depression.  After working with  this teen to establish 
counseling as well as initiation of medication management for depression, he decided 
unilaterally to stop all interventions which resulted in increased school truancy, suspension, 
and ultimately aggression at school. This ultimately  led to an arrest, subsequent probation, 
and now legal involvement in his care.  
 I share d this patient’s story during an hour -long consultation as part of this program.  I was 
able to get direct input from two  psychiatric providers on medication management  options 
and feedback from behavioral health support personnel which guide d me to community 
resources I could utilize to support this teen . Following the consult, I received a summary of 
the case with more resources to share with the family and a follow -up phone call one month 
later asking how this patient was doing and if they were able to access the resources . 
 
Having this program allowed me to get immediate feedback from child psychiatry experts 
on medication changes, provided me with community resources  that could be enacted 
relatively quickly, and provided follow -up to be sure this child eventually got the 
comprehensive psychiatric services he needed for his current crisis situation. I could not have 
done this on my own.  
 
We do not have enough child psy chiatrists in our state to manage the need of our patients. 
This puts a burden on already overworked general pediatricians and family physicians who do 
not have the skill set or training to adequately manage complex mental illness.  Until we are 
able to increase access to child psychiatrists (a national issue that likely won’t happen any time soon), ongoing funding for this collaborative partnership is critical  given the rise in 
teenage depression/anxiety and other mental health issues in the setting of limited 
psychiatric resources in our State.  
 
I strongly urge you to support LD 231  so that we can access the expertise needed to provide 
our high -risk teen population with services and resources for their immediate mental health 
issues.
  
 
  
