 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony In Support of LD 231, ‘An Act to Support the Maine 
Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership Program’  
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Dr. Ellen Lauer, a pediatrician 
and resident of Bangor , Maine.  I am an active member  of the Maine Chapter of 
the American Academy of Pedia trics. I am testifying in strong support of LD 231.  
The Maine Behavioral Health Partnership has been a wonderful resource for me 
and my patients! I was able to have a phone consultation within just a few days 
and it was immensely helpful.   I was able to mo re confidently help someone who 
would ordinarily have to wait months to be seen by a mental health provider.   I 
am also completing the ECHO series for Pediatric Psychiatry in Primary Care.   This 
has been great as well. The didactic sessions are brief, to t he point, and 
informative.   The case presentations are very interesting as well as give me a 
sense of camaraderie with other pediatric providers around the state who are 
also facing complex biopsychosocial cases with limited local resources.   Having 
the ex perts weigh in with their opinions is truly a gift to those of us working in 
primary care and gives us insight into their thought processes and reinforces the 
clinical experience/knowledge that I have as a general pediatrician.  
Thanks to this program, I ha ve developed increased comfort with more complex 
psychiatric cases and gained confidence in my treatment of routine cases that are 
not responding to the initial medication trials.  My patients, the struggling youth  
in my region, are the beneficiaries of this program. Please help us to maintain 
and expand this invaluable service that is helping so many children, adolescents,  
and their families.  
I strongly urge you to support LD 231 so that we can access the expertise needed to provide our at-risk youth  with services and resources for their immediate 
mental health issues.  
 
  
