 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine people 
 
The Honorable Joseph Baldacci 
The Honorable Michele Meyer 
Joint Committee On Health and Human Services 
Cross Building, Room 209 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
*VIA TESTIMONY PORTAL*  
 
RE: LD 231 , An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership  
Program - Rep. Daniel Shagoury of Hallowell 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee, 
 
I am writing this letter as a family physician, as the President of the Maine Medical Association 
representing more than 4,000 Maine physicians, and as a former leader in a Maine primary care 
organization with almost 100 primary care providers, all desperate for better access to psychiatric services 
in Maine. 
 
The Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership  program has been a lifeline thrown to this 
Maine family physician drowning in the unmet mental health needs of my patients, both children and 
adults. Unless my patients are in crisis and therefore must go the emergency department for help, this 
program is my only access to psychiatrists for my pediatric patients with significant mental illness. 
Without it I have nowhere to send them for expert physician care, and I am left on my own managing 
patients whose needs are substantially greater than my skills and experience.  
 
The quality of the service is outstanding: I get a coordinator with whom to initially review the patient’s 
needs, who then helps set up a meeting with the psychiatrist (zoom or phone). I get a direct conversation 
with a pediatric psychiatrist about my patient, and then either guidance so I can continue the 
management of the patient myself, or the coordinator contacts the family to arrange an evaluation with 
the psychiatrist.  
 
This approach well for several reasons. First, it makes possible a conversation between two physicians 
that would otherwise be impossible, by providing scheduling and meeting support. Second, it allows me 
to present my patient to the psychiatrist, and allows the psychiatrist to ask me questions, to really 
determine if the patient needs to see the psychiatrist. That triage function helps ensure that the 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 psychiatrist is only seeing patients they really need to see, preserving their access for the most complex 
patients. It also serves to educate me, enhancing my ability to care for this and other patients.  
Maine desperately needs this program to not only continue, but to be expanded. A network of such 
psychiatrists supported by coordinators could markedly enhance access to care for patients with severe 
mental illness in Maine. Most of those patients get the majority of their mental health care from primary 
care providers who are often out on a clinical limb treating patients without the expert help needed to 
ensure those patients are getting the expert level of care they need.  
Finally, and as someone who resists drama and hyperbole, this program is likely a lifesaver. Many of the 
patients treated through this program have significant suicidal thinking: the most recent patient I referred 
to it thought regularly about jumping out of a window onto his head. We desperately need the expert 
help this program gives us for these patients.  
 
I would be happy to provide further information and comment as needed in support of the Maine Pediatric 
and Behavioral Health Partnership program.  
 
Sincerely,  
Erik N. Steele, D.O. 
Family Physician for Martin’s Point Healthcare practices in Gorham, Biddeford, Scarborough, Portland, 
and Brunswick 
President, Maine Medical Association 
 
 
 
