LD 231: An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership Program 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
NAMI Maine endorses the unanimous passage LD 231 to continue funding for pediatric psychiatric consult service 
begun under the federal Health Recourses and Services Administration (HRSA) grant. As one of the nation's most 
rural state, Maine faces ongoing severe shortage of pediatric psychiatric services, especially in more rural regions 
of the state. This program supports the most effective us of a limited resource in order to care for a vulnerable 
population, our children. 
Maine's Pediatric & Behavioral Health Partnership Program has developed processes and structures for healthcare 
professionals and practices working in schools, primary care and specialty practices to access education and 
resources on pediatric behavioral health and to directly consult with in-state psychiatric specialists on specific 
cases of youth psychiatric needs. This supports providers, both rural and urban, to manage their more challenging 
behavioral health patients rather than seeking to refer them on, especially when the system lacks the capacity to 
accept those referrals. 
According to the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Maine has a total of 30 Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatrists (CAPs) for approximately 250,000 youth under age 18, and our professional psychiatry 
workforce is aging, especially in the more rural counties (2023). In Maine, 3 counties have no psychiatrists, and5 
have only one. This shortage is true nation-wide and comes during a period of time where our youth face 
unprecedented levels of mental health needs including clinical anxiety, depression and disordered eating and 
increased trauma-based needs. 
The Maine Pediatric & Behavioral Health Partnership Program is designed to improve access to pediatric 
behavioral health care and provide a standard for that care. The goal is to maximize the functioning of the current 
system, not replace it. Through this program we have seen rural providers accessing consultation and referral 
options from clinical specialists allowing them to better address the needs of their patients and families. Under the 
HRSA grant web-based and telephonic patient care consultations with behavioral health providers is open to all 
registered providers free of charge using a combination of federal and state funds. We have also participated as 
subject matter experts in ongoing training and education offerings reviewing complex behavioral health cases and 
accessing the consultative input of seasoned experts in the field. These combined structuring of immediate 
clinical expert consultation, educational resources and direct training supports not only the youth and their 
families, but providers working in isolated practices across the state allowing them to provide evidence-based 
care. 
NAMI Maine urges unanimous passage and funding sustaining the Pediatric & Behavioral Health Partnership to 
support the ongoing needs and to most effectively use the limited resource of out child psychiatric practitioners. 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the NationalAIIiance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state's largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional aﬁiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental 
health system through collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT Hannah Longley, LCSW, Sr. Clinical Director (207) 622-5767 Q HannahL@namimaine.org 
POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA www.namimaine.org/advocacy
