 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony In Support of LD 231, ‘An Act to Support the Maine 
Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership Program’  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services, my name is Dr. Je nnifer Jewell and I am a member of the 
Maine Chapter Board of Direct ors and a Portland resident.  
 
 We can all agree that hospital Emergency Departments are ideal locations to care for 
people with urgent medical needs, such as heart attack s and strokes, pneumonia and 
sepsis.  As a practicing hospital- based pediatrician, I can assure that Emergency 
Departments are ill- equipped to care for children and adolescents with mental health 
and behavioral concerns, particularly with the paucity of e xceedingly costly residential 
and inpatient options.   In have witnessed Emergency Department personnel tending to 
children for weeks while waiting  for alternative locations to accept patients.   Some 
Emergency Departments are so crowded that hallways are lined with children and 
families who cannot even see beyond the walls to know if it is daytime or night.  
 
Maine earned a HRSA Maternal and Child Health Block Grant that has impacted the 
ability of pediatric care providers and their teams to care for their patients in order to 
PREVENT Emergency Department visits for mental health and behavioral crises.  
 
The grant and matching Maine funds resulted in the development of the Maine Pediatric 
and Behavioral Health Partnership that offers pediatric providers training and real -time 
consultations with mental health and behavioral experts.   This partnership has enhanced 
the current systems of care by increasing access at no cost to patients, families, and 
primary care providers.   An additional benefit of this improve d access curtails mental 
health and behavioral escalations that patients experience, and therefore, decreases 
reliance on Emergency Departments as the default location for pediatric patients with 
mental health and behavioral crises.  Unfortunately, the HR SA funding ends in June 2023, 
leaving the continued work of the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership 
questionable.  
 
Not only does continuing the Partnership offer us the right thing to do -  treating our 
Maine youth with much needed services, it is a fiscally sound proposition, due to the 
high costs of inpatient and residential stays.   And it opens our Emergency Department 
spaces to care for acute MEDICAL or TRAUMA needs.  
 
There are so many competing initiatives for Maine legislation and the A ppropriations 
Committee to consider.   I believe that funding the Maine Pediatric Behavioral Health 
Partnership is well worth the cost -  to us all.   So, that OUR urgent medical needs are met 
in Emergency Departments throughout the state.   And, so, that our youth are able to 
flourish and thrive.   Because, although children make up only 27% of our population, 
they are 100% of our future.  
  
