 
Executive  Committee  
President  
Laura  Blaisdell,  MD,  MPH,  FAAP  
 
Vice  President  
Brian  Youth,  MD,  FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher  Motyl,  DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting,  MD,  FAAP  
 
Immediate  Past  President  
Deborah  Q. Hagler,  MD,  MPH,  FAAP  
 
Board  of Directors  
 
Mahmuda  Ahmed,  MD,  FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne  Carmack,  MD,  FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale,  MD,  FAAP 
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer  Jewell,  MD,  MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton  Kremer,  MD,  PhD,  FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney  Sewall  MD,  MPH,  FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey S tone, DO, FAAP  
Mary  Tedesco -Schneck,  PhD,  NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron  Wallace,  MD*  
 
*Resident  Board  Representatives  
**Medical  Student  Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive  Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin  & Project  Coordinator  
 
30 Association  Drive,  Box 190 
Manchester,  ME 04351  
office:  207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony  In Support  of LD 231,  ‘An Act to Support the Maine  Pediatric  and 
Behavioral Health Partnership Program’  
 
Senator  Baldacci,  Representative Meyer  and distinguished  members  of the Committee on 
Health  and Human  Services,  my name is  Dr. Melissa Keeport,  I reside in  Damariscotta and 
am testifying in support of LD 231.  
 
I have practiced  pediatrics  for 7 years in  Lincoln  County. I support  this bill because mental 
health  is a huge  issue  for kids which  I cannot  overstate.  If I see 15-20 patients  per day,  1/3 
of them have some mental health complaint. From anxiety to depression to self- harm to 
thoughts of suicide to school bullying to eating disorders. Recent CDC data shows:  In 
2021, more than 4 in 10 (42%)  students felt persistently sad or hopeless and nearly one - 
third (29%) experienced poor mental health.  In 2021, more than 1 in 5 (22%) students 
seriously considered attempting suicide and 1 in 10 (10%) attempted suicide.  
 
I regularly  treat  a number  of children  struggling  with  mental  health  issues.  Having  access 
to a child  and adolescent psychiatrist to review the case and  formulate a  treatment plan 
through MPBHP program is invaluable. There is a huge lack of pediatric psychiatric 
providers in Maine, and I  have had to stretch beyond my training and manage 
complicated psychiatric and mental health patients I wouldn’t normally and often 
couldn’t without this service.  
 
This service allows me to see the patient in the primary care setting by a doctor they’re comfortable and familiar with, then I present the patient’s case to the pediatric 
psychiatrist within a few days, usually over the phone or Zoom. They will then give me 
their  recommendations  for diagnosis  and management.  The wait  time  for the patient  to 
see a pediatric psychiatrist themselves otherwise would be 3 -6 months and instead it’s 
just days.  
 
I believe this service also helps kids from ending up in our emergency rooms in crisis, 
which  is the last place  they  should  be for that reason  but there’s  nowher e else for them 
to turn. And once at the ER, they may be stuck there for days or even weeks. This 
partnership allows better access to prevent this.  
 
This service  being free of charge  is also extremely  important  because  many  patients  lack 
insurance, only have MaineCare or there are complications related to insurance. No 
charge to patients allows better access to care . 
 
I have also received extremely helpful education through the partnership to expand my 
knowledge on pediatric psychiatric topics. The educational component has been tailored 
to our needs and is very relevant.  
 
Please  support  this program  and help  us continue  to provide  this safety  net for patients  in 
the primary care office setting.  

