Maine Medical 5,’ ,2 v ,., 
..<= .- I er 3 ‘ ,~e' 1 J » 
>3 - 
;. ;; 1' 
, 1,» 
~“<§§4‘ §;I/$6 is '“’:. '1» 
{ii “~ 
. II *3 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President l Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO l Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
0 SUPPORT Maine Physicians ~ ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine v PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
TO: Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate 
DATE: April 10, 2023 
SUPPORT — LD 231, An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership 
Program' 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health and Government 
Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The MMA 
appreciates the opportunity to share the following comments in support of LD 231 to provide 
support to an incredible resource to the State, the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health 
Program. 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine's largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
Nearly 20% of high school students seriously consider suicide. That is equivalent to three 
school buses filled to maximum capacity at Bangor High School. For the younger ages, 2 to8 
years old, one in six has a mental, behavioral, or developmental disorder. According to a report 
by Mental Health America 59.8% of youth with major depression do not receive any mental 
health treatment and only about 20% receive care from a specialized mental health care 
provider. 
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), primary care providers are the first 
point of contact for children with mental health concerns for up to 70% of children. Additionally, 
a study published in the Journal of Pediatrics found that 80% of pediatric mental health visits 
occur in primary care settings. 
These statistics highlight the crucial role that primary care physicians play in the identification 
and management of behavioral health issues in children. However, primary care physicians 
may not always have the resources to provide comprehensive care for complex behavioral 
health issues. The Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Program provides an opportunity for 
these primacy care physicians and other providers to access additional care for their patients 
within their medical home. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, sewing more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
Access to behavioral health care is a challenge this committee has worked on many times 
before and the MMA thanks each of you for all your work on these difficult challenges. With the 
rising rates of behavioral health needs and complexities, it is critical to provide resources for 
patients to access the treatment they need. This program provides this opportunity and greatly 
aids our providers and their patients. For these reasons, the Maine Medical Association urges 
the committee to vote ought to pass and ensure this program continues. 
Thank you for considering our comments. We welcome any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com) 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
