526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207-480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
April 10, 2023  
 
Testimony In Support of L D 231, An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership 
Program . 
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental Disabilities (DD) 
Council.1   The Maine Pediatri c and Behavioral Health Partnership Pro gram  provides a warm line for 
Pediatricians to access  real time consultation  with behavioral health p roviders  so that they can assist their 
patients  quickly.   
 
Supporting medical professionals caring for their patients at a time in which behavioral h ealth services are 
scarce is an excellent strategy .  Having access to timely behavioral  health care will likely decrease emerg ency 
and c risis service usage .  Right now , this grant is being administered through the CDC because the service 
provides  medical consultation  to medical profession als so they can give real-time care to their pe diatric 
patients .  It might  be a  logical assumption  that OCFS Behavioral Services  should administer this pro gram , but 
we believe  that would be a mistake .  This service is improving pediatric healthcare , which  includes behavioral 
health, for all chi ldren.  OCFS administers programs funded  through MaineCare while the CDC serve s everyone  
regardless of insurance  type .  The CDC is also the natural link for healthcare education.  Maine DD Council 
fears that if the administration of this project is sh ifted this might be inter preted as  a change in the program s 
scope.   
 
In summary, this program is critical.  Thank you for this opportunity to provide input  and I am available for any 
questions.  
 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD 
Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with developmental disabilities for over 50 ye ars.  
The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with members from across the state, including persons with 
disabilities, family members, and representatives of public and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for se rvice s 
for individuals with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and 
systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully in cluded, 
integrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
