 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco- Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff 
 Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207- 480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony In Support of LD 231, ‘An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and 
Behavioral Health Partnership Program’  
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services, I am  Dr. S tephanie Joy, a residen t of Freeport.  I have been a primary care 
pediatrician in Maine for the last 13 years, 3 in Brunswick and the last 10 in  South Portland. I am 
also a member of the Board for the Maine AAP.  
 
Since I started practicing medicine, there has been an explosion of mental illness and  patient and 
family needs.  According to the Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey in 2021, 36 percent of high 
school students  reported feeling sad or hopel ess for at least 2 weeks in the prior 12 months. During 
the pandemic (which  is still not over), 32 percent of middle school students and 43 percent of high 
school students reported feeling stress, anxiety, or depression “most of the time or always.” Twenty  
percent of middle schoolers  and 18.5 percent of high schoolers seriously considered suicide in the 
last 12 months. That statistic  alone is chilling to me, and it should be to everyone reading this.  For 
example, the day I write this letter, I have 15 patie nts in my schedule, a mix of annual physicals and  
sick visits in children with ages ranging from toddler to late teens. Of those 15 patients, 7 of them 
have  moderate to severe mental illness that is being treated, and another 4 have severe mental 
illness i n the family that is affecting their own health. That is 11 out of 15 patients, and that is a fairly 
typical day for  me. 
 
LD 231 is critical in stabilizing funding for the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership  
Program. Primary care pediatricians  are doing more and more psychiatric care that has historically 
been outside of our comfort zone. This program has allowed me to safely and appropriately care for 
patients  with a range of mental illness within the comfort of their medical home. When I tell  patients 
I am in close contact with a child and adolescent psychiatrist and they are helping to care for them 
by ensuring I  am using the most evidence -based and up to date treatments, it provides no small 
measure of security  to them and their family. I am  able to attend learning sessions, call for a same -
day phone consult,  submit an electronic consult that is answered within 2 days at the longest (and 
often within hours of me  submitting it), and go to their excellent website to look for local resources 
to support patients and  families. Without this program, our patients would most certainly not get the 
psychiatric care they so  desperately need at this time.  
 
Two weeks ago I was conducting a telemedicine appointment with a  teenager who was exhibiting 
signs of  mania after increasing the dose of their antidepressant. I was able within minutes to 
contact a child and adolescent -trained psychiatrist and come up with a safe plan to taper off the 
medication and get the patient connected with someone they could see in less than a week  to 
discuss the next steps in their treatment. I could not be more thankful for this service.  
 
Thank you for your time in reading this and please support this crucial piece of legislature.  
 
Stephanie Joy, MD  
 
  
