Tanji Johnston
Freeport
LD 231
Dear Members of the Health and Human Services Committee,
I am writing in support of LD 231, “An Act to Support the Maine Pediatric and 
Behavioral Health Partnership Program."  
I have been a social worker in Maine for nearly forty years, working with some of 
Maine's most vulnerable families and children.  Much of my career has been in Maine
schools, serving children who receive special education services, both as a direct 
service provider and a school administrator.  I have developed public school based 
therapeutic programs, including a day treatment program for middle and high school 
students.  
As you are aware,  the state of mental health services for children in Maine and across
the US is at a crisis point.  The lack of therapists, psychiatrists and community based 
services available to families is dangerous and at times terrifying.  I have had children
I serve stranded in emergency rooms awaiting appropriate placement for mental 
health crises for days and at times weeks.  I have had students who are suffering with 
major mental health diagnoses unable to access support and services, and have seen 
families at their collective breaking points.  I have had students suffering with 
delusions and exhibiting self harming behaviors unable to obtain services in a timely 
fashion.  I have had students waiting for services turn to substance abuse, self abuse, 
other abuse and self harm as they wait.
One exception to this dismal state of affairs has been the ACCESS program at Maine 
Medical Center.  Here, through collaboration with local pediatricians such as Debra 
Hagler, MD at MidCoast Pediatrics, we have been able to get consultation from a 
child psychiatrist at Maine Medical Center to not only support children staying safely 
at home with their families, but also  allowing them to continue attending school 
successfully.  In the past two years, we have used this program to prevent socially and
fiscally costly psychiatric hospitalization, while families have the opportunity to 
continue working with their trusted community providers.  The complex needs of 
these children requires expertise in pharmacological management  beyond that which 
can be expected from generalists such as pediatricians  and PCPs.  However, with 
access to this type of specialized collaboration and consultation, community providers
can continue to provide the care necessary to safely maintain children in their homes 
and schools.  Consultation also allows highly specialized providers to see more 
families and children, as they do not have the additional time constraint imposed by 
follow up care.
It is a drop in the bucket, to be fully transparent, but it has been the saving grace for 
three of my very significantly impacted students with mental illness.  I look forward 
to continuing to have access to this service, and will continue to advocate for broader, 
more intensive services for the families and children I serve,
Thank you for your attention to supporting and funding this critical partnership 
program.
Respectfully,
Tanji Johnston, LMSW
School Social Worker
