PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:
Committee On Transportation
From:
Nathan Davis, Sierra Club Maine
Date:
March 8, 2023
Re:
Testimony in Support of L.D. 754:
Resolve, Directing
the Maine-Canadian
Legislative Advisory Commission and the New England and Eastern Canada Legislative
Commission to Examine Restoring Passenger Rail from Boston to Montreal
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Committee On Transportation,
my name is Nathan Davis, and I write on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over 22,000
supporters and members statewide. Founded in 1892, Sierra Club is one of our nation’s oldest
and largest environmental organizations. We work diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8
million members nation-wide as we work towards combating climate change and promoting a
just and sustainable economy. To that end, we urge you to vote “ought to pass” on L.D. 754
concerning the restoration of passenger rail service between Boston and Montreal.
We’d like to recognize Senator Bennett both for sponsoring this Resolve and for his work on this
issue over the past several years.
The Sierra Club nationally supports public transit for a variety of reasons, including its salutary
impacts on climate protection, land use, and social equity.
1
We are excited at the prospect of
restoring train service between these two major population centers, and we believe that it is
appropriate to direct two existing multijurisdictional entities - the Maine-Canadian Legislative
Advisory Commission and the Eastern Canada Legislative Commission - to study related
possibilities. We are also encouraged at the prospect of passenger rail service promoting
economic development in and offering a wider range of transportation options to the smaller
communities along the proposed route, both in Maine and elsewhere.
Skeptics might assert that such a service would not be high-speed and might take longer than
driving. This may well be the case, but it diminishes neither our enthusiasm nor the potential
benefits to Maine. A wide variety of people - myself included - prefer train travel to other modes
of transportation when it is available, and there are plenty of travel contexts, including tourism
and recreational travel, in which speed is not the primary determinant of one’s choice of
transportation. More generally, even if this particular service might not be a high-speed
commuter train, the path towards the possibility of such trains in the future begins with simply
increasing the availability and acceptance of passenger rail service in Maine.
We urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 754. Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
1
h t t p s : / / w w w . s i e r r a c l u b . o r g / p o l i c y / t r a n s p o r t a t i o n

Nathan Davis
Sierra Club Maine
Legislative Team member
