..' A" 
rv 4.‘. 
-Richard A. ‘Bennett m V as State House-Station 
Se'nator,_ District 1s- ~ * 
6T 
i 
-A1' 1gusta,.Maine§04333 
' ' ' ' 
THE MAINE SENATE i i ' ' ' 
i 13i1s,t.Legislature.i 
T'
’ 
A < 
Testimony of Senator Richard 'A. Bennett y "A 
, o ' ' ’ 
, ~ 
In Support of LD 754, '"Re'solve, Directingthe Maine-Canadian Legislative Advisory . 
~ 
Commission and the New.Eng'land and-Eastern Canada Legislative Comimismsionto Examine - 
e ' 
A' *§ _' '1' 
A A Restoring Passenger 'Rail,fro' m Bostonto Montreal" ' ' 
_ _ _ i" 
.. ~ " ' 
‘9March2023 ‘ R - ’ 
Y- 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williamsand members of the Committee on Transportation, -If 
am -Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I- have the honor of serving 14 communities in Westemr 
Maine in the'.State' Senate. Iam pleased to introduce LD 754, “Resolve, Directing the Maine- .V 
Canadian Legislative Advisory Commission and the New England and Eastern Canada ;V 
Legislative" Cormnission to Examine Restoring Passenger Rail from’Boston to Montreal. ” "' 
There is‘ 
renewed interest' in restoring rail' from Boston through-Maine to' 
Quebec," and'I believe it 
is worth the Legislature engagingin the conversation. Given the multilateral discussion that is' 
required, I searched for the proper way forthis branch of government to explore the opportunity.-1 
What better entities to look into it then the Maine-Canadian Legislative Advisory Commission 
thet New England and Easternf_Canada Legislative Commission. Dormant fora _ few years 'V 
during thepandemic, these entities are tailor-made for the data-gathering,-researchand _ 
_ ' 
_§ 
conversation such as this.' 
r - -' 
s ''
- 
~ 4 
1 < --3 
-I -have been supportive of the idea of initiating modest passenger rail service from Montreal- 
through Maine to Boston for several years.-C Historically,_peop_le :of"Quebe' c havefor generations .- 
travelled forsummer vacations down Routes 26 and 302 in my district to_avail themselves of the 
beaches of the southern Maine coast. Since the pandemic this travel is growing stronger than 
eV€1'- ... .' 
. f .;.T .- 
.. ..' 
The Train-Hotel on the Saint Lawrence & Atlantic Railroad “ has been proposed as passenger train 
service from Montreal going through and stoppingiin Maine and continuing _to Boston. It would, 
:be aislow-moving overnight, “sleeper” train that would combinethe travelexperience as part of 
.vaca§tion. The trip would take an estimated» 1'4'hours,' 
so this would fnot be high—speed rail, buth
' 
instead an alternative to driving where you could’ sit back, and -sleep in a comfortable bed while 
gettingto your destination. j V V '1 
i . ' '
. 
_-
- 
, ~ - 
.- 
. 1 s * 
Fr' ancois,Reb,ello, founder of ,Trai_n-Hotel,I' nct .,, has said, “Thef passenger train we are - ' 4 
propo’sing_has' run for more than l0Oyears- y on the SLA track. Indeed, between 1860 and 1967, 
there was la passengeritrain connection from Montreal to Portland. Eightyears ago, M. Rebello 
discussed this project with the different rail owners along the routein question. ‘ Just this past fall, 
heorganized-a meeting to discuss the concept at the Coaticook, Quebec,-train station where more 
than 60 representatives of business, towns, and governments from Quebec",:Vermont, New, 
Fax: (207).' 2_87.-1527* 
_ TTY (207) 287-1583 * Messdge_Service' 
1-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.gQv/senate _
Hampshire, Massachusetts and Ma-ine participated, including myself and this resolve. ’s co.- 
sponsorRep.LoriGram1ich., Ir 
_ I I '
3 
.- 
A market study in 2000 found that as many as 600,000 travelers per year mightutilize passenger 
rail ‘connecting Maine to Montreal. A survey conducted by the Sierra Club in 2014 indicatedi
v 
80% support for train service to Montreal in all demographic segments of Maine. According "to:a 
news article on Boston.com “a market study suggests about'4,-000 people travel daily between“ 
Montreal andBo,ston, and about 1,000 of themwould opt for rail service if it?s available. ” _. 
_. 
The Portland to Lewiston/Auburn route is part of the federally designated Northern New _ .5 
England High Speed Rail Corridor. Railplanning in this corridor has included the design andV 
permittingof a new-intermodal facility at the.Lewiston/Auburn airport, which wouldimproveV 
connections for auto, bus, rail, and air travelers, and would serve commuters working in the 1 '
Z 
Portland region. The U.S.D _OT’s.Vision for High-Speed Rail in America includes enhancements 
to the Northeast Corridor, as well as incremental steps to utilize the Northern'New England V A 
High-Speed Rail Corridor that will ultimately connect Portland with Montreal. The Maine; leg of. 
this corridor is consistent with Maine"s long-range transportation plans, and reﬂects the; cultural, 
economic, and historical relationships of Maine and neighboring Canadian provinces. With more 
than $100 billion in railway infrastructure funding approved by Congress, interest in rail has-A 
neverbeenhigher..'"
. 
_ V ‘ it 
_"_ 
The Androscoggin, Oxford & Coos Counties Corridor Coalition (AOCCFC) has been meetingC 
regularlysince 2010 and includes representatives _ from the communities of Androscoggin, V 
I '
0 
Oxford and Coos Counties for the purpose of eXploring' opportu'nities for collaboration» in the‘ 
-restoration of passenger rail-to this region. The AOCCC hassigned resolutions from 14‘ towns' 
along‘ the corridor for restoration of rail service on the St. Lawrence & Atlantic Railway.- 
. .' 
-Corridor" . .A 
. -i i
r 
»' 
The proposal to restore rail is _in early stages and has several hurdles to overcome before it 
becomes _a reality. Ibelieve Maine is beneﬁted from studying thispossibility and our '' 
Legi_slature ’s collaborating with our neighbors formally so we may have input from -the start,' 
This resolve will get that conversation started.r 
p- 
VV 
lid be happy to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
