3 
STATE or MAINE " ‘ ~.*-H 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE W-’ AUGUSTA. l\4A1NE 04333-0002 
AMYBARATA Cell: (Z(i7l333-l8l7 
Testimony on Office: (I07) BS7-l-1-l0 
ASSlSTANT HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER Fa\: (Z (l7 l 3 3 7- 1 449 
E - Mail: A1n _\’.Aralaa{1 l€glSl£l1Ul'C.l ‘l‘l iine gm 
L.D. 804, "An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at 
WiII" 
Presented by 
Representative Amy B. Arata 
District 104 
Judiciary Committee 
Thursday, March 23, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
l am State Representative Amy Arata, and I proudly represent District 104, New Gloucester 
and a portion of Gray. it is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of speaking to 
* 
the merits of L.D. 804, ”An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy 
at Will. II 
By increasing the number of days’ notice to terminate a tenancy, L.D. 804 could actually 
harm more renters than it would help. 
Many tenants like having a 30-day ”tenant at will" lease, where the tenants can leave 
with just a 30-day notice. 
Many people who are considering becoming landlords will change their minds if they 
will have to suffer with a bad tenant for a long period of time. 
Owner/occupant landlords may need the space for a sick relative, or may need it vacant 
to sell the building due to financial hardship. 
Tenants smoke in the building, causing damage and harming the health of others in the 
building.' 
Tenants fight or party late at night, causing stress and anxiety for others in the building 
by keeping them awake all night. 
Tenants with intimidating or criminal behavior that is a safety issue for both the other 
tenants and the landlord. This has happened to me. 
Tenants have untrained pets or refuse to take their pets outside, causing urine and feces 
damage to the building. This has happened to my property. 
Over, please
1 Tenants wasting energy by leaving windows open or faucets running, causing severe 
monetary loss to the property owner. 
These are just a few of the reasons to oppose this bill. It would also make Maine the only 
state in the nation other than Minnesota to have a 90-day notice requirement for all tenancy 
terminations. This information can be found online at httpszﬂwww.n0lo.com/legal- 
encyclopeclia/state-rules-on-notice-required-to-change-or-terminate-a-month-to-month- 
tenancy.html. 
This will deter people from investing in rental housing in Maine and harm more tenants 
than it helps. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l welcome any questions.
