March 9, 2023
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD Opposition to LD 804:  An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to 
Terminate a Tenancy at Will
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area.  We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area.  CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive.  
This bill will have detrimental effects to availability, move in costs, sales of buildings, and ultimately to the 
good tenants that won’t ever be asked to move unless there were extenuating circumstances. Our members 
have expressed that continuing pressures on their ability to screen new tenants, how much and when they can 
collect rent, and terminating a rental relationship is changing how they are doing business.  Increasing the 
notice period to 90 days means:
More landlords are going to require the 3 months equivalent of rent for move in costs in hopes of 
covering failure to pay once notice is given.  
The length of a tenancy contract should be an agreement that works between the landlord and tenant.  
This bill will, in essence, eliminate 30-day month-to-month rental agreements.
Many landlords do not file civil cases to recoup 30 days of lost rent- if we must lose 90 days than more 
civil credit actions will be filed.
Good tenants will be subjected to 90 full days of disruptive but not necessarily actionable behaviors of 
a neighbor.
This change would also mean if you rent out a room you have to live with someone for a full 90 days, 
this could create some very dangerous situations that already occur with the 30-day notice.
We urge you to oppose LD 804.
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine  
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact Information 
