TH ti 
E 
LAW OFFIQE 
DANIEL]. BERNIER 
LLG 
March 21, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bernier, representing the _ 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southern Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Aubum Landlord 
Association. 
Re: LD 804 An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at Will 
l am submitting this memo in opposition to the legislation. This bill will increase 
homelessness in Maine. Apartment Owners will be far less likely to take a chance ona 
marginal tenant who has a criminal record, a bad credit history, prior evictions, or is 
coming out of a homeless shelter if they are going to have to give them a ninety (90) day 
notice of eviction. If you vote for this bill, you are voting to increase homelessness in 
Maine. 
One of the great myths out there is that apartment owners do evictions for no 
reason; that they just evict people because they like to spend a thousand dollars ($1000) 
on an eviction, they like to have an empty unit that is not producing any income, and they 
like spending their afternoons in District Court at eviction hearings. That is a complete 
myth. The most common reason for a thirty (30) day notice for no cause is for disturbing other 
tenants, which can include violence against other tenants, sexual harassment of other tenants, 
harassing other tenants over their race or sexual preferences, excessive noise and just being 
loud at odd hours In many cases the good tenants do not want to show up to testify at Court. 
They are either afraid or they cannot get time off from work so the landlord does not havea 
witness to prove the cause, so they do a thirty (30) day notice for no cause. A ninety (90) day 
notice will make good tenants less safe. Landlords would also run the risk of good tenants 
just moving out because they are not willing to wait for what would now be a four- or five- 
month eviction process instead of a two month eviction process to get rid of the bad tenant. 
The Maine Human Rights Act protects tenants and not landlords. If a landlord is 
being sexually harassed, harassed over their sexual orientation or race, there only option 
is a so called no cause eviction. I have done evictions in each of these circumstances. I 
have also done several evictions where elderly landlords were being subjected to elder 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.8'/7 .8969 * dan@bemier1awof ﬁce.com
abuse by their younger tenants. Should they have to put up with this for four or ﬁve 
months under this statute?" 
Are tenants going to have to give ninety (90) day notices before they move out and be 
required to pay rent for ninety days rather than thirty days? 
Another reason where you do see thirty (30) day no cause evictions is the building is 
being sold and the buyer wants it empty. I was a little shocked that we did not see a bill 
addressing this speciﬁc issue. That speciﬁc issue is worth some discussion. 
Thank you for your time. 
Very¢jtr __u1y yours,
- 
11;L 
. Bemier 
DJB/hb 
Page 2 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * da11@bernierlawof ﬁce.com
