CrossWay LLC
  #1 Water Street, Newport, Maine 04953
 (207)368-6221 
emergencies (207)487-3680
crosswayrentals@gmail.com
March 1, 2023
To:  Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee
Re:  Opposition to LD 804:  An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a 
Tenancy at Will 
Dear Valuable Representatives of the People of Maine:
I am writing as a person with a small investment in rental property in opposition to LD 804: An 
Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at Will.  Unless there are 
egregious immediate safety concerns, we give a (minimum) 30 day notice to move for a tenant 
who has violated the rental agreement over and over again.  This would be after numerous 
written letters of infractions.  Although we often could use a 7-day notice in these circumstances, 
we want to minimize the impact of a bad neighbor escalating to our existing tenants by trying to 
work with people who may very well just not be a good fit for that property.  I’d like to give you 
a real-world example of how this change would impact our communities.
A perfect example of this was a resident that had a dog.  They often tied the dog out to bark and 
defecate on the lawn.  We had to end our tenancy after many warnings with delayed action, 
complaints from fellow tenants and neighboring properties, and our lawn contractor saying they 
would no longer mow.  We gave them a notice to move and they knew the reason.  This ended 
amicably as they wanted a more rural setting anyway.  Would they have wanted 90 days?  
Probably, but that would have meant that I chose to file a 7-day eviction for numerous 
infractions. The 30-day term allowed us to keep the situation from escalating and maintain a 
good reference for the tenant.  
Please note that a 30-day notice to move is NOT the eviction.  That is just the step/time period 
of notice.  The eviction would ONLY take place after following further legal procedures and 
time frames after someone refuses to move after proper notice.  Please vote in OPPOSITION 
TO LD 804.  Thank you for your consideration.
Donna E. Hodges 
CrossWay LLC
