:_,. 
__ .u _ 
I -I-1; ,, 
126 Sewall Street 
Augusta, ME 0433045822 
Frank DIA'essandro TTY/Voice: (207) 626-7058 . ..
. _ Peo le Polio Seiutararaa Legal Services Dlreuwr Fax. (207) 621 8148 PY (207) 6267058’ ext’ 202 wwW'mejp ‘°rg 
frank@mejp.org 
Testimony of Frank D’Alessandro, Maine Equal Justice 
In support of LD 804 “An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to 
Terminate a Tenancy at Will” 
March 23, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary. My name is Frank D’Alessandro, and I am the Legal Services Director 
of Maine Equal Justice. We are a civil legal services organization, and we work with and for 
people with low income seeking solutions to poverty through policy, education, and legal 
representation. Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 804. 
Maine Equal Justice supports LD 804. Mainers’ health, wellbeing, and economic stability all 
start at home, and there is no worse threat to a family’s stability than eviction~ —or the forcible 
removal from that home. Eviction is not just a condition of poverty, but a cause of it, as it forces 
families out of their communities away from their support systems, makes children change 
schools, negatively affects mental health, and causes job loss. No one should lose their home 
and risk becoming homeless if they haven’t done anything wrong. LD 804 will help prevent 
unnecessary evictions and ensure housing stability for Mainers. 
What This Bill Does 
Under current law a landlord may terminate a tenancy at will by serving the tenant with eithera 
30 day notice or a 7 day notice. Under current law and this bill, a landlord may serve at tenant 
with a 7 day notice for the reasons set forth in 14 M.R.S. § 6001(2): 
A. The tenant, the tenant's family or an invitee of the tenant has caused substantial 
damage to the demised premises that the tenant has not repaired or caused to be repaired 
before the giving of the notice provided in this subsection; 
B. The tenant, the tenant's family or an invitee of the tenant caused or permitted a 
nuisance within the premises, has caused or permitted an invitee to cause the dwelling 
unit to become unﬁt for human habitation or has violated or permitted a violation of the 
law regarding the tenancy;
C. The tenant is 7 days or more in arrears in the payment of rent; 
D. The tenant is a perpetrator of domestic violence, sexual assault or stalking and the 
victim is also a tenant; 
E. The tenant or the tenant's guest or invitee is the perpetrator of violence, a threat of 
violence or sexual assault against another tenant, a tenant's guest, the landlord or the 
landlord's employee or agent, except that this paragraph does not apply to a tenant who is 
a victim as deﬁned in section 6000, subsection 4 and who has taken reasonable action 
under the circumstances to comply with the landlord's request for protection of the tenant, 
another tenant, a tenant's guest or invitee, the landlord or the landlord's employee or agent 
or of the landlord's property; or 
F. The person occupying the premises is not an authorized occupant of the premises. 
This bill extends from 30 to 90 days the notice requirements for reasons not covered by set forth 
in 14 M.R.S. § 6001(2). This bill does not extend the time to evict tenants who have done 
something wrong nor does this bill prevent a landlord from terminating a tenancy at the end ofa 
lease term. However this bill will ensure that tenants at will are given more time to locate 
alternative housing when faced with a no cause eviction. 
The Practical Consequences of This Bill 
This bill extends from 30 days to 90 days the notice period for an eviction brought against a 
tenant at will without cause. An at-will tenancy is one where a landlord-tenant relationship is not 
governed by a lease agreement for one year or another set time period. It is sometimes calleda 
“month-to-month ” tenancy. 
A study of Maine’s eviction records done by Pine Tree Legal Assistance from 2019 to 2022 
estimated that no-cause evictions account for an average of 19% of all eviction ﬁlings in Maine. 
With no cause evictions making up nearly 27% of all evictions in 2021. Landlords ﬁle the 
overwhelming majority of evictions in Maine (87%) for non-payment or another cause.' 
According to Pine Tree Legal Assistance, only 5% of no cause eviction cases were related to an 
underlying cause due to tenant behavior. On average this accounts for less than 1% of all 
eviction cases ﬁled in the State of Maine. 
According to records kept by Pine Tree Legal Assistance a change to the City of Portland 
Ordinance similar to that proposed in this bill resulted in a 25% reduction in no cause evictions 
1 
In 2020, the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition (MAHC) compiled the ﬁrst comprehensive study on Maine’s 
eviction ﬁlings. MAHC, Evictions in Maine: An Analysis of Eviction Filings and Outcomes as the COVID-19 
Pandemic Threatens to Increase Rental Housing Instability 9 (Sept. 2020), https://maineliousingcoalitionorglwpcontentl 
uploads/2020.109/Maine-Eviction-Report-FINAL-September-2020.pd£
2
for tenants located in Portland Maine compared to the rest of the State. This bill will improve 
stability for tenants by giving them more time to plan around a potential end-date to their 
tenancy. As a result of this bill, landlords may also look increasingly to evict at-will tenants with 
7 day notices for the causes described above. Though this will result in a shorter notice period, it 
will provide tenants with the opportunity to defend themselves. Under current law, tenants have 
virtually no defense against a 30 day no-cause eviction notice. 
Why Maine Equal Justice Supports LD 804 
Eviction Creates Disastrous Consequences for Families 
No one should lose their home and risk becoming homeless if they haven’t done anything 
wrong. Finding affordable housing in Maine has become so difficult that many Mainers become 
homeless simply because they cannot ﬁnd an apartment that meets their budget. 
When a tenant gets a 30 day no-cause eviction notice, they are put in the impossible position of 
finding a new apartment and moving within 30 days’ notice, or risk going to eviction court and 
being forcibly removed from their home. 
Eviction —or the forcible removal of a family from their home—is often a traumatic and highly 
consequential event, especially for low-income families. The Eviction Lab at Princeton 
University, a leading team of researchers working to highlight the prevalence, causes, and 
consequences of evictions nationwide, describes the fallout of eviction this way: 
Eviction causes a family to lose their home. They often are also expelled from their 
community and their children have to switch schools. Families regularly lose their 
possessions, too, which are piled on the sidewalk or placed in storage, only to be 
reclaimed after paying a fee. A legal eviction comes with a court record, which can 
prevent families from relocating to decent housing in a safe neighborhood, because many 
landlords screen for recent evictions. Studies also show that eviction causes job loss, as 
the stressful and drawn-out process of being forcibly expelled from a home causes people 
to make mistakes at work and lose their job. Eviction also has been shown to affect 
people's mental health: one study found that mothers who experienced eviction reported 
higher rates of depression two years after their move. The evidence strongly indicates 
that eviction is not just a condition of poverty, it is a cause of it. 
Clearly, eviction causes ﬁnancial losses to families who often lose their possessions and lose 
their jobs when they’re forced ﬁom their homes and communities.2 It also causes enormous 
personal trauma with signiﬁcant repercussions to economic and personal well-being. Research 
2 Matthew Desmond & Carl Gershensou, Housing and Employment Insecurity Among the Working Poor, 63 Soc. Prob. 46, 46 (2016).
3
in the wake of the foreclosure crisis has tracked how housing instability negatively inﬂuences 
adult and children ’s physical and mental well-being including increasing the risk of depression 
in mothers.3 Eviction also increases suicide and anxiety.4 For children, it results in emotional 
and educational decline.5 
People who have been evicted go on to be shadowed by an eviction judgment on their record and 
damaged credit that prevents them from moving forward and rebuilding their ﬁnances. Evidence 
shows that many housing providers screen prospective tenants out of the application process 
based on the existence of an eviction ﬁling in a tenant’s name, regardless of the basis or the legal 
outcome. “ As a result, families who have been evicted are often forced into poorer 
neighborhoods and substandard housing. 
No tenant in Maine should have to suffer these consequences. But it is especially unfair to' 
tenants whose landlords evict them with 30 days’ notice without cause. Though these tenants 
have done nothing wrong except fail the impossible task of ﬁnding a new home and moving 
within 30 days, they can suffer devastating ﬁnancial and health fallout ﬁom eviction and be 
barred from future housing opportunities. 
All the evidence shows that Mainers’ health and well-being starts with having a stable home and 
the opportunities that come with it. LD 804 is a crucial policy measure because it will help 
prevent unnecessary evictions and ensure housing stability for more Mainers. 
Maine’s Housing Crisis Highlights Deep Racial Inequality 
While housing instability and eviction is always tragic, it is not a tragedy that befalls all families 
equally. Though Maine does not have a centralized database for evictions in the state, data from 
Maine State Housing Authority has shown that 34% of Maine’s homeless population on any 
given night is Black or African American, though only 1.4% of Maine’s population is Black or 
African American.7 Pine Tree Legal Assistance has also provided statistics that 12% of 
households they represented in eviction court were non-white, though only 5% of Maine’s 
population is non-white. This reﬂects national data evidencing extreme racial disparities in 
evictions across the country; myriad studies have shown that Black women are the most likely 
3 Matthew Desmond et al., Eviction ’s Fallout: Housing, Hardship, and Health, 94 Social Forces 295, 300-30] (2015). 4 Yerko Rojas & Sten-Ake Stenberg, Evictions and Suicide: A Follow-Up Study of Almost 22,000 Swedish Households in The Wake Of The Global Financial Crisis, 70 J. of Epidemiology & Comm. Health 409 (2016). 
5 See Matthew Desmond, Unatfordable America: Poverty, Housing, and Eviction, U. Of Wis.: Inst. For Res. On Poverty (Mar. 20l5), 
https://www.irp.wisc.edu/publications/fastfocus/pdfs/FF22-20 l5.pdf. 
6 Matthew Desmond & Monica Bell, Housing, Poverty, and the Law, ll Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 15 (2015); Paula A. Franzese, A Place to Call 
Home: Tenant Blacklisting and the Denial of Opportunity, 45 Fordliam Urb. L.J. 661 (2018). 7 Maine State Housing Authority, Maine Homelessness Survey: 2022 Point in Time Cotmt (March 17, 2023), https://www,mainehousingorg/docs/default~ 
source/housing-reports/2022-poinl-in-time-survey---statewide. pd t‘?sfvrsn=l aa686 l5_7.
4
tenants are subject to eviction in the U.S. even when studies control for poverty. “ Maine’s 
housing market is no exception. e 
The Impacts of No-Cause Evictions on Communities 
No-cause eviction notices allow landlords to clear out tenants as neighborhoods gentrify. Many 
parts of Maine have been gentrifying for decades,9 but the pandemic has put unprecedented A 
pressure on Maine’s housing market. While so many people are buying and renting new Maine 
homes, many Mainers are struggling to stay in theirs. 
Increasing property values are linked to gentriﬁcation. Gentriﬁcation is a process which 
displaces low-income community members, usually renters, when more afﬂuent people move in. 
Gentriﬁcation is spurred by speculation in the real estate market which incentivizes landlords to 
raise rents and/or evict tenants to pursue higher-end development. This is occurring not only in 
Maine’s cities, but also in rural parts of the State“) where houses and apartments are 
increasingly rented out short-term on platforms like Airbnb.H 
The pandemic has only highlighted and widened power and wealth disparities between landlords 
and tenants. Tenants don’t get any beneﬁts from the right to give their landlord 30 days’ notice 
to end the tenancy because tenants have nowhere to move to since Maine’s rental market is more 
expensive and competitive than ever before. 
Maine’s housing market has gotten so tight that even those with the ability to pay market 
rents cannot ﬁnd available rental units. On April 8, 2021, the Bangor Daily News published 
an article about a retired couple in midcoast Maine who are facing the prospect of leaving the 
state because they cannot ﬁnd a single rental property in their area.” The article reports 
there are far more tenants posting on Craigslist looking for apartments than there 
are landlords seeking tenants. ” In the same week that article was published, Maine Equal 
Justice was contacted by ﬁve households whose leases in seasonal rentals are coming to an end, 
but they cannot ﬁnd any available housing. 
8 For extensive research on this topic, see Matt Desmond’s Pulitzer Prize winning work Evicted: Poverty and Proﬁt in the American City (2016), which Desmond has 
further documented in Eviction and the Reproduction of Urban Poverty, I18 Am. J. of Sociology 1, 88-133 (July 2012), and at the Eviction Lab at Princeton 
University(https://evictionlalmorg/). 
9 See Tux Turkel, No Vacancy: Landlords Capitalize on ‘Insane’ Market, Portland Press Herald (Nov. 17,2015), https://wwwpressherald.com/201S/1 1/ l5flandlords- 
use-power~hot-market-charge-pick~best-tenants-upgradeproperties-sometimes-neglect! (documenting 40% increase in Portland rents between 2010 and 2015). 
10 See University of Maine School of Marine Sciences, Fishing Communities Need to Prepare For Gentriﬁcation Challenges (Aug. 23, 2016), 
https://umaine.edulmarineI20 l6/08/23/ ﬁshing-couununities- need-preparegentri ﬁcation-challenges-say-umaine-researcliers-2!; Megan Mayltew Bergman, ‘We Have 
No Market But Lots of Lobsters': A Maine Lobsterwomon Fights For Her Livelihood, The Guardian (July 23, 2020), 
https://wwwxheguardian.com/environment/2020 ﬁuI/23/maine-l0bsterwoman-coronavirus- climate-change. 
11 
Josh Bivens, The Economic Costs and Beneﬁts of Airbnb, Economic Policy Institute (Jan. 30, 2019), https://www.epi.org/publication/the 
economic-costs~and-bene ﬁts-otlairbnb-no-reason-for-local-policymakers-to-letairbnb-bypass-tax-or-reguIatory-obligations/. 
12 Abigail Curtis, Apartment Seekers Advertise Themselves to Beat the Midcoast Maine Housing Crunch, Bangor Daily News (Apr. 8, 2021), 
htips://bangordailynewscom/2021/04/08inews/midcoast/apartment —seekcrs-advertisethem selves-in-a-bid-to-beat-the-midcoast-maine-housing~crunch/. 
1 3 
Id
5
We must confront that gains for some result in losses for others and take steps to protect tenants 
in Maine’s housing crisis. The reality is tenants need housing stability over ﬂexibility. LD 804 
would at minimum ensure tenants have more time to secure housing in Maine’s expensive and 
competitive rental market instead of becoming homeless. 
Preventing Eviction Prevents Extreme Costs to Society 
The costs to families of displacement and disruption arising from eviction also create extreme 
costs to society. 
In 2018, the Philadelphia Bar Association commissioned a comprehensive study on the cost of 
eviction in Philadelphia. The study highlighted the costs to communities, hospitals, state and 
local govermnents, and the economy in general when people are evicted from their homes. 
Research showed eviction increases emergency shelter costs, hospital costs (emergency room 
and in-patient), mental health costs, administrative burden for courts, and the deterioration of 
communities when people move away from their support systems. “ 
These costs are even greater during housing shortages when low-income tenants can’t ﬁnd 
replacement housing. Indeed, in Maine, when a landlord evicts a tenant and they cannot ﬁnd 
other housing, the landlord shifts the tenant’s shelter and relocation cost to the municipality 
without cause. The state General Assistance statute requires all municipalities to provide 
emergency housing assistance to homeless people who cannot afford their own 
accommodationsls 
Evictions trap people in poverty because unstable housing makes it extremely difﬁcult to 
maintain steady employment. “ Evictions have been linked to psychological trauma and have 
been identiﬁed “as a risk factor for suicide. ”17 Those evicted have 63% higher odds of losing 
Medicaid coverage, and getting prescriptions ﬁlled or storing prescriptions becomes extremely 
difﬁcult.“ A housing change during childhood can lead to half a year of loss in school.” 
Children that are forced to move three or more times generally have lower earnings, fewer work 
hours, and less educational attainment.2° Children with unstable housing “are more likely to be 
14 
Stout, Economic Retum on Investment of Providing Counsel in Philadelphia Eviction Cases for Low-Income Tenants 7-8 (Nov. I3, 2018), 
https://www.stout.com/en/news/stout-conducts-coshbene ﬁt-study-right-to-counselphiladelphin/. 
15 See 22 M.R.S. §§ 430l(5-A) & 4309(5) (persons staying in emergency homeless shelters are presumptively eligible for General Assistance). 
16 ACLU, N0 EVICIION, supra note 5, at 3. 
17 Matthew Desmond et al., Evicling Children, 92 SOCIAL FORCES 303, 303 (2013). 
18 
ACLU, N0 EVICHON, supra note 5, at 6; THE NETWORK FOR PUBLIC H}'J\L'I ‘H LAW, THE PUBLIC HEALTH IMPLICATIONS OF HOUSING INSTABILIIY, EVICFIQN, AND HOMELESSNESS (2021), https://\vww.networkforplIl.org/wp-content/uploads/202 l/04/Fact-Sheet-Public>Heallh-Irnplications-of-Housing-Instability-Eviction-and- 
Homelessnesspdf. 
19 ACLU, N0 EVICHON, supra note 5, at5 
20Id
truant, and are more likely to drop out”2‘ and they “are at higher risk for developmental delay, 
decreased academic achievement, anxiety, depression, behavioral disturbances, and even 
death.”22 By giving renters 90 days, instead of the current 30 days, many of the ill effects of 
unstable housing that come with eviction can be mitigated. 
Extending the notice period for N0-Cause Evictions Does Not Interfere With Landlords ’ 
Rights 
Landlords may argue that this bill eliminates an important landlord right: the right 
to recover their property at any time, for any reason (or without a reason), with 30 days’ notice. 
However, this is a mischaracterization of the 30 day no-cause notice provision in 14 M.R.S.§ 
6002. It does not exist to protect a landlord ’s property rights. It is a tenant protection. The 
The legislature can and should strengthen it to protect tenants’ and society’s interests in stable 
housing. 
Property owners have the privilege, not the right, to proﬁt by renting their buildings out to 
tenants. Landlords are justifiably subject to regulation to ensure that their business operations do 
not harm others. This includes keeping up the health and safety conditions of their buildings 
under state and local code, renting to tenants on fair and conscionable terms, and not forcibly 
removing tenants ﬁom their homes without due process. 
Maine’s requirement of a minimum 30 days’ written notice to terminate a tenancy-at-will dates 
to 1863. Shortly after its enactment, the Law Court explained, “The object of the statute 
undoubtedly was to prevent a breach of the peace, by protecting the tenant ﬁrom molestation at 
the hands of his landlord, until he shall have had a reasonable opportunity to provide himself 
with other accommodations. ”23 As far back as 1863, the Maine Legislature recognized that 
govermnent must protect tenants in evictions to prevent the hardship caused when tenants are 
evicted and cannot ﬁnd replacement housing. As the Law Court described, these outcomes affect 
not only tenants, but also the public by creating a “breach of the peace.” 
The policy reasons for protecting tenants’ rights in eviction have even more weight today. 
Maine’s rental market has gotten more competitive and expensive than ever. We know that the 
social and economic costs of eviction and homelessness are vast. The effects of eviction ripple 
far beyond an individual landlord ’s building and business and must be taken into account in 
devising sensible policy solutions for the housing crisis. 
21 Matthew Desmond et al, supra note 9, at 320. 
22 Ericka Petersen, Building a House for Gideon: The Right to Counsel in Evictions, 16 STAN. J . C.R. & CL. 63, 69 (2020). 
23 Cunningham v. Horton, 57 Me. 420, 422 (1869) (emphasis added).
7
The Legislature can and should strengthen protections for tenants by extending the 30 day no 
cause notice provision to 90 days for tenants at will. This will promote housing stability and help 
ensure that low-income tenants do not become homeless when they have not done anything 
wrong. 
Conclusion 
Maine Equal Justice hopes the Committee will vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 804. It provides a 
simple, cost-effective solution that Maine can enact immediately as a step towards ending 
Maine’s housing crisis. 
We thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill and I am happy to answer any questions.
8
