19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony in Opposition of LD 804 (“An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice 
to Terminate a Tenancy at Will”)
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 23, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve 
Government Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a 
professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. 
REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members 
represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate 
transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing 
agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine 
Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest 
trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® strongly opposes LD 804. The bill would 
increase the time for a property owner or tenant to provide notice of termination of a 
tenancy at will from 30 days to 90 days. 
In tenancy at will situations, neither the property owner nor the tenant has committed to 
the other for the long term. This provides both with flexibility and both parties understand 
that the agreement can end at any time. Current law provides sufficient protections and 
an appropriate balance for both parties that should not be expanded upon. 
Property owners who lease their units are operating Maine businesses. They provide 
safe and decent housing and tenants pay a monthly rent that covers the cost of providing 
this housing. This bill would place an additional burden on property owners who have 
chosen to enter their property into the rental market. By tripling the notice period, it may 
make the market unfavorable for prospective property owners to want to enter the rental 
market or continue renting their property. Rental housing needs are best met through 
private investment, and limiting use of property through regulation limits private property 
rights and could have unintended consequences of causing more damage to Maine’s 
fragile housing supply. 
Furthermore, this bill would cause significant delays involving real estate transactions 
for rental properties. It is important that property owners are able to follow a fair process 
to terminate tenants for any of the reasons presently afforded under the statute. Current 
law allows termination of a tenancy at will with a minimum of 30 days’ notice, which is 
Page 2
12781773.1significantly longer than the 7-day notice required for termination for nonpayment of rent 
or for risk of safety and wellness to the premises or other tenants. Property owners have 
various reasons why they may need to have the tenants vacate. It could be due to the 
sale of the property or for self-occupancy needs. No matter the reasoning, the property 
owner has a constitutional right under the law to use their property how they choose 
and those private property rights are paramount. 
For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 804. Thank 
you for your time and consideration.
