Testimony of Kara Hay in Support of LD 804
Before the Committee on Judiciary
In support of LD 804: An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to 
Terminate a Tenancy at Will
March 23, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, I am Kara Hay, President and CEO of Penquis, a large community action agency in 
central/northern Maine that serves between 3,500 and 5,000 struggling Mainers every, single 
day. We provide roughly fifty services aimed at ensuring Mainers have access to safe and 
affordable housing, early childhood education, transportation, family supports and programs 
that build financial stability.  I am here today to provide testimony in support of LD 804: An Act 
to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at Will.
Under current law a landlord may terminate a tenancy at will, meaning a tenant without a 
lease, by serving the tenant with either a 30 day notice for no cause or a 7 day notice for cause.  
This bill extends the notice for a no cause eviction from 30 days to 90 days.
It is important to note that no cause evictions are increasing, as shown by data pulled from a 
review of all court files conducted by Pine Tree Legal Assistance.  The data shows that in 2019 
13.7% of evictions were no cause, in 2020 they were 17.85%, in 2021 they were 26.86% and in 
2022 they were 19.4%.  Also according to data collected by Pine Tree Legal, only 5% of no cause 
evictions are related to underlying tenant behaviors.
It is incredibly important to avoid evictions, especially when a tenant hasn’t done anything 
wrong.  An eviction causes a family to lose their home. They often are also expelled from their 
community and their children have to switch schools. Families regularly lose their possessions, 
too, which are piled on the sidewalk or placed in storage, only to be reclaimed after paying a 
fee. A legal eviction comes with a court record, which can prevent families from relocating to 
decent housing in a safe neighborhood, because many landlords screen for recent evictions. 
Studies also show that eviction causes job loss, as the stressful and drawn-out process of being 
forcibly expelled from a home causes people to make mistakes at work and lose their job. 
Having an eviction also has been shown to affect people's mental health: one study found that 
mothers who experienced eviction reported higher rates of depression two years after their 
move. The evidence strongly indicates that eviction is not just a condition of poverty, it is a 
cause of it.
Landlords may argue that this bill eliminates an important landlord right: the right to recover 
their property at any time, for any reason (or without a reason), with 30 days’ notice. However, 
this is a mischaracterization of the 30 day no-cause notice provision in 14 M.R.S. § 6002. It does 
not exist to protect a landlord’s property rights. It is a tenant protection. The Legislature can 
and should strengthen it to protect tenants’ and society’s interests in stable housing.
For all of the reasons, I ask the Committee to support LD 804: An Act to Increase the Time 
Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at Will.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
