Lisa Black
Bangor
LD 804
Hello, I am Lisa Black of Bangor, Maine. I am writing today as a private citizen and 
not as a representative of my employer, but in my work as TRIO Director at 
Kennebec Valley Community College, a program that assists low income students to 
persist to graduation, I see every day how housing insecurity impedes students’ ability
to persist to graduation.
I am reaching out to urge you to support LD 804 “An Act to Increase the Time Period for 
Notice to 
Terminate a Tenancy at Will” because it will help low income students stay in college and 
complete the degrees that will lift them out of poverty. 
According to a 2019-20 survey conducted by the Hope Center at Temple University, 
around half of students attending two- and four-year schools were housing insecure. 
That means at best they couldn’t pay their utilities or rent, and at worst they faced 
eviction, moved three or more times during the school year or had to leave their 
residence because of unsafe living conditions. I want to make sure you know that this 
plays out here in Maine, too. I work with students every day who are in precarious 
positions, and this is not limited to the students in my program. According to the 
Maine Community College System website, 74% of Maine Community College 
students qualify for need-based financial aid. These are students, many of whom are 
parents, for whom a college degree will mean the difference between scraping by to 
make ends meet and a real chance out of generational poverty. 
LD 804 will help students stay in school by mitigating the impacts of no cause 
evictions. Under current law a landlord may terminate a tenancy at will ( a tenant 
without a lease) by serving the tenant with either a 30 day notice for no cause or a 7 
day notice for cause. This bill extends the notice for a no cause eviction from 30 days 
to 90 days—essentially the length of one academic semester. I can share anecdotally 
that having to move in the middle of a semester is something most students cannot 
bounce back from. It means time away from classes and homework and typically 
means withdrawal from classes or failing grades. This in turn causes a domino effect 
of academic and financial aid sanctions, lost momentum, and ultimately drop out. 
This is especially tragic because we know that the vast majority of no cause evictions 
occur through no fault of the tenant, as evidenced in data provided by Pine Tree 
Legal. Fixing the law to extend the notice in no-cause evictions from 30-90 days 
would afford tenants time to locate new housing and transition to a new home with 
less disruption to their lives (like time away from jobs or classes). The current law 
creates crisis situations that drive tenants further into poverty with lost wages and 
time away from training and academic opportunities.
Please support LD 804. Thank you for your hard work and commitment to the people of 
Maine.

