Mick Delargy
BANGOR
LD 804
OPPOSITION TO LD 804 – An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to 
Terminate a Tenancy at Will from 30 to 90 days.
No building owner has any incentive to give a good tenant a 30-day notice. Apartment 
turnovers cost money. Typically, at least one months lost rent plus the time and expense of 
doing showings and screening prospective tenants. 
The only times I have used a 30-day notice is to move on a dangerous or disruptive tenant. 
You might say that I could use a 7-day notice for that. Technically yes, but in practice no. 
Unless I was at the building at the time of the incident all my knowledge is second hand and 
inadmissible in an eviction hearing under the hearsay rule. Even police reports cannot be 
entered as evidence unless the police officer is present at the eviction hearing. To solve the 
admissibility of evidence, I could also persuade other tenants who witnessed the bad acts to 
come to the eviction hearing and give firsthand testimony against the disruptive tenant. This is
a big ask and puts the other tenants in danger. Evictions are a slow process. If the building 
owner prevails at the hearing, the writ of possession does not issue until 7 days later. Then it 
has to be served by the Sheriff, which can take another week or two. Once served, the 
evicted tenant then has 48 hours to vacate. Therefore, the bad tenant will be in the same 
building as the other tenants that testified against him or her, for several weeks. Trust me, this
does not end well. A 30-day notice is a much safer way to move on a disruptive, or 
dangerous, tenant without putting other tenants in peril. 
If a tenant is given a 30-day notice, it is not uncommon for the tenant to stop paying rent. If 
this exposure period moves to 90 days, building owners have only two means of recourse to 
price in this added risk. The owner can either increase the security deposits or the rents. Both
of these are disastrous for tenants. We need more affordable housing not less.
Changing the 30-day notice period to 90 days will also harm tenants in other ways. If a tenant
receives a better job opportunity in another town, what perspective employer will be willing to 
wait three months for their much-needed new employee?
At present, most Government assistance programs (Section 8, Shelter Plus, Community 
Health and Counseling etc) can terminate an individual tenant voucher with a 30-day notice. 
Increasing the notice period from 30 days to 90, will mean these noble agencies will need 
bigger budgets or serve fewer clients.  The former means the added dollars must be taken 
from someone else’s budget. The latter means that fewer of the neediest members of society 
will have housing.   
Thank you for your kind attention.
Mick Delargy
Bangor resident and rental property owner since 2004

