a. 1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207-956-7030 | f. 207-805-1679
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | fb. @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | t. @MaineRights | ig. @Maineimmigantrights
Enhancing Lives and Strengthening Maine Immigrants!     
TESTIMONY OF RUBEN TORRES SUPPORTING LD 804:
An Act to Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a
Tenancy at Will
Public Hearing scheduled for Thursday, Mar. 23, 2023, at 1:00 pm
Sponsor: Rep. Christopher Kessler of South Portland
Link: 
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=HP0493&item=1&snum=131
Dear members of the Committee on Judiciary, my name is Ruben Torres, on behalf of the 
board and members of the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (MIRC), a coalition of more 
than 97 member organizations, I am testifying in support of LD 804, An Act to Increase the 
Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at Will. Our mission is to improve the legal, 
social, and economic conditions experienced by Maine’s immigrants – enhancing their lives 
while strengthening Maine – through advocacy, information sharing, and collaboration both 
through and among our member organizations. We actively prioritize the voices, 
perspectives, and decision-making of New Mainer communities as we acknowledge the 
status quo of systems that consistently disadvantage them. MIRC envisions policies that will 
not exacerbate inequities across BIPOC groups, including divisions across the country of 
origin, socioeconomic status, state geography, language, and immigration status.
LD 804, proposes to increase the notice period required for landlords to terminate a tenancy 
at will. Under current Maine law, a landlord can terminate a tenancy at will with only 30 
days' notice. However, this short notice period can make it difficult for tenants to find new 
housing, especially during the current housing crisis which resulted in high demand and 
limited availability for Maine homes. This bill seeks to increase the notice period to 60 days, 
giving tenants more time to find new housing and make other arrangements. By providing 
more time and stability for tenants, this bill can help prevent unnecessary eviction and 
displacement.
When I recently graduated from my master's program at the Univerity of Maine I was excited 
to start my new job and move to Portland. Finding housing was extremely difficult, with my 
roommate even being scammed out of a security deposit for an apartment. When we finally 
signed a lease for our current place we did it without even seeing it because we were 
pressured to do so. However, our lease did not start until a month after our lease in Orono 
ended. Our story is not unique but it highlights the extremes people go through to find 
housing. That was 2 years ago. Our housing market has only gotten more competitive, 
demand has surpassed the housing supply, and the risk of homelessness is growing every day 
for more and more people. By providing more time for people who are in at-will living 
situations to secure housing, tenants are granted the opportunity to find housing and be out of 
the premises by the required date. This change will benefit landlords. Evictions can be 
expensive and time-consuming for landlords, and they can be devastating for tenants. By 
providing more notice and stability for tenants, this bill can help reduce unnecessary 
evictions and prevent disputes between landlords and tenants.
I urge the members of the Committee on Judiciary to support LD 804 and increase the notice 
period for tenancies at will. This change would benefit both tenants and landlords by 
providing greater stability and predictability in the housing market. Thank you for 
considering my testimony.
### 
a. 1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207-956-7030 | f. 207-805-1679
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | fb. @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | t. @MaineRights | ig. @Maineimmigantrights
Enhancing Lives and Strengthening Maine Immigrants!     
Contact: 
Ruben Torres– Communications and Policy Lead
831-428-3118
rtorres@maineimmigrantrights.org
