BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.orgHello Senator Carney, Representative Mooney, and members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Taylor Cray, and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Preble Street’s Advocacy 
Team. I am writing to you today to ask that you please vote in favor of LD804: An Act to 
Increase the Time Period for Notice to Terminate a Tenancy at Will.
In our current housing market, finding an apartment for rent is an incredibly difficult task. 
Combine that reality with the even-lower availability of low-income and affordable 
housing, and you have a situation that many Mainers face daily: there is simply nowhere 
to live. Our growing homelessness crisis in this state is a testament to this fact. Part of my 
work at Preble Street is to help coordinate Homeless Voices for Justice, a group of 
advocates with lived experience of homelessness and poverty who work to address the 
systemic reasons for these issues. Many of the advocates in this group have experienced 
no-cause terminations of their tenancy. One individual was forced out of housing because 
his landlord was unwilling to register his apartment under new zoning regulations. 
Fortunately, other housing options were available at the time, and this individual is 
housed today. However, had those options not existed, this individual may have found 
themselves homeless yet again. This is the terrifying reality that many folks in our state 
face today. 
Thirty days to find another place to live is not enough time. Most apartments have long 
wait lists, application fees, and other barriers that make it difficult for low-income 
individuals to apply. Even without any of these barriers, the lack of available apartments 
means that it may not even be possible to find another apartment within this thirty-day 
window. Providing folks with ninety days’ notice before terminating their tenancy can 
make the difference between someone remaining housed and becoming homeless. Once 
an individual becomes homeless, it can be very difficult for them to maintain their 
employment, access shelter in an overburdened system, and find housing once again. 
Giving folks more notice of the termination of their tenancy allows us to help individuals 
and families alike remain housed by giving them time to find alternative housing options. 
Housing can mean the difference between life and death, and it is vital that we give folks 
as much of a chance as possible to find stable and affordable places to live. Please 
remember this and vote in favor of LD804. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray 
Advocacy Outreach Team Leader
Preble Street
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger


