I am writing in regards of our contract negotiations. I am an 18 year employee for the stat e and 
enjoy my job. When I first started with the Ferry Service, my pay was not of industry standard, 
however the lower cost of benefits helped out w ay these i ssues for me. Over the years the pay 
has increased but also so has the cost of our benefits and recently the cost of living has gone 
out of control. As a licensed Marriner, 1 600 ton Master, I am in charge of one of the most 
expensive pieces of equipment  that the state owns , and I carry the most precious cargo that any 
vessel can carry, people. The Captains and crew prov ide safe pa ssage in all types of weather, fog, 
wind,  snow for example.  
Over the past few years we h ave been battling constantly with crewing shortages. One 
classification will fill up then another set will not have enough. We have been told by HR that 
since all the boats have full time Captains, we do not have a Captain issue. We do have Captains 
that have had  a hard time getting reliefs for vacations and are close to losing their vacation time 
due to shortages of manpower. I find it very unfair that Able Seaman and Engineers received 
ample increases to their pay and are able to receive a retention bonus just f or show ing up to 
work. The  Captains were offered a bonus if we worked three 80 hour work rotations, this means 
being home 1 week a month, not caring about the home li fe of my fellow Captains.  
In the past, I have helped many times to make sure th at the boats would keep running. I would 
fill in at any position that I am licensed for the sake of the islands we represent to maintain 
service. Not just me, many of the Captains would do the same, but we are not worthy of the 
same treatment. I am in favo r of any body rec eiving increases to their pay, I just want to be 
treated equally considering my personal efforts and the effor ts of the other Captains. Dedication 
to my job and to the Island communities has been of upmost importance to me and I hope y ou 
can see that, we are not nor mal DOT employees, pay and treat us accordingly, do your re search 
and see our wo rth! Please support our p roposals! Aaron Sheridan, Captain, Maine State Ferry 
Service  
