May 12, 2023 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, me mbers of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, my name is Amelia Lyons. I am wr iting as a private citizen and on my own time in 
support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Im plement the Comprehens ive Review of the 
Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees, sponsored by 
Representative Drew Gattine. 
 
I have the distinct honor and privilege of working for the Maine Department of Education, formally 
as a state employee since 2018 and as a contractor  since 2013. The work that this department does 
is truly vital and some of the most important work  in our state. My collea gues are dedicated leaders 
in the profession, and move mountains every day to do what’s best for Maine’s children. I am 
regularly in awe of the strength, compassion, and tenacity of my colleagues, as they support the 
critical infrastructure of pub lic education in our state. 
 This is why I write to you to sa y, I am devastated by how many of my skilled colleagues have left 
state government service in the past few years. At the end of the day, the wages do not compare. 
Colleagues have reluctantly left th eir dream jobs at the state, for other positions that pay 50% more 
and have a school year schedule. Folks who have years of historical knowle dge and context for the 
department - something that is fe w and far between, and so crucial - are realizing it’s not worth it to 
continue working at these salary  levels given th eir expertise. 
 When someone puts in their notice at the depart ment, it can take many m onths to refill that 
position. Many months of others taking on their workload, hours of reviewing applications, 
preparing, conducting, and evaluating interviews. Our work and our morale suffer when we face 
long gaps without essential staff in our depa rtment. This means time taken away from our 
important duties supporting Maine schools and student s. If the State of Main e could close the well-
documented wage gap, I know there are many who woul d choose to stay - because this work is so 
fulfilling, and it is a priv ilege to be a public servant. But if we’re asked to do these complex, 
difficult jobs without adequate pay or support, we cannot blame our colleagues when they find a 
better offer. 
 I sincerely appreciate your  attention to this matter and am available if you have any questions. 
 
Amelia Lyons Topsham, ME 
