Testimony – LD 1854  
Bobbie Sh ay 
A little over three years ago I left my job as a Police Records Technician in California and move d home to 
Maine. I had been wanting to return  home  for years  so I could  help my mother and  enjoy “the way life 
should be” once more . I knew even though I would be making less at my new job as Office Associate II 
with the state, the cost of living was significantly less than California and thought the State's health 
insurance and benefits would make up for the shortfall. This of course turned out to be the beginning of 
COVID and the cost of living skyrocketed ever since.  
 
After moving back,  I found myself  in my late 30’s  living once more with a parent.  We thought our two 
paychecks would be able to cover the cost of our living. Like many others we found ourselves with the 
stress of living paycheck to paycheck. We both worked through the pandemic and only benefited with 
Governor Mill’s few relief checks for everyone.   
 
I was never an employee to complain. I take pride in my work and wanted a job I could stay at for years 
and thrive. I arrived in my current position with years of experience and served the citizens and visitors of 
Maine daily with the professionalism and f riendliness that people expect from our quaint state. With my 
arrival, the department had more specialized expertise than it ever had before. We had made 
improvements to every part of our division,  but my wage  didn’t  represen t the work and service I brough t to 
the job daily.  
 
After understanding the title of Office Associate II more, it occurred to me we were working out of class. I 
submitted my FJA on February 8, 2022  to get reclassed. With full support of my supervisors,  it has taken 
me 15 months to obta in a new title.  I’m one of the lucky ones. Currently I wait for the retro pay to help the 
cost-of-living  debt incurred during the process. Since the  FJA process  started  over a year ago,  my only 
direct co -worker retired  and I worked solo as the position was filled. It took 2 listings to fill the position. I 
believe t he generalized job title and low pay made it difficult to fill .  
 
Growing up as a Mainer I was taught hard work pa ys off. It appears that may no longer be the case.   As a 
State of Maine employee I'm not making enough to live in today's State of Maine. Our wages can  not 
compete with  money coming from  out of state. Our housing and costs of living are considered a deal for 
the rest of New England but simply too much  for most residents.  The small raises we received last year 
helped and were  greatly  appreciated  but had little effect with the growing cost of winter heating and food.  
While waiting for the reclass I was  tempted daily at the idea of finding better pay and fe lt like a fool  for 
being so loyal. One day th is wage gap will become too wide and many will  be left with no other choice.  
 
Closing the pay gap would be night and day in quality of life . Like many employees we're not asking to 
become millionaires, simple asking for enough to live  and thrive . Enough money so we in turn can 
support our communities, small businesses and trades year round. Enough money to raise a family here. 
It's time to invest in the future of Maine State Employees. We're here and want to stay. Help us.  
 
 
