Bobbi Bard
Richmond
LD 1854
Dear Legislature’s State and Local Government Committee,
I’m an ICM on the Outpatient team.  The team works with little over 50 clients that 
have been found not criminally responsible (NCR) by reason of insanity as a result of 
mental disease or defect.  Out of 51 NCR clients, 16 have killed one or more people 
and an additional 24 clients have committed other violent offenses including assault, 
aggravated assault, elevated aggravated assault, and attempted murder. The remaining
11 clients have committed child molestation, child pornography, visual child 
aggression, rape, criminal threatening, terrorizing, stalking, criminal mischief, and/or 
arson.  We, as ICM’s, are tasked with keeping the client and society safe.  Team 
members monitor clients’ compliance with their court orders, support development of 
client skills and independence, and assess clients’ symptoms and safety.  As part of 
these responsibilities, it is the team’s duty to observe and supervise clients while they 
are in their homes and in the community - often while working alone and without 
nearby backup.   
This job is not for the faint of heart and can be dangerous at times.  I personally, was 
on the team when a client was shot in our lobby, and I have been assaulted.  A while 
ago I was tasked to drive close to two hours to pick up a client, in his own residence, 
that had an increase in paranoia and was refusing medication changes.  A peer and I 
went to get this client and to transport him back to RPC.  This client is in the NCR 
system because he took a life.  We, as ICMs, had no backup accept each other and 
911.   I am happy to say that this client went back into the hospital without incident.  
But as ICMs, we never know what will happen in these types of circumstance.   
I urge you to support this bill, LD 1854, and show all ICMs that the good work that 
we do is noticed and appreciated and is paid comparable to other New England States.
This bill will at least be a start to help us get to that point.  
     Thank you for your time and consideration,                                             
 
                                                Bobbi   

