 
1 
 May 12, 2023 
To the Members of the Maine Legislature’ s Committee on State a nd Local Government: 
I’m Brian Markey. I work for MaineDOT currently as an Assistant Technician and prior to that 
as a Transportation Worker III. I live in Kendus keag. I’m writing on my own time in support of 
LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the Classification 
and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees, sponsored by Representative Drew 
Gattine 
I’ve been with MaineDOT for seven years. I wo rk seven days a week in order to pay my 
mortgage, health insurance, childcare and just day- to-day bills – heats, lights and stuff. I have a 
second job to make ends meet. I’d like to share with you my wages at each job and the work I do 
for each employer. At my second job, Bangor Av iation Food Service, the parent company that 
operates the restaurants at BIA, pays me $30 an h our to service vending machines at the airport. 
But in my main job, with MaineDOT, I ear n less than $22 an hour operating a $1.2 million 
testing vehicle for the department. 
You need to know the pay at MaineDOT is not enough to even really su rvive on. I just barely 
pay the bills. And it’s not just the low pay that’s  a problem. It’s also the huge workloads caused 
by understaffing. There are so ma ny vacant positions we’re all stretched way too thin. In my 
former job as a transpor tation worker, I on ce plowed continuously for 42 -and-a-half hours straight, 
during the bomb cyclone of Februa ry 2017. You see double -vision, triple-vision,  when you get that 
tired. This is all dangerous and ha rd work. It requires our full atte ntion to keep everyone safe, not 
just the workers but the general public as well. 
Throughout Maine DOT, and the rest  of state government, there’s a big problem with recruiting 
and retaining qualified workers. It’s been goi ng on for decades. Some of you may recall that 
back in January of 2009, the Maine Department  of Administrative and Financial Services 
contracted with Crescendo Consul ting for a labor market survey. That survey found that even 
back in 2009, MaineDOT highway crews were pa id 21.6 percent less than their private sector 
counterparts. 
Whenever a MaineDOT camp is short Transporta tion Workers, it means everyone else has to 
work twice as hard. This leaves all of us vulnerable to health and safety problems. You can get 
rushed and that can lead to problems real fast.  
In recent years, there has been some progress in dealing with the recruitment and retention 
problem at MaineDOT. A Recruitment and Rete ntion Committee over the years took action to 
make things better in some job cl assifications. But there’s much mo re work to be done and many 
more DOT classifications to address. We all kno w a Department-wide, St ate-wide solution is 
needed. 
The State must start paying all of us fairly fo r the hard work we do. Management needs to stop 
lowballing the pay of state workers and start paying us fairly. You have the latest facts: As of 
two years ago, State of Maine workers were bei ng paid on average 15 percent less than what our 
counterparts make throughout New England, and that’s even after accounting for regional differences. It’s all spelled out in the 2020 State of Maine Market Study Report . And it’s even 
worse for some positions. Main tenance mechanics who work for the State of Maine are 
 
2 
 unperpaid by 31 percent, according to the report..  It should come as no surprise, then, that 
because MaineDOT competes with municipalities a nd the private sector fo r workers, the pattern 
of MaineDOT training drivers who then leave stat e service for better pay in the private sectors 
and municipalities is continuing. 
The State Employee Pay Gap has wors ened since that 2020 report came out. State wages haven’t kept up 
with the rising cost of living, so  my coworkers and I have been falling further and further behind. That’s 
why I’m asking you to support LD 1854 and, as you craft and vote on the next State Budget, to:  
 
1) Address this issue by incl uding in the State Budget the funding necessary to end the 
State Employee Pay Gap;  2) Provide the funding in the State Budget necessary for th e Executive Branch of Maine 
State Government to both complete and imp lement the ongoing review of the State 
compensation and classification systems.  
 Both actions are necessary to ensure the quality  MaineDOT services folks count on, as well as 
the quality services Maine people count on from all other departments of Maine State 
Government. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 Brian Markey Kenduskeag, Maine 
  
