Testimony in support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement 
the Comprehensive Review of the Classification and Compensation 
System for Executive Branch Employees 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, me mbers of the Committe e on State and Local 
Government, 
My name is Connor Smith and I am testifying on my own time. I am a Procurement 
Analyst II for DAFS, the State Department re sponsible for overseeing every purchase 
made by State of Maine Agencies.  
I am here to today to discu ss the importance of increased funding to both our agencies 
and our workforce. Staffing shortages are going to become an increasing problem over 
the coming years, and signific ant funding is the only way to combat the issue. An aging 
workforce is going to see a substantial increa se in vacancies, vacancies that will not be 
filled at the current pay rate s. My department alone is seei ng two retirements within the 
next six months. These retirees  are public servants who have taken on significantly more 
work than their roles would normally require , because 30 years of experience provides 
expertise that cannot be taught over night to new hires.  
The cost of living, especially rental pric es, have skyrocketed throughout the state of 
Maine over the last few y ears. One-bedroom apartments under  $1,500 a month are few 
and far between, and rarely in places people want  to live let alone start a family. To be 
frank, I am only able to work  for the State because my education was paid for through 
military service.   The current pay gap has become so extr eme that there will be no hiring college 
graduates struggling wit h student loans on top of the in creased price of living. The 
phrase “do more with less” will not fill posit ions or allow workers to keep up with 
demands as people leave for well-deserved retirements.   Turnaround times within my department are ex pected to be within five days for RFPs, 
RFAs, or selection packages – something we feel is necessary to keep our government 
functioning. It is difficult to see how our department, or any department, can continue to 
provide timely service when our workforce continues to downsize and positions cannot 
be filled by qualified workers do to  the pay gap. Raises that fail to meet interest rates are 
not raises, but pay cuts. As things currently  stand, State employment  is not an avenue to 
the middle class, but a sentence to live pay check to pay check.  Recruitment and retention need to  be the primary focus of t he State if they intend to 
continue functioning while dealing with the retire ment of one of the olde st work forces in 
the nation.  I appreciate your time and consideration and hope that the wellbeing of those who have 
dedicated their lives to State service wi ll a remain a priority for you all. 
