1  Testimony in support of LD 1854, An Act to Comp lete and Implement the Comprehensive Review 
of the Classification and Compensation System  for Executive Branch Employees, sponsored by 
Representative Drew Gattine 
 Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, members of the Committee on Stat e and Local Government 
My name is Cynthia Barre. As a Ma ine citizen I am personally providi ng my written te stimony to address 
concerns of State employment. Th ank you for taking the time to listen  and to consider our concerns 
regarding our working conditions.  I started employment with the State of Maine in 2012 after working half  of my career in the private 
sector. I started at MaineCare where the pay was low, the building was si ckly, and the job was high stress 
due to working on many emergent issues. While at Ma ineCare my team filed an FJA to have our pay 
scale re-evaluated. It was a long and hard battle which took 5 years. Th e State fought hard against us. We 
were not willing to give up and we won. This resulted in moving up one paygrade. By the time this 
happened I had already left MaineC are and took a new State position. 
 Currently I work at the Maine Bureau of Insurance. Th e majority of our job desc riptions were written in 
the 1980's, which is when they were assigned a paygr ade. These outdated job descriptions and paygrades 
are common with the majority  of the State's positions. 
 In 2020 MSEA was successful in getting a Pay Scal e Study approved by the State. The study has been 
completed, however, to date the Stat e has done nothing to consider re-a ccessing our pay scales. The data 
in the study reveals that employees in the private sector who have th e same job titles and job duties are 
making considerably more than thei r counter part does at the State of Maine. Si nce the study, the MSEA 
has negotiated our contracts and the State has held strong on not addres sing the inequity in our pay, only 
agreeing to minimal pay raises in each contract negotiation. 
 Staff retention, and finding the best  qualified candidates for State positions, is an issue due to the 
paygrade of State positions. While I was at MaineCar e, Governor LePage put both a hiring freeze and a 
pay raise freeze on State positions. Due to these two factors if a position became open a new employee 
could not be hired to fill the positi on. By the time I left MaineCare I was doing three jobs for the same 
low paygrade I was hired at. Although today we no l onger have a hiring freeze or pay raise freeze the 
issue of inequity in our pay and sta ff retention still persists. It is hard  to find high quali ty candidates when 
they see the pay they will be offered.  Telework is also an issue State employees are greatly concerned about . During contract negotiations the 
State would not allow telework to be written into  our contract. Instead the State said they were 
developing a telework policy. So far this telework po licy has been a moving target as it is changed and 
been reworded more than once. Telework has been a big plus for my team si nce the pandemic sent us 
home to work in March of 2020. My Management tells  us our work performan ce and employee morale 
has increased since we have started working from hom e. Telework is also a factor for prospective 
employees, so many companie s are now offering full time telewor k. Between the paygrade and the lack 
of permanent telework, Management struggles to find the best qualifi ed candidates to fill our State 
positions.  I would like to ask the Legi slature to address the sick  buildings we work in as State employees. Currently 
my building is closed and employees are either working from home or in a temporary State space due to 
2  our building being unhealthy. Since I have worked for the State I have had mult iple lung infections and 
health issues due to toxic air quality in the buildings  I have worked in. I have  addressed this issue over 
and over again since 2012 only to ha ve it fall on deaf ears by the Ad ministration. The ma jority of the 
State buildings I have been in (for meetings etc.) have made me and others sick. 
 There are a vast number of State bui ldings that are in horrible condi tion and very toxic to employees’ 
health. It would be a significant co st savings to Maine taxpayers to cl ose these old dila pidated buildings 
and enact a permanent telework policy. I understand this  is not an option for al l State positions as some 
employees interface with the public daily, however many employees do not. The State could keep a 
number of the newer State buildings fo r employees who must work on site. 
 In 2021 I was approved through an ADA re quest form to work from home due  to the health ramifications 
State buildings have caused me. The State put a disclosure in this a pproval that for the purpose of work 
operations this approval can be revis ited at any time. My long term hea lth ramifications that have been 
caused by working in these toxic State buildings is not  going to change. It is my  greatest fear that the 
State will make me go back to work in a State bu ilding. Due to the State's disclosure my ADA approval 
seems to be the same moving target that our current telework policy is. 
 I find it both disturbing and sad that  I had to fight for nine years a nd I had to advocate this hard for 
myself to be allowed to work in healthy working c onditions. I can't breathe in State buildings and I have 
had multiple lung infections due to the condition of the buildings I have worked  in. Today I have been 
working from home for 3 years and I ha ve been breathing freely for these 3 years. I am grateful every day 
for the privilege of breathing freel y. This in itself is sad becaus e breathing freely should not be a 
privilege, but a right. I hold myself to a high moral standard and I have an  excellent work ethic. I ask that 
my employer respect what I bring to the table with ac tions that address the con cerns of employees. I am 
about to turn 59 and I thought I would be with the St ate until I retire. I have been seriously reconsidering 
this due to the issues I have outli ned. Employment elsewhere has become  an option that I am researching 
and considering.  Thank you for your time.   Cynthia Barre   
