May 12, 2023 
 Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, me mbers of the Committee on State and Local 
Government,  My name is Darcey Boucher. I’m testifying on my own time, and I live in Sabattus. I have worked 
for the Department of Health and Human Services in the Offi ce of Family Independence for 14 
years, and I currently work  as an Eligibility Specialist. My ro le involves working with Mainers and 
families to determine their e ligibility for benefits provided through DHHS, such as EBT, TANF, 
MaineCare, etc. Please support LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive 
Review of the Classification and Compensa tion System for Executive Branch Employees, 
sponsored by Representative Drew Gattine.  In my time at DHHS, I’ve seen the number of clie nts in need steadily incr ease each year. As more 
people struggle to keep up with the rising cost  of housing, food, heat, me dicine, childcare, and 
other expenses, more people are relying on Maine’ s social safety net and the services that we 
provide at DHHS. Because we are helping more pe ople in need, caseloads have grown, which has 
led to stress and burnout for many staff members. 
 Specialists, who assist Mainers with accessing thes e critical benefits, ar e trained for roughly six 
months when they are first hired. But after their training, many of them will promote to a different 
role or simply leave the department due to the pay, large caseloads, and st ress. The turnover is not 
sustainable and makes it harder for all of us to do our work. 
 If we want to keep qualified and experienced peop le on staff, we need to pay them more. Higher 
pay will help the Department with both recruitm ent and retention. The longer you do this work, the 
more experience you gain. If we were able to retain more of our staff, it w ould mean we could help 
more Mainers who are in need. It would also mean a better work/life balan ce for all of us, as the 
caseloads wouldn’t be as heavy if we had more pe ople to work them. The work that my coworkers 
and I do is so important to so ma ny of our fellow Mainers; we offer stability during challenging 
times, a lifeline out of poverty, and a safety net for t hose who are down on thei r luck. But we need 
to be paid fairly for the work we  do and we need to invest in maki ng sure we retain qualified staff 
like myself.  Thank you fo r your time. 
