 
1 
 May 12, 2023 
To the Members of the Maine Legisl ature’s Committee on State and Local 
Government: 
I’m Dave Boudreau of Holden. I’m writing to you as a private citizen on my own 
time and as a member of my union, the Ma ine Service Employees Association. I’m 
asking you to support of LD 1854, An  Act to Complete and Implement the 
Comprehensive Review of the Classifi cation and Compensation System for 
Executive Branch Employees, sponsored  by Representative Drew Gattine. 
I work as a Transportation Worker II fo r the MaineDOT, a job I’ve held since 
November of 2019. I’m writing to tell you th ere’s a real problem with recruiting 
and retaining MaineDOT workers, and it’s mostly because of the State’s low pay. 
Study after study have shown that the State pays us far below what other workers 
throughout New England are paid for the same work. The fact is, the State just 
can’t get the people to come in or stay at these jobs because of the low wages. This 
problem is getting worse, not better. 
Don’t take my word for it on the State’s low wages. Please read the 2020 State of 
Maine Market Study Report . It shows that state work ers on average are underpaid 
by 15% and that maintenance mechanics for the State of Maine are actually 
underpaid by 31 percent. An earlier study that the State co mmissioned back in 
2009 reached similar conclusions. 
I recently was interviewed by WCSH6 TV after work one day about the 
recruitment and retenti on problem at MaineDOT. You can watch that story here . 
There’s been a lot of talk in the Maine Legislature about  the need for more funding 
for infrastructure like roads and bridges,  and it’s great to see funding for more 
infrastructure in the proposed State Budget . However, how is the State going to get 
all that work done without a qualifie d and experienced MaineDOT workforce? 
MaineDOT keeps losing workers to bette r-paying employers both in the private 
sector and at cities and towns statewide. If MaineDOT wants to have the workforce 
it needs to maintain our network of road s and bridges, and to carry out all the 
infrastructure projects in the works, then  the State must end the State Employee 
Pay Gap. There are two things I’m asking  you to do to help make that happen: 
 
2 
 Please support LD 1854 and provide, in the State Budget, the funding necessary to 
end the State Employee Pay Gap. Maine State Government must complete and 
implement the ongoing review of the St ate compensation and classification 
systems. 
Thank you. 
Dave Boudreau 
Holden 
