 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inaction, Inflation, and Insufficient Raises Will Widen Wage Gap to 25.6% by December 
 
Derryen M. Plante 
Principal Revenue Agent at Maine Revenue Services 
Eight Year State of Maine Employee 
Doctoral Candidate in Business Administration 
May 12, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and esteemed members of the Committee on 
State and Local Government, I cannot emphasize enough how dire the current situation is for 
state employees. Over the last three years, inaction, inflation, and insufficient raises by 
management will widen the wage gap to 25.6% by December 2023.  
At our hearing on Friday, the question was raised as to why this is not being addressed in 
collective bargaining. After reviewing this testimony and supporting documentation, it will 
become clear that management has no intention of completing this classification study, and 
therefore it will not be completed without your intervention.  
For anyone who is unfamiliar, here is a brief recap of what state workers have been subjected 
to over the last few years: 
• 2019: State employees turned to the legislature after management continued to refuse to 
provide increases for a livable wage.  LD 1214. "Resolve, To Conduct a Comprehensive 
Study of the Compensation System for State Employees" put the wheels in motion to provide 
management with the “proof” they needed to justify wage increases.  
• November 2020: The market pay study is completed by Segal, who provided a detailed 
breakdown of how state employees are underpaid, by position, compared to private and 
public sector competitors, and recommendations for all 1,180 state positions. As of this date, 
it became known to management, legislatures, and state workers that as of 2019 (the data that 
was used in the study), we are underpaid 15% on average.  
• July 2021: State employees begin contract negotiations with the “proof” of being underpaid 
by 15% on average. Management insists that the study has not been completed, but will make 
a “good faith effort” to do so, and give us a 2% wage increase 12/1/2021, and 4% 7/1/2022.  
• Early 2022: State workers begin experiencing unprecedent economic hardship: (1) gas 
skyrockets to about $5.00 per gallon; (2) landlords start increasing rents by several hundred 
dollars a month; (3) CMP somehow gets approval for yet another rate hike, in addition to the 
11.5% increase July 2021 we get hit with another 49% increase in 2022; (4) the spike in gas 
prices causes massive inflation in costs of goods. To put it lightly, WE ARE DROWNING.  
• Early 2022: Our union president contacts management, requesting to sit down and discuss 
additional wage increases to compensate for the unprecedented economic hardship state 
employees are dealing with. Management denies this request.  
• March 2022: The legislature is provided with a spirted and cheery update regarding the 
compensation study which elaborates on how wonderful life is for state employees and how 
much progress has been made. The legislature is told that state employees have 
experience wage growth of 10.32%, and that management is making “substantial 
progress” closing the gap, and (shockingly) “keeping pace with inflation”. But despite 
receiving a detailed catalog from Segal for all 1,180 state positions, they still have not gotten 
around to completing it. The letter also notes that the project has experienced delays because 
their specially established Steering Committee was “overwhelmed by the sheer volume of the 
data”. As with the WorkDay project, it seems that unqualified individuals were appointed to 
oversee this project, resulting in no progress being made over two years, perpetuating the 
economic suffering of 12,000 workers.  
• April 2022: A massive $1.2 billion supplemental budget has been announced and state 
employees are given a ray of hope. State employees believed that both management and 
legislatures would realize how much we have been struggling financially for years, and now 
we finally have the financial surplus to fix this issue. Unfortunately, rather than invest in 
state employees (thereby improving services for all Mainers), the surplus money was 
distributed to individuals, many of whom had already received massive unemployment 
benefits over the past several years. Having absolutely no money allocated to closing this gap 
was utterly devastating to state employees.  
• Present Day: As of this writing, management is refusing to meet with us, further prolonging 
this economic torture. Rather than coming to collectively address problems with mass 
retirements, recruitment, retention, management instead accuses us of gaslighting and cancels 
two agreed upon meetings. More than 30 months after the compensation study results are 
provided to management, they have still not completed it.  
Despite becoming aware of the severe disparities in pay in 2020, management has been 
committed to keeping their rose-colored glasses on and telling themselves, and the legislature, 
that everything is just splendid and great. I have attached the classification study, the 
Commissioner’s 2021 update, and the Commissioner’s 2022 update. It will become readily 
apparent that the testimony read aloud by the Commission at the hearing on Friday was recited 
VERBATIM from her March 2022 update, except for the final paragraph. That letter contained 6 
pages of excuses, primarily blaming COVID for the lack of progress, and explaining the litany of 
“benefits” state employees have. She again claimed that the study was 98% completed. She told 
us the same thing a year ago. There is no reason this study should remain incomplete three years 
later. The only reason it has remained incomplete is because as long as it remains incomplete, 
they can justify not giving us the pay raises we desperately need.  
It is shocking that the Commissioner now claims that the wage gap was only 11%, and 
not the 15% that was originally reported by the study. I have attached the compensation and 
classification study in its entirely to this testimony. The study found that we were underpaid by 
11% compared to other public sector employers, and 20% compared to private sector employers. 
The average between these two types of employers is 15%. For your convenience, this can be 
found on page 9 of the attached report. The Commissioner has conveniently tried to move the 
goal post back to make herself and this administration look like they have accomplished more 
than they have. The cost-of-living increases from 2020-2023, determined by the Social Security 
Administration, are listed below for your convenience. This means cost of living has increased 
nearly 20%, and management has increased wages 10%. THIS DOES NOT EVEN ACCOUNT 
FOR THE PAY GAP. ONLY COST OF LIVING INCREASE.  
• January 2020 -- 1.6% 
• January 2021 -- 1.3% 
• January 2022 -- 5.9% 
• January 2023 -- 8.7% 
• January 2024 – 3.1% Current Estimate 
When we combine the cost-of-living increases with our wage increases and the pay gap, 
we get the following: 
Year Pay Gap as of 
January 1 Wage Increase Cost of Living 
Increase Pay Gap as of 
December 31 
2019    15% 
2020 15% 4% (1.6%) 12.6% 
2021 12.6% 2% (1.3%) 11.9% 
2022 11.9% 4% (5.9%) 13.8% 
2023 13.8% - (8.7%) 22.5% 
2024 22.5% - (3.1%) est. 25.6% 
 
Despite many opportunities to intervene and prevent the wage gap from reaching this 
point, management refused to acknowledge how devastating this is and take action to alleviate 
the increasing strain state employees are facing. How could this situation possibly get any 
worse? Well, losing employees is costing the state millions more than keeping them. These costs 
arise from lost production from vacant positions, costs of hiring, onboarding, lack of production 
due to workers conducting training, etc. Turnover costs amount to 1.5-3 times an employee’s 
salary depending on their position and experience. If I chose to leave my job today, it would cost 
Maine taxpayers over $30 million in lost revenue. 
 If I were to tell you that over the last five years the State of Maine has spent 549 million 
dollars in taxpayer funds with nothing to show for it, would that be a cause for concern? If I were 
to tell you that that figure equates to placing $300,000 dollars of taxpayer funds into a shredder 
every single day, would that elevate your concern? Unfortunately, that is a very conservative 
estimate of what losing state employees is costing the State and its taxpayers. I have attached 
documentation I have commandeered from the BHR’s intranet, providing the true number of new 
hires, terminations, and vacancies. In addition to the money that is being thrown away on 
turnover, employee satisfaction is at an all-time low. The greatest driver of productivity, revenue, 
customer service, and several other variables is employee satisfaction. Right now, employees 
who are already 22% underpaid are now being forced to cover these vacancies by absorbing the 
extra work, increasing burnout, further increasing turnover, decreasing moral, and worsening this 
vicious cycle.  
 In addition to turnover costs, this pay gap has cost taxpayers tens of millions in taxpayer 
dollars on the Workday Project. Personally, it was incredibly embarrassing to read the Portland 
Press Herald article about the WorkDay meltdown. Besides the obvious nepotism that remains a 
pervasive state-wide issue, contractors who were brought in to work on the project publicly 
pointed out issues that state employees are plagued with: (1) distracted senior management; (2) a 
toxic work environment; (3) constantly shifting requirements; and (4) failure to offer sufficient 
pay to recruit qualified individuals. Some notable quotes are included below:  
“Maine didn’t have the right people in the right places, and the rates they were offering 
were not going to bring the right expertise to Maine.” 
“Attempts to engage with the State of Maine teams are often met with resistance, 
deflection, defensiveness, and other tactics.” 
          The department that we have spent three years waiting on to complete the compensation 
study and relieve our economic hardship is the same department that watched the wage gap 
increase by 10% in 3 years, has a documented history of ignoring, deflecting, and failing to 
address issues, allocating unqualified individuals to projects leading to failures, and 
demonstrating questionable integrity and ethical decision making. Based on these factors, the 
likelihood that management will follow through on implementing the classification study without 
the influence of the legislature is non-existent. All 12,000 state employees are now looking to 
you, to be our voice, to be the ones to say “this is unacceptable, and we won’t allow it to 
continue any longer”. Thank you for your consideration in addressing this matter.  
 
Respectfully,  
Derryen M. Plante 
 
Derryen Plante
Portland
LD 1854
https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/7684
https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/8512
https://www.maine.gov/bhr/sites/maine.gov.bhr/files/inline-files/Update%20to%20SL
G%20on%20DAFS%20Compensation%20and%20Classification%20Effort%2002%2
010%202021.pdf
