Doreen Da vis 
LD 1854  
This pay gap thing has created a lot of stress in my home life as well as my work life. 
With what the state starts out for pay for so many of the departments within the state 
makes no sense. First we can't find and hire qualified help with a starting pay lower than 
say at a McDonalds. And promoting in a department is just as bad. How can, for 
instance say we have 2 Executive Housekeepers for a depar tment because there's 
never been a upgrade and one makes less than the Building Custodians and the 
Housekeeper II they Supervise, and both having the same job responsibilities. It all just 
seems so unfair and frustrating to say the least. Especially after investing so much of 
your life in a department and finding out financially it would take the rest of your life to 
even get to a point where you could retire with even just 3 of your highest years being 
your lowest compared to any other job not in the state  government.   
 
 
It's affected my mental and physical health and well being to think that I started working 
for the State of Maine February 1st 2016 as a Institutional Custodian pay grade 5 at 
10.44 a hour. When I decided to go for the Housekeeper II positi on I was making $12.63 
a hour. I got the Housekeeper II position and thought I'd be making more money. But 
when I found out that I was starting out at only $14.10 a hour and I wasn't even going to 
be making as much as some of my Institutional Custodians th at I was now Supervising 
even at pay grade 10. When I questioned it I was told not to worry because HR does the 
5% rule. and then on top of that I started paying for my insurance. At the end of this 
position I was making only $15.41 a hour! That's 41 cents  more then some of my 
Building Custodians under me. So again I applied for a higher position and got it. Now I 
am a Executive Housekeeper Supervisor for the whole Eastside complex, at pay grade 
16. At first I thought they made a mistake with my starting pa y at $16.37. So now I’m a 
Executive Housekeeper Supervisor pay grade 16 at $17.02 a hour and making less 
then most of my Building Custodians and Housekeeper II with more responsibilities.!!!! I 
am told it was because each time I went for a new position I m issed my merit raises. So 
if I’d stayed an institutional I would be making more money??? And on top of all this no 
one could tell me who was at what steps in the pay   grades I was in until I got my 
Doreen Da vis 
LD 1854  
current position and asked HR. No one even pointed me in the right direction when I 
asked they didn't know. Please fight for us and close this pay gap please ! 
 
