 
1 
 Testimony in support of LD 1854 – the compensation and reclassification 
legislation 
 
May 12, 2023  Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, me mbers of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, my name is Gary R. Brooks from Dedham and I’m writing on my own time as a 
member of my union, MSEA, and as a privat e citizen in support of LD 1854, An Act to 
Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Re view of the Classifi cation and Compensation 
System for Executive Branch Employees, s ponsored by Representative Drew Gattine. 
 I work as a Building Custodian for the Maine De partment of Defense, Veterans and Emergency 
Management. I’m here today to tell you that St ate of Maine workers have been underpaid for 
years and it’s past time our wage s are raised so 1) we can catch up with the rising cost of living 
and 2) so we are paid fairly compared to everyone else doing simi lar work throughout New 
England.  I have 20 years of experience as a custodian. Three other custodians a nd I clean 20 buildings 
daily. We cannot live on $17.54 an hour! The four of us are really hurting.  We like are jobs and 
aren’t going anywhere, but our pay cannot stay flat  while everything around us skyrockets out of 
sight. I should not have to find another job to survive. When I told my State Representative, 
Micky Carmichael, about our low pay, he aske d me: Why is the pay so low and how are you 
living on half-pay?  Everybody knows we’ve been falling further and further behind, but the State still hasn’t done 
enough about it. The State two years ago, in 2020, released a report showing State workers are 
on average paid 15 percent less than their public and private sector coun terparts throughout New 
England. If you haven’t read that report, I think you should read it. It’s online at 
(https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/5615) . 
 
As a Building Custodian, my paycheck is eaten up the cost of living and circumstances beyond 
my control. We need higher wages. My power bill as a single person has gone up a lot because 
the PUC raised my kilowatt rate. With a $820 mo nthly house payment there’s not much left for 
everything else, so we custodians at the Guard base, all of us wo rkers, every one of us, need 
higher wages.  Right now the State has a budget surplus, so I’ m asking you to fund a State budget that ends the 
State Employee Pay Gap. You should also know it’ s the low wages for State workers that is 
making it hard for the State to recruit and reta in workers. Funding a St ate budget that ends the 
State Employee Pay Gap will go a long way toward making sure the services are there that Maine people count on every day. Thank you.  Gary R. Brooks Dedham, Maine  
