Testimony of James Bailey 
 
In Support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the 
Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees, Sponsored by 
Representative Drew Gattine 
 
May 12, 2023 
 Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, me mbers of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, I’m James Bailey, a licensed social worker employed at Dorothea Dix Psychiatric 
Center and president of the Maine Service Employee Association Local 1989 chapter that 
represents the hospital. I am submitting this testimony on my ow n time in support of LD 1854 and 
to highlight the needs of the hospital.  Consider that the average length of a medical hos pital stay is about 4.5 days, whereas a typical 
commitment at our state psychiatri c hospitals is measured in mont hs. The consistenc y of staffing 
in a psychiatric hospital, with patients that have  been hospitalized months and sometimes years, is 
of vital importance to the functioning of the hospital. In previous supplemental budgets, money 
has been appropriated to DDPC to fund expenses rela ted to travel nurses. Th e frequent turnover of 
staff – especially nurses, but also  therapeutic staff, clinical sta ff, recreational staff, and more – 
makes our jobs not only more difficult, but more dangerous. A patient that doesn’t trust their staff 
in a state hospital is a patient that has a higher risk of violence due to their mental illness. 
 You are likely well acquainted with the increas e in violence against healthcare workers in 
emergency departments both acros s the state and the country. Every employee at both state 
hospitals, regardless of position, must train to physically restrain vi olent and unsafe patients 
against walls for emergency medication administ ration, to use non-restrictive blanket wraps to 
safely seclude, and place them in a multi-point re straint chair if they pers ist in unsafe behavior. 
Not only is one’s training importa nt in these unfortunate events, but trusting that those working 
with you are equally trained and prep ared is essential. Frequent tu rn-over erodes that trust. Staff 
being mandated to work pa st their shift end time due to poor st affing erodes that trust. Nickel-and-
diming staff compensation and be nefits erodes that trust. 
 Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center an d Riverview Psychiatric Center need consistent staffing across 
the board to keep the staff safe  and the patients safe. Money i nvested in travel nursing and 
contracted employees should be inve sted in the staff comm itted to the hos pitals, the st ate, and the 
people they serve. Please ensure that the Stat e seriously address the known 15% average pay gap 
across state employees with regional peers, please ensure that the State prioritize the safety of their 
staff and patients, please ensure that the State operates  the hospitals with equity, opportunity, and 
fairness.  Please support LD 1854. Thank you for your time and c onsideration and feel fr ee to follow-up with 
any questions you may have. 
