Testimony oflane L. Gilbert 
In Support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the 
Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees, sponsored by Representative 
Drew Gattine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government, 
Friday, May 12, 2023, Cross Office Building Room 214 and Electronically 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, members of the Committee on State and Local Government, 
I'm Jane Gilbert of Augusta. l have worked for the State of Maine for over 40 years under Republican, 
independent and Democrat administrations, with the last 25 years in managerial capacities. I speak in 
support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the Classification 
and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees, sponsored by Representative Drew Gattine. 
My managerial capacities for the State of Maine have included: 
0 Personnel officer for the Maine State Prison; 
v Labor relations specialist for the Governors Office of Employee Relations, now known as the 
State Bureau of Employee Relations; 
v Director of labor relations for the Department of Transportation; 
0 Director of human resources for the Department of Transportation; 
0 Deputy commissioner for the Department of Labor in which I was responsible for all labor 
relations with Department employees; 
0 Although I retired in 2009, I went back to work for the Department of Labor in 2019, again asa 
Deputy Commissioner; 
0 In the spring of 2020, I became the point person for hiring for the Department of Labor to 
address the demand for departmental services as the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded. 
Throughout my state service, I can say unequivocally that the low state employee wages, as well as the 
steady degradation of state employee benefits, from pensions to healthcare, have created a real 
recruitment and retention problem for Maine State Government. This problem has permeated all 
departments, and it continues unabated today. 
State workers today aren't just struggling to make ends meet. They also are worried about whether they 
will have a secure retirement as a result of being underpaid throughout their careers. l’d like to share 
with you some stories of state workers, in their own words, illustrating their concerns about ever being 
able to retire with dignity: 
"As a millennial, I do not have the luxury ofthe generational wealth that the generations before me 
enjoy - I do not have a retirement account as I had never had enough money left over after living 
expenses to contribute to one, I will likely never be able to purchase my own home, and I certainly 
would not be able to support children on my salary. The sen/ices that Maine employees provide to the 
people of Maine is worth so much more than the pennies that we receive in return." 
--A worker in the Office of Family Independence within Maine DHHS
1
"The pay gap affects me personally in that my retirement will be less than it should be. I will be retiring 
in about 3 years, and because the state pay scale has been eroded over the past few years, the amount 
that I have to live on in retirement will be less than it should be." 
--A worker for Maine DHHS 
"My savings account balance is the minimum of $5 as I CANNOT SAVE MONEY ON MY STATE SALARY! In 
terms of other employers, in January 2023 the State of Massachusetts advertised an opening fora 
position doing exactly what l do now (manage hazardous waste cleanup at Dept. of Defense facilities) 
with a *starting* salary that is over $15,000 more than what I make after 28 years in my current 
position. I'm unable to move to Massachusetts but I have considered asking ifl could do that job 
remotely or mostly remotely. This would mean the State of Maine would lose my 28 years of 
institutional knowledge (the only other staff in my unit who do what I do, with experience working with 
Dept. of Defense, have less than two years’ experience *combined*) as well as all the connections l have 
made over the past 10 years working with staff from other states and senior staff from the US Office of 
Secretary of Defense on national committees and work groups. The idea of leaving the State of Maine 
causes me great anxiety but as I approach retirement in less than 10 years, I simply can't afford to live 
on my state salary anymore." 
--A worker for Maine DEP 
"While we have seen small progress in wage increases in the last couple of years. The 2 to 4% we have 
received does nothing to compare to the increases to the cost of living is in this state. Couple that with 
increases to our insurance premiums, higher deductibles, and less medical/dental and vision coverage 
available and how is anyone supposed to survive, yet alone try to save for our retirements?" 
--A worker for Maine Revenue Services 
”With the cost of living and cost of gas, (I travel 30 miles to and 30 miles back for work), I have all I can 
do to keep up with my bills let alone have enough money left for food. I cut corners wherever I can just 
to be able to buy my Kids and Grandkids birthday gifts etc. I'm 64 years old and close to retirement. If 
they go by your three highest pay years, I'll have to get a part-time job after I retire just to survive." 
--A worker for Maine Revenue Services 
”|‘m almost 74 years old, my husband is 76, and we still have to work, to help build our retirement 
income. Right now with the price of groceries & gas, plus everything else that is inflated, we can't retire. 
We have both worked for 50-plus (years) and still can't afford to retire. A pay raise would help to make 
that possible." 
--A worker for the Office of Family Independence within Maine DHHS 
"I work in the Division for the Blind and Visually Impaired in a poorly known field called Orientation and 
Mobility. There are only 11 positions in the whole state for this job title and our work is itinerant , 
covering the entire state to provide direct service (teaching and rehabilitation to people with vision 
impairments of all ages - birth through seniors. We have had a vacant position in or Portland office for 
two years (1 out of4 positions for all of Southern Maine and we'll be down to 2 by the end of May, 
putting us staffed at 50%). There is a national shortage in this field and we can't even get applicants to
2
consider our position as our salary doesn't come even close to any other agencies in New England 
providing this work (with cost of living factored in.) Portland is especially suffering because of the 
housing and living costs being the highest in the state. We have caseload sizes well beyond any I've had 
in my 17 years working in this position and soon people will be waiting many months before seeinga 
specialist. Aside from burnout on the employee level, this will impact our clients‘ getting the rehab they 
need to return to work or maintain work which becomes a struggle with the onset of vision loss, as our 
work directly relates to Vocational Rehabilitation. Staff from more northern parts of the state are 
having to travel south to help us, with one traveling from as far North as Bangor. Without addressing 
our pay gap and with the rising cost of living in southern Maine, l fear our positions and any new 
vacancies will never be filled and that my final few years before retirement will be grueling. I question 
whether l will be able to remain in the position myself.” 
--A worker for the Maine Department of Labor 
"We worry and fret that our children and grandchildren are leaving the state never to work or live here 
again. They do this not for wanderlust, but for financial security. Not to get rich, but to survive witha 
chance of saving for retirement. Daily l speak with our younger Mainer's offering positions of 
employment, only to hear them say they are just going to move to a different state. They see the Maine 
State job listings and literally laugh at the rate of pay offered. We are not able to fill all open positions 
because of this gap. When you can make almost as much working for fast food, including insurance, as 
you can working in a State job why would you?" 
--A worker for the Maine Department of Labor 
Please support LD 1854. Thank you and l would be happy to answer any questions.
