Testimony of Jonathan French, P.E. in  Support of LD 1854 An Act to Complete 
and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the Classification and 
Compensation System for E xecutive Branch Employees 
 
 
Senator Nangle, Representat ive Stover, and members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is Jonathan French,  I live in Hallowell and I am a licensed 
professional engineer in Maine with almo st 25 years in state government (my 
anniversary date is May 18th). I have spent t he past 22 years at the Maine Department 
of Transportation (MaineDOT) where I currently  serve as the Engineering Data Manager 
for the Bureau of Project Development, and I’ve  been in that position for over two years. 
I regret that I can’t be there in person to te stify before you, but I am in strong support of 
LD 1854 because it’s become increasingly clear  to me that I may be one of the last 
state employees with my years of experienc e or less that is still planning on spending 
their entire career in stat e government. If we don’t do something to change that, we 
won’t have a state workforce that can adequately perform t he necessary work for the 
citizens of Maine. 
 
As the Engineering Data Manager, I have the responsibility for administering the CADD 
software for the Department, including the tr aining of employees. Currently we are 
undertaking a migration to a new drafting and design software, the likes of which we 
haven’t seen for over 20 years, because our  legacy software is no longer supported and 
design and construction are rapidly changing to use 3D models instead of plans. We 
had been using the same software for drafting since I had started with the Department 
in 2001 and the same design software si nce 2005 with the last version upgrades 
occuring in 2019 and 2013 respectively. Now this software will likely need to have 
MaineDOT changing versions every 18 months due to the vendor requirements. It took 
about five years for Department  staff to gain core compet ency in the legacy design 
software when it was introduced in 2005. I wonder if staff will even remain with 
MaineDOT long enough to gain similar com petency in the new software before they 
leave, because with just the basic knowle dge of the software they are extremely 
desirable for other employers. Will I have to have continuous training of just the 
fundamental skills due to turnover of empl oyees? What will that do to budgets, as well 
as production? 
 
When I left my position as a transportation engineer for the Bur eau’s Highway Program 
in September of 2020 to serve in the pos ition I have now, I was the senior most 
designer in a production role and had over 19 y ears of experience in designing projects. 
Now, the most senior designer in production has just over nine years of experience, and 
I am curious how long they will actually stay  with the Department. Mo st of the designers 
on the two remaining internal teams in the Program have less than five years of 
experience.The Bridge Program  in the Bureau has also tu rned over personnel with 
several new entry level engineers being hired in  the last few years. Retirements and 
promotions to supervisory and management pos itions have occurred, but there have 
been many employees leaving for other employers as well. 
 
Some employees have left for m unicipal or federal positions, while the majority have left 
for the private sector. This  means that taxpayer dolla rs have been used, and are now 
still potentially being used to train employees for private sector companies. However, in 
that situation, in order to continue to be able to produce work, the Department not only 
has to attempt to hire  a new employee and invest in more  training for them to fill the 
vacancy, but also has to hire the company t hat recruited the former state worker to do 
the work. In some cases the company will also have that employee do the same exact 
project work that they were  doing before, only now under a contract and for a significant 
profit for that company at taxpayer expense.  
 
We are at the point where we  need to start asking the ques tion: what do we want the 
state government workforce to look lik e in the decade ahead? Do we want state 
government to continue to be a training grou nd for the private sector, and use taxpayer 
dollars to develop employees for companies who will use them to profit from state 
contracts at taxpayer expense? Do we want to erode the state workforce to the point 
where we are totally reliant on the private sect or to deliver state services at whatever 
profit margin they desire?  
 The alternative is at least attempting to try to retain a core workforce with the 
competency and skills that are needed to provide quality public services and retain that 
investment that taxpayers have made in the tr aining of the current state workforce. LD 
1854 will give the State the abilit y to make that a ttempt with pay studies every two years 
beginning in 2024 and establishing a fund to  keep state wages cu rrent with market 
trends. 
 
In 2011, in testimony I warned the Appropria tions and Financial Affairs Committee at the 
time that the state budgets proposed to erode state employee benefits would “devalue 
Maine’s public sector work and employees by continuing to ‘tax’ state employee benefits 
and salaries while increasing expectations  and demands” and I stated that if that 
happened “I doubt many will even want to consider becoming a state employee.”  
 
The budgets passed with that erosion, especia lly to health insurance and retirement 
benefits, and salaries stagnated due to mini mal wage increases. Employees left and 
those who remained were forced to pick up the slack in a successful bid by the LePage 
administration to shrink the state workforc e and make public sector work unattractive. 
Now, in spite of fair contra cts during the Mills administratio n, with larger wage increases 
than were seen with the prior administration, Maine state government is still struggling 
to fill positions. It simply can’t compete wit h other employers because  of the decline in 
desirability of public sector work, and the lower wages and eroded benefits. Job security 
was always a selling point with state employ ment with benefits for s eniority. However, 
with younger workers wil ling to be quite mobile in their career path to take advantage of 
companies competing for workers, especially in engineering, those benefits of security 
and seniority are no longer as im portant as wages and income. 
 
It has reached the point that now management is just looking for candidates to apply for 
a position and they will decide what role to pu t them in if the one they apply for does not 
work out. They just want to “get the person in the door.” I remember when I first applied 
for a seasonal highway laborer position to “get  my foot in the door” as a college student 
and now it’s being left wide open and nobody wants to walk through. That is where we 
are now, so something has to change.  
 
The State of Maine has to hav e competitive wages to recrui t qualified workers and it has 
to maintain that competitiveness in order to retain them. Therefore, I strongly urge the 
members of the Committee to vote “ought to pass” for LD 1854. Please give the State of 
Maine the means it needs to recruit and reta in a state government workforce that can 
consistently provide quality services, and protect the investment of Maine 
taxpayers.Thank you. 
 
 
 
