Dear m embers of the Committee on State and Local Government, my name is Katharine Rehm , I 
live in Augusta,  and I’m writing on my own time in support of LD 1854.  
 
I've been working for the state for 7 years. I hit my pay cap in the middle of COVID. My husband 
also works for the state, he's been here for over ten years and has also hit his pay cap. We have 
a 3 year old and a 10 month old. We pay a mortgage and have two v ehicles that we make 
payments on. I have student loans. Prices have gone up on groceries, clothing, over the counter 
medicine, diapers, formula, toiletries, you name it. The cost of daycare, propane to heat our 
home, electricity, and other utilities and se rvices have also risen. We used to be able to afford to 
live and stay well above water, we even had savings tucked away. But throughout the pandemic 
with all of the rising costs, and no raises or pay increases of any kind, we're barely treading 
water. It's  nearly impossible for either of us to promote within state work, because the only 
types of jobs that are offered above our level are management, or require a degree in the field 
of expertise, for example social worker roles get paid more but you need to h ave a social work 
background or a degree. I went to art school. My husband did not get the opportunity to go to 
college because he was forced to raise his younger siblings for a few years (with no help from 
the state! It was a 'foster care' situation but h e was put into a corner and because he was family 
they told him he could not be compensated for any of it). I digress. We receive emails for 
'training opportunities' such as classes to help us be able to promote within DHHS, but it 
requires supervisor appr oval. The supervisor never approves of it because we are so 
shorthanded. So we're not even able to take a 2 hour CLASS that will help us get a foot in the 
door of a higher paying job WITHIN the department, because of operational need. How is that 
fair? The  only reason either of us continues to work for DHHS, is because we make just enough 
money that we do not qualify for SNAP or Medicaid. So if we left, we would lose our health 
insurance and be forced to apply for marketplace health insurance with very high  deductibles. 
We're part of the 'middle class' but it's felt more like like 'lower class' without all of the help 
from the state that our clients are receiving. We weren't offered help with heating expenses, we 
were not given stipends, we were not given ma ximum food stamp allotments, etc. We still 
struggle to make ends meet and barely live paycheck to paycheck. We have to put all of our 
medical bills into a third party account and make small payments on it. We don't get to travel or 
go on vacations. We migh t have to take second jobs pretty soon. When I took the job for the 
state 7 years ago, I was so happy and excited because I could officially quit my THREE jobs that I 
was working at that time to make ends meet, and I didn't even have kids then. I was final ly able 
to get a FULL TIME job with decent pay and health insurance. Now I'm back where I started!! 
CLOSE THE PAY GAP!! Also, we shouldn't have to work OVERTIME in order to cover the work 
that we're supposed to complete during a regular 40 hour work week. Other states offer better 
pay along with benefits and health insurance for the SAME POSITION that I currently work in. 
The same states have relatively the same cost of living expenses. We are likely going to move 
out of state if we don't see a change happe n soon. Then you'll be losing TWO state employees 
who have invested 7 and ten + years of dedication and hard work into DHHS OFI. We are 
starting to feel like numbers and not people anymore. We are starting to feel like we don't 
matter, that the only people  in Maine that matter are the low income clients we serve. We 
deserve to be respected, protected and PAID a fair wage for the hard work we do . Please pass 
LD 1854 and close the state employee pay gap!  
