 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
www.maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy Kilrain del Rio  
Advocacy & Programs Director  
 (207) 626 -7058, ext. 210  
kathy @mejp.org  
 
  
MEJ Testimony in Support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive 
Review of the Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Good morning,  Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local 
Government Committee . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio , I use she/her pronouns,  and I’m the 
Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider worki ng 
to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. We are testifying 
today in su pport of LD 1854.  
 
A big part of the work MEJ does is assist Mainers with low i ncomes in accessing needed 
suppor ts and programs that are managed by state a gencies. These programs help people across 
our state put food on their table s, maintain a safe place to live, access education and training  so 
they  can increase their financial security, navigate the loss of employment, access necessary  
health care, and so much more. To help people with meeting their basic needs , MEJ works 
closely with mul tiple state agencies  and greatly appr eciate s the variety of vital  work done by 
state workers .  
 
Strong state government is necessary for our safety net programs to run smoothly and meet 
the needs of low -income Mainers. And state workers are the backbone of our state agencies . 
When someone is struggling to feed their family , access Unemp loyment Insurance, acces s 
health care to treat ser ious medical issues, or facing other financial challenges  that threaten 
their wellbeing or the wellbeing of their chi ldren , they need prompt  responses from state 
agencies . Long wait -times  and stretched workers  with huge workloads  weaken the ability  of 
older Mainers, fami lies, and other s in need to acces s safety net services .  
 
Chronic problems with recruiting and maintaining staff for these important positions prevent 
Maine people from getting the services they need when they need them. That ’s why we need 
to complete and implement the review of our state compensation and classification system. 
State positions must be competitive to attract and keep a stro ng workforce.   
 
It’s also why creat ing a structure for regularly performing  a compensation study every two 
years and conduct ing a comprehensive classification review every 10 years  is so important. I  
spend a lot of time in the Health and Human Services Committee and have seen how our health 
care workforce deteriorates when reimb ursement rates are left to langu ish for y ears. In 
response, through legislat ion passed in the 130th Legislature, the Office of MaineCare Services 
2 
proposed  a structure for regu lar review of all rates on specific  timelines so that we can respond 
to changing c osts of delivering care – which includes labor costs – in a more timely manner. 
That process has begun , and I believe we will see over time that it will strengthen our heal th 
care workforce. In the same way , the compensation  and classification structure created by LD 
1854 would streng then the workforce for our state government  – and that benefits us all.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts with you today. We urge you to pass LD 
1854 and I ’m happy to answer any questions.  
