Testimony of Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on 
State & Local Government 
“An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the 
Classiﬁcation and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees ” 
May 12, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. I am Kirsten Figueroa, the 
Commissioner of the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. Iam 
here today to offer testimony regarding the Executive Branch Classiﬁcation and 
Compensation Review. 
Thanks for the opportunity to be here today. 
First, to be sure this is the ﬁrst and most important thing people hear us say: We 
value our state employees and respect and admire the work they do every day in 
every way to support the residents of Maine. During this Public Service 
Recognition Week, and within that especially State Employee Recognition Day, 
and every day and week around it, we are committed to supporting them. 
As I have been quoted in the past, when ﬁrst testifying to secure funding for the 
Classiﬁcation and Compensation Study, there is good reason to review the 
classiﬁcation/compensation system of our State. The system is 40+ years old, and 
many inadequacies and inequities existed within the system at that time. We are 
Working to become Maine’s employer of choice and We know that involves 
competitive compensation and an attractive beneﬁt package. 
The Administration continues to work on the classiﬁcation and compensation 
evaluation, and we do feel we’re on target for delivering recommendations, both 
process and ﬁscal, by the beginning of next calendar year. The caveat to this is if 
we are required to complete a new market study. We will not be able to do both.
1
I know there is concern about how long this has taken. And, I know we all want to 
move past the pandemic, but it warrants more than just a quick footnote. The 
pandemic was all consuming for our HR team as they worked with our employees 
to: conduct contact tracing; update policies and work rules; process pandemic 
hazard pay; comply with federal pandemic efforts and policies; and, assist with 
leave time for illness and death. As a result of their efforts, state govemment was 
open, state employees were supported, and services were available throughout the 
pandemic. 
I will take a minute here to highlight a few of the additional beneﬁts that were put 
into place as a result of the pandemic, responding to the protection and needs of 
our employees in the face of an unprecedented emergency. 
Initially: 
- Within weeks, State ofﬁces were mobilized to send the majority of non 24/7, 
emergency services employees to work remotely 
- With the initial Families First Coronavirus Relief Act, which provided leave 
for employees whose children were unable to attend school/childcare, we 
continued to pay employees their full rate of pay instead of the 2/3 pay 
required by law 
- Provided hazard pay through December 2020 for employees required to 
report to work in positions that required interaction with the public 
Beginning in 2021: 
- Provided 80 hours of COVID Admin leave, available to all employees, to 
use for their own illness or quarantine. In fact, most employees were also 
allowed to use that time to care for family members who were ill or needed 
to quarantine 
- Front loaded sick leave for employees to ensure they had leave time 
available if they didn’t have COVID leave 
- Allowed sick leave to be used to care for children when their school or 
childcare was closed due to COVID 
- Rolled over vacation leave for two years, to allow employees to carry their 
time while job demands increased and gatherings and travel were restricted 
- Had regular labor management meetings with employee representatives 
from all unions and MSEA staff to hear and address concerns related to 
COVID and reentry to the work site
2
- Undertook space renovations, including improvements to air ﬁltration 
systems, to ensure employees reporting to the work site were kept distanced 
and safe 
- Provided PPE and followed increased cleaning protocols in accordance with 
CDC recommendations 
' Merit increases and collective bargaining continued and positions were ﬁlled 
with no employees laid off at any time due to the pandemic, despite 
economic and budget concerns 
- Developed a telework policy in recognition of the excellent work State 
employees demonstrated they could perform remotely 
Yesterday, May 11"‘ , with the end of the COVID-19 federal public health 
emergency, the Governor sent this message to state employees: “When I think 
about Maine’s nation-leading success in confronting the pandemic, I think about 
our state workers, and the many ways you contributed to our state these last 1,200 
days. Thank you for all you continue to do for the State of Maine.” 
Bottom line — BHR supported us, protected us, advocated for us and kept us 
working. And still kept moving forward with the work of the Classiﬁcation and 
Compensation study. 
Now to a summary of their classiﬁcation and compensation progress: 
- A study conducted in 2020 indicated that salaries for those employed by the 
State of Maine, then, were on average 15 percent below market for similar 
positions in the private sector, and, maybe more relevant for our purposes: 
ll percent below market, on average, when compared with other public 
sector employees. 
- The Segal Group looked at 100 benchmark positions out of 1,189 different 
classiﬁcations in state government, a sampling of approximately 8.4 percent 
of all Maine State job classiﬁcations. Nearly 20% of those classiﬁcations 
could not be matched. Though this Report did not take into account all job 
types (or “classiﬁcations”), it did identify discrepancies in employee pay, with 
some classiﬁcations being compensated well above market value and some 
well below. So, while 1 1/ 15% is accurate for the study conducted, it does not 
necessarily track all the way through to all positions in state government. 
- The cumulative Maine State Employee Wage Growth amid this 
Administration totals 13.63%. This is more in four years than what was done 
in the 8 years of each of the previous administrations. And, as we’ve 
discussed this issue amongst various associations and with other states,
3
we have learned that other public entities have not kept pace with these 
increases. In addition to the 13.63% wage increases are the one-time lumpA 
sum payments; improving longevity pay for workers with over ten years of 
service; a number of special pays and adjustments; and increasing our base 
pay to at least $15 per hour. 
This ﬁnal move alone — to increase base pay to $15 per hour — positively impacted 
382 employees to the tune of almost $1 million per year, representing an average 
pay increase of 9 percent for the lowest paid positions in the State workforce, and an 
increase of more than 21 percent for those who had previously been earning the 
minimum wage. 
In addition, unrelated to this classiﬁcation and compensation survey but part and 
parcel with our commitment to Maine State employees, this Administration 
continues to evaluate positions one-by-one to ensure State employees are paid at the 
classiﬁcation matched to their work efforts. 
As a result, this Administration has improved the base pay rate — above and beyond 
any across the board wage increases outlined above —— 
for nearly 15 percent of Maine 
State employees in the past three years — more than 1,750 reclassi ﬁcations, 
reorganizations, and/or range changes. 
Relatively speaking, and without consideration to inﬂation that has become more 
of an issue in the past year than it has been for many years but affects all employers 
in the same way, we are likely to have completely closed the pay gap when 
compared to peer State employers for a signiﬁcant percentage of our 
employees. But we know nationally public sector salaries continue to lag behind 
the private sector. 
We know through communications and outreach that executive branch employees 
want to stay with Maine state government as their employer. We are drawn to 
public service, the beneﬁts, the variety, and the impact of what we do. However, 
We also know that salary, beneﬁts and compensation as well as work-life balance 
and burn-out can inﬂuence that decision. We also know that work culture is 
changing: workers are more likely to move around and today’s workforce wants 
more ﬂexibility. 
As an employer, Maine state government is active and responsive to the changes.
4
Telework: 
After years of contemplating the viability and possibility of telework for State 
employees, the unintended silver lining of our forced pandemic telework situation 
resulted in changes to the way we do business, to allow telework for more types of 
work and positions resulting in modernization of paper-heavy processes. 
From June through October 2022, state government transitioned from an 
emergency telework situation to a post-emergency hybrid workforce. We 
developed a statewide telework policy, and telework is now a component of an 
employee ’s amiual review. 
Not all positions and job tasks are suited to telework. However, current data shows 
that 31 percent of Maine state employees are teleworking, most with a hybrid 
schedule. Another 1,313 or 11.7 percent have submitted requests for approval. In 
some cases, employees who have not yet received approval may be working a 
hybrid schedule while the paperwork is ﬁnalized with supervisor approval. The 
majority of those with a hybrid telework schedule work three days per week 
remotely. 
Work schedules: 
Studies show that employees who regularly take time away from work stay with the 
company longer, and good retention numbers improve morale. Maine state 
government has increased the number of vacation hours a new employee earns. 
Where the average private sector employer might offer 17 days, or 136 hours, of 
paid time off a year for vacations, personal appointments and illness, an employee 
starting with the state will earn a minimum of 27 days, or 216 hours, a year; the 
minimum is 36 days, or 288 hours, after 20 years of employment. And unlike many 
companies, these balances can carry over year to year (up to a maximum). This is 
in addition to l3 paid holidays. 
Under this administration we added paid parental leave and then increased it from2 
to 4 weeks, with some ﬂexibility of when to take it. 
Also to ﬂexibility, balance, and personal responsibilities, employees are looking 
for options outside a “standard ” work week or schedule. Although a challenge for 
an institution such as state government where residents have expectations of when 
services are “open” , we are currently evaluating more options for ﬂexible work 
schedules.
5
Part and parcel with having the hours to take away from work is providing an 
environment where an employee feels that is possible. Increasing workloads and 
expectations; additional statutory, enforcement, and reporting requirements; anda 
retiring and retirement-eligible workforce create an enviromnent of more work 
than workers. 
Adding new positions: 
Often in state government, we don’t usually remove a service, but instead add. And 
in the spirit of needing to balance the requirements within our limited resources, 
it’s often the case that the additional expectations and duties don’t come with 
additional workers. Also, over time, every supervisory job has changed froma 
mix of supervision tasks and job tasks to a full day to day workload; this means 
less time for employee/supervisor interaction, mentoring, training, performance 
discussions, and brainstorming. And, in an environment like ours where so many 
people with so many years of service are retiring, you cannot expect a new 
employee to state govermnent to be able to do the workload or work at the pace of 
an employee with 20 plus years of experience and knowledge in that job. 
Governor Mills has routinely requested new headcount in each budget. Not all that 
are requested by agencies make it into a budget bill, as there is a balance. But 
consistently the Governor has recognized the challenge employees face in being 
able to keep up with the demands. 
Vacant positions: 
There has been a lot of discussion about our vacancy rates, as there has been across 
the state and the country. All organizations have vacancies. Eliminating vacant 
positions to fund or create new positions routinely happens in our agencies as each 
position is evaluated when it becomes vacant. But having vacant positions does not 
diminish or eliminate the need to add new positions. 
Particularly in state government, it’s important to remember that Personal Services 
has to cover a number of things so a program will always need some vacant 
positions as part of managing its overall Personal Services budget. Managing 
Personal Services includes meeting the attrition reduction of 5% while also 
covering other self-funded Personal Services costs including hiring above budgeted 
step; vacation payouts; unanticipated overtime, callout, standby; and certain 
recruitment/retention efforts.
6
However, vacant positions, of course, add to the workload of those present. 
Although we normally run in the 9-10% vacancy zone, we are currently running 
closer to 16%. As such, we are expending a signiﬁcant amount of effort to ensure 
successﬁll recruitment and then retention. These include increasing our use of 
social media to advertise our positions; connecting with other recruitment vendors; 
increasing our number and presence at career fairs and community events; 
updating job classiﬁcations and job postings so more people feel comfortable that 
they have the skills and background we’re looking for; expanding public sector 
apprenticeship, internship and job shadow opportunities; and our new hire journey 
to make sure we’re setting new employees up for success and to grow in their 
careers by focusing on retention efforts as well. 
This last bit ties back to lessons we’ve leamed during our process. 
The BHR team has now met with nearly 98% of state agencies to review the 
classiﬁcation recommendations of the consultant, Segal Group. Patterns for career 
ladders are being noted and considered as the bureau’s classiﬁcation and 
compensation team establish and reclassify positions through the Functional Job 
Analysis (FJA) process. This will mean a clearer career path; something employees 
have told us matters to them and would help to retain them. 
A major lesson we’ve learned is that our current evaluation system is very effective 
at addressing the breadth and depth of the duties of our employees. We also 
recognize it does not have a market component. We do have a statutory process for 
market consideration, and we believe there may be a way to incorporate another 
method. Knowing our current process is actually quite good bodes well for the rate 
with which we’ll be able to implement recommendations. 
As with all things, it’s a balance. 
The impact of the 13.63% cumulative wage increases that have been negotiated 
during this Administration is approximately $200 million a biennium, ongoing, all 
funds. This does not include the one-time payouts, annual merits, or the myriad of 
allowances and special, stipend, and shift differential pays. 
A 5% increase is equal to another approximately $55 million a year, across all 
funds. 
As we consider each beneﬁt increase and wage increase, there are a number of 
factors that must be balanced. Impacts to the General Fund, yes. But also, the 
impact to other funds. The General Fund supports approximately 44% of the total
7
cost of Personal Services. Increased costs put at risk positions funded with stagnant 
or diminishing grant funds. Or funded through rates that can’t be adjusted. Or 
ﬁanded with fees that cannot be increased. And also balancing resources between 
funding existing positions and creating new positions. 
A few comments regarding the speciﬁcs of the proposal in LD 1854. 
0 We do agree that evaluating positions, classiﬁcations, compensation, and 
career paths should be ongoing rather than sporadic, all at once efforts. We 
do believe we could accommodate a market study more often, but not every 
two years. We will need funding to hire a consultant to help with this effort. 
0 Not sure of the need for a new fund. Also, at only 1% of the cascade, not 
much will flow to it. We currently rely on the Salary Plan for collective 
bargaining, and would continue to do so, within resources, for compensation 
efforts, including the recommendations that come from this effort. 
0 To that, although as mentioned, we believe we will have recommendations 
by January, to lock us into implementing all of them by next July may not be 
feasible. For process recommendations, we feel certain we’ll be able to 
implement those. But for the ﬁscal ones. . .what if all of the ﬁscal 
recommendations are way more than the money we have available? Also, as 
mentioned, compensation is a collective bargaining item. We will not be ina 
bargaining session next spring. So, we’ll need to talk through the 
timing/process of that. 
0 In section 6, as I mentioned, we do feel we’re on target for completing the 
review and delivering recommendations, both process and ﬁscal, by the 
begimiing of next calendar year. The caveat to this is if we are required to 
complete a new market study. We will not be able to do both. 
v We do agree that we need additional resources (up to $1 million should do 
it) to help us connect the market study and the infonnation we’ve gathered 
from the classiﬁcation effort to help us ﬁnalize our recommendations. 
We consider our state employees to be valuable beyond compare. 
That’s been shown in a myriad of ways: including efforts through the pandemic, 
including no layoffs and additional leave time; ongoing wage increases (even ina 
curtailment budget); increased beneﬁts including new 4 week paid parental leave. 
In the budget, we are proposing changes to the health credit program to align the 
health credit bands with increased wages.
8
As is consistent with Governor Mills’ approach to budgeting, we have balanced 
the importance of competitive compensation and an attractive beneﬁt package and 
new headcount with other priorities across the state. 
We have made considerable progress on the evaluation of our classiﬁcation system 
as outlined in previous reports and above (a reminder that we re-sent our February 
10, 2021 and March 31, 2022 reports to you on March 6, 2023). And, we are likely 
to have completely closed the pay gap when compared to peer State employers for 
a signiﬁcant percentage of our employees as We recognize that nationally public 
sector salaries continue to lag behind the private sector. 
We are committed to ﬁnalizing the effort and consolidating our learnings into 
actionable recommendations. 
As the second largest employer in Maine, We are in a position to be a leader and 
we continue to lead by example. This Administration is committed to a continued 
partnership with state government employees to ensure they are adequately 
compensated and otherwise supported for their meaningful contributions to the 
Wellbeing of Maine people. 
Thank you.
9
