My name is Lasca Black, I live in Augusta  and I work at Riverview Psychiatric as an RN. 
I am writing on my own time in support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement 
the Comprehensive Review of the Classification and Compensation System for 
Executive Branch Employees.  
 
I have been here ten years and frequently want to leave because this is a VERY 
dangerous place to work as you can imag ine. The big problem is that we cannot keep 
our nurses , so we end up chronically understaffed or using expensive travel nurses who 
can only do half of what we do. They get paid A LOT more and we work harder because 
we have to pick up all their slack. That makes no sense. Additionally, most of us do not 
want to work so many hours. We can go to Maine General and make the same base 
pay and get paid for 40 hours for a 36 hour week. Here we work 36 hours one week and 
43.25 the next... plus mandates and overtime that we pick up because we are short so 
often. We wouldn't get so burned out if we had an option of working 36 hours and we 
might get more staff if there were an option of part time work of some sort.  Due to 
position numbers being  low for full time staff, they don't let us veer from full time... some 
just don't want full time or cannot do it, so we lose opportunities for staff due to this 
issue.   
 
As far as pay goes. Too much of our pay is put into stipends, even when the legislature 
proposes it be base pa y, we end up with a stipend. Every time I get a raise , I get a raise 
on my base pay, but stipends are a third of my pay. Why work in a dangerous, 
understaffed place where you feel underappreciated and underpaid?  The current 
culture in America is to live h arder, not work harder... I think you all know that. At RPC 
we simply work harder with no other options and not enough pay to make it worth our 
while knowing we can be put out of work at any moment due to severe injuries and 
PTSD from their occurrence. Unl ess you work here and do what we do, it is hard to 
imagine what we go through.  
 
I implore you to pay us with BASE pay that at the very least makes it hard for us to 
leave and attracts people to come here. Honestly , money is where it’s at in a place like 
this, because it is often an ungrateful job. Closing the pay gap between RPC nurses and 
nurses working in other private & public sector jobs would go a long way toward 
recruiting and retaining staff. I also ask that someone consider spo nsoring a 36 hour 
work  week for 40 hours of pay for those nurses that want to take advantage of it. I see 
that as a great benefit. Thank you for your time.  
 
