Mark Brunton
South China
LD 1854
RE: LD1854 An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive Review of the 
Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees
Dear Legislators,
I am writing in support of LD1854. I am an employee of the Department of Health 
and Human Services Office of Aging and Disability Services (OADS). I have served 
the people of the State of Maine since May 2014 as a Caseworker, Resource 
Coordinator and Comprehensive Health Planner. 
The work we do at OADS is essential to the health and well-being of Maine families 
and their loved ones. We support and enhance services to assist aging Mainers, and 
individuals with physical and intellectual disabilities to live, work and thrive in their 
communities. We also regulate and support nursing homes and other long-term care 
facilities to serve those Mainers who can no longer maintain health and safety 
independently. Many of my coworkers in Adult Protective Services investigate threats
to the safety and health of the aging and disabled population. An APS caseworker is a 
lifeline to vulnerable Mainers to protect them from emotional, physical and financial 
abuse. 
Like many other State of Maine agencies, OADS is experiencing a severe labor 
shortage with many vacancies in vital positions. Employers throughout Maine and the
nation are currently experiencing similar challenges; however, the current level of 
unstaffed and understaffed positions in our state government is reaching the critical 
stage. The effects of lost productivity and the impact upon the people of Maine are 
becoming severe. The factors contributing to this crisis are not new and did not solely 
arise as a result of the COVID pandemic or current economic conditions. For more 
than a decade, state employees have been undercompensated in relation to our private 
sector counterparts. Cuts in our benefits and increases in our payroll contributions to 
retirement and healthcare have eroded the value of the overall compensation package. 
As you are aware, recent compensation studies have proven this to be so.
In addition to the erosion of compensation as compared to equivalent professions in 
the private sector, the classifications of state positions are outdated and obsolete. The 
classification system dates back to the 1970s with very few modifications or 
improvements. The Committee and the Legislature must consider the magnitude of 
the significant changes to the workforce and in the workplace in the ensuing 50 years.
State government is in serious need of modernization. LD1854 will begin the process 
of that modernization. The actions of this Legislature will determine the effectiveness 
of the delivery of government services to the people, businesses and organizations of 
Maine for the next 50 years. Enacting LD1854 will ensure those services are 
delivered by Maine workers who can support their families and contribute to the 
Maine economy and their communities in a sustainable way, for the future of Maine. I
urge you to pass LD1854.  
Sincerely,
Mark A. Brunton
MSEA-SEIU Local 1989
207-735-5428

