Megan Scott
Waterville
LD 1854
Testimony of Megan Scott, MSW
 In support of LD 1854 - “An Act to Complete and Implement the Comprehensive 
Review of the Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch 
Employees”
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is Megan Scott. I am a resident of Waterville and a 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention employee. I have worked at the 
Maine CDC for nearly four years and have served in a management capacity for two. 
I have prepared these comments in support of LD 1854 on my own personal time 
because I feel that my experience with the reclassification and hiring processes 
illustrate why this bill is so important. 
The team I lead at Maine CDC was previously in another office within DHHS. When 
it transferred to Maine CDC, the management position retained the classification it 
had at the previous office, which was a class lower than the three other managers 
within the program it joined. The manager at the time never initiated a reclassification
process. When she retired and I was promoted two years ago, I worked with my 
Program Director to submit the required paperwork to reclassify the position. To date,
my position still has not been reclassified, but in that time my position has changed 
significantly. When I started, I anticipated managing a team of two but now manage a 
team of five and will ultimately have a team of seven direct reports when two open 
positions are filled giving me the largest team in my program. I love my job, and I 
certainly never expected to make a lot of money working in public health, however I 
struggle with not having parity with the other managers in my program. Not 
considering the estimated 15% state employees in general are underpaid, I estimate 
that I am being underpaid at least $6,000 annually, which as a single mother of two is 
significant especially as basic living costs have increased dramatically. Although my 
direct supervisors have been tremendous advocates, the system is broken and I 
struggle to feel that my work is valued.  
As mentioned above, my team has grown over the last two years, meaning I have 
spent a substantial amount of time engaged in the hiring process. Most recently I have
struggled to fill three open positions. One I filled after posting three times, another 
four times and still another I have now posted five times and hope to fill after the 
posting closes tomorrow. Each round requires a significant amount of my time 
between reviewing candidate resumes, conducting interviews, checking references, 
salary negotiations, and paperwork. Some rounds I have received terrific applicants 
but they are unable to accept the salary they are offered even though they are 
extremely interested in the position. Other rounds I have not received any qualified 
candidates. The expectations of these positions far outweigh their classification and 
pay scales, and my current staff most definitely work outside of their class. I want 
nothing more than to be able to attract the best candidates and ultimately pay my staff 
what they deserve for the extremely challenging and vitally important roles they fill.
I believe LD 1854 is imperative to making sure I can hire qualified candidates and 
most importantly retain the dedicated and hard working staff I currently have. Thank 
you to the committee for your consideration of my comments. I urge you to give LD 
1854 a favorable report and vote ought to pass.
