 
1 
 May 12, 2023 
 Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, me mbers of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, 
 
I’m Ramona Welton of Augusta. I’ m writing as a private citizen in support of LD 1854, An Act 
to Complete and Implement the Comprehe nsive Review of the Classification and 
Compensation System for Executive Branch Em ployees, sponsored by Representative Drew 
Gattine. 
 
As a process auditor in my 39th year of servic e with the Maine Bureau of Motor Vehicles, I 
know when things add up and when they don’t.  
Yet again, strong increases in state government revenues  are predicted for the coming years on 
top of the recently projecte d $283 million surplus . This follows a trend of several years of recent 
surpluses. While this is good news, there’s a cav eat: These surpluses are a direct result of the 
state government underpaying thous ands of state workers throughout  our careers. Not one but 
two state-commissioned reports found the state c onsistently lowballs pay for state workers 
compared with other public- a nd private-sector workers thro ughout Maine and New England. 
A 2009 report  documented that Maine Department of  Transportation crews were underpaid by 
21.6 percent; professionals like engineers and chemists, 17 percent; in stitutional workers, 11.8 
percent; and supervisory workers, 9.6 percent. The Baldacci administration essentially responded 
by stamping the report “confidential” and instituting 20 unpaid state worker furlough days , 
further reducing state workers’ wages. 
Under the LePage administration, state work ers went four years without raises and the pensions 
of state workers and teachers were cut  to pay for tax breaks that mostly benefited Maine’s 
wealthiest residents. LePage left hundreds of positions vacant, worsening a crisis in delivering 
services from plowing snow to answering 911 calls to staffing our psychiatric centers. 
Data from 2020  show we’re paid 15 percent less than our peers in the private and public sector in 
Maine and across New England. For some classifications, it’s wo rse: Accountants are underpaid 
by 20 percent to 33 percent; chemists, 24 percent;  civil engineers, 20 percent to 25 percent; 
mechanics, 31 percent; and corr ectional officers , 16 percent. 
Since then, wage growth for state workers ha s lagged far behind that of the average Maine 
worker. In 2022, Mainers sa w average raises worth 8.6 percent , while state workers’ pay 
increased only 4 percent. With  most employers competing in a tightening labor market, the 
average worker saw double the nominal raises st ate workers did, and the pay gap continued to 
grow. 
State job postings  tell the story: Custodians, laborers, groundskeepers, park rangers and assistant 
rangers start at $15 an hour; legal secretar ies, $15.85; egg and poultry inspectors, $16.20; 
accounts-payable clerks, $16.30; and accountants, $18.94. State commissioners , environmental 
groups , state workers  and their unions  all say the state must addr ess this wage problem. The 
 
2 
 impact on services is real. One in 6 positions in state government is vacant  — totaling nearly 
2,100 vacancies. The reward for those who keep working for the state: forced overtime.  
When you’re plowing roads, answering 911 calls or working with children and families in crisis, 
the mental and physical exhausti on of excessive overtime runs th e risk of becoming a serious 
public safety concern. And when the Maine Depa rtment of Environmental Protection or Maine 
State Ferry Service are understa ffed, as they’ve been for ye ars now, it affects our economy. 
Currently state workers are in contract negotiations, yet the Bureau of Human Resources has 
refused to meet with us . Given how far behind the state has fallen, it’s no  mystery why the state 
HR director doesn’t want to meet  with all state workers. It’d be  difficult to defend this stark 
inequity in front of an audi ence of your own employees.  
As one of Maine’s largest employers, the state of  Maine has a duty to cr eate fair standards for 
workers across Maine. Instead, th e state is actually applying dow nward pressure on wages as it 
competes with industries for the same pool of workers. 
Some have suggested using the supposed surplus  for tax cuts for the wealthiest Mainers . This is 
offensive; the last round of income tax cuts in  2011 were paid for by dramatically cutting the 
retirement benefits of state workers and teach ers, who don’t even rece ive Social Security 
benefits.  
To be clear, while neither Gov. Janet Mills nor the 131st Legislat ure created these issues, they 
have a responsibility to fix th em. Please support LD 1854. Thank  you. 
 
