TESTIMONY OF TOM FEELEY, GENERAL COUNSEL 
MAINE SERVICE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, SEIU LOCAL 1989 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF LD 1854 
AN ACT TO COMPLETE AND IMPLEMENT 
THE COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF THE CLASSIFICATION AND         
COMPENSATION SYSTEM FOR EXECUTIVE BRANCH EMPLOYEES 
 
May 12, 2023 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Committee on State and Local 
Government, I am Tom Feeley, the General Counsel of the Maine Service Employees 
Association, SEIU Local 1989, a labor union representing over 13,000 workers statewide. 
I am here today to testify in support of LD 1854, An Act to Complete and Implement the 
Comprehensive Review of the Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch 
Employees, sponsored by Representative Drew Gattine.   
I have been a member of a joint labor-management Steering Committee that for the last three 
years has been overseeing the Executive Branch’s comprehensive review of its compensation 
plan and classification system. 
The review arose out of the 129th Legislature, when Senator Jackson introduced a resolve to 
conduct a comprehensive study of the compensation system for Executive Branch workers . 
Shortly after Senator Jackson introduced the resolve, MSEA and the Executive Branch entered 
into a Memorandum of Agreement which obligated the State to commission an outside 
consultant to perform a comprehensive review of the classification and compensation system, 
and the bill was pulled before being presented to the full Legislature. 
The compensation and classification system arose out of a study conducted by Hay Associates in 
1975  and was implemented and funded through Legislation shortly thereafter . By design, the 
system requires active management, which included regular updates and reviews. By statute, 
proper oversight of the classification system “shall provide for periodic updating of job 
descriptions at least every 5 years to accurately reflect current duties and responsibilities of each 
job classification.” 5 MRSA § 7061 (4)(A). In addition, the Bureau of Human Resources is 
required, by statute, to provide annual reports that include data such as turnover rates by job 
classification, the total number and disposition of reclassification requests, and the number of 
vacancies and the reason for those vacancies, as well as the length of time required to fill each 
vacancy. 5 MRSA § 7036  (13). Similarly, civil service rules require the Director of Human 
Resources to “make or cause to be made such comparative studies as deemed appropriate of 
factors affecting the levels of salaries in the classified service.” Chapter 18, Section 389 , chapter 
5(2)(B). 
However, over the last forty-plus years, the system has not been actively managed. As Maine 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services Commissioner Kirsten Figueroa eloquently 
stated in her 2019 testimony in support of LD 1214 : 
The current compensation system is 40 years old and has never been systematically 
reviewed. During that time, inadequacies and inequities of the current compensation 
system that loudly demanded our attention in the form of arbitration, legislation, 
settlements and collective bargaining were addressed through a hodgepodge of 
reclassifications, range changes, stipends and adjustments. Meanwhile, a host of issues 
remain unaddressed, some solutions have given unintentional rise to new issues, and the 
work of state employees has evolved considerably since the current compensation system 
was first instituted.  
Clearly, the classification system is long overdue for a comprehensive review and update. 
Similarly, compensation for State workers has lagged far behind those of Maine’s competitors 
and presents a significant barrier to recruiting and retaining employees. As Commissioner 
Figueroa noted in her 2019 testimony:  
This study will no doubt confirm what we already know: Maine state employees’ 
compensation has not remained competitive with Maine’s private sector, and perhaps 
even lacks parity with public sector compensation at the local level and in comparable 
states.  
Over the years, there have been numerous attempts to fix the system, including the multi-year 
Pay Study conducted under Governor Baldacci that Governor LePage shelved his first year in 
office. These past failures have had a devastating effect on State employee morale, as well as on 
the State’s ability to recruit and retain quality employees. I would again direct your attention to 
Commissioner Figueroa’s testimony from 2019. She wrote: 
As a 22-year Maine state employee, I want to acknowledge the disappointment and 
resentment felt by state employees in the past when similar studies were commissioned, 
only for the findings to be forgotten about when there wasn’t funding to fully implement 
the recommendations. This is the unfortunately common fate of studies commissioned by 
State government. In my position, I am keenly aware that funding will be no less of a 
challenge when this study is complete and recognize our responsibility to be good 
stewards of these findings. Our failure to do so would only compound the problems that 
necessitated this legislation. I hope that once informed with specific knowledge of where 
inadequacies and inequities exist within the current compensation system, future 
collective bargaining and legislation will continually refer to the study and over time we 
will make steady meaningful progress towards its recommendations.  
This was the state of affairs in 2019, when the State and MSEA entered into the aforementioned 
Memorandum of Agreement. The Agreement called for the consultant to (1) “provide 
recommendations as to improvements to the existing classification and compensation systems,” 
(2) “transition to potential alternative classification and compensation systems,” and (3) to 
provide “conclusions as to best practices for classification and compensation systems for 
comparable employers.” The Agreement specified that the cost of the study should not exceed 
$600,000, and it obligated the State to make a good faith effort to complete the study by August 
1, 2020.  
In the Fall of 2019, the Steering Committee conducted the Request for Proposal process, which 
resulted in the selection of the Segal Group as the outside consultant. The State began 
negotiating with Segal in early 2020, and by mid-February, the details were finalized. The 
Steering Committee held its first meeting with Segal on March 3, 2020.  
Coincidentally, the day before that meeting – March 2, 2020 – was the first time that I spoke 
with the Bureau of Human Resources about COVID-19 and raised MSEA’s concerns about 
school closures, quarantines, telecommuting, leave time, and the like. And sure enough, within a 
matter of weeks, everything had changed.  
To its credit, the State was committed to moving forward with this project despite the major 
disruptions posed by COVID-19. After some initial delays, the project began taking shape. 
Segal’s review had to separate two components running simultaneously. The first component 
was the market analysis of State worker compensation. Segal, in consultation with the Steering 
Committee, selected 100 benchmark titles and compared them with their counterparts in ten 
public sector employers in the Northeast, including four other New England states, four cities in 
Maine, the biggest county in Maine, and the Federal government, as well as private sector market 
data for New England. The 2020 State of Maine Market Study Report  was finalized on 
November 20, 2020.  
As Commissioner Figueroa had predicted, the Markey Study Report did in fact demonstrate that 
State employee compensation lags far behind that of the State’s competitors. On the whole, 
wages lag 15 to 20% behind those of our private and public sector competitors. MSEA-
represented positions in both the Administrative Services Bargaining Unit and the Operations, 
Maintenance and Support Services Bargaining Unit earn 82% compared to their counterparts; 
workers in the Professional-Technical Services Bargaining Unit earn 86% compared to their 
counterparts; and workers in the Supervisory Services Bargaining Unit earn 84% compared to 
their counterparts. 
Digging deeper into the Market Study Report, you will see that while certain benchmark 
classifications are at or near the market rate, other categories of employees lag woefully behind. 
For example, even at the top step of the pay scale, accountants for the State of Maine make 20 to 
33% less than their peers working elsewhere in the region. Chemists make 24% less. Civil 
Engineers make 20 to 25% less. Maintenance Mechanics make 31% less. Administrative workers 
make between 20 to 35% less. Rehabilitation Counselors make 25% less. Correctional Officers 
make 16% less, and Correctional Captains make 26% less than their counterparts. 
The second component of Segal’s review was their analysis of the classification system. In 
consultation with the Steering Committee, Segal created a Job Description Questionnaire, or 
“JDQ,” for each employee in State government to complete. The JDQ was designed to elucidate 
the core components of each position, including essential duties and responsibilities, the degree 
of discretion and independent judgment, minimum job requirements, supervisory responsibilities, 
knowledge and skills, fiscal responsibility, working conditions, and the like. From there, Segal 
analyzed the data. On November 8, 2020, Segal presented the Steering Committee with the first 
draft of its proposed “Classification Structure.” 
In theory, after some fine tuning of the Classification Structure, Segal was to merge the 
compensation data from the Market Study Report with the Classification Structure, provide a 
cost analysis, and make its final recommendations. According to Segal’s timeline, this entire 
process was supposed to be wrapped up in February 2021.  
Segal’s proposed Classification Structure detailed and analyzed 1,172 positions within the 
Executive Branch and proposed new job titles, merged positions, new occupational groupings, 
new job summaries, and new pay grades based on a newly developed scoring system. Upon 
digging into the draft Structure, we found myriad issues. For example, a particular job 
description might not match what we knew about the position. In other places, seemingly 
disparate positions, or positions from very different pay grades, were being combined into a 
single position. Elsewhere, the assigned pay grade for a certain position would not make sense 
relative to other positions. The proposed Classification Structure was salvageable, but required 
more work.  
The Steering Committee began working with Segal and offering substantive revisions to the 
Classification Structure. In December 2020, Segal sent a revised Structure which incorporated 
some of our feedback, and we continued our analysis. In early February 2021, they sent a second 
revised draft. However, at about the same time, Segal announced that they had reached the end 
date of their contract with the State and therefore any ongoing work would be at an hourly rate. 
The Steering Committee has not had direct contact with Segal since March 2021. 
Over the last two years, the Steering Committee has continued our review of the proposed 
Classification Structure. Essentially, Bureau of Human Resources employees been meeting with 
departmental stakeholders and review the proposed revisions to positions within that department. 
The BHR employees then reports back to the Steering Committee with their findings. I am happy 
to say that, as of yesterday, the Steering Committee has completed this department-by-
department review and has discussed all 1,172 unique job classifications in State government.  
So where does that leave us? Essentially, we are exactly where we were in 2019, with a broken 
and out of date compensation and classification system and a review that is still not close to 
being done. 
State workers are hyper-aware that the classification system is broken and that their 
compensation lags far behind their competitors. We hear these concerns from State workers, as 
well as questions about the pay study, almost every day. I am not going to recap their concerns in 
my testimony, but scores of State workers will be submitting testimony today, speaking from 
their personal experiences dealing with staffing shortages, pay inequity, and the like. I would ask 
that you listen to the concerns of these workers.   
To be clear, we have accomplished a lot in the three years since study began. We have done an 
initial and thorough review of the State’s classification system and the recommendations of the 
outside consultation. And we have quantified the size of the pay gap as it existed three years ago.  
However, we still have to get the job done.  
This legislation has four main and essential components.  
First and foremost, it obligates the State to complete the comprehensive review of the 
compensation and classification system and report back to the Legislature by January 31, 2024, 
and it provides $1,000,000 in funding for the State to do it. We believe this funding is necessary 
because, frankly, the State and Steering Committee cannot do this alone. We need an outside 
consultant with both the expertise in compensation and classification reviews and an arms’ 
length objectivity to conduct the overall review and finish the job. Additionally, the Market 
Study report from 2020 is already obsolete. We need a consultant to re-run the Market Study 
comparing the Executive Branch’s compensation levels with those of its competitors using 
current salary data.  
Second, this legislation obligates the State to implement the recommendations of the report and 
close the pay gap by July 1, 2024. Earlier in my testimony, I mentioned that the State has 
conducted similar studies in the past but failed to implement them. This legislation builds 
accountability into the process, mandating that if the study is not finalized and implemented by 
July 1, 2024, there will be an across-the-board salary increase of 5% for all Executive Branch 
workers. 
Third, this legislation creates a mechanism for closing the pay gap in the form of the State 
Employee Compensation Stabilization Fund, which redirects a slight portion of the Highway 
Fund towards state employee salaries.  
And fourth, this legislation requires the State to conduct a market pay study every two years and 
a comprehensive review of the classification system every ten years. This is routine maintenance 
and should not be controversial. We are currently attempting to untangle a system that has not 
had a comprehensive review for almost half a century. This legislation would ensure that the 
system is actively and routinely managed, and that we never again get to the point where we are 
at right now, where the State cannot adequately staff positions necessary to perform vital State 
services.  
This is an important bill, and it impacts everyone who relies on State services. 
Thank you and I would be glad to answer any questions. 
 
 
