Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is Winifred Malia and live in Scarborough. l ama 
Principal Economic Research Analyst, l have worked for the Maine Dept of Labor 
almost 36 years, and l am the current Chapter President of the Eichel-Crinion 
Chapter of the Maine Service Employee Association. I am submitting this 
testimony on my own time, using my own personal devices in support of LD 1854, 
An Act to Complete and implement the Comprehensive Review of the 
Classification and Compensation System for Executive Branch Employees . 
As you know, the Dept of Labor provides vital services for the State of Maine such 
as employment and training sen/ices for workers and employers, workplace 
safety training, wage and hour standards, services for the blind & visually 
impaired, deaf, hard of hearing & late deafened, vocational rehabilitation, labor 
market information, and economic stability from unemployment benefits while 
workers find reemployment. ln order to provide these services, the Dept of Labor 
needs to be able to fully staff the positions. Retention and recruitment of qualified 
employees is made more difficult as the pay gap widens without any meaningful 
progress to close it. 
The pay gap is causing positions to remain vacant or employees to accept 
positions elsewhere because the wages are on average 20% lower than similar 
public and private sector positions. There are regular job postings for rehabilition 
counselor, careercenter consultants, occupational safety specialist,and customer 
service representatives to name a few because qualified individuals are not 
applying due to the low wages. There are numerous employees that have or will 
be retiring in the next few years. These positions need to be filled with qualified 
individuals and that will only happen if wages are competitive. 
The pay gap has been an issue for the last 20 years with no meaningful efforts to 
resolve it. Morale is effected when some employees are given stipends while the 
same issue of recruitment and retention exists all over state government. I was 
on the MSEA Bargaining Team 2 years ago, the administration says that the pay 
gap should -not be a bargaining issue but a legislative issue. l feel the pay gap 
should be just as important an issue as raising the salary of the Governor and 
members of the Legislature. As Representative David Woodsome said about 
raising the pay for members of the Legislature - it is long overdue. I think 
resolving the pay gap is long overdue as we'll. Now is the time to use some of the 
surplus on the employees of the State of Maine. 
l am asking that you support LD 1854 for the workers of the Dept of Labor and 
the rest of the Executive Branch that serve the citizens of th State of Maine every
day by closing the pay gap. i want to thank the committee for listening 
Winifred Malia 
Scarborough, ME
