LD 1589 " Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Adopt 
Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, 
Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom" 
 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my 
testimony in support of LD 1589 “Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Adopt Rules 
Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, Ideological and Religious Advocacy in 
the Classroom.” 
It is no secret that classrooms and schools have become political battle grounds where a small 
fraction of “educators” are more activists and recruiters for their ideology than educators. Reviewing of 
the states NWEA scores would also confirm this. By enforcing this policy, our classrooms would once 
again be “neutral” ground where a child can learn “how to think,” instead of being taught “what to 
think.” 
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1589 “Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, Ideological 
and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1589
LD 1589 " Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Adopt Rules 
Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, Ideological and 
Religious Advocacy in the Classroom"
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of LD 1589 “Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public
Schools from Engaging in Political, Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the 
Classroom.”
It is no secret that classrooms and schools have become political battle grounds where
a small fraction of “educators” are more activists and recruiters for their ideology than
educators. Reviewing of the states NWEA scores would also confirm this. By 
enforcing this policy, our classrooms would once again be “neutral” ground where a 
child can learn “how to think,” instead of being taught “what to think.”
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1589 “Resolve, Directing 
the Department of Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools 
from Engaging in Political, Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
