Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, 
 
My name is Elizabeth Caruso, and I live in Caratunk. I am testifying in support of these bills. 
 
LD 1589 “Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting 
Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, Ideological, and Religious 
advocacy in the Classroom 
LD 1129 “An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act” 
Our Declaration of Independence states “that to secure these rights, governments are 
instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed…”  
Thus, power is given FROM the people TO the government.  
I remind you that, as the courts have reaffirmed, it is the parents’ fundamental right to direct 
the education of their children. Government and publicly-funded schools are not co-parents, 
nor do they own our children.  Public, taxpayer-funded schools, have no right to interfere with a 
child’s morals, ethics, religion, or worldviews. I stand with parents who demand and deserve 
transparency in curricula and to know and/or approve what their children are being taught. 
 
It has become public knowledge that some teachers and administrations are purposefully and 
admittedly trying to train schoolchildren into ways of thinking that are contrary with those of the 
parents - ways of thinking that have nothing to do with educational subject matter.  In private 
meetings, their exposed purpose was to undermine the views of the parents and convince the 
children to keep secrets from their parents - placing a purposeful wedge between the students 
and their parents and undermining the family bond.  
 
Teachers’ unions and administrations have no jurisdiction or inroads into shaping the minds and 
worldviews of someone else’s children.  The school’s job is to teach math, writing or grammar, 
science, trades, etc. so that the next generation is prepared to be capable, self-sufficient 
members of society. Parents don’t need or want schools parenting their children, molding and 
training their minds in morals, ethics, religion and worldviews. These bills will protect the 
children and give parents their requested oversight - transparency into their children’s curricula.   
 
Martin Luther King Jr. knew that our children should “not be judged by the color of their skin, but 
by the content of their character”.  It is psychological abuse and national suicide to indoctrinate 
children in segregation and discrimination by skin color or race, or to condition self-hate, 
confusion, and victimization. Schools should have an atmosphere of respect for one another 
while instilling responsibility, work ethics, and scholarly/technical prowess for a prosperous life. 
 
LD 1589 will stop Maine teachers from “engaging in political, ideological, and religious advocacy 
in the classroom”. Parents have made it clear that Maine schools must cease and desist from 
indoctrination, segregation, and social dysfunctional emphasis and refocus on academia and 
teachings that build up students, not destroy or distract.   
 
Much like our global competitors in China and Europe, Maine should again intentionally prepare 
our youth for successful careers, strong work ethics, and a strong sense of accountability and 
responsibility, not enablement, divisiveness, and social distractions – and certainly not racism, 
pornography, and American hatred. The focus of our classrooms must revert to advancing 
academics, not lowering academic standards. Maine schools must reestablish order instead of 
chaos in the classrooms and increase focus on technical, trades and vocational programs to 
help our HS graduates have prosperous careers and positively contribute to society.  
 
By supporting these bills, you will be reinforcing the Maine family structure – the foundation of 
our society. By supporting these bills, you will protect our children, align yourselves with 
taxpayers and voters, restore confidence and aptitude in our public schools, and ensure our 
future generation will be emotionally, academically, and mentally prepared to take the baton. 
 
Thank you for voting ought to pass. 
 
 
 
 
 
