Testimony in Support of LD1129. An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act and LD 1589, Resolve, 
Directing the Department of Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from 
Engaging in Political, Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee: 
Thank you for accepting this testimony in support of LD’s 1129 and 1589. My name is Jon Reisman. I 
have recently retired after 38 years at the University of Maine at Machias as an associate professor of 
economics and public policy. For a decade I was chair of the Professional Studies division that housed 
the Education program. In the 90’s I served as a special projects manager in the King administration, 
getting rid of car testing and rejecting school administration consolidation. I am a Selectman for the 
Town of Cooper, a columnist for two Washington County weeklies and a Statler and Waldorf intern. 
My support for both LDs stems from a conviction that quality public K-12 education is critical to 
sustaining our Republic, our economy and cultural cohesion, and a reluctantly drawn but increasingly 
obvious conclusion that current “best practices” including Diversity, Equity and Inclusion, Critical Race 
Theory, Social and Emotional Learning and other Marxist indoctrination shibboleths are destroying both 
the quality of public education and parental and taxpayer support.  Greater transparency and a directive 
to stop indoctinahng students and teaching them to hate their country is an essential first step to 
sustaining public K-12 education. It will not be sufficient however. The source of the rot is higher 
education and the education and teacher training programs that have produced a cadre of educators 
and an associated institutional community committed to a Marxist narrative of oppression and 
victimhood. Unless and until this rot is excised, our public schools and Republic will continue to decline. I 
leave you with the sage words of Justice Brandeis: “Sunlight is the best disinfectant.”  
