PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
L wwwaclumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought Not To Pass — LD 1589 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Education To Adopt Rules 
Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, 
Ideological or Religious Advocacy in the Classroom 
SUBMITTED TO THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND 
. CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
May 11, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. My name is Meagan- 
Sway, and I am Policy Director for the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties in our state. On behalf of the 
ACLU of Maine, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (GLAD), EqualityMaine, 
MaineTransNet, and OUT Maine, we ask you to vote “ought not to pass” on LD 
1589.' 
The preamble to LD 1589 begins with language that most of us would agree upon: 
that one of the purposes of public education “is to produce knowledgeable and 
competent adults able to participate as informed citizens in the democratic process’? 
and “education in a democracy is best served by teaching students how to think, not 
telling them what to think.” However, the bill quickly devolves from worthy- 
aspirations into censorship. _i 
The United States Supreme Court has repeatedly held that teachers don’t lose their 
right to free speech just by walking through the doors of a public school. See, e.g., 
Pickering v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 563 (196-8). The Supreme Court has also 
signaled that “speech related to scholarship or teaching ” may be specifically 
protected by the First Amendment in ways that other speech by public employees is 
not. Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410, 425 (2006). The Supreme Court has not 
curbed academic speech, and this committee should not either. We urge this 
committee to refrain from abridging teachers ’ First Amendment rights by censoring 
their speech. 
In addition to its constitutional issues, LD 1589 also presents two other problems.
I
First, the legislation as written is too vague to be understood or implemented by the 
Department of Education or school districts. For example, Section 2(5) would 
prohibit “[i]ntroducing any controversial subject matter that is not germane to the 
topic of the course being taught,” without defining what “controversial subject 
matter” is. What is controversial to the bill’s sponsor may not be controversial to 
you or me, and vice versa. And, a topic that the sponsor of this bill may not consider 
germane to a course could very much be considered germane by the trained 
educator who has designed and is teaching the course. 
Second, the bill endorses censorship and conﬂict-avoidance, both of which contradict 
the goals of raising competent, upstanding citizens. Section 2(9) appears to prohibit 
discussions of racism.1 As a 2017 ACLU report, We Belong Here, found, taunting, 
racial slurs, and physical aggression against students of color are commonplace at 
many Maine schools? LD 1589 would prohibit teachers from addressing such acts if 
they should come up, leading to unsafe school environments (in violation of federal 
and state law) and producing students who do not feel personal accountability for 
their actions. Contrary to the bill’s stated purpose, this bill would not prepare our 
students to be competent, informed adults in 21$“ century America. 
Because the bill raises First Amendment concerns and could lead to unsafe learning 
environments for the students of our state, we ask you to vote “ought.not to pass” on 
LD 1589. 
1 The bill states this as a prohibition on “[s]egregating students according to race or singling out one 
racial group of students as responsible for the suffering or inequities experienced by another racial 
group of students. ” It is not clear Whether this is meant to prohibit discussions of racism and White 
supremacy in America’s history, though as written, it would not prohibit such conversations. 
2 Available at: https://WWW.aclumaine.org/en/publications/report-we-belong-here.
