Maine Atheist Freethinker and Humanist Association 
Maine Chapter - Freedom from Religion Foundation 
 
 
MAFHA   phone: 207-344-7852 
39 Gordon Lane    
Litchfield, ME  04350  www.ffrfmaine.org May 10, 2023  
 
Members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,  
 
This is testimony AGAINST LD 1589.  
The use of “Whereas” seven consecutive times, linking talking points in such a way as to lead to 
more talking points, would be amusing if the consequences weren’t so frightening. “Discussion” 
becomes “advocacy”, for example, which is simply ludicrous but is being used more and more 
often as a debating tool. Being required to present “both sides” in a controversial topic, which may 
be controversial only because of the volume of a small minority, is an impossible situation. In 
many areas there is a consensus of opinion with some outliers, and giving both sides gives equal 
weight to both (the old “On the other hand, Mr. Stalin contends…” argument). How are students 
going to learn to evaluate such information? Also, in any truly controversial area, there’s usually 
more than two sides.  
This bill also defines “controversial issue” as “an issue that is a point made in the most recent 
electoral party platform of any party that is qualified for the ballot at the state or federal level.” By 
this definition, the so-called controversial issues are planks in a political platform – chunks of 
language intended to promote a political party, funneling people toward one position and away 
from another. If LD 1589 were to pass, parties could get creative with their platforms and shut off 
any meaningful opportunities for learning.  
It also brings up the question of private schools, especially private religious schools. If taxpayer 
funds are not to be used for alleged advocacy of a particular point of view, why should taxpayer 
funds be allowed to go to the schools which, by definition, indoctrinate students? If LD 1589 were 
to pass, the state would have to stop sending funds to such schools.  
Please vote “Ought Not To Pass” on LD 1589 and focus on improving public education, rather 
than damaging it.  
 
 
