Ryan Dippre
Bangor
LD 1589
I am writing in opposition to LD 1589: “Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in 
Political, Ideological, and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom.”  I have spent most 
of my life in schools as either a student or a teacher, and at no point have I seen 
anything that even resembles the title of this bill, let alone the content of it.  
The bill makes several claims—that the majority of teachers K-12 discuss 
controversial issues in their classrooms; that this teaching is encouraged by teacher 
training programs and professional organizations; that “political indoctrination” is 
something that students spend significant time in class on—that are unsupported not 
only by my own experience, but by any evidence provided in the bill.  Line 7 refers 
vaguely to “surveys.”  What surveys?  When were they given?  To whom?  And there 
is no other evidence provided, aside from that single word.
Based on these unfounded claims, the bill then develops a set of restrictions for public
teachers.  These restrictions range from those already in place (“no segregating 
students”) to those that are oddly specific and largely disconnected from the daily 
work of teaching (“no hampering military recruiters”).  
With these unhelpful restrictions in place, the bill then demands teachers take three 
hours of their time each year to review them, and asks both the Department of 
Education and state professional organizations to “voluntarily” adopt a code of ethics 
that conforms to the specifications of the bill.  
Essentially, this bill creates a context for its own passage that is not rooted in the 
everyday realities of teaching; creates odd guidance to navigate that nonexistent 
context that would negatively impact the work of teachers; and asks professional 
organizations to abandon their own judgment in order to bestow moral weight on that 
guidance with a “voluntary” code of ethics.  At no point in time would this bill make 
teaching and learning better in the state of Maine, and therefore this bill ought not to 
pass.
