 
    
 
LD 1814: An Act to Reduce Mercury in the Environment by Phasing Out Certain 
Fluorescent Light Bulbs  
To Gov ernor  Mills, Members of the Maine Senate, and House  of Representative s: 
WM ( Waste Management ) is pleased to express our SUPPORT for LD 1814: An Act to Reduce 
Mercury in the Environment by Phasing Out Certain Fluorescent Light Bulbs , which would phase 
out the sale of compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) and linear fluorescent lamps (LFLs) used for general 
lighting applications in Maine.   
 
We support LD 1814 because:  
1. It protects those who work in resource  recovery across the state.   In 2011, Maine passed an 
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) law that required manufacturers of mercury -added 
lamps to fund a collection and recycling program. In 2021, a report by the Maine Department of 
Enviro nmental Protection found that an estimated 16% of lamps were recycled through the 
program, meaning the vast majority are improperly disposed of, putting those who collect our 
state’s waste at risk.  
2. It helps Maine achieve climate goals, and lower electricity demand: LED replacements for  
fluorescent lamps use approximately half the electricity to produce the same amount of light, and 
last 2 -3 times longer. Maine can save 1 28 GWh (annually) by the year 2030, the equivalent 
electricity usage of approximately 1 5,000 households.1 
3. Maine will save $2 16 million on their utility bills : According to estimates from the Appliance 
Standards Awareness Project, by 2050 Maine residential, commercial, and industrial consumers 
would save $2 16 million cumulatively on their utility bills by transitioning from the most common 
fluorescent lamps to LEDs2.  
4. Mercury -free alternatives are readily available , making the sale of CFLs and LFLs 
unnecessary: Mercury and its compounds are highly toxic to humans and the environment. The 
World Health Organization considers mercury one of the top 10 most dangerous chemicals 
impacting public health. Much more energy -efficient, mercury -free light emitting diode (LED) 
technology can easily and affordably replace fluorescent lamps.   
LD 1814 will both protect Maine from the unnecessary threat of mercury exposure and act as an 
important climate protection initiative to accelerate the transition  to a low -carbon economy through 
increased use of energy -efficient LED  lighting.   
For the many reasons described above, we SUPPORT LD 1814 and respectfully request your support for 
its passage.  
For questions, please contact Garrett Tr ierwei ler at 508 -549-5648. 
Sincerely,  
 
Garrett Trierweiler  
 
Garrett Trierweiler, Director of Public Aff airs 
 
1 Appliance Standards Awareness Project 2023 State Clean Lighting Savings estimates for: Maine  
2 Ibid.  
