 
 
1620 Eye Street, NW, Suite 200 · Washington, DC 20006 · (202) 387 -6121 · CFA@ConsumerFed.org 
www.ConsumerFed.org   
 
Statement of  
Richard Eckman , Energy Advocate  and Communications Manager  
Consumer Federation of America  
before the  
Maine  House of Representatives  
Committee of Environment and Natural Resources  
in Support of  LD1814 , 
An Act to Reduce Mercury in the Environment by Phasing Out Certain 
Fluorescent Light Bulbs  
May 8 , 2023 
 
Dear Members of the Maine  Environment and Natural Resources  Committee,  
 
My name is Richard Eckman. I am the Energy Advocate  for the Consumer 
Federation of America. Founded in 1968, CFA is one of the nation’s largest 
consumer organizations working in the consumer interest through research, 
advocacy and education. CFA represents over 2 50 national, state and local groups. 
For mor e than 20 years, CFA has supported and promoted cost -effective energy 
and water efficiency policies and practices at the federal, state and local levels. I’m 
pleased to comment  in support of the Act to Reduce Mercury in the Environment 
by Phasing Out Certa in Fluorescent Light Bulbs  (LD1814) . Quite simply, it will 
benefit Maine  residents and businesses by saving them money on their utility 
bills—while also benefiting the environment.  
 
The Act would save Mainers and businesses money by transition ing sales of 
common fluorescent light bulbs to LEDs. As LEDs are twice as energy efficient as 
fluorescents, LEDs will  generate significant electricity bill savings. Estimates by  
ASAP show that by 2030, Maine  would see annual utility bill savings of $ 20 

 
 
 
2 of 2 million thanks t o transitioning from fluorescents to LEDs. By 2050 Maine  would 
save a cumulative $253 million  on electricity bills.   
 
In closing, passing this legislation is a win -win-win for Maine . The bill will 
cut energy waste and reduce greenhouse gases while improving air quality. CFA 
urges you to adopt this highly cost -effective pro -consumer bill.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Respectfully submitted , 
Richard Eckman  
Energy Advocate  &  
Communications  Manager  
Consumer Federation of America  
reckman@ConsumerFed.org  

