Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street 6 Augusta, Maine 04330 Q (207) 622-3101 Q Fax: (207) 622-4343 Q www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1814, 
An Act To Reduce Mercury in the Environment 
by Phasing out Certain Fluorescent Light Bulbs 
Sarah Nichols, Sustainable Maine Director, May 8, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (N RCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
support LD 1814, as proposed to be amended by the bill sponsor. 
Mercury-containing lamps, such as long ﬂuorescent light tubes and compact- ﬂuorescents 
(CFLs), pose a signiﬁcant public health risk when they are not kept intact and recycled properly. 
It is illegal to dispose of them in landﬁlls and incinerators in Maine, where mercury can be 
released into the environment and make its way into our water, contaminating the ﬁsh we eat. 
Even in very small quantities, mercury can cause severe health problems such as cardiovascular 
disease and neurological damage. 
To help our local government and taxpayers manage this particular mercury threat, Maine passed 
an Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) law in 2011 to require manufacturers of mercury- 
containing light bulbs to operate and fund a collection and recycling system for used bulbs. 
Unfortunately, the program has consistently underperformed and has failed to collect most used 
bulbs. In 2021, about 16% of the bulbs were estimated to be recycled through the program, and 
about 6% were collected by and paid for Maine’s municipalities. ‘ The vast majority likely end up 
where they don’t belong, in our landﬁlls and incinerators. 
Non-toxic LED (light-emitting diode) light bulbs are a readily available alternative for mercury- 
containing ﬂuorescents. They last about twice as long, out energy use in half, and are the more 
cost-effective option over their lifetime. If this bill was to pass, then Maine’s households and 
businesses would save more than $20 million annually on their utility bills by 2030, and by 2050 
our state would avoid the release of 178,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, 
which is the equivalent of 38,000 gasoline-powered passenger cars driven for one year.2 
Vermont and California have passed legislation banning the sale of mercury-containing light 
bulbs by January 2024.3 And I understand that bills similar to LD 1814 are awaiting signatures 
by the governors of Hawaii, Oregon, and Colorado. The European Union banned the sale of most 
mercury-containing bulbs by September 2023. And Canada is on track to effectively phase out 
the manufacture of most ﬂuorescent lamps by the end of 2023 and ban the sale of most 
ﬂuorescent lamps by the end of 2026. 
‘ Data according to Maine DEP’s 2023 Annual Product Stewardship Report to the Legislature 
2 Data according to Appliance Standards Awareness Project: htt;gs:/.iappliance- 
standards.org* ’sitesfdefauit/ ﬁles/Maine_l .pdf and littps:/ ’/appliance-standardsorg/sitcs/defauitftiles/Maine __l .pdf 
3 httos:5/deavemiont.govfwastemanagement/solid/product~§tewardshi_p/mercuiy
We urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1814 as proposed to be amended so that 
Mainers also experience the beneﬁts of more energy-efficient, cost-effective, and less-toxic 
lighting here in Maine. And we are not alone, I’ve attached to my testimony an organizational 
sign-on letter of support for this important piece of environmental legislation. Thank you for 
your consideration of my comments, and I’d be happy to answer any questions.
Maine 
Clf E:r§;::ii:2.. M°i"°eR° €°"!°° 
M||][;gA3r $g1}'\g\!/?A\|F?§SH1P E i‘ 
“"‘° ACTION couNc|L Natural Resources Rivers 
*=*Fr.i§$* CONSERVANCY ‘J Council of Maine 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources: 
The undersigned organizations write to voice their support for LD 1814, An Act to Reduce Mercury In 
The Environment By Phasing Out Certain Fluorescent Light Bulbs. This mercury-containing lighting 
equipment can be easily and affordably replaced by much more energy-efficient, mercury-free LED 
lighting equipment. Phasing out ﬂuorescents is a proven mechanism to save families and businesses 
money on utility bills, protect public health, and decrease carbon emissions. 
All ﬂuorescent bulbs contain mercury, a potent neurotoxin that the World Health Organization counts as 
one of the top 10 most dangerous chemicals impacting public health. An estimated 75% of these bulbs are 
disposed of improperly, which leads to mercury emissions from Waste to energy facilities or landﬁll 
leachate , which pollutes the air we breathe and Water We drink. 
A 2022 study published jointly by the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy and Appliance 
Standards Awareness Project conﬁnned LEDs are now Widely available and provide the same or better 
lighting, longer product life, and much lower total cost than ﬂuorescents. 
If implemented, LD 1814 Would: 
0 Help l\/Iaine households and businesses save more than $20 million annually on their utility 
bills by 2030 
0 Prevent 178,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions per year by 2050, the equivalent of 
38,000 gasoline-powered cars driven for a year 
0 Avoid 45 pounds of mercury Waste from polluting our environment, enough to contaminate 2.2 
billion gallons of water 
In 2022, Vermont and California became the ﬁrst states to phase out the sale of most ﬂuorescent 
lightbulbs, and many other states are considering similar laws. Maine laws already regulate mercury- 
containing products, including ﬂuorescent light bulbs, because of their toxic nature. We can continue this 
effort to protect Maine from mercury pollution by passing LD 1814 and ensuring a transition from 
ﬂuorescents to LEDs. 
Sincerely, 
Appliance Standards Awareness Project 
Conservation Law Foundation 
Defend Our Health 
Maine Resource Recovery Association 
Maine Rivers 
Midcoast Conservancy 
National Stewardship Action Council 
Natural Resources Council of Maine
