TO:    EDUCATION & CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE 
 
FROM:  ERIC WADDELL, SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, KITTERY, ME 
 
DATE:  APRIL 12, 2023 
 
RE: LD 154 – AN ACT REGARDING SPECIAL EDUCATION FUNDING FOR SO-CALLED 
MINIMUM RECEIVER SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION UNITS 
 
 
On behalf of the citizens of Kittery and the Kittery School Committee, I am providing this 
written testimony in support of LD 154.   Kittery municipal school department serves 
approximately 1000 students who reside in Kittery.  Our FY23 budget is approximately $20 
million.  Historically, Kittery has received no subsidy from the State of Maine for regular 
education costs; as such, we are identified as a ‘minimum receiver’ based on the EPS funding 
formula.   
 
I cannot deny that the valuation of Kittery has grown remarkably over the past 10 years.  
According to data gathered from the District’s ED279, the town’s valuation has increased by 
approximately half a billion dollars since 2014.  Therefore, the local contribution for Kittery is 
well above the allocation year after year.   
 
The valuation of the town, however, does not tell the whole story.  Kittery is proud of the fact 
that its school district is home to the largest population of military-connected students of any 
SAU in Maine.  That represents 18% of the District’s student population.  It is no secret that our 
military families live on a very modest income.  A disproportionate piece of their income must 
be used to pay for housing in Kittery where demand for affordable housing is high and supply is 
remarkably low.  In other words, many of Kittery’s residents can barely afford the cost of 
housing within the town, and picking up nearly 88% of the cost of educating its K-12 students 
placing a remarkable burden on them.  
 
As a minimum receiver, Kittery receives about 8% of its total operating expenses from the State 
of Maine.  This subsidy currently represents 50% of the total cost of special education.  
Increasing that percentage would certainly help SAUs like Kittery who are feeling pressure from 
local taxpayers to cut expenses in order to lower the local burden on taxpayers.  The last 
increase of 5% (from 45% to 50%) came in FY21.  Ideally, this adjustment for minimum receivers 
would be even greater to help offset the burden on local taxpayers.   
 
I fully support LD 154.  Furthermore, I urge the Committee to overhaul the EPS funding formula 
to take into account factors other than local property valuation.  Median household income, for 
example, would paint a much more accurate of what a community can afford for its local 
contribution to education costs.   
 
 
 
 
Eric Waddell
Kittery School District
LD 154
TO:  EDUCATION & CULTURAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
FROM:ERIC WADDELL, SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, KITTERY, ME
DATE:APRIL 12, 2023
RE:LD 154 – AN ACT REGARDING SPECIAL EDUCATION FUNDING FOR 
SO-CALLED MINIMUM RECEIVER SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION UNITS
On behalf of the citizens of Kittery and the Kittery School Committee, I am providing
this written testimony in support of LD 154.   Kittery municipal school department 
serves approximately 1000 students who reside in Kittery.  Our FY23 budget is 
approximately $20 million.  Historically, Kittery has received no subsidy from the 
State of Maine for regular education costs; as such, we are identified as a ‘minimum 
receiver’ based on the EPS funding formula.  
I cannot deny that the valuation of Kittery has grown remarkably over the past 10 
years.  According to data gathered from the District’s ED279, the town’s valuation 
has increased by approximately half a billion dollars since 2014.  Therefore, the local 
contribution for Kittery is well above the allocation year after year.  
The valuation of the town, however, does not tell the whole story.  Kittery is proud of 
the fact that its school district is home to the largest population of military-connected 
students of any SAU in Maine.  That represents 18% of the District’s student 
population.  It is no secret that our military families live on a very modest income.  A 
disproportionate piece of their income must be used to pay for housing in Kittery 
where demand for affordable housing is high and supply is remarkably low.  In other 
words, many of Kittery’s residents can barely afford the cost of housing within the 
town, and picking up nearly 88% of the cost of educating its K-12 students placing a 
remarkable burden on them. 
As a minimum receiver, Kittery receives about 8% of its total operating expenses 
from the State of Maine.  This subsidy currently represents 50% of the total cost of 
special education.  Increasing that percentage would certainly help SAUs like Kittery 
who are feeling pressure from local taxpayers to cut expenses in order to lower the 
local burden on taxpayers.  The last increase of 5% (from 45% to 50%) came in 
FY21.  Ideally, this adjustment for minimum receivers would be even greater to help 
offset the burden on local taxpayers.  
I fully support LD 154.  Furthermore, I urge the Committee to overhaul the EPS 
funding formula to take into account factors other than local property valuation.  
Median household income, for example, would paint a much more accurate of what a 
community can afford for its local contribution to education costs.  

