Karen  Matso
Kittery Maine
LD 154
My name is Karen Matso and I live at 31 Goose Point, Kittery Point ME. 
I plan to testify tomorrow at 1:00.  Just in case I have technological difficulties 
tomorrow, I am writing in, in support of LD 154.  I am a member of the Kittery 
School Committee, an educator who has worked in Kittery schools and currently, I 
deliver professional development in schools all over New England.  
As a minimal receiver town, Kittery school district struggles to fund necessary 
supports for students.  Student needs are growing, particularly in the area of social 
emotional health.  To keep our students safe, and meet their emotional needs so that 
they can learn, we must expand our counseling and guidance personnel, and building 
leadership, resources for which, have been hard to find in our budget because of our 
minimal receivership status.  
Our taxes are being raised each year to support our school system but many families 
in our community are lower income families that have inherited homes that they could
no longer afford today.  These families cannot afford the increased tax expenditures 
needed to provide for our children in schools.  
Our school enrollment has largely stayed the same, keeping the state's formula for 
what Kittery should be able to contribute for our schools  somewhat static while the 
needs of students has increased.  Also, while we value all of our students from the 
naval shipyard, it is my understanding that the costs to educate those students is the 
same as all students but the reimbursement from the federal government that we get to
support those students is less than what we gain from students not living in the 
shipyard.   
Our FY 2024 school budget is $21.2m. From what I understand, the Funding Formula
calculates the Kittery school budget at $13.4m or 63% of its actual budget. The 
calculated state contribution to our 21.2m dollar budget is $1.7m or just 8.1% of the 
total budget.   That leaves a very heavy burden on Kittery Tax payers.  We have a 
very strong school committee and an involved community who cares about education.
Our teachers are paid nearly at the bottom of the local pay scale and we are trying to 
rectify that but it is hard with our current budget constraints.  We have just completed 
a very strong 10 year vision for Kittery schools and we hope to be able to fund the 
changes we'd like to see for our students and the school community.  
Please pass this bill to help add needed funds to the Kittery school budget. 
