Nicole Grohoski P.O. Box 1732 '- Eli?A 
Senator, District 7 Ellsworth, ME 04605 
‘Wa 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 154, “An Act Regarding Special Education Funding for 
So-called Minimum Receiver School Administration Units” 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
12 April 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, I am Senator Nicole Grohoski and I represent Senate District 7, most of 
Hancock County. Thank you for providing me the opportunity to support LD 154: An Act 
Regarding Special Education Funding for So-called Minimum Receiver School Administration 
Units. 
I am supportive of the sponsor’s amendment, which increases the minimum state share ofa 
school administrative unit's special education costs under the essential programs and sen/ices 
school funding formula from 50% to 55% starting in ﬁscal year 2024-25. 
This modest increase would be a huge help to communities all around the state. There is also 
precedent for the state providing greater support for special education costs, at 84% in the 
mid-2000s. 
I serve schools who receive funding from the state to provide essential programs and services 
(EPS), and schools who do not, the so-called minimum receiver schools. I understand that the 
EPS formula is designed to provide equitable funding for education statewide and am not here to 
advocate for changes to that formula. This legislation instead looks to support school districts 
with the costs associated with the special education services that they are required (for good 
reason) by federal law to provide. 
Many of the minimum-receiver schools in my district are in small towns with populations under 
2,000 people. They have school populations in the 100-200 student range. Some property owners 
in these towns are Wealthy and others are very much not. In fact, some of my minimum-receiver 
districts receive additional funding because of income levels. 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * l I Y 711 
Nico1e.Grohosl<i@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.maine.gov/senate
When a student with special education needs moves into schools like these, the cost of education 
can increase dramatically because the cost of supporting that student is a greater percent of the 
school’s overall budget. This cost can be incurred unexpectedly during an ongoing ﬁscal year, 
which is challenging to accommodate within the approved school budget. Many schools have 
contingency funds for this reason, to soften the timing and ﬁnancial effects of providing these 
services. 
Each community is asked to shoulder via their property taxes what is, in my view, a cost that 
should be spread statewide. While many property owners can absorb this cost, others struggle to. 
When school budgets increase sharply or unexpectedly, people look for the reasons why. The sad 
reality is this — in small towns, it’s not hard to ﬁgure out and families and students can be blamed 
or ﬁnd themselves ostracized for something that is not their fault. Sometimes, school and 
municipal leaders have tough conversations about cutting other programs, which can further 
exacerbate hard feelings. 
I have seen this happen in towns I serve, and it is a policy failure. Principally, the failure lies at 
the feet of the federal govemment, but in the absence of federal action, this is a state problem. 
This bill is a step in the right direction to correct this failure and help so many of our schools 
with costs that are largely out of their control. 
Thank you for your attention and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
2
