 
 
 
 
 
  
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Support of  
 
LD 154 - An Act Regarding Special Education Funding for So -called Minimum Receiver School 
Administration Units  
 
April 12 , 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee , my name is Rebecca Lambert and I am providing testimony in support of  
LD 154 on behalf of Maine Municipal  Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC). For reference, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.   
 Special education costs are rising each year an d funding  these programs has  become increasingly more 
challenging. Contributing to the struggle overall are the increase s in the number of special education 
students, more specialized programs, and reduced state and federal funding.  
 
Federal funding in pa rticular has been flat funded since 2005, and with the most recent rate of inflation, 
this would mean that federal funding has decreased significantly, with the need only increasing. Small and more rural communities suffer increased financial hardships relating to special education costs as students with special needs move in and out of their schools. Likewise, low subsidy districts fund more of their special education costs than other districts.  
 
The bill before you would increase special education funding  from 50% to 55% in fiscal year 2022 -2023 
and succeeding years. This additional funding would help many districts across the state  fulfill their 
financial requirement to provide education to persons with disabilities.  
 
MMA is also supportive of the part of the bill that directs the Department of Education to examine the 
methodologies used to determine when a school administrative unit is a so -called minimum receiver. 
Continual examination of the funding formula to determine its equity is always supported by  local leaders.  
 
Thank you for your time and for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.     
