. BOARDS Tele hone: (207 622-3473 Fax: 207)626-2968 
ASSOCIATIONP.
_ 
PUBLIC EDUCATION /~0v00\TES Webs“ Ww“""’Sm“Web'C°'"H MaineScl\oolSuper-inlcndcntsAssocialiun 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF 
L.D. 154 
AN ACT REGARDING SPECIAL EDUCATION FUNDING FOR SO-CALLED 
MINIMUM RECEIVER SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION UNITS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in support of L.D. 154. 
The growing number of “minimum receiver ” districts continue to face difficult challenges in funding the 
necessary and desired offerings of education instruction for their students. As minimum receivers, there are 
limited sources of revenue that come to these districts through state subsidy. Even though property valuation 
would provide the appearance that a community can provide an education for their students without assistance 
through General Purpose Aid, residents living in these areas often are on ﬁxed incomes with little 
discretionary income or be families that qualify for free and reduced school meals, thus not able to pay 
property taxes that support the quality of education desired by the minimum receiver communities. It is indeed 
a challenge for these families. 
The one area where the state does contribute to the funding of the minimum receiver schools is to reimburse 
special education expenditures from two years prior. In 2004, legislation was passed for the state to pay 55% 
of state education costs, a parallel provision was for the state to pay 100% of special education costs for 
minimum receiver districts. This has not occurred. While it began at 84% in 2005-2006 and continued there 
for three ﬁscal years, it bottomed out in 2011-2012 at 30%. Since then, there has been a steady increase to this 
percentage rising to the proposed 55% for 2022-23 (though I think that should read 2023-2024). MS SA and 
MSBA support this continued increase. 
A more signiﬁcant part of this bill is to have the Department of Education examine the methodologies used to 
determine when a school district is determined a “minimum receiver ” . All factors need to be explored along 
with the trends that have been experienced in recent years. The request is to determine a means to reduce or 
resolve issues contributing to school districts becoming minimum receivers — or ways for districts to receive 
greater funding through General Purpose Aid. 
Steven W. Bailey Eilgen E, King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Execugive Direclm
