*5”?
» 
& W STATE OF IWAINE 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE ml‘ AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 Ol\l‘lC6I (107) IS7~ I 4-l(l 
AMYBARATA Cell: (Z(l7l333-ISI7 
A§%I%TA\THOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER F3“ (207) 337-I44‘) 
E - Mail: A1n)' ..~\1"a1a;{1Iegislalummiine 20\ 
Testimony on 
L.D. 679, “An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by Tenants" 
Presented by 
Representative Amy B. Arata 
District 104 
Judiciary Committee 
Thursday, March 23, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing~Committee on Judiciary:' 
I am State Representative Amy Arata, and I proudly represent District 104, New Gloucester 
and a portion of Gray. It is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of speaking to 
the merits of L.D. 679, “An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by Tenants." 
I have been a landlord in Maine since 2007, and as an animal lover, I am certainly 
sympathetic to the situations in which an animal may be abandoned. I hope my experience can 
assist you as you consider what is the most humane way to handle this. 
Last October, a tenant suddenly died in one of my apartments. He had listed his daughters 
as references on his application six years prior, and I was able to give their phone numbers to 
the officer. This made me realize that I needed a better system of keeping track of emergency 
contacts. Email is the primary way I contact tenants, so I emailed 42 tenants to ask for 
emergency contact information. Of these, only 17 responded. Therefore, one problem with 
this bill is that tenants may not want to provide you with the contact information of an 
authorized person. 
When the officer called to tell me that my tenant was deceased, I immediately went to the 
apartment. The tenant's body was still there. Officers and the funeral service employees went 
in and out of the apartment. This tenant didn't have pets, but it would have been difficult to 
keep an animal inside the apartment if it tried to escape. If the animal were protective of the 
body or dangerous, it would have put me at risk to try to confine it. An officer was required to 
stay with the body until it was picked up, and a dangerous animal could have harmed him as 
well. Instead, a professional animal handler should be called immediately. 
In the case of an abandoned animal, it may have been without food or water for some time. 
The landlord would have an ethical obligation to try to feed or water it rather than allow it to go 
Over, please
another 24 hours without care. if this animal were territorial or vicious, it would be dangerous 
to enter the premises. lfthe animal needed veterinarian care, it would be best to call the 
authorities immediately. 
Also, some landlords live out of the area or may not be reachable at all times of day. Who 
would be responsible to care for the animal in this case? 
Tenants don't just keep dogs and cats. They may have-livestock, reptiles, rodents, spiders, 
or other types of animals that are difficult to care for, and that some landlords have phobias of 
A l appreciate the intent of this bill, but animal control should be called when an animal is 
abandoned, and hopefully they will hold the animal long enough for it to be claimed by the 
proper person. 
I'd be happy to answer any questions.
