1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
March 23, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 679 An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by Tenants 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs are at stake. 
Anyone who has ever developed a friendship with a dog, cat, horse or other 
animal understands the benefit of having that relationship in their lives. It 
can be a bond that words cannot adequately explain. If you know, you know.   
At other times in our culture there would be no need for this bill. If a pet 
outlived their human, a family or friend would adopt the pet or find the pet 
another home. Unfortunately, families are smaller now and often live far 
away and we out-live our friends. For many older adults, their animal friends 
may be the only “family” they have left. And if they out-live that animal 
friend their landlord is left with the responsibility of finding a place for the 
animal to go. This bill will help solve a problem that is all too common and 
will bring some certainty to landlords willing to accept the task of relocating 
the surviving animal. We support this bill but we do have one concern. 
It seems reasonable to ask the tenant to provide the name of someone that 
will be responsible for relocating their animal friend “just in case”. 
However, it may be a difficult thing to do for a person who is virtually alone 
in life and does not want or is not capable of making such an end-of-life type 
decision. If that is difficult to believe, please consider that many people with  
much better life circumstances do not have an advance directive for their 
2own health care. We expect that most people will provide the requested 
contact, but some will not. Despite that, a landlord may come to know the 
name of a friend or relative. Perhaps it would be prudent to anticipate both  
circumstances. The proposed statue provides a default source that the 
landlord can contact if a designated individual does not collect the missing 
human’s animal friend. Language could be added following proposed 
Section 2 as Section 2-A. That new section would make those default 
resources mentioned in proposed Section 4 available in case no individual is 
designated or is otherwise known to the landlord. Here is some language for 
your consideration:
  
2. Designation of authorized person. A landlord shall request, and a tenant 
keeping an animal in a rental unit shall provide and routinely update, the 
name and contact information of a person or persons the tenant authorizes to 
enter the tenant's rental unit to retrieve the animal if the animal has become 
an abandoned animal or an unclaimed animal.
2-A If no written contact information is provided or updated but is otherwise 
know by the landlord, the landlord shall proceed as provided in Section 3 or 
Section 4. If the landlord lacks contact information and the landlord 
determines that the animal is abandoned or unclaimed, the landlord may 
immediately remove the animal for placement in an animal shelter or release 
the animal to an animal control officer or police officer. 
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to share our thoughts with you.  
         
