                                         TESTIMONY OF MEG EPSTEIN
   In SUPPORT of LD 679 “An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by Tenants”
                                             Committee on Judiciary  
                                                     March 23, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Meg Epstein and I live in 
Phoenix, AZ. It is through my personal experience that I help create the law you are 
discussing here today. 
In July of 2020, my 27-year old cousin, Matthew Meisner, was senselessly murdered by 
two teenagers in Tempe, AZ. Sadly, the situation became even worse when we were 
prevented by his landlord from rescuing the three senior cats Matthew left behind in his 
apartment.
Can you imagine your companion animal, who depends on you for absolutely everything, 
waiting patiently, for days, getting hungrier and thirstier by the minute, wondering why 
you-its loving caretaker has not returned? Your surviving friends and family want to 
come in and rescue your animals, but your landlord can be held liable for allowing 
anyone to take them if there is no designated person to do so. Matthew‘s landlord was 
just simply following the law when he prevented his cats, Hunter, QT and Skitty from 
being rescued, because Arizona law requires a 15 day waiting period to enter the premise 
when the tenant has become deceased or incapacitated. And whereas animals are 
considered legally “property”, like a piece of furniture, no exception was made to rescue 
the pets in these situations. 
Surprisingly, the story did have a happy ending. The lead detective in Matthew’s murder 
case, despite having a little time and resources to do so, spoke with his apartment 
managers, and got them to release Matthew’s cats to his friend’s custody. But his cats 
went four days without food or water, and Hunter was on death’s door, stiff, catatonic 
and barely breathing. Fortunately he was taken to a vet in time to save his life. 
I was obviously very distraught this happened Matthew’s cats and did not want it to 
happen to any other pets who are left behind when their owner becomes incapacitated or 
unexpectedly dead. So I engaged my parents’ State Representative and we worked a 
bipartisan bill successfully through the Arizona House and Senate. On April 1, 2021 
House Bill 2507 was signed by Governor Doug Ducey, and amends the Arizona 
Residential Landlord and Tenant Act.
This was a significant effort on my part, and was very excited to see Maine coming 
forward with similar legislation and helped advise on this bill. I strongly support it and 
urge you to vote “Ought to pass” on LD 679 “An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by 
Tenants.” I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
