TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  - IN SUPPORT OF   
L.D. 679 "An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by Tenants ” 
Committee On Judiciary  
March  23, 202 3 
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee : 
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in support  of L.D. 679 "An Act Regarding Animals Abandoned by Tenants” .  This 
bill, if passed, would provide a safety net for pets that are left behind in/on a rental property, should the caretaker pass 
away, become h ospitalized unexpectedly or abandon the animals in the process of vacating the property.  
 
This is an issue that impacts Maine , especially now that the housing market has become so challenging .  People are being 
forced to make decisions between their pets a nd having a roof over their heads.  Additionally, Maine has a  rapidly  aging 
population, which means our residents often become hospitalized or pass away suddenly with no plan in place for their pets. 
L.D. 679 would create a process to help landlords take q uick action on behalf of the  pets left behind, while at the same time 
protecting their property  from damage  and themselves from liability issues,  
 
Earlier this week, a six-year-old German Shepherd was rescued from a rental home in Maine.  He had been with his family 
since he was a puppy, but they moved out and left him behind, without notifying anyone.  Thankfully , one of the neighbors 
was paying attention  and r ealized quickly that the dog was abandoned .  The neighbor  was able to contact the previous 
tenant, access the  dog and facilitate the transfer  of the dog to a local rescue group.  If it were not for that neighbor, who 
knows how long it would have been before the dog was discovered?  Or once it was discovered, how long it would have 
taken the out -of-state landlord t o access the property.  It would have helped in this instance to have an emergency contact 
available.  
 
While the language of L.D. 679 may need to be tweaked to allow for a quicker process from landlords, the need for this 
legislation is unquestionable.   The committee might consider amending  the language  to streamline the process as follows : 
 
1) Allow  the landlord to both transfer the animal(s) to the contracting  animal shelter/ animal control facility and communicate 
with the emergency co ntact immediately upon discovering the animals in need.  
 
2)  Require the holding facility  (shelter/rescue)  to keep the animal for the stray reclaim period  already in statute  (or 48 hours 
for species not covered in the statute)  to give  the emergency contact time to make the necessary arrangements.  
 
Animals are considered as property under the law, but are living, breathing, sentient beings and need to be  protected  as 
such.   
 
Thank you for your consideration.    Please vote “ Ought to pass” on L.D. 679. 
 
Susanna Ric her  
Portland, ME   
2 | LD 595 Testimony ( S. Richer)  Comments from Susanna Richer  
Proposed rule changes for Chapter 702: Rules for the Low Income Spay/Neuter Program  
January 28, 2023  
 
 
 
Dear Director Steciuk,  
 
Thank you for considering my comments regarding the proposed rule changes for Chapter 702: Rules for the Low Income 
Spay/Neuter Program. This public program is intended to be accessible to our most vulnerable populations which means it 
should have as few b arriers as possible. From my perspective, the original program model accomplished this goal in theory, 
but was not efficient due to poor administration. As a result, I believe the focus of the Department should be on finding an 
appropriate administrator, n ot making significant changes to how the program operates.  
 
The proposed rule changes raise some red flags for me. My overall concerns regarding the proposed language changes are 
as follows:  
 
1) the proposed language creates unnecessary barriers for the public to access the program due to the transition to an 
event -based spay/neuter model and away from an individual, appointment -based voucher system.  
 
2) the proposed language would make it impossible to find an eligible state -based non -profit organizatio n to operate the 
program due to untenable qualification and operational requirements.  
 
I have included my detailed language concerns below.  
 
Section 2 – Eligibility  
 
A.4 – “Make a co -payment determined on an annual basis by the Commissioner. The require ment for a co -payment may be 
waived if the Director of the Animal Welfare Program and/or the Administrator determines that its payment by the owner or 
keeper of the animal would create a financial hardship…  
”  
It does not make sense to remove the program a dministrator’s ability to waive the co -payment given that the intent of L.D. 
1828 was to remove the administration of the program from AWP. If any change is made to this subsection, the decision -
making regarding the co -pay should be left up to the administ rator - not assigned to the Director of AWP.  
 
C. “Dogs and cats imported or transferred from out of state to a licensed or unlicensed shelter or rescue organization are 
not eligible for participation in the program.”  
 
By adding language specific to barri ng animals from licensed or unlicensed shelters and rescue organizations from using 
the program, the proposed language inadvertently allows dogs/cats privately purchased from out of state (online, from a 
breeder, pet shop, or individual) to be eligible for  the low cost spay / neuter program. I am not sure why this change was 
made as the original/unamended language for this section accomplishes the goal of excluding from the HFM program all pet 
dogs and cats imported into the state including, but not limited  to, companion animals imported for adoption by Maine 
shelters and rescue organizations.  
3 | LD 595 Testimony ( S. Richer)  Section 3 - Veterinarian Participation  
 
It appears that the annual application, quarterly reporting and co -pay collection requirements outlined in this section will 
prove burdensome to already overextended, understaffed veterinary hospitals, possibly leading to less participation - not 
more - even with advanced payment and higher rates of pay,  
 
Additionally, this section reinforces the intentional move towards an event -based spay/neuter program and away from 
issuing individual vouchers to Maine low -income pet parents for timely use at their local veterinarian.  
 
Although large spay/neuter events are an excellent way to help control unwanted litters and support healthy pet populations, 
these events are not always timely, convenient, or accessible to many of our low -income families, especially in the more 
rural part s of the state. BOTH options are needed in Maine – spay/neuter events and individual vouchers for use by 
appointment at a local vet clinic. The existing Help Fix ME Program currently allows for both options, thus, when properly 
administered, supporting low  barrier and timely intervention. I have concerns that the proposed changes to this section will 
make the Help Fix ME program unavailable to many families that need close and quick access to these services,  
 
Section 4 - Program Administration  
 
A. This se ction of the proposed rules requires the organization that administers the program have “experience managing 
programs of similar funding on a state -wide basis.” This language essentially disqualifies every possible Maine -based non -
profit as a program admin istrator. We are fortunate to have multiple dedicated and experienced spay/neuter organizations in 
Maine that would be excellent choices to run this program, but this language excludes them all…leaving AWP (or perhaps 
an out -of-state organization?) as the only qualifying party to administer the program. This language seems to go against the 
intent of L.D. 1828.  
 
C.. “In avoidance of any conflict of interest, Tthe administrator of the program shall not be eligible to receive payments or 
vouchers from the fu nd, with the exception of the administration fee not to exceed 15%.”  
 
Although, I understand that oversight of fund dispersal is necessary to maintain transparency and avoid misappropriation, 
the updated language in this section that prohibits the program  administrator from receiving vouchers and participating in 
the program works against the intended goal of low -barrier statewide accessibility as it will prevent qualified veterinary 
organizations, such as the Community Low Cost Spay Neuter Clinic  in Topsham, or a Maine shelter with an existing 
spay/neuter clinic, from applying to administer the program.  
 
The bottom line is that this program is already well -designed  to meet the spay/neuter needs of Maine’s unique, widely -
dispersed, low -income demographic – it only needs efficient administration to be fully successful. While it is apparent that a 
good deal of thought has gone into the proposed changes and the HFM prog ram’s redesign, if these rules pass as written, 
the result may be disastrous from client accessibility, provider participation and administrator recruitment perspectives.  
 
Thank you for your consideration and for the incredible work you do on behalf of Ma ine animals.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, Maine  
