TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: February 28, 2023 
LD 64] — “An Act to Combat Hunger by Creating an Income Tax Credit for 
Businesses Engaged in Food Production for Donations to Qualified 
Organizations ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee —~ good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 641, 
“An Act to Combat Hunger by Creating an Income Tax Credit for Businesses 
Engaged in Food Production for Donations to Qualiﬁed Organizations. ” 
This bill proposes, for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, an 
income tax credit for certain taxpayers engaged in commercial agricultural 
production, commercial aquacultural production, or commercial ﬁshing. The 
credit is equal to 10% of the amount claimed by the taxpayer as a deduction under 
the Internal Revenue Code (“the Code”), Section 170 for food donations to an 
organization described in the Code, Section 170(c)(2) or (3) — certain corporations, 
trusts, community chests, funds, or foundations, or organizations of veterans — that 
is located in Maine and that provides free food to low-income individuals. The 
credit may not exceed $5,000. 
A review of similar credits in five other states indicates that a very small 
number of taxpayers receive a beneﬁt from these types of credits, and the tax
1
savings is minimal. It’s not clear if the beneﬁt of such a credit outweighs the costs 
of compliance and tax administration. A program administered through the Maine 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry may be a more efficient 
method of providing these beneﬁts. 
Currently, for federal and Maine income tax purposes, taxpayers who utilize 
itemized deductions or claim business expenses may deduct food donations made 
to qualiﬁed organizations, thereby reducing taxable income by a portion of the fair 
market value of the food donated. Therefore, the donations under the Code, 
Section 170 are already deductible for federal and Maine income tax purposes and 
would result in a duplication of beneﬁts. 
The Administration notes the following technical concerns: 
0 The requirement that the qualiﬁed donee use the donations “for the 
care of individuals who are ill, needy or malnourished ” is inconsistent 
with the term “low-income individual. ” The terms ill, needy, and 
malnourished are not deﬁned by the bill. 
0 The bill identiﬁes qualiﬁed donees as described in the Code, Section 
170(c)(2) or (3). Therefore, donations to state agencies and political 
subdivisions of the state as described under the Code, Section 
170(c)(1) would not qualify. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of approximately 
$50,000 per year based on information from other states with a similar credit. 
Estimated administrative costs are $33,000 during ﬁscal year 2024 - 2025 
for one-time computer programming costs to add new income subtraction 
modiﬁcation lines to the corporate, individual, and ﬁduciary income tax retums,
2
update check stub messages and notices, make federal tape changes, and perform 
system testing. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Com1nittee ’s questions.
TAX LEGISLATION REVIEW VVORKSHEET 
Biii Objectives and Tax Policy 
(1) Does the Bill's drafted text and underlying tax policy objectiveis) appear 
to align with each other? 
(2) Similar legislation pending or program in place? 
ls there other tax legislation, state spending or other government programs 
that have the same purposes as the tax legislation? 
List: 
Existing deduction for charitable contributions 
(2) Coordinated? 
Are those additional programs appropriately coordinated with the tax 
legislation and complementary or duplicative? 
(3) Program improvements? 
Are there any opportunities to improve the effectiveness of the tax legislation 
in meeting its purposes? lZI Yes 
l:l Clarify 
Yes 
El No 
Complementary 
IX] Duplicative 
Improvements 
suggested 
Administration and Compliance 
(1) Strong framework? 
Are there adequate mechanisms to ensure that intended beneficiaries receive 
any tax benefits and comply with any requirements? 
(2) Cost/intended tax benefits balance for tax administration? 
Are the administrative costs and taxpayer compliance burdens associated with 
the tax legislation proportionate to taxpayer benefit? 
(3) Tax administration improvements? 
Are there any opportunities to reduce the administrative and compliance 
burden ofthe tax legislation while still meeting its purposes? Yes 
II] No 
II! Proportionate 
lZl Disproportionate 
El Improvements 
suggested
