District 150: Eliot, Kittery (part) and South Berwick (part)  
  
March 28 , 2023  
 
Testimony of Rep. Michele Meyer in support of  
LD 641, An Act to Combat Hunger by Creating an Income Tax 
Credit for Businesses Engaged in Food Production for Donations to 
Qualified Organizations  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Taxation Committee, I am Michele 
Meyer. I represent House District 150, which includes my hometown of Eliot and parts of both 
Kittery and South Berwick. Thank you for the oppo rtunity to come before you today to testify in 
support of LD 641, An Act to Combat Hunger by Creating an Income Tax Credit for 
Businesses Engaged in Food Production for Donations to Qualified Organizations , which I 
am proud to cosponsor.  
 
Roughly 16% of Ma ine’s children are food insecure.1 One in four Maine children is at risk for 
hunger, and more than two -thirds of them do not qualify for public assistance.2 These are  
troubling statistic s, and their impact goes far beyond the rumbling of an empty belly.  According 
to Feeding America, children who do not have enough to eat are more likely to be hospitalized 
and have various  preventable  health conditions, are at risk of struggling in school and more often 
experience developmental delays.3  
 
By addressing fo od insecurity and poverty more broadly, we can keep children safe and healthy 
and their families strong and stable. I know we all share a commitment to ensuring that Maine 
kids are able to flourish. For me, it has been the number one focus of my work in th e Legislature.  
 
                                                 
1 The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Kids Count Data Center: https://datacenter.kidscount.org /data/tables/11448 -
childhood -food-insecurity -by-county -2020?loc=21&loct=2#detailed/2/any/false/574/any/22105,22106 .  
2 Maine Department of Education, Food Security: https://www.maine.gov/doe/ index.php/foodsecurity .  
3 Feeding America: https://www.feedingamerica.org/hunger -in-america/child -hunger -facts .   
Michele Meyer  
58 Odiorne Lane  
 Eliot, ME 03903  
Phone:  (207)  438-9197  
Michele.Meyer@legislature.maine.gov
  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287-1400  
 

District 150: Eliot, Kittery (part) and South Berwick (part)  
 There are many strategies to help relieve  food insecurity, and it will take a multifaceted approach 
to end hunger in Maine. This legislation represents one important way of strengthening our 
response to this problem . By incentivizing donat ions to our food banks and pantries, we can 
increase support for the organizations who are on the front lines, working to provide children and 
families with the nutrition they need to be healthy and to succeed at school, work and home.  
 
By providing an in come tax credit to Maine’s commercial farmers, fishers and aquaculturists, we 
can increase access to nutritionally dense , fresh food available to families experiencing food 
insecurity through the food banks and pantries who serve them.  
 
Ending hunger interrupts generational cycles of harm and trauma and opens doors to opportunity 
and pros perity for the people, families  and communities of Maine.  
 
Our hunger relief organizations are a key resource for families in need. Please help to support 
them by voti ng in favor of LD 641. Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to 
answer any  questions you may have for me.  
