\' 
1 /I lg
A
A 
,\ ,_M.=~‘§1" \ , 
ggﬁmé. 
David LaFQuntain THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 16 13 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Dave LaF0untain introducing 
LD 1828, An Act Regarding Enhanced 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering PointsA 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Dave LaFountain. I have the honor 
of representing the good people of Senate District 16, which is the towns of Albion, Fairﬁeld, 
Oakland, Waterville, and my hometown of Winslow. I am here to introduce LD 1828, “An Act 
Regarding Enhanced 9-l-l Public Safety Answering Points.” 
For many years, prior to 2007, the Waterville Police Department Dispatch Center was a Public 
Safety Answering Point (PSAP), receiving 9-l-l calls for Waterville, Oakland, Winslow, and 
Delta Ambulance. Receiving 9-1-1 calls directly at the city dispatch center allowed trained 
dispatchers, familiar with the community, to dispatch the correct service quickly and efﬁciently 
to the emergency. 
In addition, this would create less of a backlog at other PSAPs, increasing the public service to 
our citizens and the citizens of other communities in the area. While we do have to be ﬁscally 
responsible to our citizens and develop a fair rate structure we would potentially receive a 
signiﬁcant source of revenue as our current customers would likely ﬁnd us an affordable, quality 
option for PSAP services. This would then share among our customer communities the cost of 
having quality E911 services. 
The beneﬁts of reinstating the Waterville Regional Communications Center as a PSAP include 
reducing fragmentation of our city’s 911 calls created by the original consolidation. Further, the 
WRCC is the only dispatch center in Kennebec County to retain Emergency Medical Dispatch 
and Emergency Fire Dispatch functions, which are a staple of PSAP services. These functions 
will be paid for by the ESCB if Waterville becomes a PSAP. 
We are at a turning point with our 9-1-1 communications. As a former ﬁre chief, I know that 
when you call for help, you expect a timely response from our dedicated ﬁrst responders. This 
will allow dispatchers and ﬁrst responders to do their jobs to protect the people they serve. 
I thank the committee for their time and allowing me to present this important bill, and I’m 
happy to answer any questions you may have to the best of my ability. 
State House: (207) 2874515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free: 1-8()0-423-6900 * TTY: 7/! 
David.LaF ‘ 0z1m'ain@legislature.znainagov * Web Site.‘ legislature.maine.g0v/sencrfe
