its ,_’§_,,_ 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear' 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission J 
In Support of _‘ 
LD 1828, An Act Regarding Enhanced 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering Points 
- 
May 9, 2023 7‘ 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee . 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Maria Jacques, Director of the 
Emergency Services Communications Bureau (Bureau), testifying in support of LD 1828, An Act - 
Regarding Enhanced 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering Points, on behalf of the Maine Public Utilities 
Commission (Commission). 
LD 1828 provides some additional tools for the Bureau to manage Public Safety ‘Answering Points 
(PSAPs). A PSAP is deﬁned as a facility with enhanced 9-l-1 capability, operated on a 24-hour basis, 
assigned the responsibility of receiving 9-1-l calls and, as appropriate, directly dispatching emergency 
services or, through transfer routing or relay routing, passing 9-1-1 calls to public or private safety 
agencies. Currently there are 24 PSAPs in Maine--- eight municipal, 13 county and three state. 
Current law] requires each municipality that does not have a PSAP to contract with an entity that does 
have a PSAP, which may be the Department of Public Safety (DPS). If a municipality without a PSAP 
does not enter into such an agreement, DPS shall serve as the PSAP for that municipalityland the 
municipality shall pay the department for the provision of those services. 
Historically, this process of allowing municipal choice and having a default PSAP has worked well. 
However, in January 2023, l6 towns in Kennebec County received notice from their ‘PSAP that starting 
July 1, 2023, it would no longer be providing PSAP -service to these municipalities. This short notice 
has left these towns scrambling to ﬁnd PSAP services by July 1, 2023, which is particularly diﬁicult 
considering that most PSAPs are currently experiencing severe stafﬁng shortages. Seven towns in the 
greater Winthrop area were able to ﬁnd services through Androscoggin County Regional 
Communications Center (RCC), but for the other nine communities in the greater Waterville area, there 
are no options, including through the default option of DPS, which is short staffed as well. 
A potential solution is to make Waterville Police Department Communications a PSAP. Waterville 
currently supports at least some emergency dispatch services for the nine towns. While the 
Commission is supportive of the plan, the statute does not clearly give us the ability to add a PSAP. The 
Commission requested this after deadline bill to create the necessary tools to address this situation and 
to put some safeguards in place to prevent this type of situation in the future. 2 
1 
25 l\/IRSA § 2923 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207)287-3831 (VOICE) TFY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony —LD 1828 May 9, 2023 
The bill has 3 speciﬁc sections: . 
Section 1 of the bill requires a PSAP to provide the Bureau notice at least one year prior to 
discontinuing service to a municipality unless the Bureau authorizes a shorter period for notiﬁcation. 
Currently, there is no notice requirement. A minimum of one year is needed to ensure a safe transition 
of PSAP services for impacted communities. This section also establishes a ﬁne of $500 for violation 
of this section. 
Section 2 speciﬁcally authorizes the Bureau to establish an additional PSAP uponi a determination that 
it is necessary to ensureypublic safety and access to 9-1-1 services. Current law establishes a goal of 
having between 16 and 24 PSAPs and only includes a process for a decrease in the number of PSAPS. 
The statute is silent regarding adding a new PSAP. Having clear authority to establish a new PSAP 
when necessary to ensure public safety and access to E-9-l~l services will address the current situation 
and, if necessary,' enable swift action in the future. For example, with the current situation, DPS is not 
able to take on additional responsibility due to severe staffing shortages. Adding a PSAP in Waterville 
would provide a stable solution for those nine towns that already receive dispatch services from that 
center. Waterville is supportive of this plan. .S 
Section 3 requires the Commission to conduct a study assessing Whether PSAPs_can be more 
eﬁiciently managed to ensure stability of the system. Clearly, the expectation that DPS could serve asa 
reliable backstop has not been borne out and staffing has been a challenge at many locations. It is 
important to assess whether changes could be made to improve stability for this essential service. Thep 
Commission would be required to report back to the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology the results of the study and any recommended legislation.-The committee would be 
authorized to report out legislation to the 1315‘ Legislature in 2024. - 
Costs for the additional PSAP and the study will come from the dedicated E-9-l-1 Fund reserve balance 
and would not require any new funds., 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session.
2
