1 
1' 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002" 
J (20-7) 287-1400 
Allison Hepler TTYZ MAINE RELAY 711 
417 Montsweag Rd.' 
Woolwich, ME 04579 
Phone: (207) 319-4396 
Allison.Hepler@legislaturemaine. gov 
April 6, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Allison Hepler 
presenting 
LD 1180, An Act to Add an Exception to the Law Regarding Intermediate Driver's 
Licenses Regarding Passengers 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Good aftemoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Transportation 
Committee. My name is Allison Hepler, and I represent the towns of Arrowsic, Georgetown, 
Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich. I am pleased to present LD 1180, An Act to Add an 
Exception to the Law Regarding Intermediate Driver's Licenses Regarding Passengers. 
The idea for this bill came from a conversation with a parent last summer, but I’ve since talked 
about this with other parents who have busy lives, live down long peninsulas, live in school 
districts that lack after-school transportation, and have young drivers in the family. 
I am not a parent, and I have been a driver for a very long time. l’ll spare you any “when I wasa 
teenager . . . .” stories, but I think we can all agree that teenagers today come in all varieties. We 
know that many are occupied with part-time jobs after school, and sports activities that keep 
them busy after school and weekends. And we know that many are responsible and are good 
students and cautious drivers.- 
This bill would allow young drivers to drive their peers to events, to school, to jobs without 
waiting the 270 days currently required of new drivers under an “Intermediate License” if they 
have a job and if they have a safe driver endorsement on their automobile liability insurance. 
This Intermediate License is aimed at drivers under 18 and establishes restrictions on who can be 
passengers — siblings only — and when they are permitted to drive._ 
Under this bill, parents who have jobs and whose kids need to get somewhere could coordinate 
their child going with their peer. The relevant restrictions on Intermediate Licenses and 
designated individuals a licensee holder could drive were created in 2003. There have beena 
nmnber of changes since then that warrant responsible teens being able to drive their peers. 
Families increasingly require two working parents or are single-parent households. Teens are 
busier than ever, as the number of opportunities available continue to grow and college entrance 
requirements become more rigorous. 
District 49: Airowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich
I am open to feedback on how to best demonstrate a teen is responsible enough to drive their 
peers, aside from having a job and a safe driver endorsement on their automobile liability 
insurance, but believe that providing this opportunity — just 270 days earlier — in limited 
circtunstance would expand students ’ access to fulﬁlling opportunities that beneﬁt their futures 
While helping to accommodate their parents’ work schedules. 
As an-example, a special Restricted License is available to young people with certain medical, 
employment, or educational circumstances. The application for this License may provide a 
model for other opportunities.
I 
Thanks for your tinie, and I’m happy to answer your questions.
l
i
1
l 
District Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich
