April 6, 2023 
Sarah Thompson 
Georgetown, Maine, 04548 
Good afternoon,'
. 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, Esteemed members of the committee, 
My name is Sarah Thompson and I am a parent living in Georgetown, Maine. 
l am here testifying in support of LD1 180, An Act to Add an Exception to the Law 
Regarding ‘ Intermediate Driver's Licenses Regarding Passengers, sponsored by Rep. 
Allison Hepler of Woolwich. Thank you, Representative Hepler. 
My elder son is 17. He worked diligently to obtain his driver's license as early as 
possible, by earning the money to take Driver's Ed, ace-ing the exam (and finishing first 
of all his classmates), and then purchasing a car with his own income as soon as he 
passed his exam. He works three days a week mentoring 5-7 year olds in the woods, 
and he qualified for agood student discount on the basis of his home school transcript. 
He has been careful and responsible; earning a driver's license, and being able to pay 
for a car out of one‘s own income, is a major rite of passage and not easily achieved. 
Due to the restriction against carrying passengers, he was not permitted to transport his 
peers or their siblings for 270 days after earning his license. That meant that he could 
not help out his best friend's single mom, who works full time 20 minutes from her 
home, by driving her children to activities. Maine is a large and rural state. Being. able to 
carpool, and thus economize on gas and time, is a major factor in livability here;I 
routinely have a car full of children - one occasion, none of them are even mine! 
This exemption will lead to the following outcomes: responsible young people like my 
son will be incentivized to obtain employment (given the difficulty of finding entry level 
employees in Maine right now, this is a major point - many young people are waiting to 
get their licenses until they are 18 because it hardly feels worth it to pay the high 
insurance rates if they can't drive their friends), and they will be rewarded for their 
maturity and competence. It will also restore a joyful element of youth that many of us 
remember fondly. These teens deserve to be treated with respect for what they have 
achieved, and part of that respect is having the confidence in their ability to conduct 
themselves responsibly with adult privileges. 
I encourage you to vote "Ought to Pass" on LD1180. 
Thank you.
