Good afternoon,I 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and Esteemed members of the committee. 
My name is Wallace Thompson and I live in Georgetown, Maine.< 
I am here testifying in support of LD1180, An Act to Add an Exception to the Law Regarding Intermediate 
Driver's Licenses Regarding Passengers, sponsored by Rep. Allison Hepler of Woolwich. Thank you, 
Representative Hepler.'
’
_ 
I worked very hard to acquire my drivers license. It was really important to me; I paid for Drivers Ed. out of 
my own pocket, and crammed studying into the small amount of time between when I got home from work 
and when I had to go to bed to get up for work the next day. 
I aced the exam. So step two was to get my driving hours in.- 
I did that. I sent all the required documents -into the BMV and waited. 
A month went by and I got a test date.,l practiced even harder in the Ieadup to that date.I 
It was time for my test and tragedy struck. My vision had gotten worse. I failed the eye exam. 
I was out of the BMV before I evengot in the car. . 
I did not give up. So after squeezing in an appointment at the only optometrist who had the time, I waited 
for my next test date and practiced even more.A And on May 23rd I passed, and got my license. 
I was happy, thrilled, exhilaratedt 
But after all that, I was only granted an intermediate license. The main restriction was I could not drive' 
with anyone except my immediate family for 270 days, which meant I couldn't carpool with my best friend, 
who works the same job I work, and lives directly along my route, nor I could I drive friends and their 
siblings to any events.f 
This was exceptionally frustrating, especially since I had attempted to prove my capabilities through every 
avenue possible. I could "not have attained my license more ﬂawlessly-with the exception of that issue 
with my eyes, which was out of my control. ' ‘ 
Many of mypeers, friends, and friends of friends, have opted to not even go through the tedious drivers 
education process to get their license when they're 16 because of these restrictions. 
Instead, they are opting to wait until they're 18 so that they may acquire a full and unrestricted license byA 
simply passing a written exam and the road test. Whereas someone like me, with much more driving 
experience and knowledge, is only granted a reduced amount of responsibiIity — simply on the basis ofa 
two year age difference.< 
Please recommend for this Act to pass to reward teenagers who have put the effort in, and to encourage 
teenagers who want that privilege to accomplish the things necessary to gain the exemption. 
Thank you.
