I 
, .l STATE OF MAINE HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE “* *" AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
AMY B. ARATA ASSISTANT HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER 
Testimony on Office: (207) 287-14-I0 
Cell: (207)333-1817 
Fax: (207)287-1449 
E ~ M a i I : AI11}.Al ‘ﬂi11('(:1 lCglSl£ilI.iI ’C.I11£11I1r3 go\ 
L.D. 691 ”An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting Tenant ApplicationI 
Fees" 
Presented by 
Representative Amy B. Arata 
District 104 
Judiciary Committee 
Thursday, March 23, 2023‘ 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
I am State Representative Amy Arata, and I proudly represent District 104, New Gloucester 
and a portion of Gray. It is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of speaking 
against L.D. 691, ”An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting Tenant Application 
Fees." 
I have been a landlord in Maine since 2007. I have served hundreds of happy customers, 
and a very important part of that mutual benefit comes from properly screening tenants to 
make sure they'll have a successful tenancy. I charge below-market rents and participate in the 
Section 8 Housing Assistance Program. 
I do not make a profit from application fees. Having the tenant pay for the screening 
service instead of paying for it myself helps me to keep my rents lower for everybody. 
Before I charge an application fee, I ask pre-screening questions. Knowing that their 
answers will be veriﬁed once they fill out an application and pay the fee often causes applicants 
to be more truthful. They need to have ”skin in the game" . This saves a tremendous amount of 
time and money. Otherwise, I would waste time showing apartments to dozens of unqualified 
applicants. Often, the current tenants are still living in the apartment, so I want to show it only 
to qualified applicants in order to avoid invading privacy. I also don't want to show occupied 
apartments to people who may want to steal from the apartment. 
This is so important that even when it was a tenants’ market and I had high vacancy, l still 
charged an application fee, but credited it toward the tenant's first month's rent if they were 
truthful in their pre-application.I 
Over, please
The City of Bangor recently made a distinction between application fees and screening fees. 
I'm unsure if that's the intent of this bill. A compromise may be to allow the landlord to charge 
their actual screening expenses, as well as an hourly rate for processing. 
If we want more housing to be available for rent, we must allow landlords to use the tools 
that will allow both them and their applicants to have a successful tenancy. 
I ask that you vote ”ought not to pass" , and I am happy to answer questions.
