Hello Senator Carney, Representative Mooney, and members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is 
Cheryl Harkins, and I am here to ask you to vote in favor of LD691: An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing 
by Prohibiting Tenant Application Fees. 
I am an advocate with both Homeless Voices for Justice and Homeless Advocacy for All, and a board 
member of both the Statewide Homeless Council and the Maine Continuum of Care. I am also an aging, 
disabled rented. I reside in South Portland in the Redbank Community. Rental prices have mercilessly 
raised, in some situations to the point that tenants are working multiple jobs simply to cover the rent, 
with no utilities! When the Redbank Community was sold last year, it was taken over by a company 
called JRK Holdings, which is located in Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles, California. The owner 
promised his investors a return of their investments within a year, and proceeded to raise rents by 25%. 
This meant $500 for each of the apartments. There are 500 units in Redbank. The people of Maine are 
not rich people. Many are receiving assistance from agencies like Maine State Housing. I personally am 
on the Section 8 program. There have been countless evictions. Large families, newly arrived people 
who don’t have proper court representation and many times do not understand English fully, disabled 
people, and anyone who complains about the situation are being evicted. When I spoke up about the 
conditions of my dwelling at a televised City Council meeting, my lease, which had previously been 
added to the online rental portal for Redbank, promptly disappeared. Despite requests from me and my 
South Portland Housing specialist to have the lease re-uploaded so I could sign it, there was no reply 
from the office. JRK Holdings then served me an eviction notice for non-payment of rent. I had already 
received the paperwork for the increase in rent, and had been approved to pay the new amount. When 
the time came for my increase, I began to pay the new amount even though I had not received my lease 
yet. I went to my court date and explained to the judge that my portion of the rent had been paid, but 
that South Portland Housing could not pay their portion until the lease was signed, which I could not do 
because it been removed from the portal. 
South Portland City Council had to pass a new city ordinance on March 21, 2023 to cap the amount that 
landlords can raise rent yearly to 10%. This affects landlords with more than 15 units. At Redbank, I 
cannot afford the high prices for rent, but I also cannot afford to move out. I survive on SSI, which is 
$914 a month. Add this to the sharp increase with utility bills. Due to these increases, many families are 
losing their fight to stay housed. Many generations of families sometimes share a home. Many have 
been in the neighborhood their whole lives and cannot afford to stay. New hidden charges pop up every 
day. They even add charges when you call for a repair. When you apply to live at Redbank, the company 
checks your information. They charge absolutely ridiculous amounts for simply punching someone’s 
name into an online system. In my situation, I was required to pay $75 dollar per resident of the 
apartment for a background check. I had already been cleared by the Section 8 program, which meant 
that the U.S. Government had already run a background check on me and my son, who lives with me. I 
was told that did not matter. There are so many people looking for homes today that a landlord could 
charge so many people for background checks and then refuse to rent to any of them and make a 
significant amount of money on the background checks alone. In the meantime the people who are in 
some cases actually living outside are staying there because they have literally paid multiple landlords 
for multiple apartment applications and now have nothing left. Any agency that assists with paying for 
any of these types of extra fees can be drained needlessly. The money could pay for security deposits 
and first month payments to establish security for a client. Also one landlord could collect many fees 
from those agencies if they have multiple buildings and many have applied. It simply puts landlords at an 
unfair advantage once again on the backs of those who truly need to get back on their feet. Please pass 
LD691 and eliminate charges for tenant background checks to give the people of Maine the chance to 
overcome one more obstacle in their path to finding permanent safe housing. 
Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely, 
Cheryl Harkins 
