19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony in Opposition of LD 691 (“An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by 
Prohibiting Tenant Application Fees”)
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 23, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government 
Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade 
association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow 
Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers 
involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also 
includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, 
building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National 
Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 691. The bill would prohibit a property 
owner from being able to charge an application fee to a prospective tenant. 
Application fees are used to pay for the administration costs of tenant applications – 
including labor to review and process the application, the costs of background and criminal 
history checks, credit checks, property preparations and other expenses associated with a 
potential tenant. These measures are critical components to assessing the viability of a 
tenant and protecting private property from potential risk or damage. 
Property owners who lease their units are operating Maine businesses. A property owner 
needs to be able to generate revenue from their business to at least match expenses 
(property carrying costs and administration) for the business to continue to be viable. This 
bill is an overreach that unfairly dictates real estate business operating procedures. 
Prohibiting a property owner from charging a fee to cover business expenses wrongly 
targets property owners. Many other businesses charge fees in the same manner such as 
cell phone companies, cable companies, lenders, automobile dealerships, and other 
professional services. 
Moreover, the bill could have considerable unintended consequences. It could force 
property owners to cover expenses by means of rent increases, thereby contributing to a 
higher cost of housing. It may also cause some property owners to risk not performing 
background checks on potential tenants – thereby risking potentially unsafe conditions for 
existing tenants and financial loss to the property owner in the event of damage to the unit. 
Page 2
12781773.1Lastly, it could also deter property owners from continuing to lease their property, resulting 
in a decrease of much needed rental housing supply. 
For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 691. Thank 
you for your time and consideration.
