Jim Lysen
Lewiston
LD 691
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Judiciary Committee : my name is Jim Lysen, I am a resident of Lewiston, 
and I am here today to testify in favor of LD 701.
Everyone deserves a safe, affordable, accessible home, and together we can work to 
guarantee housing to all who reside in our community. Unfortunately, more than a third of 
renters in Maine pay more than 30% of their income on housing, and of those, many pay 
more than half their income on rent. Meanwhile, the dream of home ownership seems more 
and more distant, as the average house price in Maine is unaffordable to the average income 
household.  
The people hit hardest by the high costs and shortage of housing are extremely low-income 
households, of whom nearly 60% are paying more than half their income on rent. These are 
primarily people who are working, older Mainers, and people with disabilities. Housing prices 
and rents have risen by double digits, and there are severe shortages of all types of housing, 
all over the state (and country). Put simply, housing is not affordable for a huge number of 
Mainers, and that puts tens of thousands of Mainers at risk of homelessness, including 
veterans and seniors. Nowhere in Maine can median-income renters even afford the median 
rent. Making things worse is having to pay for a rental application, often multiplr applications.
In this housing market, it is extremely difficult if not impossible to find housing in Maine, which
means people often are applying to lots of landlords.  Rents are extremely high and rising, 
which makes paying application fees even less affordable. Tenants already have to pay first, 
last and (often) security deposit all at once. 
This is not an onerous burden on landlords. They can and should build in the time for 
screening tenants into their ongoing business model and can get the information they need to
screen potential tenan
To address this crisis, we need solutions that enable Mainers to find stable housing now, as 
we invest in the future. LD 701 will attack Maine’s housing crisis by: protecting tenants from 
unnecessary fees, as we do the longer-term work of building the housing we need; fully 
funding the development of affordable housing for people at all income levels; creating a 
rental registry so renters can know who their landlords and building managers are, where 
they’re located and how they can contact them (We have done this in Lewiston, but we are 
not effective in administering the program).  We must also strengthen smart growth incentives
and zoning changes to allow us to better grow our communities without hurting our natural 
and agricultural resources. Finally,  we must establish and fully fund a system for ensuring 
every community is part of the solution, actively supporting the development of the housing 
we need. 
To the Legislature's credit, a special bi-partisan Housing Committee has been created to deal 
with the many bills associated with solving this housing crisis. In addition, the fact that 
housing bills have been assigned to over seven legislative committees clearly indicates how 
housing impacts so much of our lives. 
I encourage our legislators to support and fund LD 701 and other proposed housing 
bills, to help solve this crisis. No person, regardless of race, gender, class, sexual 
orientation, age, ability, medical condition, disability, citizenship or previous criminal
or housing record should be denied a home. High application fees often derail people 
at the get go. We can do this, but it will take us working together to do so. Thanks for 
your time to hear me out.
