Malne Center for 
Economic Pollcy "i:;i;1%; 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Carney and Moonen, and all members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. 
I am testifying in favor of LDs 690 and 691, which would both help alleviate the burden that 
rental application fees can pose to renters. 
Rental application fees, while not especially burdensome in individual cases, can be taxing to 
renters in tight rental markets where landlords are able to charge high application fees and 
tenants are likely to apply to multiple places before being accepted. ‘ Maine’s rental vacancy rate 
in the fourth quarter of 2022 was the 2"°' highest in the nation at 2.9 percent, indicating that the 
state’s rental market is tight relative to other states? Because of the lack of rental options 
available at any given time, landlords are able to wield this market power to charge higher than 
necessary application fees, leaving renters with little recourse but to pay these fees or further 
restrict their housing options? Another result of Maine’s low vacancy rate is that there are 
frequently multiple households applying for the same piece of rental property. This means that 
prospective renters frequently apply for multiple rental properties and pay application fees to 
multiple landlords, fees which can add up to hundreds of dollars over the course of one search 
for housing. ‘ The problem of ramping application fees is particularly severe for Black and Latino 
renters, who on average submit 50 percent more rental applications than White or Asian 
renters? 
This highly competitive environment where multiple renters are frequently applying for the same 
unit creates an adverse situation for renters that can easily be exploited by some unscrupulous 
landlords. From the renters’ perspective, application fees turn their search for the housing they 
need into a game of chance, where they find themselves paying for the chance of receiving 
some benefit — in the form of safe, stable housing — but often receive no tangible benefits for 
their money. For landlords who are willing to charge application fees far above their actual costs 
of screening each applicant, the existence of application fees creates a moral hazard, 
incentivizing landlords to leave units vacant while collecting unnecessarily high —- yet perfectly 
legal — application fees from the many parties who are interested in renting the unit. Renters 
should not be in a position where they are wasting resources gambling for the essentials they 
need to survive, and landlords should not be in a position that allows them to weaponize renters’ 
vulnerability for profit. 
1 
Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy, "The Case Against Rental Application Fees." 
https://www.law.georgetown.edu/poverty-journal/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2023/01/The-Case-Against- 
Rental-Application-Fees.pdf 
2 U.S. Census Bureau, ”Housing Vacancies and Homeownership (CPS/HVS)." 
https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/data/rates.html 
3 U.S. Census Bureau, ”Which States Have the Highest Percentage of Vacant Housing Units?" 
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2022/demo/h121-22-O1.pdf 
4 Maine Beacon, ”Portland renters report spending hundreds on application fees in apartment hunt." 
https://mainebeacon.com/portland-renters-report-spending-hundreds-on-application-fees-in-apartment-hunt/ 
5 Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy, "The Case Against Rental Application Fees." 
https://www.law.georgetown.edu/poverty-journaI/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2023/01/The-Case-Against- 
Rental-Application-Fees.pdf 
Board of Directors 
'1 Leef webb, Ph.D., Chair """" T‘7 
saﬁra Butler W77 M"T 
Stacy Mitchell 
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lucy Van Hook 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica lvlaurer
This situation of high vulnerability for renters is what LDs 690 and 691 intend to rectify. LD 690 
would address the problem by allowing the consumer reports that many landlords use asa 
basis for their application evaluations to be transferable to multiple landlords within a 30 day 
period. A transferable consumer report, accessible and able to be distributed by the renter, 
would prevent the renter from paying multiple times for the same report based on the same 
information. 
LD 691 would go a step further by eliminating rental application fees, avoiding the moral hazard 
described earlier entirely. Some may argue that application fees are necessary to avoid wasting 
landlord time on frivolous rental applications, but this argument is lacking. Searching and 
applying for housing is a time consuming, tedious process that people are unlikely to pursue 
unless legitimately interested in finding a new place to live. Vermont has banned rental 
application fees for decades,6 and while the ban faces many challenges with enforcement, there 
is no evidence to suggest that this has led to a substantial increase in frivolous applications. ’ 
Finally, whereas the presence of rental application fees contributes to an incentive for landlords 
to allow units to go vacant, the absence of application fees increases the incentive for landlords 
to rent vacant units as quickly as possible. This would help prevent units from remaining vacant 
even as many Mainers are struggling to find housing or are even homeless. 
LDs 690 and 691 would each in their own way help to even the current power imbalance 
between landlords and renters. These bills would shelter renters from the escalating costs of 
applying to multiple rental units, knowing that their odds of being accepted for any individual one 
of them are low. The bills would also limit the ability of unscrupulous landlords to take 
advantage of renters’ vulnerability in Maine’s fiercely competitive rental housing market by 
charging application fees above and beyond the actual cost of assessment. Because of the 
necessary shelter these bills provide to renters, and the fairness they help to guarantee in 
tenant-landlord relationships, Maine Center for Economic Policy urges this committee to vote 
yes on LDs 690 and 691. 
6 NPR, ”Rental application fees add up fast in a tight market. But limiting them is tough.” 
https1//www.npr.org/2023/01/13/1148426491/rental-application-fees-housing-affordable-market-states-Iaws 
7 Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy, ”The Case Against Rental Application Fees." 
https://www.law.georgetown.edu/poverty-journal/wp-content/uploads/sites/25/2023/01/The-Case-Against- 
Rental-Application-Fees.pdf
