3/11/23  
RE: LD 691  An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting Tenant Application Fees  
 
Dear Members of the Judiciary Committee,  
 
I’m opposed to LD 691. We need to conduct credit and background checks to perform a proper tenant 
screening. The service we use is apartments.com which charges the tenants $29 per adult to do this. 
Apartments.com lets the applicants  send  up to 10 screening  reports over the next 30 days  to different 
listings . We don’t make any money from  this. Even when tenants do pay this fee , we often have 
applicants who are accepted, but they decide to not take the property as they have put out multiple 
applications.  We try to limit the number of applications we process at a time to reduce the cost to 
prospective  tenants.  I don’t think landlords should have to spend money on these screening reports. In 
fact, if this bill passes and forces landlords to pay for these r eports, more prospective tenants  will apply 
just to kick the tires resulting in major losses  of money and time  that we’ll need to pass on to the next 
tenant. The current method  where tenants pay for the reports  is more cost effective  to both parties  
compar ed to what LD 691 is proposing.  
 
Although we don’t collect application fees some property managers do, and I support that option. We 
spend 3 -5 hours processing each application  including calling references . That time has value and I see 
why many property managers need to bill for that time, especially when they must  hire staff to do so. If 
you think about it, if you are paying someone even a minimum of $20 per hour the cost to process an 
application ranges from $60 to $100. Why should landlords and propert y managers have to work for less 
than the minimum wage? That is illegal in every other industry. You must understand these costs will 
ultimately be passed onto the tenants. Having to put money down into the application  process make s 
the applicant have some skin in the game.   
As always, I encourage you to find ways to work with rental housing providers instead of creating laws 
like this that will make it more costly and difficult to provide housing to the great people of Maine. The 
sheer number of anti -rental  housing laws this year is astounding. It would be better to focus on reducing 
barriers and red tape that get in the way of building new housing units. That is the only way to truly 
solve a housing crisis.  
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Fairfield, ME  
Manager  
Habitat For ME LLC  
 
