PINE TREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE, INC. 
Katherine R McGovern ¢ Portland Area Oﬂice 
P.O. Box 547 
Portland, ME 04112i 
(207)400-3216 0 V/TTY 711 ~ Fax (207) 828-2300 
www.ptla. org ' kmcgovern@ptla. org 
Testimony of Katherine McGovern, Pine Tree Legal Assistance in Support of LD 691, An 
. 
Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting Tenant Application Fees 
March 23, 2023 . 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing‘ 
Committee on the Judiciary. My name is Katherine McGovern and I am an attorney at Pine Tree 
Legal Assistance. Pine Tree Legal Assistance is a nonproﬁt organization with ofﬁces in Portland, 
Lewiston, Augusta, Bangor, Machias, and Presque Isle. Since 1967 Pine Tree has represented 
low-income Mainers in civil legal matters including representing tenants in eviction and other 
housing matters before District Courts throughout the state. 
Pine Tree Legal Assistance supports LD 691 because it is a modest but important step toward 
increasing housing stability for low-income Mainers. 
Application Fees Increase Housing Instability 4 
Current Maine state law imposes no limit on the amount a landlord can charge a prospective 
tenant to apply for housing. ‘ Vermont and Massachusetts prohibit application feesz . Some 
landlords in Maine use commercial services to run credit or other background checks, some do 
their own screening, and some do no formal screening. When a tenant pays an application fee, 
the tenant may or may not be offered the housing. Moreover, the tenant has no way of knowing 
whether they are seriously considered for the housing or even if the landlord has used the 
application fee to pay for a background check or simply pocketed the money. Paying a single 
application fee of $50 or $75 per adult applicant may not seem signiﬁcant but as the housing 
market has tightened and become more competitive, tenants have had to apply for a larger and 
larger number of apartments before securing housing. A tenant may spend so much money on 
application fees that they no longer can pay the security deposit and ﬁrst month’s rent required to 
move into an apartment. 
In 2019 the Portland Rental Housing Advisory Committee recommended that Portland prohibit 
application fees. The Committee took public comment from tenants impacted by application fees 
before making that recommendation. Jemia Dorr described her family’s experience of scrambling 
to ﬁnd new housing and spending more than $500 in application fees without knowing whether 
background checks were actually being conducted or whether they were truly being considered 
for apartments. Alyssa Floyd described paying application fees and never knowing why she was 
not offered an apartment. The housing market has tightened and housing has become 
signiﬁcantly more unaffordable in the years that have passed since these comments. 
‘ The cities of Portland and Bangor have recently acted to limit or prohibit application fees. 
2 VT. STAT. ANN. tit. 9, §4456a; MASS. GEN. LAWS ch. 186, § l5B(1)(b).
For Mainers with low incomes, application fees mean tenants cannot even apply for housing for 
which they would otherwise be qualiﬁed. For example, tenants renting with a section 8 voucher 
are low-income tenants who can afford their rent thanks to their housing subsidy but who must 
ﬁnd a unit on the private market. The section 8 program does not pay for application fees. In the 
current housing market, many section 8 tenants search for housing for months and must pay 
many application fees before securing a unit. Increasingly we hear of tenants losing their 
vouchers because they cannot ﬁnd a unit to rent before their time to search has expired. 
Similarly, general assistance will assist very low-income tenants with rent payments but with not 
assist with application fees. 
Application Fees Disproportionately Impact Renters who are Black, Indigenous, and 
People of Color 
Renters who are Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC) are disproportionately harmed 
by application fees because those communities are most likely to be excluded based on past 
eviction records, criminal history, or credit-history. Eric Dumi of the National Housing Law 
Project explains this impact in his article “The Case Against Application Fees.”3: “An increasing 
body of evidence shows that Black women, especially those with children, disproportionately 
experience eviction and_multiple studies have shown how various forms of credit scoring and 
credit history-based decision-making tend to disadvantage people and communities of color as 
well. Research by Zillow.com found that Black and Latinx renters must typically submit 50% 
more rental applications in a housing search than the typical white or Asian renter—and that 
3 8% of Black and Latinx renters must submit ﬁve or more applications, compared with 21% of 
white renters. ” 
Prohibiting Application Fees is a Small but Important Step to Addressing the Housing 
Crisis’" 
Prohibiting application fees is a simple and straightforward way to remove one barrier to housing 
security for low-income Mainers that disproportionately harms renters who are Black, 
Indigenous, or people of color. A prohibition on these fees also removes the market incentive for 
landlords to collect fees from tenants when they may not be seriously considering them for 
available housing. A prohibition, as opposed to a limit, also makes for much more 
straightforward education and enforcement. , 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in favor of LD 691. 
3 Durm’s article appeared in The Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law & Policy, Volume XXX, Number 1, Fall 2022 
L : America's Partner 
for Equal Iusricc 
LEGAL serwlces coneon/mow
