Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Judiciary Committee: my name is Patty Kidder and I am a resident of 
Springvale, part of the city of Sanford. I am here today to testify in favor of LD 
691: An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting Tenant Application 
Fees.' 
I am here today to tell you housing insecurity is a real problem for low income 
Mainers and every expense is a barrier for them to access a new place to live. 
Recently, a couple I was trying to help find permanent housing would geta 
section 8 voucher but it would expire before we could find enough charities to 
help with the security deposit and all of the other expenses. There were 
application forms to ﬁll out and fees to scrape together and by then someone 
else with ready cash and great references had already signed the lease. There 
just isn’t enough affordable housing for low income people in my community. 
I helped another low income family fill out many different applications for 
different apartments and each different landlord wanted a fee. The listings never 
said how many apartments were open, just that they were accepting 
applications. They spent most of the money they had saved for a security 
deposit on application fees only to be denied. 
I feel landlords are using the application fees to legally discriminate against Iow- 
income Mainers. There isn't enough affordable housing in Maine for low-income 
families so they have to apply to many different landlords. The fees quickly add 
up with no guarantee of being offered an apartment. It becomes too great an 
expense just to have a chance to rent an apartment so the middle class family 
with the big savings account gets to move in.
To me, it's not fair and I am asking you to please vote LD 691 ought to pass and 
help level the playing field for everyone when looking for a new apartment. 
Honorable members of the Joint Standing Judiciary Committee, thank you for 
your time. 
Patricia E. Kidder 
4 Carpenter Street 
Springvale, ME 04083-1109 
pattykidderd19@gmail.com 
207-977-3325 (Call or Text)
