BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Terry Sutton
     President
Chip Leighton
     Vice President
Yemaya St. Clair
     Secretary
Jennifer Wilson
     Treasurer
Joann Bautista
Terry Davies
Lauren Gauthier
John Roberts
Elaine Rosen
Kini Schoop
Maurice A. Selinger III
Jay Tansey
Lannie Welch
Lori Whynot
Mark R. Swann
     Executive Director
55 Portland Street
Portland, ME 04101
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org
www.preblestreet.orgHello Senator Carney, Representative Mooney, and members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Taylor Cray, and I am the Outreach Team Leader for the Preble Street 
Advocacy Team. I am writing today to ask that you please vote in favor of LD691: An Act 
to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting Tenant Application Fees. 
In my role at Preble Street, I help to coordinate Homeless Voice for Justice, a group of 
individuals with lived experience of homelessness and poverty that works to advocate for 
structural solutions to these issues. Within these efforts, we frequently work alongside 
individuals who have been repeatedly disheartened by the many barriers that exist in 
housing applications. The current lack of affordable housing means that individuals are 
continuously applying to different opportunities, adding their names to multiple wait lists, 
and doing all that they can to secure stable housing for themselves, and sometimes for 
their families as well. Completing these applications takes time, energy, and often money. 
The cost of the application fee for one apartment alone can be difficult to manage for 
low-income individuals, very few of whom have the luxury of applying for only one 
apartment. 
There are far more people in need of housing than there are available apartments. This 
means that each apartment available for rent is receiving multiple applicants, all of whom 
are required to pay the application fee regardless of whether or not the apartment is 
actually rented to them. In short, this means that these individuals are paying portions of 
their already-limited income for a service that they, in most cases, will never receive. This 
is beyond illogical – it is discriminatory. People who cannot afford to pay application fees 
cannot apply for housing, while people who can afford to pay are able to apply and can 
also afford such things as background and credit checks, which are often associated with 
these application processes. Such barriers serve only to keep people in poverty and 
prevent individuals from accessing one of the most necessary and life-saving resources: 
housing. 
In a state where the cost of living continues to rise, and where we can barely shelter 
those folks who are currently living without stable housing, it is unacceptable that we 
would continue to allow the barrier of application fees to exist. Please consider these 
points when you are voting today, and vote to support LD691. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray, Advocacy Outreach Team Leader
Preble Street
Meeting urgent needs ● Empowering people ● Advocating for change ● Creating solutions to homelessness and 
hunger


