			  Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network PO Box 8 Augusta, ME  04330 www.muusan.org admin@muusan.org			
	
								March	23,	2023		Senator	Carney,	Representative	Moonen,	and	distinguished	members	of	the	Committee	on	Judiciary:		My	name	is	Thea	Spires.		I’m	a	resident	of	Brunswick.	I	am	submitting	testimony	on	behalf	of	the	Maine	Unitarian	Universalist	State	Advocacy	Network	(MUUSAN).		My	testimony	is	in	support	of	LD	691.		I	submit	these	remarks	as	one	of	more	than	500	members	of	the	MUUSAN		network,	which	links	Maine’s	26	UU	congregations	in	working	for	legislation	that	affirms	and	promotes	justice,	equity	and	compassion	in	human	relations,	and	the	inherent	worth	and	dignity	of	every	person.	This	includes	support	for	laws	and	programs	that	assist	the	most	vulnerable	lower	income	Mainers	in	obtaining	safe,	accessible,	and	affordable	housing.		Unfortunately,	these	Mainers	are	having	a	very	difficult	time	securing	such	housing	due	to	a	number	of	factors,	including	added,	unreasonable	application	fees.		In	the	tight	rental	housing	market,	more	and	more	landlords	and	management	companies	are	charging	non-refundable	cash	fees	just	to	submit	a	rental	application.		It	has	been	estimated	that	41%	of	Maine’s	population	are	cost-burdened	when	it	comes	to	housing,	meaning	the	household	spends	more	than	30%	of	its	income	on	housing	and	housing-related	expenses	such	as	utilities.	Application	fees	create	serious	barriers	for	them	as	they	search	for	housing	that	is	already	difficult	to	find:	many	in	search	of	rental	housing	pay	one	application	fee	after	another	for	rental	units	that	have	so	many	other	applicants	that	their	chance	of	success	is	almost	nil.	Mainers	who	live	paycheck	to	paycheck,	and	those	who	receive	general	assistance,	as	examples,	simply	don’t	have	extra	cash	to	pay	an	extra	fee	for	the	opportunity	to	apply	for	housing.	The	burden	of	application	fees	thus	falls	most	heavily	on	those	least	able	to	afford	them.		Reviewing	rental	applications	is	the	responsibility	and	a	business	cost	of	a	landlord	or	management	company.	Prospective	tenants	should	not	be	paying	for	such	reviews	(which	are	not	even	guaranteed	to	occur).			Applying	for	rental	housing	should	be	cost-free.		For	most	Maine	tenants,	but	especially	for	those	who	have	low	incomes	and	cost	burdens,	coming	up	with	funds	for	a	security	deposit,	first	month’s	rent,	and	often	also	the	last	month’s	rent	is	an	extreme	struggle	in	itself.		To	be	required	also	to	pay	for	the	civil	right	to	apply	for	rental	housing	is	inequitable,	unjust,	and	income-discriminatory,	
	indeed	a	literal	barrier	at	a	time	our	State	should	be	doing	everything	possible	to	make	housing	accessible	to	those	who	live	here.		For	these	reasons,	I	urge	the	committee	to	vote	Ought	to	Pass	on	LD	691.		Thank	you	for	the	opportunity	to	testify.  
