1 
 State of Maine  
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION  
 
Testimony of Daniel Chuhta , Deputy Commissioner , Maine Department of Education  
 
In Opposition of: L.D. 383  
 
An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
 
Sponsored by: Representative Andrews  
Co-Sponsored by: Senator s Baldacci  and Brakey and Representatives Greenwood and Riseman  
 
February 14, 2023  
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government : 
 
My name is Daniel Chuhta, Deputy Commissioner for the Department of Education  and I am 
here today representing the Maine Department of Education  speaking in opposition of LD 383, 
An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking , which proposes to change the 
designation of all rules , as governed by Title 5, Chapter 375 of the Maine Administrative 
Procedure Act, to be major substantive rules.  This action would impose an enormous burden on 
our Department as well as on the Legislature.    
 
As provided in Title 5, ยง8071 which identifies two categories of rules , major substantive rules and 
routine technical rules . Major substantive rules are defined in this statute as needing significant 
agency discretion or interpretation; and are expected  to, due to subject matter or anticipated impact, 
have a serious impact on the public or other units of local government, such as school 
administrative units. Routine technical rules are simply procedural rules that establish standards 
of practice. These two categories of rules were established by PL 1995, c hapter 463 in order to 
allow for maximum agency flexibility and governing efficiency while maintaining an appropriate 
level of legislative oversight over particular ly identified  rules that are expected to b e controversial 
or have a major impact on the community.   
 
This flexibility allows agencies such as ours to make timely changes to the routine technical rules 
that affect our schools and educators . Important updates to terminology, federal programs, and 
field practice can be changed efficiently and often within a single year. Major substantive rules, 
however, require delivery to the Legislative C ouncil by the second Friday in January in order to 
meet the legislative acceptance date. Given the complexity of the work required for a major 
substantive rule, this deadline is not always achievable within a single year from listing on the 
regulatory agenda to delivery to the Council . This can result in rule change delays that can have 
the unintended consequence of conf using or misleading our educators and the public.  For example, 
the DOE completed a major substantive rule change  with provisional adoption  that began in 202 1 
as the result of chaptered law and  is only now printed for Legislative review.  
   
The Maine Department of Education maintains a listing of 5 7 rules  which includes nine rules with 
the State Board of Education . Of these, 18 are currently identified as major substantive.  If LD 383 
2 
 is passed, the DOE would need to devote significant staff t ime to complete the transition of the 
remaining 3 9 rules . LD 383 does not indicate if each of the existing routine technical rules would 
require immediate review by the Legislature upon passage, or if these rules would simply be 
labeled a s major substantive and require legislative review at the next updating. Re-categorization 
of routine technical rules is likely to require significant resources and time taken away from other 
responsibilities  for both the DOE and the Legislature . 
 
For thes e reasons, the Department of Education opposes L.D. 383, An Act to Restore Legislative 
Oversight of Rulemaking .  I am happy to answer any questions, and I will be available for work 
sessions on this bill.  
 
 
