AMANDA E. BEAL 
COMMISSIONER  JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
BUREAU OF AGRICULTURE , FOOD & RURAL RESOURCES  
28 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
 
 
 
 
 
CRAIG LAPINE , BUREAU DIRECTOR  PHONE : (207)  287-3491 
AGRICULTURE , FOOD & RURAL RESOURCES  FAX: (207)  287-7548   
90 BLOSSOM LANE, DEERING BUILDING  WWW .MAINE .GOV/DACF  
  
     
 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON    
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
 
 IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 383  
  
"An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking "   
   
February 14, 2023  
  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Committee on State and Local 
Government , the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF) strongly opposes LD 
383, An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking .   
 
DACF  stewards many of Maine's most treasured resources and the vital natural resource economy they 
support . DACF helps prevent and fight  forest fires; steward s our state parks and public lands; conducts  
land use  planning ; collect s and mak es data available to enhance natural resource management decision -
making; support s our forestry and agricultural sectors; and ensur es the safety and abundance of the food 
we eat.   
 
DACF  has approximately 250  Chapter rules  governing its four bureaus and 110 program areas.  The 
majority of these rules are Routine Technical, which, pursuant to the Maine Administrative Procedures 
Act, must go through a thorough rulemaking process that allows for r obust public review, input, and 
information gathering. Major Substantive rules create  an additional step whereby the Legislature approves 
rules provisionally adopted by an agency that has completed the Routine Technical process. The 
Legislature can hold ad ditional public hearings as part of the Major Substantive process. DACF believes 
LD 383 is unnecessary and would greatly  disrupt and delay our agency's critical work in meeting our 
constituency's needs.  
 
Routine Technical rulemaking already requires signif icant DACF staff resources to navigate 
appropriately. Shifting all rulemaking to Major Substantive will require additional  staff resources , 
otherwise it will  impede  our ability to carry out our other statutory responsibilities. Further, the tim eframe 
for effectuating Major Substantive rules will be prolonged to the public's detriment. Because rulemaking 
must be conducted while the Legislature is in session, finalizing rules will have to wait until the 
Legislature convenes. And, because all state agencies will be in line for Major Substantive rules, the 
Legislature will be consumed with rulemaking, which will likely impact its ability to legislate effectively . 
 
Designating a rule as Major Substantive creates  a significant disincentive for an agency to update its rules 
due to  the burden on staff resources, resulting in outdated provisions that are difficult to administer and do 
not serve the regulated community or the people of Maine well.  Also, there are many  times when only 
 
 
minor changes to a rule are needed , and having to wait for legislative review is very  
inefficient.   Examples of minor changes include updating  citations and references to incorporated 
documents; updating terms, agency names, and place name s; removing outdated provisions based on 
statutory changes; and minor clarifications that do not result in a material change to the intent of a 
regulatory provision.  Distinguishing between Routine  Technical and Major Substantive rulemaking 
recognizes the l egitimacy of a more expansive public process for changes that have a more significant  
public policy impact.  
 
As just one direct example of t he impact of LD 383 , please be advised that it would  have catastrophic 
consequences for the Maine Milk Commission , located within DACF .   
 
The Milk Commission engages in three  types of rulemaking, including structural rules that govern the 
operation of the Commission, set fees, and determine the scope of the reporting that licensees must submit 
to the Commission every  month . The Commission conducts studies to determine the cost of producing 
milk on Maine farms, the cost of processing milk in Maine plants, and the cost of making Maine milk 
easily available to Maine consumers for purchase  in Maine stores.  The Commission's  major form of 
rulemaking takes the form of monthly emergency rulemaking to set milk prices at the producer, 
wholesale, and retail levels.  These monthly  rulemaking meetings are extremely  efficient and mirror their 
federal pricing counterpart in both substance  and timing.   
 
The impact of this emergency rulemaking is that new prices can go into effect as soon as seven days after 
being recorded by the Secretary of State.  To force this emerge ncy rulemaking to be come  Major 
Substantive would prevent the Commission from adjusting milk pricing as it respond s to the often volatile 
and dramatic changes that can occur between one month and the next.  The bill would  completely disrupt 
the operation of the Commission, put it out of compliance with its statutory requirements for price setting, 
and would likely result in significant economic harm to all parts of the dairy industry in Maine.  
 
This example is one of many  pertaining to DACF’s work  that we could provide to illustrated the over-
burden some, in efficient, and harmful impacts that would be bourne by the people of Maine that our 
programs aim to serve .  Therefore, w e strongly urge you to vote ONTP. Thank you for your time ; DACF  
staff would be happy to answer any questions at the work session.  
 
 
Amanda E. Beal 
Commissioner  
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
