1Testimony of
Erik C. Jorgensen
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications
Maine State Housing Authority
before
The Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
In Opposition to
L.D. 383 "An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking"
February 14, 2023
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Committee on State and Local 
Government, I am Erik Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at 
the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony in strong 
opposition to LD 383, An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking.
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 
1969. We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems 
of unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing.  We are authorized to issue bonds 
to finance single family mortgages for first time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family 
housing.  
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs.  We receive state general fund revenue for 
homeless programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund.
This is a significant policy proposal that appeared in the first weeks of session with virtually no 
warning. Our legal department has analyzed this proposal and determined that it would be 
detrimental to the operations of the agency. We are deeply concerned that such a policy shift 
would significantly affect our ability to serve the public with our programs. It would extend 
rulemaking timelines, which for us are often repeated each year, and the provisions of this 
change would necessitate that all of our agency’s rulemaking be timed to coincide with the 
legislative session in order for the necessary legislative approvals to take place. This bill would 
not increase public input with respect to our rules; it would just delay or, could halt, the process 
for adopting the rules through which we distribute our resources.  Most, if not all of our 
2resources, have strict deadlines for distributing the funds.  Any delay or stoppage would be 
problematic, and worse case, could result in our losing some of our funding sources.
The rules that MaineHousing develops and promulgates are classified as Routine Technical, which, 
as specified in the Maine Administrative Procedure Act, are subject to a defined and thorough 
rulemaking process that allows significant public input. Major Substantive rules, which all rules 
would be under this proposal, require that same process plus an additional step: legislative approval. 
MaineHousing’s annual rulemaking for various federal programs already extends over the course 
of multiple months per rule. For just one example, consider our Qualified Allocation Plan 
(QAP), which is the rule that guides our allocation of federal affordable housing tax credits, a 
primary tool for creating affordable apartments in Maine.  With respect to the QAP, we receive 
an annual allotment of federal credits that have to be allocated to our partners by the end of the 
allocation year.  If we don’t allocate the credits in a timely fashion, we lose the credits to the 
national pool.  If we allocate all of our credits in a timely fashion, Maine becomes eligible for 
additional credits from the national pool. 
To ensure that we allocate all of our credits, we start the process the year before the credits have 
to be allocated.  Even so, we are usually adopting the QAP shortly before applications are due 
from affordable housing producers, simply because of the lengthy process required to adopt the 
rule. The state process is already much more involved than the federal process required by 
Section 42 of the Code.  
Prior to adopting the QAP, we hold multiple meetings with our partners to inform the QAP 
before we even start the formal rulemaking process.  Then, we present it to the Board of 
Commissioners for approval to start the rulemaking process.  We then send the proposed rule to 
partners for review once we have a draft. The Board is then present at the public hearing (at least 
a month later) and must adopt the final rule at least a month after that.  The QAP must then be 
approved by the Governor pursuant to Section 42 of the Code.  It’s a lengthy process that asks a 
lot of both staff and constituents. This proposal would add a minimum of another month to that 
timeline.
That is simply one example. We routinely update our Homeless rule and Low Income Home 
Energy Assistance Program rule as improvements are made with our various partners. These are 
done when needed to provide the best public service possible.
We would also suggest that this bill would open up the possibility that the rulemaking process itself 
could become politicized.  
3MaineHousing strongly asserts that LD 383 is unnecessary, and that its passage would greatly 
disrupt and delay our public work.  Shifting all rulemaking to Major Substantive will either require 
significant additional staff resources, or it will force our agency to prioritize rulemaking above other 
legislative activities. During the course of this legislature we expect to be considering dozens of bills 
that touch on housing, many of which are complex and require sustained attention from committees. 
Because rulemaking must be conducted while the Legislature is in session, finalizing these rules 
under this bill would add an extreme new layer of delay and bureaucratic burden to each year’s 
legislative session. A significant question that should be considered would be to explore how the 
legislature’s time in session should be spent. If every state and every quasi-governmental agency is 
submitting all of their annual rules to the legislature for approval, how will the legislative 
committees find the time to attend to their other business?
In addition, it is important to underscore that many of our funding streams are time-limited, and 
adding such an inefficiency to an already thorough and lengthy public process would only compress 
the amount of time we can devote to allocating resources and assuring that they are used efficiently 
and fairly. 
MaineHousing, along with its legislatively confirmed Board of Commissioners, the public body that 
ultimately votes to accept our rules, is committed to transparency, accountability and quality public 
processes. We do not, however, believe that adding this burdensome extra step, one that would need 
to be repeated many times each year, would do anything other than to slow down our work. 
Thank you for considering this testimony. 
