STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
 
February 14, 2023  
 
Senator Tim Nangle  
Representative Holly Stover  
Committee on State and Local Government  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Governm ent, 
 
I am writing to express the opposition of the Department of Economic and Community 
Development to LD 383, An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking . Our department, 
like all agencies, depends on the ability to promulgate rules to implement the will of the Legislature 
and serve  the public. Labeling all rulemaking as “major substantive” and following the additional 
Legislative approval process accordingl y would impede  our abilit y to work , potentially to the point 
of some programs being inoperable.  It would create an incredible backlog , adding months to an 
already time-consuming  process for updating language that is frequently only for minor 
adjustments or to adapt  to a new law . 
 
Our most recent examples of rulemaking demonstrate the relevance of maintaining the “routine 
technical” process. We recently adopted a rule change that amended the Employment Tax 
Increment Financing rule to be in line with LD 1156 passed by the 130th Legislature —there were 
no substantive changes other than updating certain phrases, definitions, and numbers to match the 
legislation.  We are also in the midst of issuing  new rule s laying out the basic requirements and 
process for issuing grants in response to two other bills from the previous Legislature, LD 492 and 
LD 2003 . Requiring these rules receive  a public hearing in and  separate approval from the 
Legislature , despite implementing laws recently passed by the Legislature, would delay 
implementing those laws by many months , if not over a year.  
 
We are happy to discuss this issue further at your request.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Heather Johnson  
Commissioner  

