STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or PROFESSIONAL 
_ AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
,§ 35 STATE HOUSE STATION I.f._,. , i 
F AUGUSTA MAINE 
_ , ' 
Anne L. Head 
Janet T- Mlns Commissioner 
Governor 
TESTIMONY OF JOAN COHEN 
DEPUTY TO THE COMMISSIONER 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
IN OPPOSITION TO L. D. 383 
“An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking ” 
Sponsored by Representative John Andrews 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and Honorable Members of the Committee, my name is 
Joan Cohen, and I am the Deputy at the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation 
(DPFR), and I am speaking on behalf of the Department in opposition to LD 383, An Act to 
Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking. This bill will impose an enormous burden on state 
agencies, like DPFR, as well as the Legislature. It will consume our department ’s existing staff 
resources and crowd out our ability to carry out our other statutory responsibilities. 
DPFR is a regulatory department consisting of 5 agencies and 6 afﬁliated boards. We regulate 
insurance, ﬁnancial institutions, securities, consumer credit, and a range of professions and 
occupations. Our statutory responsibility and mission is to protect the citizens of Maine public 
through our regulatory functions. To give you a sense of the enormity of our rulemaking 
responsibilities, just one of our agencies, the Office of Professional and Occupational Regulation 
(OPOR), is comprised of 37 licensing entities. 
Our regulatory authority is set forth by statute and our agencies and boards undertake rulemaking 
throughout the year in order to implement legislative intent and to perform our statutory duty to 
protect the public. If all proposed rules were required to go through the lengthy and laborious 
process set forth in this bill, it would substantially delay even the most routine rulemakings and 
impede our ability to implement the legislative intent of laws you develop and enact. 
A number of checks and balances are already built into the current rulemaking process to ensure 
that departments do not exceed their authority. 
0 The Legislature currently has responsibility to decide whether a rule will be “routine 
OFFICES LOCATED AT: 76 NORTHERN AvENuE, GARDINER, MAINE 
PHONEI (207)624-8511 (VOICE) TTYUWS, CanMa,,,,Re|ay 711 FAXZ (203624 ssqs
teclmical ” which doesn’t require additional legislative oversight, or “major substantivel ” 
which requires legislative approval before the rule is ﬁnally adopted. This two-tier system 
was established by a bi-partisan amendment to a 1995 bill (then LD 1123) similar to this one. 
This bipartisan amendment recognized that some, but not all, agency rules require additional 
oversight, and gave the Legislature authority to determine which rules require additional 
oversight, while avoiding unnecessary delay implementing all other agency rules. 
After the Legislature delegates rulemaking authority to an agency, there are additional checks 
and balances to ensure that the adopted rules are consistent with the authorizing legislation. 
o Every year, agencies are required to provide the Legislature copies of its agency 
regulatory agenda which must include a list of rules that the agency expects to 
propose as Well as the statutory or other basis for adoption of a rule (5 M.R.S.§ 
8060). An agency may not propose a rule unless it is on an agency’s regulatory 
agenda and, if additional rulemakings are necessary, the agency must amend its 
regulatory agenda. These regulatory agendas are ﬁled with and posted by the 
Secretary of State’s Ofﬁce and submitted to the legislative committee which has 
jurisdiction over that agency. 
o Pursuant to Executive Order 4 FY 19/20, prior to an agency issuing notice of 
rulemaking and submitting a proposed rule to the Secretary of State for publication, 
the agency must submit a draft to the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General (OAG) fora 
legal pre-review of the proposed rule. 
o At the time of giving notice of a proposed rule, an agency must provide a fact sheet to 
the Legislature. The fact sheet contains all of the relevant information abouta 
proposal, including the statutory basis for the rulemaking. If an agency determines 
that a rule it intends to adopt will be substantially different from a proposed rule, it 
must provide the Legislature with a revised fact sheet. 
0 An agency must directly notify the primary sponsor of the legislation that was 
enacted and authorized the rulemaking if the legislation was enacted within the past2 
years 
o After an agency completes the required APA rulemaking process, including the 
opportunity for public input, and votes to formally adopt a rule, it must again submit 
the rule to the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General for approval as to form and legality 
before it can be ﬁled with the Secretary of State and become effective. 
o Any person may petition an agency for the adoption or modification of any rule at 
any time. 
1 
A major substantive rule is one that, in the judgment of the Legislature, either 
o requires the exercise of signiﬁcant agency discretion or interpretation in drafting or 
o is reasonably expected to result in a signiﬁcant increase in the cost of doing business, signiﬁcant 
reduction in property values, signiﬁcant reduction of govemment beneﬁts or services, serious burden 
on the public or serious burden on units of local government.
If a ﬁnal vote of the Legislature to approve a rule were required before any rule could be ﬁnally 
adopted, even the most routine, non-controversial rules will be delayed for months, if not a year 
or more, since agencies promulgate rules throughout the year, not just when the legislature is in 
session. Review of all agency rules within a legislative cornmittee ’s jurisdiction would greatly 
expand the workload of all committees requiring them to either extend their existing committee 
days or add additional workdays. Legislative committees already have a full workload with 
public hearings, work sessions and other committee responsibilities. Finally, the state 
govermnent workforce would need to be expanded to provide the stafﬁng resources needed to 
comply with the provisions of this bill - within agencies, OPLA, and the Secretary of State’s 
ofﬁce, as it would potentially double the efforts for each rulemaking project. 
We urge you to vote ONTP. Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any 
questions now or at the Work session.
