John. ~ “T\ inc »“" 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
- AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 I 
HOUSE OE REPRESENTATIVES 
‘Ararat’T 
John Andrews 
P.(). Box H8 
South Paris. ME (H171 
Andre“510»Ieeislalure.mainc.uo\ 
Cell: (I07) 739-9075 
February 14, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 383 
"An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of RuIemaking" 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and the distinguished members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is John Andrews and I represent House District 79 in western Maine. I am 
here to present my bill LD 383, ”An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking. ” 
I believe in the separation of powers. I believe that the Executive, Judicial and Legislative are all co-equal 
branches working for the good of the people of Maine. These branches are accountable to the people. 
The people have a First Amendment right to a redress of grievances with these parts that make up our 
Government and a vote every two years on every legislative seat in the state. 
What I do not believe in is the Fourth branch of Government that no one ever talks about, the 
Administrative State. The Administrative State is made up of bureaucrats who never face election or re- 
election working in government agencies and ofﬁces. Often these jobs are ﬁlled by the same person for 
decades. This is dangerous because it takes away oversight and the people's voice. The Administrative 
State is not accountable to the people. They are faceless, nameless and have the power to run your life 
or rein in your business through ’Routine Technical ’ rulemaking while never being elected to make laws. 
There is nothing routine or technical about this type of rulemaking. It takes the power and often ties the 
hands of the Representatives and Senators who are elected by their communities to serve. It is 
extremely dangerous to let the State make its own rules and call it routine. 
It's time that we as Legislators took our power back and re-afﬁrmed our commitment to the separation 
of powers of the three legitimate branches of Government that face a re-election every two years. It is 
beyond time that we reined in the Administrative State and provided oversight of the rulemaking 
process in its entirety. 
Today, we have an opportunity and a simple, yet impactful solution to this problem facing us. We can 
pass LD 383 which would make every rule under the Administrative Procedures Act a ’Major Substantive ’ 
rule which would require legislative oversight. This is the way that it should be. Our communities need to 
District 79 Paris. Sumner. West Paris and Woodstock 
Printed on rec}cled paper
be able to have input on all rulemaking and this would facilitate that going forward. We owe it to our 
citizens and businesses to be their eyes and ears under the dome and LD 383 would help us do that. 
This bill has co-sponsors that are Republican, Democrat and Un-enrolled. It is a nonpartisan bill, but it is 
a necessary bill for best practices in governance. I ask for your support in voting LD 383 ‘Ought to Pass’. 
Thank you for your time and commitment to public service. 
Rep. John Andrews
