 
TESTIMONY OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE  
 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
 
IN OPPOSITION  TO 
L.D. 383 
 
“An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking ” 
 
Presented by Representative:  ANDREWS of Paris.  
Cosponsored by:  Senator BALDACCI of Penobscot and Representatives: GREENWOOD of Wales, 
RISEMAN of Harrison, Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin.  
 
DATE OF HEARING: February 14, 2023  
 
Senator  Nangle , Representative Stover and members of the Committee  on State and Local 
Government . I am Judy Camuso , Commissioner  for the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife, submitt ing written testimony on behalf of the Department, in opposition  to L.D. 383. 
This bill will impose an enormous burden on state agencies, like MDIFW , as well as the 
Legislature.   
MDIFW is a n executive branch agency with statutory responsibility and mission to preserve, 
protect and enhance the inland fisheries and wildlife resources  of the State, which includes 
effective management of these resources . If this bill became law, it would hinder  our ability to 
manage fish and wildlife  populations  in the most timely, efficient , and responsive manner.  
Our regulatory authority is set by statute  which includes rulemaking both routine technical and 
major substantive. The Department undertake s rulemaking throughout the year in order to 
implement changes related to hunting, fishing, trapping, guiding and oth er recreational activities 
that our agency manages . Most of these rulemaking changes involve species management of fish 
and wildlife i.e. setting bag limits , seasons, and permit number s for wildlife  that are supported by 
scientific information gathered  by our biologists  and the resulting changes can greatly impact 
aspects of the state’s tourism economy . To give you a sense of the enormity  of our rulemaking 
efforts , typically our fisheries division alone proposes over 200 rule changes annually that 
addre ss season and bag limit modifications  for individual water bodies across the state. In the 
realm of hunting,  we have annual rule changes related to many of our big game animals as well 
as birds and furbearers addressing biological needs prior to the start of a harvest season ; 
additionally we  set annual migratory waterfowl season framework rules as required by the US 
Fish and Wildlife . Much of the rulemaking described above is done outside the timeline of a 
legislative session  to be in place for an upcoming  hunting , fishing, or trapping  season s.   
For Department rulemaking, the  Department has  an Advisory Council comprised of 11 members , 
appointed by the Governor  who represent geographic areas of the state  and operate under the 
umbrella of the Administrative Procedures Act with in Title 5 . Rulemaking is a large part of their 
responsibility  as a council member. Council members attend the public hearings on rules either 
proposed by the Commissioner or put forth via public petition and  make recommendations to the 
Commissioner based on public and stakeholder input from the region of the state they represent. 
The Commissioner cannot adopt rules unless the Advisory Council consents to the rule proposal 
by a majority vote.  
A number of checks and balances are built into the current rulemaking process to ensure that 
departments do not exceed their statutory authority  with the requirements to have a review done 
by the Secretary of State and Attorney General’s Office during parts of the rulemaking process. 
If all proposed rules were required to go through the major substantive legislative review it 
would substantially delay even the most routine rulema kings. We urge you to vote ONTP  and 
thank you for your time.  
 
Judith Camuso
MDIFW
LD 383
MDIFW has submitted the attached testimony but will not be testifying via ZOOM. 
We only wanted to submit it in writing.  Thank you, 
