Testimony in Support of LD 383:
“An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking”
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on State and Local Government, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 383.
A review of all 50 states’ small business climates published by the Pacific
Research Institute in 2015 ranked Maine 5th-worst in the nation.
1
Though PRI has not
conducted another analysis since then, the regulatory burden on Maine people has not
gotten better; far from it.
An analysis of the 2018 Code of Maine Rules (CMR) found that it contains
113,862 regulatory restrictions and 8.1 million words. Author James Broughel noted
that “it would take an individual about 449 hours – or more than 11 weeks – to read the
entire 2018 CMR, assuming the reader spends 40 hours per week reading at a rate of
300 words per minute.”
2
These regulations are not empty words; each is backed by the force of law,
bearing costs for those tasked with complying with them.
In 2021, a Mercatus Center analysis of the burden on Mainers from federal
regulation found an association “with an increase in the number of people living in
poverty by 13,140 (151,458 after vs. 138,318 before) and an increase in the poverty rate
of 1.01 percentage points (11.6 percent after vs. 10.59 percent before).”
3
In addition, the
analysis found the following regressive effects to Maine’s economy:
●
1.9 percent higher income inequality
●
53 fewer businesses
●
608 lost jobs annually
●
7.35 percent higher prices
Excessive government regulation makes life harder for everyday people.
3
Chambers, Dustin and Colin O’Reilly. The Regressive Effects of Regulations in Maine. Mercatus Center. 
March, 9 2021.
https://www.mercatus.org/research/policy-briefs/regressive-effects-regulations-maine
2
Broughel, James. A Snapshot of Maine Regulation in 2018. Mercatus Center. January 16, 2019. 
https://www.mercatus.org/research/policy-briefs/snapshot-maine-regulation-2018
1
Winegarden, Wayne. The 50-State Small Business Regulation Index. Pacific Research Institute. July 
2015.
https://www.pacificresearch.org/the-50-state-small-business-regulation-index/
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

As part of his work on Maine, Broughel also provided a framework for capping
onerous rules and regulations in order to promote an environment of economic growth,
including a yearly review of agency regulations and implementing automatic sunset
provisions. These are pertinent reforms for this committee to consider this session, in
addition to LD 383.
4
We commend Rep. Andrews for submitting this simple but important bill; LD
383 would require all future rulemaking to follow the “major substantive” level of public
scrutiny. The biggest difference between “routine technical” rules and “major
substantive” is the extent to which the legislature is involved in gathering information
and ultimately giving preliminary consent to the proposed rule.
Under “major substantive” rulemaking, due process exists. Under “routine
technical” standards, very little oversight exists. Mainers ultimately pay the cost.
Section 8071 outlines current standard for agency rulemaking to be considered “major
substantive” as those that, “in the judgment of the Legislature…Require the exercise of
significant agency discretion or interpretation in drafting; or…are reasonably expected
to result in a significant increase in the cost of doing business, a significant reduction in
property values…or other serious burdens on the public or units of local government.”
5
One could argue that any use of bureaucratic power, since it carries the force of
law, would be “reasonably expected to result in a significant increase in the cost of doing
business.” Why shouldn’t every rule promulgated by the executive branch be subject to
legislative scrutiny?
Why do legislators so easily cede legislative authority to unelected bureaucrats to
decide the extent of their own power? It is a system with very little balance, and it is
Mainers who bear the brunt of it. Agency rules are not lawmaking, they are executive
decrees, supported by little more than a legal opinion from the regulating agency itself,
yet they carry the force of law and often significantly affect the economy.
Please deem LD 383 “Ought To Pass” and help save Mainers from unnecessary
costs and compliance burdens stemming from overzealous state agency rulemaking.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
5
5 MRSA §8071. Legislative review of certain agency
rules
4
Broughel, James. Presentation to Maine Policy Institute on StateRegData. January 17, 2019. 
https://mainepolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/Broughel_slides_with_annotations-1.pdf
