  TESTIMONY OF  
Patrick Keliher  
Department of Marine Resources  
 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying  
In Opposition to  
LD 383 An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking  
Before the Committee on State and Local Government  
Sponsored by Representative Andrews  
Date of Hearing:  February 14, 2023  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative  Stover , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government , my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of  the Department of Marine Resources, and I am 
providing testimony  on behalf of the Department in opposition to  LD 3 83. 
 
This bill would make all  agency  rule-making major substantive, requiring legislative approval before adoption.   
The Department of Marine Resources is currently authorized to conduct rule -making to promote the 
conservation and propagation of marine organisms by limit ing their tak e by ti me, method, number, weight, 
length, or location.     The Department routinely adopts rules for such matters as setting fishing seasons, 
minimum or maximum sizes, or other  typical fisheries management measures.    DMR adopts approximately 
20 rules each year , addressing various aspects of commercial and recreational fisheries management.     Often 
these are done in the months leading up to a fishing season, so that the rules can be promulgated with the 
latest information on the resource, including recent fish ery survey results.    
 
The existing rule -making process provides opportunity for public input and the Department often modifies 
rules from the time they are proposed to the time they are adopted, in consideration of the comments 
received.  Rules advanced b y the Department must receive approval by the DMR Advisory Council before they 
can be adopted.  The Advisory Council is a 16 -member Council made up of a diverse array of commercial 
harvesters and dealers with geographical representation as well as public, recreational, and tribal 
representatives.    Collectively, they provide significant expertise in evaluating the appropriateness of proposed 
rules.   
 
At present, the Legislature has the ability to designate rules as major substantive in those instances wher e it is 
warranted.   By taking a broad -brush approach and designating all rules as major substantive, the entire 
purpose of granting rule -making authority would in many ways  be defeated.  DMR would need to propose 
regulations for future fishing seasons  well over one year in advance  to ensure their timely adoption .  This will 
result in the proposal of regulations more conservative than necessary, because the actual condition of the 
resource will be unknown.  I n addition , it will cause the Department to rely more heavily on emergency rule -
making, which w ill have the perverse effect of reducing the opportunity for public input.   
 
In short, moving forward with this legislation would have a negative effect on Maine’s marine resources, as 
well as the individuals who rely on t hese resources for their livelihood and recreation.   I urge you to vote 
Ought Not to Pass.   Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
might have.     
 
 
