Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
State of Maine 
(207) 287- 3531   
  Douglas A. Farnham  
Major  General  
Commissioner  
(207) 430- 6000  
 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management  
33 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333- 0033 
 
 
 
 
LD 383 “An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking ” 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
 
February 14, 2023  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and honorable members of the State and Local 
Government Committee , I am  Scott Young, D eputy Commissioner, Department of Defense, 
Veterans and Emergency Management  (DVEM) . I am writing to provide a letter in opposition to  
LD 383, An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of Rulemaking . 
 
Our department only has one major substantive rule with an additional eight routine technical rules. Consequently, we do not have staff dedicated to rulemaking. Requiring all department rules to be established as major substantive rules would create an undue burden on our program managers who are already at capacity managing the military, veteran, and emergency management operations within the State. This bill would result in pulling employees away from their primary duty of supporting the citizens of Maine.  
 Additionally, from our perspective the legislature already has the authority to decide which programs and associated rules should go through the more rigorous process of major substantive rule making. The current process of differentiating in statute w hich programs are routine versus 
major more appropriately targets the use of precious resources.  Ultimately the legislature has 
complete oversight of programs and associated rules though our various department annual/bi -
annual report s, the State Government Evaluation Act Report, and other various means such as 
the budget and the Maine State Annual Report. This bill seems unnecessary and e liminates the 
flexibility and judgement afforded the legislature in current law.  
 We respectfully request you vote Ought N ot to Pass. If our department can be of further 
assistance, please reach out to me at Scott.a.young@maine.gov. 
 
Scott Young
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management
LD 383
This letter is provided for the committee.
