February 14, 2023  
Dear Senator Na ngle, Representative Stover,  and esteemed committee members,  
Thank you for considering my comments regarding  L.D. 383  An Act to Restore Legislative Oversight of 
Rulemaking . 
While I understand the need for government agencies to have some freedom  to m ake timely  technical  
updates  by way of the rulemaking  process , through my own interest s in animal welfare and wildlife 
issues , I have notice d a pattern of some departments taking advantage of the rulemaking process to 
work around exi sting statutes and/or avoid going through the legislative process.  
For example, t here is another , simila r but more targe ted bill under consider ation  by the A griculture, 
Conservation and Forestry  committee  (L.D. 595 An Act to Require Major Substantive Rulemaking for the 
Companion Animal Sterilization Fund ).  L.D. 595  was submitted  in response to an overreaching and 
potentially damaging rulemaking  proposa l specific to  Maine’s low cost s pay/neuter program  (Help Fi x 
ME).   
 
The proposed rule  appears to be an e ffort from the Department  of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry  to circumvent a law passed  last session  that remo ves the Help  Fix ME Program from the  
Department ’s purview  and requir es that the Program  be outsource d to an appropriate organization  with 
spay/neu ter program  experience .   The language of the  proposed rul e makes it impossible for any 
Maine -based organization to qualify as the new ad ministrator of the Help Fix ME program, th us 
nullifying  the legislative  decision to outsource the program and allowing the Help  Fix ME program to 
remain under the control of the D epartment . 
While I agree that Maine government agencies need to have flexibility to respond to time -sensitive  
issues , and technical rulemak ing allows for th at flexibility , I believe in some cases the privilege  is being 
abused and more oversight is needed.  
Thank you f or your consideration . 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
 
 
Susanna Richer
Portland, ME
LD 383
Thank you for considering my comments regarding L.D. 383  An Act to Restore Legislative 
Oversight of Rulemaking.

