Auburn School Department 
Superintendent 60 Court Street 4th Floor 
Cornelia Brown PhD Aubum, ME 04210 
Assistant Superintendent Fax: 207-333-6628 
Sue Dorris, EdD , Phone: 207-784-6431 
Business Manager 
Mark Conrad, CAGS 
"Empowering lifelong learners to succeed in an ever changing world" 
http;//www.auburnschl.edu 
Testimony 
LD 725 
Dr. Cornelia Brown 
Superintendent of Schools 
Auburn School Department 
An Act to Add an Adult Education Pathway to a High School Diploma 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee of the 
131st Maine Legislature, my name is Connie Brown and l am the Superintendent of Schools for the Auburn 
School Department in Auburn, Maine. l am here today to testify in support of LD 725, An Act to Add an Adult 
Education Pathway to a High School Diploma. 
There are several graduations that I attend each year but my favorite is, and has always been, the Adult 
Education ceremony. For many, the path to this commencement has not been an easy one. Many students 
faced considerable challenges along the way. They have gone to school between working and/or taking care of 
a family and there have been many times when they wanted to give up. Abraham Lincoln once said, “Upon the 
subject of education, not presuming to dictate any plan or system for respecting it, I can only view it as the 
most important subject which we as a people can be engaged in” . He understood that the key to the 
betterment of society was education. Adult Education students understand completely the deﬁnition of 
PGTSGVGFGHCG. 
Adult Education changes lives. Life is often not easy for many students, who, for a variety of reasons, choose 
an alternative path to graduation. They should be celebrated for their discipline, commitment and courage to 
acquire the necessary education to enable them to move fon/vard with their personal and professional goals. 
They should not be counted as “non-completers" as they currently are because they chose to accessa 
different path to success. 
Life is a journey and sometimes that journey is not what you planned. Adult education students have 
succeeded against formidable odds. They meet those challenges with purpose and determination. Eleanor 
Rosevelt said, “The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their dreams" . An Adult Education 
diploma is the tool to turn their hard work and dreams into reality. 
LD 725, an Act to Add an Adult Education Pathway to a High School Diploma would allow Adult Education 
students who finish in 4 years within the beginning of high school to be considered “comp|eters ” . These 
students would neither count for nor against a high school’s completion rate. lt would dignify the hard work and 
achievement that these students so rightfully have earned. l hope that you will support LD 725.
