RSU 54/ MSAD 54 Adult & Community Education 
March 29, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the 131st Legislature's 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Jeremy Lehan. I am the Director of Adult Education in MSAD 54, which 
serves the Skowhegan area. This year I am also serving as President of the Maine Adult 
Education Association. I am testifying against LD 725. 
When I consider the broad nature of LD 725's phrasing, "Has completed the required 
adult education courses prescribed by the commissioner within 4 years of beginning 
high school," I am worried about potential unintended consequences. 
The language leaves much to interpretation and raises a series of questions and 
concerns, questions which have been eloquently articulated by Shirley Wright, the 
Executive Director of the Maine Adult Education Association. In addition, there may be 
a potential conflict with federal law that defines graduation rates. 
When I shared the proposed bill with my superintendent, Jon Moody, he shared these 
same concerns. Most importantly, however, he and I agreed that the existing statute 
already allows for adult education to work closely with high schools and alternative 
high school programs, as we jointly support students in finding the best pathway to 
their diplomas. 
Because I have worked in MSAD 54 for 27 years, I have a very close working 
relationship with the staff of Skowhegan Area High School and the alternative high 
school, Marti Stevens Learning Center. 
This year alone, I have met with over 15 high school aged students and their families to 
discuss adult education and how it might be an option for them as they pursuea 
diploma. 
In most cases, the students and parents begin talking to a high school counselor or 
administrator before I am brought into the conversation. 
As a result of these meetings, some students follow the process as outlined in existing 
statute: they first withdraw from K-12 education in order to pursue either a high 
school diploma or high school equivalency diploma through adult education. ff 
Tel: (207) 474-7553 0 61 Academy Circle, Skowhegan, Maine 04976 0 Fax: (207) 474-0992 
www.msac:l54.maineadulted.org
In other cases, however, we encourage these students to stay in school, especially if 
they are only 16 or 17. This fall, for instance, I met with one young man who is 
struggling at Marti Stevens Learning Center. Although earning the required number of 
credit hours to graduate on time with his class will be extremely difficult, he 
recognized —after our meeting—that it would be much better for him, as a 16~year- 
old, to stay enrolled. 
At Marti Stevens, he has access to all of the subject area teachers and can continue to 
learn content that will be essential to help him succeed on the HISET (high school 
equivalency) exams should he choose to withdraw down the road. 
As is the case in MSAD 54, most adult education programs have a small number of staff 
and cannot provide the same array of instruction that is available to high school 
students. 
In some instances, however, adult education can nicely supplement a high school 
student's education. Last year, for example, we offered our Reading and Writing Skills 
class to two high school seniors who would have had to come back for a fifth year to 
earn their last English credit required for graduation. 
This was a perfect illustration of how, as described in Chapter 315, Section 8605, adult 
education can serve a ”secondary school student” if it ”is designed to supplement the 
student's regular day school program." 
To me, this is a key distinction: adult education can and should help serve secondary 
school students who remain enrolled —but only if it is to supplement their education, 
not to supplant it. 
For those students who need to unenroll, we already have existing laws and 
procedures that have been working well for many years. 
In short, adopting LD 725's proposed changes could have unforeseen impacts that 
would fundamentally undermine the nature of adult education. l urge the committee 
not to move forward with this bill as written. 
Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely, 
Jeremy T. Lehan, Director 
MSAD 54 Adult and Community Education 
ilehan@msad54.org 
207-474-7553
