 
March 29, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the 131st Legislature’s Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs:  
 
Maine Adult Education Association (MAEA) is testifying against LD 725 because we are not sure of the intent of this 
legislation. LD 725 is brief but may have unintended/detrimental consequences throughout the statewide adult education 
system and for that reason, MAEA cannot support this legislation as written.  Before this legislation proceeds, we would 
suggest that statewide adult education leaders, including our association, and those interested in this bill, have a 
conversation about the intent of this proposed bill and its potential ramifications. There may be potential conflict with 
federal law  as well.  We would like to encourage the committee to explore federal law before moving ahead with this piece 
of potential legislation.  That said, concerns should this bill move forward are outlined below.  
 
There are three places already in Maine law tha t need to be noted and that may apply to this bill and they are listed below.  
 
In Chapter 315: Adult Education, section 8601 -A, the law states the following:  
“Adult Education means an education program primarily operated for individuals beyond the compuls ory age that is 
administered by school administrative units through a career pathways and service system…”  
 
In Title 20 -A, Chapter 207 -A, Section 4703 - Instruction for individual students, the law states, “Elementary and secondary 
schools shall provide st udents with opportunities for learning in multiple pathways that may include the following:  #7 
includes adult education.  
 
In Chapter 315, Section 8605:  Eligibility, the law states that:  
“The following persons may attend adult education courses offered by  a unit, region or center in accordance with that 
entity’s published program criteria and admission standards:  
A.  A person who is not yet 17 years of age who has withdrawn from school under the provisions of section 5001 -A, 
subsection 2, paragraph B.  
A-1, A person who is 17 years of age or older and who is not attending public school  
C. A secondary school student enrolled in a public day school program, if that student’s attendance at an adult education 
course is designed to supplement the student’s reg ular day school program and if attendance is in accordance with rules 
adopted by the commissioner.”  
 
Given what the law states above, districts have their own local policies regarding how adult education is accessed by K -12 
students; local programs are fun ded in different manners.  When looking at this proposed law, it is difficult to understand 
which part of this law it is intended to supplement or change.  If this bill proceeds, we have the following questions:  
1. Is the intent of this law to reduce dropout rates by counting adult education diplomas as high school diplomas to 
those students who receive a diploma within four years of starting high school?  If this bill is intended to lower the 
dropout rate, wouldn’t the law change involve a change in 20 -A, Cha pter 211, Section 5102 - Definitions (of a 
Dropout) and also in Subchapter I -B, Section 5031 High School Graduation Rate?  Adult education doesn’t count 
dropouts or configure graduation rates so it seems these are the laws that need to be amended.  Rules s et by the 
Department regarding these laws should also be taken into consideration and may also need to change.  
2. Has federal law regarding graduation rates been investigated?  It might make sense to thoroughly investigate 
ESSA law regarding graduation and dr opout rates.  
3. Would this proposed law make it more desirable for younger students to attend adult education instead of 
remaining in high school?   

4. Does this law imply that a student can solely attend adult education for nearly four years and earn a regular high 
school diploma and be counted in EPS funding?  
5. Is the intent of this bill to have adult education programs become alternative education programs?  
6. Would this bill change the intent of Chapter 315, Section 8605, in that students could access adult educa tion for 
the majority of their instructional program without dropping out of school?  
7. Does this law change the definition of a student who can be served by adult education?  
8. Would this law supersede current local policy that is working to serve at risk students?  
9. Adult education is already listed as a pathway in law for K -12 students.  Is this bill necessary?  Could this be 
handled at the local level by developing an individual ized plan for each at -risk student?  
10. How will this be funded?  If the student stays enrolled in the K -12 system and is part of the EPS count, how can 
you assure that adult education will receive funding to serve this student?  
11. What new programs and operatin g hours will adult education need to develop to make this law work?  And, how 
will this be funded?  
 
The model for adult education now in place across the state is one for occasional use by high school age students for 
credit recovery; they attend the same classes as adults and their access is limited unless an alternative education 
program has been developed and funded locally.  This process is guided by local policy.  Within adult education 
programs, all learners are expected to be self directed, motivated , and working toward a high school credential.   
 
The proposed law does not clearly define what it is trying to do.  If it means to promote  adult education as a K -12 
pathway, then many issues could arise.  For example:  
● Adult education programs may need to add classes and staff to serve younger students.  How would this be 
funded?  
● Adult education programs do not have open access to mental health services, special education services and 
guidance counseling.  How would this be funded?  
● Mixing adult learners wit h teens often doesn’t work well.  This could diminish services to adults if there isn’t proper 
teacher training and funding.  How will older adults’ needs in our programs be served?  
● Who counts whom?  Would this legislation reduce adult education’s ability to count the students served hence 
lowering funding that depends on enrollment?  
● Will this law create a domino effect and require several other law changes to reach its intent?  
 
These are some of the questions that Maine Adult Education has now, and we are sure more may arise as this subject is 
fully discussed.  We look forward to that discussion and to helping solve the issue once that issue is clearly defined.  
 
Thank you for your time today.  
 
Sincerely,  
Shirley Wright, Executive Director  
Maine Adult Educat ion Association  
swright345@gmail.com  
207-343-2157  
