I I 
'§‘(§ﬂ'$§,L 49 Community Drive, Augusta,ME 04330 
ms ' a %1£§g|§m0N Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATES Website: www'mSmaweb'c0mM MaineSCh0<IlSuperi|\l1:|ulc||lslksiidnliiin 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. 725 
AN ACT TO ADD AN ADULT EDUCATION PATHWAY TO A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, neither for nor against L.D. 725. 
Both legislative committees of MSSA and MSBA are supportive of students completing their high school 
education and graduating using a variety of pathways for this to occur. They understand the important role 
Adult Education plays in helping students gain their high school diploma or high school diploma equivalency. 
The intent of this bill sounds positive, yet in changing this statute, many other statutes would also need to be 
changed. First of all, in order to access Adult Education in order to attain a high school diploma, students 
would need to drop out of high school — thus would be considered a drop out — something this bill is trying to 
avoid. The graduation completion rate is determined by federal deﬁnition, as those students graduating within 
four years of entering high school. If a student has to drop out of high school in order to engage in the Adult 
Education program, MSSA and MSBA, don’t understand how this bill will serve to increase graduation 
completion rates. 
Positive alternatives already exist for students to receive support to graduate. Individual plans can be 
developed for those students considering dropping out of school. This should be goal number one. Adjusted 
ﬂexible schedules to provide support for the student can be developed. If the student has an IEP, this can be 
continued and used to support the student; something that cannot be utilized were the student to drop out and 
enter Adult Education. Additionally, the student could enroll in some Adult Education courses, those that 
might coincide with a ﬂexible, adjusted schedule. The goal is the same; improved graduation rates and with 
fewer students dropping out. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E_ King MSBA EXe¢"ﬁ"° Dl'e°l°' MSSA Executive Director
