Windham Raymond Adult Education
406 Gray Road • Windham, Maine 04062
Phone:  207-892-1819 • Email:  wrae@rsu14.org; Web:  www.windham.maineadulted.orgThomas A. Nash, Director
tnash@rsu14.org
Our Mission :  
Windham Raymond Adult Education provides affordable, high quality adult learning opportunities that meet the academic, 
career, and personal pursuits of our diverse adult population - families, workers, citizens and the business community.March 29, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the 131st Legislature’s Committee on Education and Cultural  Affairs:  
I am testifying today against LD 725 primarily because I am unsure of the intent of this legislation. LD 725 is brief but may 
have unintended/detrimental consequences throughout the statewide adult education system and for that reason, I cannot 
support this legislation as written. The proposed legislation may be in conflict with federal law as well. 
For over 37 years I have served several school districts and their respective communities as an Adult Education Director. I 
have helped thousands of adults ranging from age 17 to 81 complete their High School Diploma, GED, or now the HiSET 
(Maine’s approved High School Equivalency Test). For myself and my colleagues, we have been a welcoming, safe place 
entrusted to serve adults who never finished high school due to a variety of factors as well as those disenfranchised young 
adults who had recently left school. We have never labeled any of them as “dropouts” but rather saw our role to help them 
navigate a different path to completing high school.
While I am familiar with state statutes that guide and govern adult education programs in Maine defining the population we 
can serve - many of which would require revision if this bill were to indeed move forward - I would like to focus on just a few 
major concerns that I see with LD 725 as written.
Adult education programs serve a range of ages as noted previously.  Adults who return to complete their high school creden -
tial are highly motivated, juggling multiple responsibilities. Placing them in classes with young adults ages 17-18 currently cre -
ates new challenges and obstacles for them to persist. Younger students are at different maturity and developmental levels. 
Oftentimes, the older adults become frustrated with said maturity level and ultimately leave our program because of it. Imagine 
placing them in a class with 14, 15, or 16-year-olds as well!  It would simply not work.
Proposing to give students the ability to potentially complete the majority - or even all of their four years of high school - in an 
adult education program is no different than an alternative education pathway already available. Most high schools currently 
offer that option, complete with support services, and access to all the rights, privileges, and activities afforded to traditional 
high school students. They would lose those services due in part to the fact that adult education programs are already gross -
ly underfunded. How would a new model as vaguely presented in this bill be funded locally? How would issues of busing, 
increased hours of operation, support services, including special education, nutrition needs, etc. be addressed?
If the true intent of this law is to simply reduce “dropout” rates by counting adult education diplomas as high school diplomas 
then change the definition of a “dropout’! . Allow for a lateral move of an age-appropriate student to an adult education pro -
gram to not count against a district’s completion rate. Providing adequate funding to serve current and  future adult education 
students is also essential. I would go a step further and encourage the elimination of the word “dropout” altogether from our 
school environments.
If Maine wants to build this type of system, there would need to be ample negotiation and ample funding to build one that is in 
the high school age learner’s best interest.  The best system would not let these students “drop out” at all but build individual -
ized pathways to ensure the success of all involved and in need.
Thank you for your time today. 
Sincerely, 
Thomas Nash, Director
RSU #14 - Windham Raymond Adult Education 
tnash@rsu14.org
207-892-1819
