. <‘;~i“ ,. 
x: _ <%‘ 
(3, ,, -4 .. 
E :*
i
.
I .‘”€=i1b.@% .
“ 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS cor. WILLIAM ROSS GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cmsr 
Testimony of Lt. Aaron Hayden 
IN OPPOSITION or LD I455 
An Act to Establish the Weigh Point Preclearance Program 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation. My name is Lt. Aaron Hayden, and I am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Commercial Vehicle Enforcement 
Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and 
the Maine State Police in opposition of LD1455. 
This bill is to create an act to establish the weigh point preclearance program. 
The Maine State Police is the lead agency for the Motor Carrier Safety 
Administrative Plan (MCSAP). On December 4, 2015, the President signed into 
law the FAST Act. It provides long-term funding certainty for surface 
transportation priorities including the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
Administration ’s (FMCSA) grant programs. One of the largest changes under the 
FAST Act is the consolidation of multiple FMCSA grant programs into the Motor 
Carrier Safety Assistance Program (MCSAP) and High Priority (HP) Program. 
MCSAP and HP now include components of the previously separate New Entrant, 
Border Enforcement, Safety Data Improvement, Performance and Registration 
Information Systems Management, and Commercial Vehicle Information 
Systems and Networks grant programs. 
This MCSAP Comprehensive Policy (MCP) serves as a combined 
information resource, providing program policy, guidance, and technical 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
assistance. It includes FMCSA’s goals, objectives, and national program elements 
and strategies to meet the Nation’s most urgent commercial motor vehicle (CMV) 
safety needs. Within this policy are the state’s requirements to have electronic 
screening or a preclearance program. 
The section that addresses E—screening from the MCSAP policy is as follows: 
Electronic Screening (E-Screening). Projects that electronically identify a 
commercial vehicle, verify its size, weight, and credentials information, and 
review its carrier’s past safety performance while the vehicle is in motion and 
then communicate safely to the driver to either pull in or bypass the roadside 
inspection station. Vehicles that are: 1) properly credentialed; 2) operated bya 
motor carrier with a history of safe operations; and 3) within weight limits (if the 
site is instrumented for weight measurements) are allowed to bypass inspection 
facilities (although such vehicles are still subject to random inspection). E- 
screening projects are designed to target roadside enforcement services aimed at 
high-risk motor carriers/ motor vehicles, and to reduce operating costs for safe 
and legal motor carriers. Fixed, virtual, or mobile inspection stations that can 
provide this functionality are examples of e-screening implementations. 
Transponders (i.e., dedicated short-range communications or commercial mobile 
radio services network devices, such as smartphones, tablets, ﬂeet management 
systems, global positioning system navigational units, and onboard telematics 
devices are referred collectively as wireless mobile data devices. 
Maine as a state became compliant with this requirement in 2005 with the 
pilot of Maine’s ﬁrst bypass program. The program was selected through a 
process and a company selected. Keep in mind that FMCSA only requires thata 
state has a program and does not require more then one vendor. The bypass 
program in Maine is based on a company’s safety score and not based on weight. 
A company choosing to buy into a program can do so and if their company meets 
the safety requirements set for that time frame, then they would receive a signal 
on a transponder to bypass the open scale house. The Trooper or Motor Carrier 
Inspector receives a signal of a bypassing truck with a picture and then ensures 
visually the truck passing is the correct one receiving the bypass. As you can 
imagine when screening 100s of trucks at a time this can be difficult to track. It is 
important that trucks that do not meet our safety criteria do not bypass the scale 
without proper screening. 
There are three very signiﬁcant areas within this bill that formulate our 
reasons for our opposition. 
1S*- Any additional laws in 29-A that require the state police to do more 
tasks than what we are currently tasked to do is concerning. We would ask that 
the Transportation Committee consider additional headcount be added if this act 
were to pass. This bill basically requires Troopers to evaluate multiple programs 
at the same time while trying to screen commercial vehicles. This would require 
additional manpower be present at the weigh stations. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
2nd- This act also subverts current Maine procurement rules and Ofﬁce of 
technology procedures. This act requires the Maine State Police to allow for all 
bypass systems being offered to be “used concurrently ” . This could require 
technology to be forcefully installed into our weigh stations even if we felt that 
company was not up to Maine’s standards for IT protection. 
3Yd- As stated above Maine already has a preclearance program that is 
evaluated to ensure it meets the standards we have here in Maine. We have 
evaluated other vendors in the past and ask that you continue to allow for that.A requirement in law for a program that already exists is unnecessary. 
We understand the need to be fair to business. It is very important to note that 
we have not blocked companies that provide services to commercial vehicle 
owners and operators. Most of these companies offer many services such as 
tolling and trafﬁc alert systems that are outside of Maine’s bypass program and 
can still be used if a company chooses. Maine only has 5 ﬁxed point structural 
weigh stations and again only a few Troopers and Motor Carrier inspector to run 
the technologies we have currently in use. Any additional requirements as stated 
above would be draw on manpower. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote against of LD1455. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank 
you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you 
might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-7088 (Fax)
