 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
Timothy S. Doyle  
ON 
L.D. 1455 , “An Act to Establish the Weighing Point Preclearance 
Program ”  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and 
members of the Transportation Committee.  My name is Tim Doyle  
and I am the Vice President of Maine Motor Transport Association.  
The Association  is comprised of  over 1,700-member companies, 
whose employees comprise a large portion of the nearly 34,000 
people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine.  
 
I am here today to testify neither for nor against  LD 1455  and to offer 
the trucking Industry’s perspective on weigh station bypass programs . 
 
Weighing point preclearance programs are operated across the 
United States by law enforcement who enforce commercial motor 
carrier saf ety regulations  as well as  state laws regarding size and 
weight.  The use of technology today allows for the screening of 
many more trucks than was possible  even  a decade or so ago  and 
technology is improving all the time .  For example,  at certain weigh 
stations in Maine , Troopers are able to determine  size and weight, 
whether or not required state and federal fees  are paid , and what a 
motor carrier ’s inspection selection score  is, all while the commercial 
trucks are pulling up to the weigh station  and befo re they even come 
to a stop where Troopers are stationed .   
 
This allows for Troopers to quickly asses important aspects of the 
carrier ’s safety, and in the majority of instances the truck is allowed to 
proceed without even being stopped, or having only be en st opped for 
a few minutes while a Trooper briefly checks the driver’s credentials  
and makes certain assessments  of the driver .  The future of this 
technology will be to screen and inspect  commercial trucks while they 
remain on interstate highways, witho ut need to interrupt commerce 
unless safety defects or violations are discovered during the 
screening.  
 
Weigh station bypass technology allows trucks with certain 
transponders or apps installed on their phone or tablet to “bypass” the 
weigh station based o n preselected parameters established by 
Troopers.  The technology communicates with the participating  trucks 
on the highway , informing the driver that they are authorized to 
bypass the weigh station . At their sole discretion,  however,  Troopers 
can also det ermine that all commercial trucks must be inspected 
without bypassing.   This technology is available from vendors and 
purchased by motor carriers who wish to participate in the bypass 
program , all at no cost to the State .  Currently in Maine, Troop K only 
authorizes  one such bypass technology vendor.   
 
This bill would require the State Police to operate a bypass program 
and allow all qualified vendors to sell and operate their technology in 
Maine .  It would also require that all qualified vendors be treate d 
equally in terms of their use in Maine . 
 
MMTA believes that the use of technology by Troop K greatly 
enhances motor carrier safety and also serves to protect the state ’s 
vital infrastructure , as well as providing policy makers with valuable 
data on truck  count and other information .  The use of bypass 
technology saves compliant carriers time and money by allowing 
those  who have a demonstrated safety record to potentially bypass 
the weigh stations, while allowing Troopers to focus their enforcement 
efforts  on the carriers that need the most attention .   
 
MMTA is agnostic when it comes to which vendors should be 
authorized  in Maine . We believe that all qualified vendors should be 
allowed to offer their product, giving motor carriers greater choice on 
which s ervice they select based on their individual needs.  
 
We are aware of discussions that are underway which may prevent 
the necessity of this legislation and we are supportive of the ongoing 
communication and involvement of the State Police  and the vendors 
involved .  We are pleased to be included in the discussions and are 
hopeful that solutions can be found that avoid the need to mandate a 
program by law.  
 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Timothy Doyle
Maine Motor Transport Association
LD 1455
Corrected Version from the one passed out in Committee.
