Maine Conservation Voters 
I rzform. Vote. Protect. 
Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters 
In Support of LD 1363 
“An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the MaineV 
Metallic Mineral Mining Act” 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
V April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Beth Aheam and I am the 
director of government affairs for Maine Conservation Voters (MCV). MCV isa 
nonproﬁt organization dedicated to protecting Maine’s environment, democracy, and 
climate future. Today we are testifying in support of LD 1363 and commend the sponsor, 
Rep. Landiy, and the Department of Environmental Protection for crafting this bill. 
LD 1363 would allow the restriction on open pit mining in Maine’s Mining Law to be 
lifted if a proposed mining operation will only generate mine waste that does not have 
the potential to create acid mine drainage or other drainage that would violate water 
quality standards. We do not do this lightly. I spent ﬁve years Working with Nick Bennett 
from NRCM, battling mining legislation that would have damaged Maine’s water 
resources. Finally, in 2017, we were able to get Maine’s current mining law passed. I 
would not advocate weakening that bill and believe that it can be changed to allow for 
mining for important minerals that will not pollute our water; These are the reasons why: 
First, the bill is designed to apply statewide to any metal or metalloid element, and not 
just to one particular deposit of spodumene (the mineral from which lithium is obtained) 
in Newry. 
Second, it puts the appropriate burden of proof on the mining operator of a spodumene 
deposit, or other metal, to provide data showing that the deposit does not co-occur with 
deposits of reactive, acid-generating ores, or materials that are otherwise dangerous 
because of high levels of heavy metals, for example.
Third, this approach keeps intact all of the other safeguards in Maine’s Mining Law that 
protect Maine’s enviromnent and taxpayers from a legion of possible risks associated 
with mining activities. These include: 
0 No use of tailings impoundments and a requirement to use dry stack tailings 
management; 
0 A ban on mines requiring perpetual treatment; 
0 A requirement not to contaminate groundwater beyond 100 feet from a mining 
operation; and 
0 A requirement that a mining operation provide sufficient funding up front to the 
State to cover a Worst-case mining disaster (refundable after successful closure). 
We hope that spodumene mining can occur safely in Maine. But as Nick has expressed, 
there is much We do not know and mining is risky. MCV supports the amendments to LD 
1363 that NRCM has offered. I would be happy to answer any questions, now or before 
the Work session.
r
