 
  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner 
Representative Lori Gramlich  
Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources 
Via email 
April 10, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished ENR Committee, 
 
I cannot join you this week as you consider the following bills:  
 
L.D. 1363    An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the Maine Metallic Mineral 
Mining Act 
L.D. 1433    An Act to Exclude Pegmatites from the Definition of "Metallic Mineral" 
L.D. 1476    An Act to Amend the Definition of "Metallic Mineral" in the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining 
Act 
L.D. 1508    An Act to Ensure a Strategic Approach to Maine's Energy Transition by Imposing a 
Moratorium on Lithium Mining 
L.D. 1471    An Act to Amend Provisions of the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act 
L.D. 1495    Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Role of Critical Minerals as a Resource in 
the State 
L.D. 1564    An Act to Eliminate Metallic Mining Activities Without a Permit 
 
As you delve into the complex issues surrounding valuable minerals, the Appalachian Mountain Club 
asks you to approach the issue with certain core principles in mind:   
 
Maine’s clean environment is our most valuable asset. Clean air, clean water, and natural beauty are 
the basis of our state’s identity and economy. They are essential not only to our good health, but to our 
$7 billion tourism economy. Clean water in particular is also essential to Maine’s $11.7 billion 
agricultural sector and our $3.2 billion marine products sector.  
 
Maine’s water and air have not always been clean. Within living memory, our rivers carried an 
overpowering stench and fumes strong enough to peel the paint off nearby houses. They were cleaned 
through decades of collective work, strong environmental laws, and considerable investment.  We must 
not backslide on the tremendous gains we have made. 
 
Maine is home to exceptional fish that require clean water. Maine supports the most extensive 
distribution and abundance of wild Brook trout in their native range in the United States. Ours is one of 
only two states with populations of native Arctic charr, the other state being Alaska. Maine is home to 
the only U.S. population of the endangered Atlantic salmon. Each of these fish depends on cold, clean 
water, and their populations have survived thanks to decades of careful stewardship. We must not put 
the future of these extraordinary assets at risk. 
 
 
 We must anticipate and prepare for the full range of potential extraction proposals. While the six bills 
currently before you appear to be inspired by the Plumbago Mountain find of spodumene, any actions  
that you take should recognize the potential for other mineral extraction. As you know, Wolfden Mt. 
Chase LLC has a current application before the Land Use Planning Commission to rezone 374 acres in T6-
R6 WELS for the purpose of developing and operating a metallic mineral mine at Pickett Mountain.  
Exiro Minerals Corporation is currently expressing interest in mining for nickel, copper, and cobalt near 
Crawford Pond in Union and Warren. Wolfden Resources previously conducted exploratory drilling in 
the Pembroke area, with the intent to mine silver at Big Hill, while J.D. Irving previously sought to mine 
copper and gold at Bald Mountain in Aroostook. Other proposals are certain to come forward, and 
Maine must prepare for the full range of potential scenarios.  
 
Maine’s residents, taxpayers, and wildlife must not pay the future price for mineral extraction. Fifty 
years after it closed, the  Callahan mine in Brooksville remains a Superfund site, with taxpayers footing 
the bill for stabilization and clean up. The State of Maine sued Kerramerican, Black Hawk Mining, and 
Denison Mines, Inc. to recover its costs for addressing hazardous substances released into surface and 
groundwater at Blue Hill.  We must learn from these experiences and prevent both future 
environmental harm and the expense of attempting to mitigate it.  
 
We can take the time to get this right. Climate change is real, and we support the transition to  new 
technologies to replace fossil fuels. At the same time, biodiversity loss is equally real and threatening to 
the future of life on Earth, with an estimated 69% drop in wildlife populations worldwide since 1970, 
according to the World Wildlife Fund. Both issues are complex and addressing them requires multiple 
solutions. We must approach the issue of mineral extraction with seriousness, gathering the facts and 
understanding the risks before making decisions.  
 
We appreciate your work on behalf of the people of Maine and look forward to engaging with you on 
this and other issues going forward. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Eliza Townsend 
Maine Conservation Policy Director 
 
PS: I highly recommend this terrific article on Maine’s fisheries from the April 9 edition of the Maine 
Sunday Telegram : https://www.pressherald.com/2023/04/09/maines-a-fishing-destination-for-out-of-
staters-and-residents-alike/  
 
