April 13, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
RE: LD 1363 – An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the 
Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Environment and Natural Resources , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am 
the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate 
this opportunity to comment  neither for nor  against LD 1363, An Act  to Support 
Extraction of Common Minerals by A mending the Maine Met allic Mineral Min ing 
Act. We appreciate the intent and general di rection of this bill, but we have som e 
feedb ack we would like to see incorporated into a final version . We understand there 
are some conversations around a n amendment,  and we hope these points would be 
consider ed in that version.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
Lithium will play a big role in the world ’s clean energy and economic future.  Identifying 
these resources in Maine has provided us an e xciting opportunity to  be part of that 
future, but it is c ritical that we proceed th oughtfully. It is our res ponsibility to  work 
together at the state, local, and federal lev els to ensure we minimize the impacts to the 
communi ties and ecosy stems  we tre asure in our state. We believe LD 136 3, which we 
understand had significant input from the Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection,  would allow us to  deve lop thoughtful  approach.  
 
In reviewing this bill, my team at TNC in Maine focused  on a few broad principles that 
will continue to be  important as  our state considers how to move forward with this 
opportunity. These princip les includ e: 
- Any changes t o the Maine  Metallic Mineral Mining Act must cons ider broad 
long -term  impacts. This section of law  (Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 9 ) is 
comprehens ive, complex, and took several years  of work from  state agency 
staff, legislators, and environm ental organizations to enact. The Nature 
Conservancy was deeply involved in shaping these rules  and had specific  input 
in the pieces that protect Maine ’s water quality . 
- The development of any deposit must rely  on thorough and science -based  site 
characterization . We need to look beyond the specific mineral of interest and 
understand the risks or impacts of t he surrounding  area. Often the target of the 
mining operation  is found emb edde d or within  other rock types with varying 
levels of risk. These si te specifics will need to inform the development  – 
including the handlin g of materials, waste rock, tailings, etc.  
- Any changes to Maine law apply statewide. We must ensure that changes we 
make today  are protective  enough  to ensure any future deposits and potential 
sites  will be evaluate d in a careful and deliberate way.  
 
With those principles in mind, we would like to offer a few specific suggestions to LD  
1363. We understand that our  colleagues  at NRCM have been working with interested 
parties to offer some amended language. We support their amendment, and 
specifically support these a spects:  
 
- Section 4 – Changes to the Criteria for Approval  – Water Quality  
The language  added here  appears to exempt  mining operations that use off site 
processing facilitie s from compl iance with section 490 -QQ, subsection  3, which 
is the section of the Maine Metallic Mineral M ining Act that governs 
performance, operation, and reclamation standards . Sub section 3 of that Act 
outlines the water quality monitoring require ments. We believe this exemption 
was unintentional an d recommend clarifying  the language  to direct  that all 
operations must adhere to the water quality monitoring require ments at the 
mine site , regardless of where the material is processed.  
 
- Section 5 – Changes to the Criteria for Approval – Allo wing Open Pit Mining  
We understand that lithium bearing minerals are found in spodumene crystals, 
which  are found in granitic  pegmatite rock. These  deposits tend t o be  different 
than other sulfide deposits where other me tallic minerals are found in Maine. It 
is important to distinguish the difference s between these two types of deposit s 
and the different associated risks. However, it is critical that thorough site 
characterization is required  to understand if any aspect of the mining operation 
carries risk of acid rock drainage, alkali rock drainage, or metal mine drainage.  
 
We understand  the intent here to allow open pit mining in low-risk situations, 
but as written this section of the bill is  not strong enoug h. Words like “potential ” 
are subject ive and undefined. What does it mean in this context? Does it mean  
no potential to create acid rock drainage? Low potential? How would this be 
measured? Against what criteria? Where within the mining operation – just at 
the extraction site? At the processing area? At the tailings / waste storage area?  
 
TNC recommends strength ening this section by requiring the Maine DEP to 
adopt major substantive rules governing the char acterization necessary to 
determine whether a deposit  would qualify for pe rmitting as an ope n-pit mine 
and best practices  for using open -pit metho ds. 
 
We recommend  the following  changes  (in red)  to language in part O: 
O.  The mining operation will not use open -pit mining , except that the mining 
operation may use open -pit mining if the mining operation will only generate mine 
waste that does not have the potential to  create acid rock drainage, alkali rock 
drainage or  metal  mine drainage  containing toxic metals  at levels that violate 
water quality criteria adopted p ursuant to secti on 420  or does not  violate water 
quality standards other than sedimentation and turbidity . 
 
- Section 6 - Criteria  for Reclamation of an Open -Pit Mining Operation  
TNC has serious concerns about criteria (6):  
o (6) The actively mined, not reclaimed portion of the open pit may not 
exceed 100 acres at any one time.  
Which features of an open -pit mining operations are considered the “actively 
minded ” portion? How is that different from the  total mining area?  
 
TNC strongly recommends changing this approach to require 
“contemporaneous reclamation ”, meaning that reclamation would occur prior to 
the operation being allowed to open another active  open pit area.  Using this 
contemporaneous reclamation method, the operator could still  oper ate over a 
large area but would be re quired to reclaim each section as they go to minimize  
the risks of longer -term  exposure of the underlying rock and mat erials. It would 
also minimize the overall landscape impacts.  
 
In addition, we recommend limiting the actively mined open pit to 10 acres or 
less at any one  time  rather than 100 acres.  A 10 acre active pit size limit would 
mirro r existing statute in title 38 section 490 -D(8)(a) that governs  performance 
standards for excavations . 
 
 
The Nature Conservancy believes if  we take a deliberate, smart from the start approach 
to developing lithium resources in our  state, we  can have  both protective regulations 
and responsible mining.  We hope the sponsor and this committee will take our 
suggeste d language changes and recommendations into co nsideration  during the work  
session. We  would be happy to  answer questions duri ng the work session or at any 
time during this process.  Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
