Testimony of Mary Freeman in Support of LD 1476 and LD 1433 and Opposition to LD 
1363 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources, I am Mary Freeman, from South Paris, Maine, and I am 
here representing myself as a veteran Maine gem miner. 
My husband and I purchased property in Western Maine and have been exploring Maine 
pegmatites for more than 25 years. Western Maine is blessed with granite pegmatites that have 
centuries of mining history without environmental problems. Tourmaline and other gems as Well 
as Spodumene form in these pegmatites. 
In 2018 we uncovered large spodumene crystals on the north side of Plumbago Mountain 
in Newry. Spodmnene contains lithium, a metal, and, as a result, concerns have been raised about 
our proposal to quarry spodumene. Yesterday there was a very informative presentation from the 
State Geologist and representatives from the Maine DEP on basic geology and the Maine Mining 
Act. As was discussed, the majority of elements on the periodic table are metals, and the vast 
majority of minerals contain metal elements. The environmental risks, however, vary by the class 
of mineral, and spodumene is a very low risk common rock-forming silicatemineral. I refer you 
to a bulletin by Henry Beny that discusses lithium and the spodumene at Plumbago Mountain 
and explains its classiﬁcation. Simply put, spodumene is not in the class of minerals that present 
the environmental risks that Mining Act was intended to regulate. 
LD 1476 and LD 1433 are important because they clarify what types of minerals would 
be subject to comprehensive regulation under the Mining Act. As you heard yesterday, the 
Mining Act and Chapter 200 establish a comprehensive set of regulations and a robust permitting 
process that require a signiﬁcant dedication of time and money. It would not make senseto
subject relatively benign activities to that regulatory program. These two bills provide important 
clariﬁcations that would ensure the mining of minerals that present enviromnental risks are 
subject to the robust requirements of the Mining Act, but the excavation of minerals that do not 
present such risks (and that have occurred for generations in Maine) can continue under the 
Performance Standards for Quarries. 
Crushed spodumene of the purity present at Plumbago Mountain is needed to make 
scientiﬁc glass including our computer and cell phone screens. Our proposal to develop a 5 to 10 
acre quarry to excavate this spodumene would be indistinguishable in appearance and 
environmental impact from the limestone and granite quarries that exist throughout Maine. When 
responding to our request for a quarry license, the DEP agreed and concluded that the 
environmental risk associated with our proposal to quarry spodumene was generally comparable 
to extraction of limestone or granite, particularly when compared to mining sulﬁde deposits to 
extract metals. Nonetheless, because of uncertainty in the deﬁnition of what constitutes a' 
metallic mineral, the DEP denied our request. 
We have been working for more than three years with the DEP to try to resolve and 
clarify issues associated with our proposal to quarry spodumene. Everyone agrees -it does not 
present enviromnental risks that warrant regulation under the Mining Act. l hope that common 
sense can prevail and We can clarify the law consistent with its intent. The regulatory burden 
should be commensurate with the environmental risks. Subjecting relatively benign quarrying 
activities to regulation under the Mining Act is not needed to protect the enviromnent. I strongly 
urge you to approve legislation that allows environmentally responsible quarrying of granite 
pegmatites to proceed in accordance with Maine’s Performance Standards for Quarries.
2
I also understand that Legislators and citizens are concerned about the potential impact of 
chemical processing of spodumene to make lithium salts for use in EV batteries. We are not 
proposing to do so. We understand that concern, however, and would support language that 
requires chemical processing of any ore be regulated under the Mining Act. 
Finally, I am opposed to LD 1363 because as drafted, the deﬁnition of metallic mineral 
would subject any mineral containing a metallic or metalloid element of economic value, to the 
Mining Act regardless of its use. That would include tourmaline because it contains lithium. In 
fact it would include all Maine’s gemstones, granites, gravels and soils and a host of other 
commonly quarried materials to regulation under the Mining Act and lead to discussions about 
the economic values of aluminum, iron and other common metals rather than focusing on 
enviromnental impacts. 
We do not have to sacriﬁce the enviromnent to have new products; nor do we need to 
sacriﬁcei advancements to care for our enviromnent. With thoughtful planning and legislating, we 
can have both. 
Thank you for consideration of my comments and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Mary Freeman - 
South Paris, Maine
3
