S STATE or MAINE 
V _ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION *‘"“°"” Q, 5 
‘*1 
I-~./~ Q.-, -5 1;, 
,.i__ _ _;;s 
j,I
4 _ _, ;|-alliw
\ I' 
“"4fE0n\t»\ ‘\‘“_ 
JANET T. MILLS MELANIE LOYZIM 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY OF 
Melanie Loyzim, Commissioner 
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
SPEAKING IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 1363 
AN ACT TO SUPPORT EXTRACTION OF COMMON MINERALS BY AMENDING 
THE MAINE METALLIC MINERAL MINING ACT 
SPONSORED BY REP. LANDRY 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON 
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
DATE OF HEARING: 
APRIL 13, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee, I am 
Melanie Loyzim, Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, 
speaking in support of L.D. 1363. 
Maine has one of the most stringent mining laws in the nation, ensuring that valuable 
minerals can be safely extracted and processed in our state without sacrificing the 
quality of drinking water, lakes and streams, and other natural resources. L.D. 1363 
would make changes to Maine's Metallic Mineral Mining Act to clarify what metallic 
minerals are covered by the law, and it would allow open-pit mining under a very narrow 
set of circumstances. This bill would retain all other environmental protections currently 
1\U($USTt\ BAN(§()R I’()R'1‘I,2\;\‘I) PRESQUI7, ISLE 
I7 $T:\TE HOUSE S'1'1\TI()N 106 iI()(.§i\N RUAD, SUITEI 6 312 (I:\NC() R()§\D I235 (IENTRAI, DRIVE, SKY\V1\\ PARK 
:\UG¥JS'i'1 ‘\ _, i\'I1'\INl*,li4333ei?l)i7 Bu-‘\NG()R_ Mr\INE ()~I4I7i I’OR'i‘I,-1\NI'), MAINI5 (34103 PRESQUE. ISLE, i\-"Ii\INI ‘1(§4769 
{Z137} Z37—7(18?§ FAXZ (207) 2873826 5297} 94.174574} FAX: 94‘ 4:244 QIZQ7} 822-6317f} FAX: (287) 8226303 {Z97} 764-04?? IUXX: (207) 76l)<3I43 
xx cbszt \\ \\"\V.l" "iinc.g0v,;'dcp
L.D. 1363: An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the Maine Metallic Mineral 
Mining Act 
Testimony of: Melanie Loyzim, DEP 
Public Hearing: April 13, 2023 
Page 2 of3 
provided by Maine’s law and the Departments Chapter 200 rule, Metallic Mineral 
Exploration, Advanced Exploration and Mining. 
Recent discoveries of metallic mineral deposits have led to questions about whether 
mining of those deposits are, or should be, subject to the Mining Act. The current law's 
blanket prohibition on open-pit mining makes it virtually impossible from a practical 
perspective to extract metallic mineral deposits near the surface, and compliance with 
the highly protective requirements of the law and DEP’s rule will be very expensive for 
those who want to mine for metals in Maine. The owners of a quariy in Newry, wherea 
spodumene deposit containing lithium was discovered, have asserted that the rocks 
they remove from the deposit do not meet the current law's definition of a metallic 
mineral. DEP disagrees with their interpretation of the statute, and they have filed two 
lawsuits against the Department on this issue that are now pending in the Kennebec 
County Superior Court. Due to that pending litigation, DEP is not able to discuss the 
particulars of that situation here today, but looking forward suggests that the Legislature 
is a more appropriate forum to decide how mining should be regulated in Maine. 
Prior to 2011, Maine’s Mining Act specifically excluded “common rock forming minerals, 
such as quartz, calcite, dolomite, feldspar, pyroxenes, amphiboles, zeolites, clays, or 
micas.” Pyroxenes include spodumene. The new definition adopted into Maine’s law in 
2011 mirrored a similar mining law in effect in Michigan, which does not include those 
specific exemptions. Throughout three rounds of major substantive rulemaking to 
incorporate Maine’s 2011 mining law into DEP’s rules, from 2012 through 2017, there 
was little discussion about what that new definition of metallic mineral would cover. The 
primary focus by citizens and lawmakers was on massive sulfide deposits, groundwater 
contamination, siting restrictions and tailings management. 
Now that lithium and so-called “rare earth metals” are in high demand for renewable 
energy technology and other uses, and deposits of those metals are being foundin
L.D. 1363: An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the Maine Metallic Mineral 
Mining Act 
Testimony of: Melanie Loyzim, DEP 
Public Hearing: April 13, 2023 
Page 3 of3 
Maine, we are faced with a question of balancing the fight against global climate change 
with protection of groundwater and natural resources in our backyards. 
As we prepared for this legislative session, DEP considered recommending that the old 
exclusion of common rock forming minerals be added back into Maine's mining law. 
However, that would categorically exempt all activities involving those minerals from the 
environmental standards in the mining law and rule, including facilities that may process 
those minerals using chemicals and other extractive methods to create a high value, 
raw metallic product. Although digging up minerals like pyroxene and silica may 
present a lower risk to the environment than the extraction of sulfidic metals such as 
gold, industrial metallic processing facilities produce tailings and other wastes that must 
be carefully managed and are subject to a wide array of state and federal environmental 
standards. Maine's Mining Act and DEP’s rule give mining companies a roadmap for 
meeting all of those standards. 
Additionally, we could not assure you that digging up any of those minerals would not 
jeopardize ground water supplies in all locations of the state. lt may be relatively low 
risk in some locations, and high risk in others, depending on the surrounding geology. 
Therefore, we recommend a careful approach focused on environmental risk. The 
proposed change to the metallic mineral definition in LD 1363 is not a perfect solution, 
but is intended to focus changes to the law in a way that retains the Mining Act’s highly 
protective effect. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. l am available to answer questions 
of the Committee, both now and at work session.
