3 Natural Resources Council of I\./laine 
3 Wade Street <4 
Augusta, Maine 04330 9 (207) 622-3101 8 Fax: (207) 622-4343 ' www.nrcm.org 
Testimony on Proposed Legislation Concerning Mining 
and Possible Amendments to the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act 
By Pete Didisheim, Advocacy Director 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee. My name is Pete Didisheim, and l am the advocacy director for the Natural Resources 
Council of Maine (NRCM). NRCM is Maine's largest environmental advocacy group with more than 
25,000 members and supporters. 
NRCM worked closely with the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and this committee in 
developing the 2017 Metallic Mineral Mining Law (‘Mining Law”) and its associated rules. Based on that 
experience and having reviewed the bills before the Committee, as well as available literature about 
spodumene and rare earth deposits in Maine, our advice today is a simple one: we urge you to proceed 
with caution. 
There is a lot that we do not know about the ore deposits that have spurred a flurry of media attention 
and public interest here in Maine. We know very little about the full range of materials that exist in 
these deposits and whether they have the potential to cause acid mine drainage, basic mine drainage, or 
toxic metal leachate that could violate Maine's water quality standards. 
We have seen no plans that explain how or where these ore bodies would be processed at scale. And we 
know essentially nothing about possible ore transportation plans, site remediation plans, or whether the 
deposits in Maine are even economically viable compared with other spodumene deposits or other 
technologies for lithium production. 
Any path forward should be guided by a ”no regrets" policy, and this means digging into the details 
about these ore deposits, about the possible environmental impacts of various processing techniques, 
and the potential liabilities for neighboring communities and Maine taxpayers. 
The world is riddled with mining operations that have gone awry. We do not want rushed legislation 
today to result in contaminated waters, stigmatized communities, and a trail of clean-up challenges in 
the future. 
NRCM is not categorically opposed to amending Maine's Mining Law. In fact, our testimony includes 
amendments for the purpose of advancing conversations about spodumene mining. But we firmly 
believe that the critical safeguards for the environment and Maine taxpayers that are key features of 
Maine's Mining Law must be kept intact. 
We fully recognize the important role that lithium plays in electric vehicles and other clean energy 
technologies. But we also recognize that there is a lot that we don't know. Maine has no experience 
with spodumene mining, so we all are still pretty low on this learning curve.
That said, NRCM believes that, of the many and diverse bills before you today, LD 1363 comes closest to 
striking a defensible path forward. We appreciate the work that the DEP and the bill sponsor have put 
into this legislation. NRCM opposes LD 1433 and LD 1476, which would remove spodumene mining from 
being regulated by the Mining Law. And we are not taking a position on the other bills at this time. 
LD 1363 would allow the restriction on open-pit mining in Maine's Mining Law to be lifted if, and only if, 
a proposed mining operation would only generate mine waste that does not have the potential to 
create acid mine drainage, basic mine drainage, or toxic metal leachate in amounts that would violate 
water quality standards. We support this general approach for three primary reasons: 
First, the bill applies statewide to any metal or metalloid element, and notjust to one particular deposit 
of spodumene (the mineral from which lithium is obtained) in Newry. This statewide approach makes 
sense. 
Second, it puts the appropriate burden of proof on the mining operator to provide data showing that 
the deposit does not co—occur with deposits of reactive, acid—generating ores, or materials that are 
otherwise dangerous because of high levels of heavy metals or uranium, for example. 
Third, this approach keeps intact all of the other safeguards in Maine's Mining Law that protect Maine's 
environment and taxpayers from a legion of possible risks associated with mining extraction and 
processing activities. These safeguards include: 
0 No use of tailings impoundments and a requirement to use dry stack tailings management; 
0 A ban on mines requiring perpetual treatment; 
0 A requirement not to contaminate groundwater beyond 100 feet from a mining operation; and 
0 A requirement that a mining operation provide sufficient funding up front to the State to covera 
worst—case mining disaster (refundable after successful closure). 
Many recent press articles have contained claims that mining spodumene is just like mining granite, but 
this is highly misleading. 
The major difference between granite and spodumene mining is that with granite mining, granite is the 
end—product. But spodumene must undergo considerable processing, or beneficiation, to produce 
purified spodumene concentrates that are useful to make the raw materials, such as lithium hydroxide, 
for batteries. This beneficiation process creates high volumes of waste, called tailings. Because there is 
no way to manage this liquid waste properly, the Mining Law requires drying the tailings and stacking 
them. This requirement needs to stay in place for spodumene. LD 1363 does that. 
Beneficiation involves grinding the ore and running it through a series of processing tanks containing 
surfactants, which can be highly toxic. Air is bubbled up through the tanks, and spodumene concentrate 
floats to the surface. The concentrate is removed for further processing, and the tailings, which make up 
the vast majority of the ore, sink to the bottom of these tanks. 
In Australia, the country with the largest spodumene industry, mining companies discharge these 
tailings to impoundments, which have a risk of catastrophic failure. Examples of recent catastrophic 
tailings dam failures include the Mount Polley Mine in British Columbia and the Samarco Mine in Brazil. 
The Legislature should not make any amendments to Maine's mining law that would allow tailings 
impoundments. LD 1363 would keep the prohibition on tailings impoundments in existing law in place. lt
2
would also maintain the other protections that are relevant to spodumene mining and processing as 
mentioned above. LD 1476 and LD 1433 would exempt spodumene mining and processing from all 
provisions of the Mining Law, including the ban on tailings impoundments, which is why we oppose 
these two bills. 
Unlike granite mining, Maine has no experience with large-scale open-pit spodumene mining, which is 
why state law should require deposit owners to characterize their deposits thoroughly before allowing 
them to use open-pit mining techniques. For example, we know from the very limited public data about 
the Newry deposit that there is some galena, or lead sulfide, present in the ore. This is an acid- 
generating mineral and has the potential to leach lead. We are uncertain if galena is present at levels 
that are dangerous, but the only way to know would be through detailed characterization of the deposit. 
This has not happened in Newry. 
There is also an additional step in the manufacture of battery materials from spodumene concentrate 
that involves treatment of the concentrate with acid at high temperatures. Like beneficiation using 
chemical flotation, this process also uses large amounts of energy and chemicals. The Legislature should 
decide whether Maine's current environmental laws and rules are adequate to regulate this process, 
with which our state has no experience. I mention lithium processing because it is a critical component 
of turning any spodumene concentrate into a form that is useful for products such as electric vehicle 
batteries. 
Let me now turn to our proposed amendments, which we would be glad to describe in more detail for 
the work session: 
Sec 2. Our suggested language would clarify that spodumene is a metal that would be regulated 
under the 2017 Maine Mineral Mining Law and that the Legislature could specifically identify 
other metals to come under the Mining Law in the future. Spodumene mining is not treated like 
quarrying in Australia, but is regulated as metal mining. This language conforms with that 
approach. 
Sec. 3. Our suggested language would clarify that exempting limestone beneficiation for cement 
does not include chemical flotation of limestone. We do not believe that chemical flotation of 
limestone occurs in Maine, but the Department needs to be more specific about what sort of 
exemption it is proposing, or this language could potentially allow future tailings impoundments 
for limestone beneficiation waste and set a precedent for allowing tailings impoundments more 
broadly. 
Sec. 4. Our suggested language is intended to clarify that independent rock crushing and sorting 
facilities in Maine would not be regulated under the Mining Law. Such operations could receive, 
crush, and sort material that is not acid generating or hazardous in other ways, as long as the 
operation is covered as specified. The original bill language could be read to suggest that any 
open-pit mine operation that uses an off-site crusher would be exempt from monitoring as 
would any processing facilities at the mine. We do not believe this was the intent of the sponsor 
or the Department. The proposed amendment tries to close a loophole that we do not believe 
was intended.
3
Sec. 5. Our suggested language would clarify the intention of the bill that an open—pit mine is 
not allowed if the ore and waste materials are reactive (acid generating or base generating), or if 
they have the potential to leach heavy metals at levels that would violate water quality criteria 
or other water quality standards other than those for sedimentation or turbidity. ln other 
words, the ore/waste can only be Group C waste as defined in Chapter 200 section 2(XX) 
XX. Group C Waste. "Group C waste” means a mine waste that does not have the potential to 
violate water quality standards other than sedimentation or turbidity. 
Our suggested language also requires the DEP to develop rules about what constitutes sufficient 
characterization of an ore body to determine whether a waste is ”Group C” and what the best 
practices are for open—pit mining of such ore deposits. 
Sec. 6. Our suggested language would limit the size of an allowed open pit to 10 acres at any 
one time, not 100 acres, consistent with title 38 section 490-D(8)(a). The amendment also would 
make clear that DEP rules would be major substantive and require “contemporaneous 
reclamation" , meaning that remediation would occur in stages. Remediation would need to 
occur on mined-out pits prior to moving on to new areas. It also clarifies that the rulemaking the 
DEP is calling for is major substantive. 
Finally, as it discusses the bills before the Committee, we urge you to consider these additional factors 
regarding mining for lithium for batteries: 
1. Diverse sources for lithium: There are two major sources of battery lithium: brine deposits and 
spodumene deposits. Spodumene mining is significantly more chemical and energy intensive 
than obtaining lithium from brine deposits. An emerging technology for extracting lithium from 
brine, called Direct Lithium Extraction allows removal of lithium salts from brine without 
evaporation of the brines and the impacts this can cause to groundwater supplies. Although it is 
not at commercial scale yet, there is every reason to believe that it will get there. 
2. Current sources of lithium: The vast majority of the world's lithium, about 80%, comes from 
Australia and Chile? Although China processes lithium from many other places and makesa 
large share of lithium-ion batteries, it produces far less lithium than either Australia or Chile. 
Because both Chile and Australia are close U.S. allies with free trade agreements, their lithium 
would be treated as equivalent to domestic lithium under the Inflation Reduction Act. 
3. Many U.S. lithium sources: The U.S. has many possible domestic lithium sources, including 
brine deposits. The Nature Conservancy produced an extensive report looking at 72 sites in the 
U.S. Among its conclusions are: 1) the U.S. has enough lithium in the ground or in brine to supply 
the world for 100 years at current levels of consumption (even though consumption is 
increasing, this is still a high volume of lithium); and 2) the U.S. should focus on developing brine 
resources using Direct Lithium Extraction rather than on spodumene mining. We urge the 
Committee to review this report? 
1 
Accessed at lattes: of ‘=v"<.1Of'if§~li €.l‘:ii}if2’l- rrociuctiors~b@=countr\'; ’. 
__..__z_e__W...M__t_W..W.W.M,,...-._W,..Wmw,t.t.,,~,.,_,...W,,...MW......m.....".. ......W,... "nix .. .. .....-... .. J . ..M..L.
2 . {.1 [;’\.w\\~\. science ,» P "1: »'-‘**.‘» it » 
t.."r%w.;.,'@"J Mist’? C t" .. Acsessed atP 
.:;.€.'Q{§.9_§l§.E;_.Yt~2;i.*Z.';.:_l €§Zj§i§.;§;.:§_mzig ﬁmi;t.:i:.s_;_..;_;.s_* ‘€3Q? :¥t~I»1‘~‘ ed?-
4
4. Future lithium needs: Long-term predictions of lithium demand may or may not be correct, and 
efficient use and recycling of lithium will lower demand. The Climate and Community Project has 
written a recent report on this that we also urge the Committee to review? 
S. Lithium market: The price of lithium is likely to fluctuate dramatically as prices for other 
commodities do. Prices for lithium carbonate (a key raw material for batteries) have dropped 
about 30% this year and supply is now outpacing demand.‘ 
These factors suggest that the Legislature can give the Department the time it needs to develop rules 
that would allow for safer regulation of future spodumene mining in Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
3 Accessible at' 
fjﬂttps;//w»v\/v_:_clémateandcomn'i_;5_Qéty ‘qryg/;_ﬁlgsiglggxiq§;j;Z§,;§= _VlQQ;§_{\i§§>§_§t_;_@" e;§ﬂ{l_{;i;§§Z}6b608abe9 €9?>dcpdi. 
4 §'v 1/ / , 5 +4. 
Accessed atettyszi Wvi/w.reuters;;_g{§L@arkets/aioizjglggigiass/iiti'i§ul]i_pilg{;__;;_§g;g§l_§§pens —chiria»bz2ttery;gjan'i; 
Qggsiheaggez-i;wuts~2{)23~G2-284i.
5
NRCM Proposed Amendments to LD 1363 (in red) 
An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the 
Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 38 MRSA §490-MM, sub-§3-A is enacted to read: 
3-A. Cement. "Cement" means any of various calcined mixtures of clay and limestone, 
which can be mixed with water and used as an ingredient in makinq mortar or concrete. 
Sec. 2. 38 MRSA §490-MM, sub-§8, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 653, §23 and 
affected by §33, is amended to read: 
8. Metallic mineral. "Metallic mineral" means any mineral, ore or excavated material te 
uranium that has metal or a metalloid element as its economicallv valuable constituent, 
regardless of the chemical end product of the metal or metalloid element. For theﬂpurpcsegg 
of clarification, ’ spodumene is a meiatlii i§;_,@_E ,nerai, ‘The Leqislaiuji ﬁ may fuitller ciarifv 
additional minerals as metallic__gnine_rals é? g__§iij)_ €3__i’i€,’_Q_iIj_____ é§i”iE‘>€3S. 
Sec. 3. 38 MRSA §490-MM, sub-§11, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 653, §23 and 
affected by §33, is amended to read: 
11. Mining. "Mining," "mining operation" or "mining activity" means activities, facilities 
or processes necessary for the extraction or removal of metallic minerals or overburden or 
for the preparation, washing, cleaning or other treatment of metallic minerals and includes 
the bulk sampling, advanced exploration, extraction or beneficiation of metallic minerals as 
well as waste storage and other stockpiles and reclamation activities, but does not include 
exploration. "Mining." "mining operation" or "mining activity “ does not include calcium 
carbonate or limestone extraction or beneficiation to produce cement, provided that the 
iimestone beneficiation doesgnet irivoivegchemicai flotation, 
Sec. 4. 38 MRSA §490-O0, sub-§4, 11D, as amended by PL 2017, c. 142, §7, is 
further amended by amending the first blocked paragraph to read: 
ln determining compliance with this standard, the department shall require groundwater 
monitoring consistent with the standards established pursuant to section 490-QQ, 
subsection 3;,_ 
materiay-lowevei; nothinqgininis $€§§l _tlri _ is intended_toWreq_ulatejidependentiv owned 
rock crushingand sorting jaciiiﬂes that aregrigt part otaiimininggqperation. Suchjaicilities 
may accept_rneta_llic __mineral ore trQn}_an_gpen~-pit ml __|Tl_l_[i _Q__QQ§i'EltlOl ’i Wiil]__§_ permit in good 
Si@_D£1§§¥Q under thiseatticiettor @?U3htQQ_3B<i§QfilUSA/iiti0U§ i2e§€Qrmin9_QrQ,u@,dwater 
{BQD§lQ€ii¥Q_,Qi£'§_U§ni ‘£0 section 4m9Q:Q.§§§£%§e,lQQ;Q i<‘2i§i_i'i. ‘5 ,L€liH§iiii1§L_§Ortinq, storaeeaieadintq
6
