3 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
,2 ., 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 237-1400 
H_ Scott Landry Jr_ TTYI MAINE RELAY 71l 
137 Shepherd ’s Lane 
Farmington, ME 04938 
Residence: (207) 491-9041 
Scott Landr _v@:legislature.mainegov 
April 13, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Scott Landry presenting 
LD 1363, An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the Maine 
Metallic Mineral Mining Act 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Enviromnent and Natural 
Resources Committee, I am Representative Scott Landry. I serve House District 75, which 
includes the towns of Chesterville and Farmington. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 
1363, An Act to Support Extraction of Common Minerals by Amending the Maine Metallic 
Mineral Mining Act. 
In 2020, the Maine Climate Council got to work on the Maine Won’t Wait Climate Action Plan 
which established ambitious goals for Maine’s future including decreasing greenhouse gas 
emissions by 45% by 2030 and 80% by 2050, and achieving carbon neutrality by 2045. Since 
then, we have made signiﬁcant progress towards meeting those goals, progress that has resulted 
in more renewable energy generation and subsequently, a need for more battery storage capacity 
to help keep supply and rates stable and to maximize the potential of all of that energy. 
Further, just last year the federal government unveiled the American Battery Materials Initiative 
which aims to secure a reliable and sustainable supply of critical minerals used for power, 
electricity, and electric vehicles. The U.S. does not currently produce enough of the critical 
minerals and battery materials, such as lithium, needed to power our clean energy technologies. 
Right now, China controls a signiﬁcant amount of the critical mineral supply chain, but Maine is 
poised to take the lead on one key element of battery production — lithium mining. 
Here in Maine, we\are fortunate to have the largest lithium deposit in the world. But we also 
have some of the most prohibitive mining laws on the books. LD 1363 would amend Maine’s 
Metallic Mining Act to allow for open-pit mining of lithium with certain important caveats. 
Lithium is unlike most other metals which are typically bound up in sulﬁde. For those types of 
metals, like gold or silver, once you open up a deposit, exposing the sulﬁte to rain and other 
elements, it turns into extremely hannful sulfuric runoff. Mining the kind of lithium we have 
here in Maine does not have this problem, which makes the actual act of extracting the material 
much less dangerous. The lithium in the deposit in Newry is bound up in hard rock, meaning the 
District 75: Chesterville and Farmington
extraction process would be much more similar to a gravel pit or a granite quarry than typical 
metal mining. 
Now, just because the extraction process is signiﬁcantly less harmful than other metals doesn’t 
mean there couldn’t be other issues. That’s why this bill proposes that mining of this kind only 
be allowed when other conditions are met. Speciﬁcally, it requires that open-pit mining only be 
allowable if the mine waste will not produce dangerous drainage issues or violate water quality 
standards. It further requires that any operation include a reclamation process which would 
involve retaining and stabilizing any topsoil that is disturbed during the mining process,- 
reintroducing native vegetation wherever possible, returning intermittent and perennial streams 
that were diverted during the mining activity to the original channels, among other remediation 
measures. 
By outlining very speciﬁcally what conditions must be met in order to allow for open-pit minin 
LD 1363 would safely and responsibly permit the mining of lithium. We have to acknowledge 
that we need this resource, and we can do that while also being thoughtful and measured in our 
approach to extracting it. Not all mining is bad. The endorsement of this bill by the Natural 
Resources Council of Maine demonstrates how important this measure is for the wellbeing of 
Maine’s natural resources, the climate and our collective futures. We have an unprecedented 
opportunity here, let’s not squander it. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present this bill. I’m happy to answer any questions you may 
have. 
District 7‘S: Chesterville and F armington8»
