Mﬁﬁﬁ §G&S 
£ﬁﬂN€& Testimony In Opposition To 
LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay to Cover More Types of Employers and 
Include More Workers 
February 7, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Honorable Members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is Alexander Price and lam before you today on behalf of the Maine Jobs Council. The Maine Jobs 
Council is a statewide, nonpartisan, member-driven advocacy organization that advances public policies to 
support the creation and preservation of foundational jobs in Maine. lam here today to testify in opposition 
to LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay to Cover More Types of Employers and Include 
More Workers. 
LD 12 would increase the cost and burdens on employers at a time when they are already struggling to 
compete. Maine's regulatory and business environments rank among the lowest in the nation. We are 44th 
in the nation in overall economic ranking, and near the bottom of the nation in capital investment. Maine is 
currently experiencing an aging population; lack of quality foundational jobs; top heavy service and public 
sectors; lack of investment; failure to attract 21“ century, cutting edge businesses; high taxes and energy 
costs; high health care costs; and aging and/or inadequate infrastructure. What does this proposal do to 
address any of those issues? lf anything, it only makes improving them harder. 
The Maine Jobs Council supports making workers a top priority. The best way to do that is with a robust 
economy full of quality foundational jobs that provide choices, career growth, and increasing wages. This bill 
would deter businesses from investing in failing businesses to keep those failing businesses alive and its 
workers employed. This bill would also make it more difficult and costly for many medium and large 
employers to perform closures, shutdowns, or relocations to save or create jobs in response to changing 
economic circumstances. Finally, this bill could force many businesses to reconsider whether to establish or 
expand operations here in Maine. 
Supporting working people is critical, but if our companies cannot compete, if money isn't invested here, if 
jobs stagnate or leave, then we will have more and more people who are no longer working people. The 
simple truth is that Maine's economic and regulatory rankings are in the bottom 10 of the nation. Maine's 
public policy needs to focus on the big picture, create a comprehensive plan that meets the needs of the 21“ 
century economy, and take steps to improve those economic and regulatory rankings. 
The MJC thanks the committee for its time and consideration of this issue, and we would welcome any 
opportunity to discuss it with you. 
Thank you, 
Alexander Price, Pierce Atwood 
On behalf of the Maine Jobs Council
