. . House OP REPRESENTATIVES 3? . ‘es. 
.1 
; 2 stars HOUSE $"i'ATIOl ‘~Z 
4 AUGUSTA. 9¢l333—[l{)ClZ 
(207.1 3315- E460 
"I ;s 
A ’‘
. 7’ 
Amy Roeder TEX iAI\'E REL —’-‘C1 ll 
-I5 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, l\-E (1-t-4&1 
Residence: Z0?-3 W31-:75 1 Tl 
Ainy.Roeder@legislanne-maine.gov 
February Y: 2023 
Testimony of Repre.sem ‘ative Amy Roeder presenting 
LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay to Cover Nlore 
Types of Employers and Include More Workers 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good aﬁemoon Senator Tipping and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes 
a portion of Bangor. Today, I present to you LD 12, An Act: to Amend the Laws Governing 
Severance Pay to Cover More Types of Employers and Include More \Vorkers. 
Currently, in Maine, we have a law in place that requires industrial and commercial facilities to 
give severance pay due to the closing, substantial shutdown or relocation of their establishment. 
This bill expands that limitation to other workplace sectors. It also removes the exclusion from 
eligibility for severance pay of employees with less than three years of service to their employer. 
The requirement that an employee work with their employer for three years before they are 
eligible for severance pay is far too long. Further, an employee should not be penalized and miss 
out on severance pay due to the closure or relocation of their employer, which is out of their 
control. 
The payout of accrued vacation and extended benefits allows employees the support they need 
while searching for new work. From an employefs perspective, offering severance pay can help 
avoid future lawsuits from employees. 
It’ s enough to lose your livelihood: but to lose your livelihood and not have the small support a 
severance package oﬁers to bridge the gap until your next employment opportunity is unbearable 
for many. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Pm happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Eistrict 23: ?art of Bangor
