 
 
 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff , President and CEO  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
February 7, 2023  at 1:00 pm  
 
 
In Opposition to  LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay to Cover More 
Types of Employers and Include More Workers  
 
 
Senator Tipping,  Representative Roeder , and distinguished members of the  Labor and Housing 
Committee:   
 My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the  President  & CEO of t he Maine Health Care 
Association . We represent approximately 200 nursing homes , assisted living , and residential 
care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical Institutions or PNMIs) across the state. Our 
mission is to empower members to ensure the integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine.   
 I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing 
Severance Pay to Cover More Types of Employers and Include More Workers . This bill expands 
severance pay due to the closing, substantial shutdown,  or relocation beyond industrial and 
commercial facilities.  It would also remove the exclusion from eligibility for severance pay of 
employees who have not been employed by the employer for at least 3  years.  
 Long ter m care facilities have been devastated by the impact of COVID -19. The pandemic has 
had long -lasting and far- reaching effects on Maine’s long term care sector. Nursing homes and 
residential care facilities are facing an existential crisis due to a lack of s taff and inadequate 
 
 
2 
 reimbursement. The continued workforce  shortage threatens  access to long term care services 
in our state.  
 
Workforce  levels in our sector are the lowest in 13 years. Data published in January 2023 by the 
American Health Care Association (AHCA) indicates that nursing homes nationwide have lost 
over 210,000 jobs since the beginning of the pandemic.1 In fact, while some other health care 
sectors have started to rebound or are approaching pre -pandemic staffing levels, long term 
care is still struggling. Specifically, n ursing homes and assisting living facilities are the worst 
impacted for staffing  compared to other health care sectors for the period of February 2020 - 
December 2022  according to  Bureau of Labor Statistics .2 
 
Maine’s long term care providers are trying to rebound from the worst crisis they have ever faced. Unfortunately, we have experienced a handful of facility closures in 2021 -2022 as a 
result of a perfect storm that included a staffing crisis, a pandemic , and lagging reimbursement 
rates that do not fully cover the cost of providing care. When a long term care facilit y close s, it 
is never an easy decision  as it can be devastating to the residents, their families, the staff, and 
the community.  Due to a lack of staff , some homes are not accepting new admissions , and it 
makes placing residents in a new facility very difficult , so these decisions are never made lightly.  
Despite these challenges, our caregivers are to be commended for their dedicated service  to 
Main e’s aging population. We have embraced increased wages , benefits, recruitment and 
retention bonuses, and all other available steps to  address the workforce shortage.   
 When a facility closes, job opportunities for trained caregivers are plentiful, and other health 
care entities are often quick to recruit staff.  Moreover, we are concerned that the added 
financial stressor of a severance pay requirement might hasten some facilities’ closures . At 
present, long -term care reimbursement rates  would not provide the resources to cover this 
 
1 Long Term Care Jobs Report: https://www.ahcancal.org/News -and-Communications/Fact -Sheets/FactSheets/LTC -
Jobs -Report -Jan2023.pdf . Acc essed February 4, 2023.  
 
2 Ibid.  
 
 
3 
 expense. T his could ultimately cause Maine to have fewer nursing facilities , which may be an 
unintended consequence of this bill. I urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 12. Thank you.  
 
 
