 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
In Opposition to  
LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay to Cover More Types of 
Employers and Include More Workers   
 
February 7, 2022  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committee . My name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in opposition to LD 12 on 
behalf of the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s 
Legislative Policy Committee and direct ed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal 
interest.   
 Local governments have functions, goals , and mission s that significantly differ from 
those of private employers , and abide by numerous statutes  regulatin g their operations , including 
a version of  a “closure”  process . For this reason , municipal leaders do not believe it is practical 
to apply the “one size fits all” standard contemplated in LD 12 to government employers .    
Municipal governments deorganize, rather than close . The process to do so is guided by 
state statute (Title 30 -A, chapter 302), and requir es numerous steps including the creation of a 
plan to distribute financial liabilities and assets , fiscal impact statements, review and support 
from the Commission on Mun icipal Deorganiation, public hearings, voter endorsement , and 
finally approval  from  the Maine State Legislature .  Furthermore, when  a municipal program or 
service is downsized or discontinued, potentially triggering the layoff or displac ement of  
employees, those  decision s are left to the municipal legislative body  (e.g., council or town 
meeting), in part, to avoid a conflict that could arise among multiple decision -making authorities . 
For example, if via the adoption of LD 12 a municipality is m andated to provide severance pay, 
but the town meeting votes down the warrant article  appropriating the necessary revenues , what 
happens?    
Out of respect for the existing process es, local leaders urge the committee to exempt 
government employers from the requirements of LD 12.   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue . If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour@memun.org  or 592 -4038.   
  

