STATE OF MAINE 
‘is, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Laura A. Fortman Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Michael Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards, 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Support of LD 12, 
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay 
to Cover More Types of Employers and Include More Workers 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, Tuesday, February 7, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. lam Michael Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards for the Maine 
Department of Labor (Department). I am here today to speak on behalf of the Department in support 
of LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Severance Pay to Cover More Types of Employers and 
include More Workers. 
Currently, 26 MRS §625-B. Severance pay due to closing, substantial shutdown or relocation of a covered 
establishment requires notice to employees, municipalities and the State, and in some cases severance to be 
paid to certain employees in the event of the closure, mass layoff or relocation of a facility that employs 100 or 
more workers. This bill repeals language as necessary to correct the potential exclusion from coverage 
of some large employers operating in the service, not-for-profit and possible other sectors that are not 
clearly within the category of industrial or commercial. 
Originally adopted in 1979, Maine's statute regarding severance pay and notiﬁcation still covers only 
"industrial or commercial" facilities, which were prevalent at the time but no longer employ as largea 
proportion of Maine's workforce. For that reason, the Department was recently unable to determine 
with certainty whether two employers that may otherwise have been required to provide notice and 
pay severance to their workers were covered by the statute. Sections 1 through 3 of the bill address 
that concern. We believe it is in the interest of all parties to remove such uncertainty from our 
statutes to the greatest extent possible. 
Regarding Section 4 of the bill, which would remove the current exclusion from severance payment of 
someone who "has been employed by the employer for less than 3 years,” the Department wishes to 
reconsider our poﬂkiﬁs -MW believe that the proposed change would have unintended 
consequences that we did not consider when we drafted the bill, among them discouraging the sale of 
a business in financial distress. Our preference would be to amend the bill to omit Section 4 while 
leaving the rest ofthe bill intact. l sincerely apologize for any confusion this might have caused. 
PHONE: (Z07) 623-7900 TTY useis call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287 S292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities
With that amendment, we urge you to support LD 12, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing 
Severance Pay to Cover More Types of Employers and Include More Workers. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now or ata 
future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sewing Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth.
