Ashley Baker
Bangor
LD 976
Ashley Baker, Bangor. In regards to LD976.
As someone who has worked in the healthcare field for many years it is completely 
disheartening to see that in 2023 we are still having to fight for appropriate care for 
those in the deaf and hard of hearing community. The option of a tablet, computer, or 
other device in place of an in-person interpreter is a temporary "solution", and it is not
only inappropriate for most situations, it's minimizing the effort we put into those 
patients in order to save time and money in regard to their healthcare. 
As a mom, I know that my hearing child can't be bothered to listen to an adult on a 
screen for more than 5 minutes. COVID-19 showed us the difficulty that hearing 
children had while trying to receive education through a screen, and for hearing 
children they had the voice of the teacher in the background to keep them somewhat 
on task and aware of what was happening. This is a privilege that many don't see, 
because those who are deaf and hard of hearing need to be GLUED to these screens in
order to know who is in the room with them, what is being done to them, and what the
process of each visit and procedure is going to be. Working with children both on and 
off the spectrum for 2 years taught me that this way of communicating is not effective
and can lead to severe trauma and even complete fear of receiving medical care if the 
patient isn't able to fully understand or comprehend what is going on in the moment. 
We allow additional visual support for patients who are uncomfortable during female 
exams, but we are unable to provide an in-person interpreter so they can remain 
present and focused while also being informed? What does that say to the women in 
this community about the overall concern for their mental and physical well-being 
during these very intimate procedures.
The pressure placed on parents and patients to obtain this support themselves is not 
only unfair, but it shows that our medical offices are willing to skate a very thin line 
in order to stay within the requirements but again reduce time, cost, and 
responsibility. We are taking an entire community of people, and showing them that 
their patient experience is held at a much lower standard than others. 
There are many studies and reports showing the risk of patient safety, care, and 
overall ability to consent to treatments with full understanding, if appropriate 
translation services are not available. A study found in JAMA pediatrics shows that 
children whose family have a limited understanding of spoken English are twice as 
likely to experience medical errors. 
In the medical field it takes a lot of planning to set up appointments, surgeries, and 
visits. Lack of time should not be an acceptable excuse for these offices to not provide
that in-person support. We need to do better in many parts of healthcare, but the deaf 
community especially deserves so much more from us. Healthcare shouldn't feel 
unsafe or disconnected, and no one should have to worry about not getting heard or 
not understanding their provider when there are medical concerns.
