 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 5, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph  Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee o f Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 976  Resolve, to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication 
Methods for Deaf and Hard -of-hearing Patients  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter provides information rega rding LD 976 Resolve, to Establish the Task Force on 
Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard -of-hearing Patients .  The 
Department  of Health and Human Services ( the Department ) is neither for nor a gainst this bill.  This 
resolve establishes a Task Force to study accessibility  to appropriate communication methods for 
deaf and hard -of-hearing patients in healthcare settings and make recommendations on how that 
accessibility may be improved. The Task Force is required to  submit a report and suggested 
legislation by December 6, 2023, to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
which is authorized to report out legislation based on the report to the Second Regular Session of 
the 131st Legislature.  The Tas k Force is to be staffed by the Legislative Council.  
 
The Department’s  Office of Aging and Disability Services currently serves 215 deaf and hard of 
hearing waiver members and about 2000 individuals who have a diagnosis of autism spectrum 
disorder.  These two groups could be impacted positively by a study that identifies  a path that 
improves access to healthcare through better communication.  According to an article1 “Inadequate 
Healthcare Services Among Individuals with Autism in the United States” (Sutton -Clark, Ballard 
Brief, November 2022), communication barriers for individuals with autism also pose significant 
barriers to access to healthcare  with 25 – 40% of in dividuals on the autism spectrum are either 
minimally verbal or nonverbal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
The Department recognizes that providing access to appropriate communication methods would 
help reduce mis - and under -diagnosis of health conditions for individuals diagnosed with autism 
and for individuals  who are deaf and hard of hearing, and the Department is in favor of further study 
and resolution of this issue.  It is unclear from this resolve  whether the Department would be 
responsible for this fu rther study . If so, we would like the Committee to be aw are that t he 
Department lacks existing staff resour ces to conduct an in -depth study .   
 
1 https://ballardbrief.byu.edu/issue -briefs/inadequate -healthcare -services -among -individuals -with-autism -in-the-
united -states  
We wanted you to be aware of the above information and the Department’s position as you consider 
this bill going forward. If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Elizabeth Hopkin s 
Associate Director  
Office of Aging and Disability Services  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
 

