Carrie Pierce 
P.O. Box 12 
Belfast, Maine 04915 
Email: metooasI@gmaiI.cc»§Q 
Txt: 207-356—2324 
Re: Testimony in favor of LD #976 
Dear Member of the Committee Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
My name is Carrie Pierce. I grew up in Kenduskeag and have been deaf since birth. I now 
live in Belfast, am bilingual in English and American Sign Language (ASL) and teach ASL as well. 
Even with my skills, I am unable to communicate with non-signing people if they are wearing a 
mask. Even without masks, it is difficult to communicate. Today, I ask you to support House Bill 
#976. 
We know that reducing stress leads to better health. Yet, it's communications around my 
health care that causes me the most stress. Health care for me includes appointments in the 
Bangor, Augusta, Belfast, and Portland areas. However, access to appropriate treatment isa 
struggle everywhere except Portland. The ADA and Maine Human Rights policies say I must 
have equal access to communication in all medical arenas. I don't. For example: 
0 Meeting with a new PCP during the pandemic involved balancing a tablet with a Video 
Relay Interpreter (VRI) in my left hand and my phone in my right hand, trying to use a speech- 
to-text application. The PCP sat at the other end of a long table and wore a mask. Neither 
device worked. The appointment ended. I fought for a year to get a live interpreter. They ﬁnally 
agreed to provide one but then kept cancelling the appointment. It's been almost eighteen 
months since I've had my annual doctor's appointment. As a woman suddenly going through 
perimenopause, I would appreciate consulting with a medical professional. As luck would have 
it, I had FULL access to Menopause: The Musical, which explained a lot, but 
0 My rheumatology appointments went the same way, resulting in errors on MyChart. 
¢ A visit to the ER and registration ofﬁces presented me with staff who had no idea what 
to do when I asked for VRI technology. 
0 After a communication mishap for a local mammogram, I now drive four hours to 
Portland to get the scan where live interpreters are automatic. 
0 I work hard to earn health insurance beneﬁts but ﬁnd myself paying a lot of cash for 
access to out-of-network practitioners who do a betterjob communicating and educating me. 
0 My parents are closing in on their ﬁnal years, and I will be in the position of making their 
medical decisions. That will be difﬁcult to do if I am ﬁghting for access to communication. 
In conclusion, I recognize that live interpreter availability is challenging, and that staff are 
overwhelmed. However, (1) having access to appropriate Wi-Fi equipment that works is 
feasible; (2) all staff working in a healthcare facility should receive minimal training on treating 
Deaf and hard-of-hearing people; (3) better yet, requiring a training module that includes 
information on whom to call for interpreters, how to set up a VRI, and how to communicate 
with Deaf people would go a long way in both preventing frustration for everybody and 
ensuring care for people like me. 
Please support this bill and make sure it happens. Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely yours,‘ 
Carrie Pierce
