Dear Committee Members, 
 
My name is Carrie Tweedie. Full disclosure, I am a licensed American Sign Language interpreter 
here in the state of Maine. As such, I am bound by confidentiality regarding any challenges I have 
witnessed during work assignments in order to protect patients’ privacy. However, I am also a CODA, 
(child of deaf adults), both my parents are deaf. In the role of caretaker for my parents and my hearing 
grandmother we have experienced many challenges over the years. These extra challenges add even 
more stress upon the usual stress of being a caregiver. My father and grandmother have since passed 
away, but my mother, Elizabeth Tweedie and I agreed that I should testify to some of our experiences in 
hopes of helping to bring about positive changes. 
The most recent challenges we faced were in getting an interpreter for my mother’s cardiac 
testing on February 17th 2023 at Northern Light Hospital in Bangor. My mother has difficulty using 
technology such as VP (video phones) and VRI (video relay interpreters). She enlists my help to make her 
phone calls and set up her appointments. I want to start off by saying that all the hospital staff during 
this challenging time were reasonably polite and professional. The challenge was that they seemed to 
have no idea what to do or how to respond when I called for my mother to confirm that an interpreter 
had been booked for the 17th. “I’ll have to run that by my supervisor” was said several times to me. “You 
can interpret!” the staff said to me on the phone. I had to educate them that I absolutely cannot 
interpret for my mother since it would be a conflict which the RID’s Code of Professional Conduct 
requires me to acknowledge, and that I could be risking my professional license. It would be impossible 
to interpret objectively for a close family member. “She won’t need an interpreter for the 3rd test” was 
also said. I had to fight and be persistent to finally get my mother the communication access she 
needed. It would be 5 days of phone calls and stress before finally getting confirmation from hospital 
staff that they would provide an interpreter for all 3 cardiac test/appts. 
Several years ago, I took my mother to the Northern Light Walk-In Care on Union St. in Bangor 
to be seen for a health issue that was quite concerning to us. First thing, per usual, I let the staff know 
that my mother required an ASL interpreter asap. The staff went to talk with someone out back and 
returned stating “We don’t provide interpreters on the weekends.” This was a Saturday. I pushed back 
saying “That cannot be. Deaf people need walk-in care on weekends too,” not just hearing people. Staff 
went out back and returned once more stating “We don’t provide interpreters on the weekends 
because the policy says that an interpreter must be approved by the Director.” I pushed back asking who 
can give approval when the Director is not present due to the weekend. She said there was no one else. 
Mom and I decided to leave and go to a different hospital, her treatment was delayed. 
We also faced a recent challenge at my mother’s eye doctor, Gaetani in Old Town. They had 
provided an interpreter before, but at this particular appt. the new receptionist proceeded to tell me 
that “She doesn’t need an interpreter…I know the law.” I had to advocate and try to educate her. I gave 
them a pamphlet that references the Americans with Disabilities Act and explains all the reasons a 
medical provider should and needs to provide an ASL interpreter. When her next appt came up they said 
“With Covid, an interpreter, doctor, and patient in the room is just too much. We should put the 
appointment off until later, our rooms are too small.” My mother is contemplating finding another eye 
doctor that will inevitably be further away from her home.  
I believe our testimonies are supposed to be limited to 3 minutes each and so I will stop there 
with my experiences. I would like to see a Maine where medical providers of all types understood their 
obligation to provide ASL interpreters when requested, and had policies that reflect that understanding 
along with training of staff so that when a Deaf person or family support Care giver made the request for 
an interpreter the response would simply be “Of course, let me get on that for you.” If this were the 
case, I, could focus on my mother’s medical/health needs better instead of spending so much energy on 
the distraction of trying to help my mother get the communication access that should be an automatic 
right. One more thing, if the request is for an interpreter to be “on-site and present” there is a good 
reason for that and it should be provided whenever possible. VRI is not the gold standard due to poor 
Wi-Fi signals, interpreter freezing mid-sentence/sign etc.  
Thank you so much, I really appreciate you all taking the time to hear our stories. Please consult 
the Deaf community when considering a bill that could have such a meaningful impact on all our lives. 
 
 
