Written Testimony 
Attention 131st Maine Legislature: Committee on Health & Human Services 
 
RE: LD 976 -Accessibility of Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of 
Hearing Patients 
 
We are writing to express our concerns and to confirm the need for greater access to 
American Sign Language interpreters in health care settings.   
We are a married couple; one spouse is hearing, and one is Deaf.  We have experienced 
a situation in the past when the hearing spouse was critically ill, and some members of 
the hospital staff did not understand that the Deaf spouse is entitled to interpretation 
for the doctor visits and treatment information as it was happening.  The sick spouse 
was not coherent enough and the Deaf spouse’s request for an interpreter in the 
moment was denied because of staff ignorance (assuming a hearing family member 
could try to relay any information).  In such situation, a live interpreter is essential, and 
not to be deprived of by staff.  This example illustrates the obstacle and necessity to 
having more immediate fundamental access to communication and information.  It also 
shows a lack of staff education regarding this right.  This continues to be a significant 
concern for the Deaf spouse for future events.  To face the reality that your primary 
mode of communication may not be available and/or denied and the lack of knowledge 
by others that it should be essential.  It is beyond disrespectful to worry and to struggle 
to obtain information.  It probably has been explained to the committee that many Deaf 
person’s primary fluent language is ASL and not written English.  The ability, and core of 
a live ASL interpreter is that they can decern the many nuances of both languages, 
explain in ASL and they can articulate the questions and needs of the Deaf person.  ASL 
interpreters provide the knowledge, and experience of Deaf culture, of the barriers that 
are unknown or not inherent to hearing healthcare providers.  
The Deaf spouse has been offered and utilized video interpretation for routine 
appointments.  This has been adequate on many occasions.  We realize there are 
challenges to always having a live interpreter available when needed.  It clearly is better 
to have a video service available with certified interpreters rather than no immediate 
option or to wait a very long time for service.  For acute situations a live interpreter is 
desired and should be an option. 
Additional experiences with local hospitals or providers in Maine are that they have 
been able to make their own policy or decision on how they provide interpretation, i.e., 
via video, without conferring with the Deaf person’s preference.   Perhaps it is the 
providers entitlement, but it reflects a lack of sensitivity and awareness.  On numerous 
occasions and still on-going, the hearing spouse has had to confirm that the practice 
knows the patient is Deaf and requires interpretation and “remind”/instruct them to 
provide the service.  We have had to explain to the providers offices how to arrange a 
live interpreter or ensure if VRI is arranged.  What seems basic to us is often very 
unfamiliar to others.  The medical community (hospital, pcp, dental, eye, etc.) requires 
more education, understanding and respect for Deaf people’s need to accessing 
effective communication and quality care. 
 
Thank you for your attention in this matter. 
 
Sincerely, 
Willson and Deborah Roper 
