Donna Irish  
  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
  
Re: Testimony in favor of LD #976 
 Dear Member of the Committee Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
My name is Donna Irish, I am Deaf and live in Unity.  I am asking for your support for bill 
#976.   I use voice and sign when I am with medical personal. If I’m emotional I will use my 
voice. I must have an ASL interpreter for appointments. I do not need one for my primary 
doctor because they use a clear mask. Other appointments, I do.  My primary doctor 
automatically informs other places I am referred to that I need a live ASL interpreter. I have 
been trying to get surgery for 2 years. 
  
I use medical services in Waterville, Bangor, Madison, Skowhegan, and Pittsfield. I also use 
Portland; I do not have issues in Portland. My doctor there retired so I can no longer use them. 
I have had the following issues: 
      Live interpreter not showing up or cancelling last minute and I must postpone my 
appointment. Often an interpreter will have issues at the last minute and then I will be 
stuck with no interpreter, sometimes I am not informed at all. 
      I always ask in advance if a live interpreter is available, sometimes they cancel last 
minute, even after confirming. If there is no live interpreter for me, I walk out. 
      My primary doctor has already indicated that I need live interpreter, but 
interpreters will not be there when the appointment comes. 
      Doctors’ offices will be given advanced notice and tell me they can’t find anyone to 
interpret. 
      One time, I called 911 told them to have interpreter ready, I arrived they didn’t, so I 
called the interpreter myself and told them to come.   
      I do not like to use VRI because its freezes. 
  
Please contact me if you have any questions. I appreciate your support   on bill #LD 976 
allowing myself to get the medical services we need. 
  
Thank you for your time, 
  
Donna Irish  
 
