 I’m writing in support of  LD 976 for personal and  professional reasons. 
 I’m profoundly deaf, meaning my hearing starts at roughly 90 decibels.  That basically means I can 
 vaguely hear a motorcycle idling when standing right next to it.  I’ve been wearing hearing aids since age 
 2, and was one of the first students mainstreamed in my school district in the late 80s. 
 Communication is always a challenge.  In order to understand speech, I have to rely on a mental 
 real-time jigsaw puzzle between hearing and lip reading.  Because most verbal words and speech are just 
 “noise” with little  meaning, I really struggle with audio-only means of communication. I rely heavily on 
 lip reading, and use sound to parse out tone and emphasis.  Essentially, if you and I were talking face to 
 face, and you turned around so your back was to me, the end result is you would be shifting from 
 speaking English to a foreign language.  I can tell you’re saying something, but what it is, I don’t have a 
 clue.  You could be swearing at me.  You could be telling a funny story.  You could also be telling me 
 important information about a decision I need to make that can have a profound impact on my life and 
 health. 
 For the most part, I can adapt to situations to ensure I understand what’s being said.  Technology has 
 helped a great deal with that, but even so there are a lot of gaps.  Auto-caption transcripts often have … 
 interesting, shall we say, word choices that are very different from what the speaker said. COVID and the 
 widespread usage of masks covering the lower half of the face, by necessity, also meant that daily 
 interactions were basically reliant on inferring by context and guessing. 
 Below are a few recent healthcare related experiences that I had through COVID that really stuck out 
 with me: 
 ●  When COVID started, around April or May 2020, I had a pretty bad case of recurring vertigo. At 
 random times, I’d break out in full body sweats, and my ears would start ringing very loudly. 
 Next, I would get absolutely dizzy and need to lay down with my eyes shut until it passed. At the 
 time, I did not have a caption phone so my wife had to set all my appointments because most 
 providers do not allow you to set up an appointment by email. When my wife called to set up an 
 appointment  and asked about the possibility of a video call so I could lipread, my PCP said that 
 was not possible and  the only option was a phone telehealth call.  They suggested that my wife 
 could repeat what the PCP was saying so that I could lipread and then respond back. 
 Understanding what was being said was impossible.  My wife tried to relay what was being said, 
 but there were so many terms and terminology that neither of us understood very well, and the 
 PCP talked for long periods  without enough breaks for my wife to keep up. It was a struggle, but 
 I managed to understand that he’d be calling in a prescription at a local pharmacy for me, and to 
 call back if this kept recurring. 
 ●  I had to change PCPs during COVID, and the new office had a new patient visit where they would 
 just talk to you and get a sense of who you are, your interests, and any concerns. It was not a 
 physical exam, more of a conversation. The office did not have any clear masks, and the person 
 doing the intake was wearing a regular N95 mask, so I couldn’t understand what she was asking. 
 In the end, the provider asked my wife, who did have a clear mask, to come in the exam room 
 and again, relay the questions asked so I could lip read her with the clear mask. 
 ●  The hearing aids I use are pretty old, so I went to an audiologist to trial a new pair.  There were 
 no clear masks at that office, so the audiologist and I had to communicate by her writing on a 
 pad of paper.  This was particularly frustrating because hearing aids are a highly customized 
 device, and clear feedback back and forth is essential. In the end, that entire experience was a 
 failure because the hearing aids had a persistent and recurring trilling reverb for any speech, 
 which made them entirely unusable and I just lost patience at the entire communication 
 process.  I’m still using a pair of 10 year old aids, and am restarting the process of acquiring a 
 new pair. 
 ●  I had some issues with my gallbladder last year, and had two stays at  Maine Medical Portland. 
 Both those stays were great, clear masks were regularly available and personnel had no issues 
 switching when I asked.  But calling for appointments or confirming, when using CaptionCall, 
 could be somewhat problematic in communicating, because as said earlier, auto caption agents 
 can have interesting word choices. 
 These are all communication issues that I’ve encountered as a mostly hearing person who communicates 
 very well verbally.  Conversely, I work full time remotely as a software engineer and am responsible for 
 designing, planning and executing projects that require communication and coordination across multiple 
 teams.  I’m able to thrive and perform at a high level in a fairly demanding  environment because as a 
 remote-first environment, most communication is via text, and all calls have captions with them.  These 
 components of the work environment, in addition with flexibility of accommodation requests such as 
 adding captions to all Zoom meetings by default or using Google Meet, make a highly positive 
 environment where small tweaks help everyone all around. 
