To the Heath and Human Committee:  
I come day as a medical provider serving the community but mostly strongly as a mother of three 
deaf/hard of hearing children.  
My eleven-year-old deaf daughter accesses her medical care and can only really participate in the 
visit if she has an ASL interpreter. Occasionally she has had times the live interpreter wasn’t 
there and she would rather deal with none then to try one of the interpreters in a box. Developing 
minds can’t get past the 2D dimension of such a 3D language. The interpreter on these tablets 
can’t fully soak in the full needs of the person to which they sign for since they miss critical 
body language and cues from the room. The interpreter on these tablets can’t fully appreciate if 
the deaf child or adult is able to understand the message or not.  
As the health care professional, I see how little goes into providers taking the time to see the 
nuances of these experiences and how they impact patient understanding. I am thankful for my 
daughter that her counselors and providers have grown to see that difference in the interactions 
for my daughter Kaylie. Kaylie’s provider and counselor step up in their organizations to push 
for the live interpreter experience. Meanwhile, I had worked the same organization for seven 
years as Kaylie’s providers and I see how much I have to fight to get the live interpreter 
experienced. I have been a nurse practitioner for ten years. I live as a hard of hearing adult. I look 
for the body and facial changes to know whether my patient understood my message. Despite my 
level of effort in front of the patient, I had a strong administrative push to keep interpreter to a 
small I-pad device. An i-pad that only worked in certain rooms, that the staff never felt confident 
in using until at least visit number eight, and in the end never felt like my deaf patients 
understood as well. I some points I was able to really push for the live interpreter but my prior 
organization put a lot of road blocks in place to discourage the process with the level of work 
needed to get that access.  
So, I ask you today to help me in my work by putting into place a way to make advocating for 
my deaf patients easier with the appropriate access which only comes from in-person 
interpreting. Help me ensure my daughter always has the in-person interpreter that she needs.  
Thank you for your time.  
 
Jennifer Gaulin, NP 
