  Support for LR #262 “Resolve to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Patients” To: Health and Human Services Committee  From: Judy A. Shepard-Kegl, Ph.D., Nationally Certified Interpreter (Generalist (CSC, CI/CT, NIC-M, BEI-M, NAD-IV; Legal Specialization: SC:L; Education Specialization: ED:K-12; Oral Transliteration Certification: OTC; Healthcare Interpreting Specialization: CoreCHI; Mental Health Specialization: QMHI. Coordinator of the ASL/English Interpreting Concentration in the Linguistics Major at the University of Southern Maine. 52 Whitney Farms Road, North Yarmouth, ME 04097.  Date: March 6, 2023 (resubmitted because of a problem with posting)  I am writing to commend you on considering this important legislation to establish a task force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Patients. I have worked as a certified and licensed interpreter in Maine since 1999. As an interpreter educator, developer of a three-course series on medical interpreting, as an interpreter certified in both healthcare interpreting (CoreCHI) and mental health interpreting (QMHI), and as the parent of a Deaf daughter, I am acutely aware of the role that communication plays in access to effective medical care. Successful two-way dialogue with healthcare professionals is as essential a tool for diagnosis, treatment, and medical compliance as any medical equipment or pharmacological treatment (even more so).  As a freelance medical interpreter here for the past two and a half decades, I can attest to the diverse needs among Deaf patients and the importance of meeting those needs adequately. When polled, Deaf consumers list access to interpreters in medical settings as a top priority.  A small percentage of our Deaf citizenry can speak and lipread; but even then, negotiating medical venues without communication support can be risky. Contrary to popular belief, captioned materials are not accessible to a large portion of the population. Even fewer can have their needs met by writing back and forth, and for that small percentage who can "make do" in this way, the ease and spontaneity of conversing with their healthcare providers is curtailed by both the time consuming and cumbersome nature of passing notes. In such situations, I have personally never seen a comparable amount of information conveyed as we would see with patients who can hear and use English, even as a second language.   For many Deaf patients, American Sign Language, which is as different from English as Russian or Chinese, is their only reliable means of communication access and failing to provide them with interpreters would be as egregious as denying interpretation to monolingual speakers of Somali, Thai, or Spanish. Many of these individuals are as astute and adept at advocating for their needs, asking for information, and participating in their healthcare decisions as any native speaking user of English would be, provided they can do so in their language.  However, we also have a group of deaf patients whose communication is atypical. They may be  immigrants from countries where they had no access to a spoken or signed language and have grown up language-less, in which case they require unique services of visual gestural specialists to bridge the communication gap.  As with our Maine population who can hear, Deaf patients may 

also be suffering the consequences of stroke, degenerative diseases, developmental disorders, or psychiatric conditions that impair communication.  Without communication access these disorders may not even be accurately diagnosed, let alone adequately accommodated.  It is particularly important for all service providers to know how to procure interpreters and first responders who are best matched to their patients, are credentialed and qualified interpreters, and are trained in the areas of healthcare and mental health. The right match can be a matter of life or death. It is equally important to have programs that support Deaf patients in knowing how to request the specific kinds of communication access needed, and in some cases  for d/Deaf consumers to learn to effectively use interpreters in specialized settings like health care. Our state is large (urban and rural) and unfortunately not all Deaf citizens have equal access in healthcare venues to the communication access they need, especially in medical settings.    Because of the heterogeneous educational and experiential backgrounds that can be encountered, there is no one-size-fits-all solution. As a person who can hear, even though I have some knowledge of the Deaf Community and the health disparities they experience, I am not the best resource to educate you on these issues or to propose solutions.  Comprehending the range of communication access needs among d/Deaf citizens in Maine is quite challenging and requires input from the range of stakeholders stipulated in this bill, particularly those who are themselves Deaf. Deaf people have experience with the range of needs encountered in medical venues as well as differentially experiences in various locations throughout our state. Deaf people have the best sense of viable solutions to making their healthcare accessible.  Setting up a knowledgeable Task Force is the wisest and most cost-efficient way to tackle the healthcare issues being faced by our Deaf citizens because such a Task Force has the ability to "listen to" and understand what d/Deaf individuals who have experienced our healthcare system have been trying to share with us for decades.  The first step in solving a problem in the most efficient way is being able to accurately define what the nature of the problem is.  This proposed Tas Force has the potential to accurately define the problem to be solved and the best resources for proposing solutions. The healthcare issues we don't tackle today will just amplify over time and will become far more costly than any solutions proposed.    Judy A. Shepard-Kegl    

