April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Honorable Members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Kandie Cleaves, and l reside in Garland. l am here to testify in favor of, LD976 
"Resolve, to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods 
for Deaf and Hard-of-hearing Patients." 
My husband, Kevin is a disabled veteran who served our country for 18 yrs. He is among the 
many service members who were provided faulty ear protection while training and during 
deployment. He has been provided hearing aids, however there are frequent issues with them, 
or situations in which wearing them isn't also the best choice. 
Since 2010 I have attended all but one important medical appointment in both community and 
VA settings with him. Because of knowing my husband well, l can catch when he hasn't hearda 
question or comment correctly from the medical provider with him. Often the provider has 
remained clueless of the miscommunication until l say something. Because of the type of 
hearing loss my husband experiences he hears most things well when speaking to someone 
with a deeper voice, higher notes are more difficult for him. This makes it easy for people to not 
realize or forget there is a hearing issue. When I had to take him to the E.R. at Togus, during the 
worse of the Covid shut down, people were not being allowed in with the patient, just as most 
medical centers; The person who did the initial intake was a male with a deep voice who 
disregarded that there was a need for me to go in with him, since Kevin had heard him well 
enough. However, when they came out to give me an update it was clear to me that there had 
been an issue. lt turned out the person who saw him next was a female, who as many hada 
higher pitch voice. Part of my husband's concerns that day were left unaddressed. WhileI 
gladly go with my husband, it won't always be possible. ln his case accessibility can currently be 
had by providing someone with a deep voice, or by simply having him repeat things back until 
he has heard correctly. But that isn't possible when the issue is disregarded to begin with. 
Please help change this by voting for LD 976. 
Kandie Cleaves 
Garland
