7
t 
Ai 
.. THE MAINE EDUCATIONAL CENTER FOR THE DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING
‘ - wvvvv.mecdhh.org 
Kare" "°P'<*"$ 207.781.1476 (VP) 
Executive Director 207131 5234 II 
Q6 GOVERNOR BAXTER SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF 
3 One Mackworth Island, Falmouth, ME 04105 
Karen Hopkins 
4 Babkirk Drive 
Scarb0rough,Maine 04074 
207-420-9918 
Karen.hopkins@n1ecdhh.org 
April 5, 2023 
Dear Members of the Committee Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
My name is Karen Hopkins, and I am a resident of Scarborough, I am also the Executive Director of The Maine 
Educational Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing. I am writing to express my strong support for LD #976, to 
Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of-hearing 
Patients. 
As a member of the deaf community, I have personally experienced numerous barriers when trying to access 
healthcare services. A few years ago, I had a serious fall which resulted in a traumatic brain injury. The time I spent 
in the hospital was a time of confusion and fear. Due to my injury, my processing was impacted, and extreme 
vertigo made it impossible for me to access interpreting services through distance technology. The need to have 
qualiﬁed in person ASL interpreters was critical to the understanding of my prognosis and steps needed in my 
healing process. One of the biggest challenges I encountered is the limited access to qualiﬁed American Sign 
Language (ASL) interpreters during this scary time of my life. Months of therapy with limited access wasa 
challenge to my recovery. This lack of access made it difﬁcult to communicate effectively with healthcare providers, 
which lead to misunderstandings and inappropriate treatments. 
As Executive Director of our state’s leading Deaf education agency, I have supported numerous families of deaf and 
hard of hearing children in advocating for appropriate access for their children in healthcare settings. Our children 
need access to qualiﬁed ASL interpreters to understand what is happening to them medically. Just this week one of 
our students had a medical emergency and my ﬁrst thought was fear that this student would not have the access 
needed. 
I believe that the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of-hearing 
Patients can make a signiﬁcant difference in addressing these barriers. I am pleased to see that the task force will 
study accessibility to appropriate communication methods for deaf and hard-of-hearing patients in healthcare 
settings, including the availability of ASL interpreters and other communication technologies that can help to bridge 
the gap between healthcare providers and patients. 
I urge you to support this important legislation and support equal access for all patients, including those who are 
deaf or hard-of-hearing. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Karen Hopkins
THE MAINE EDUCATIONAL CENTER FOR THE DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING 
GOVERNOR BAXTER SCHOOL FOR THE DEAF 
One Mackworth Island, Falmouth, ME 04105 
wvwv.mecdhh.org 
Kare" H°P'<i"$ 207.781.1476 (VP) 
Executive Director 207,731 _6284
