 
 
April 2, 2023 
P.O. Box 53 
Belfast, ME 04915 
 
Honorable Representatives 
 
I want to speak in support of LD 976, an act to encourage the legislature to look 
into making a task force to improve communication access for deaf and hard of hearing 
in health care settings. 
As a health care professional who has worked in private practice, nursing homes, 
in patient and out patient settings in Maine, with people who are deaf and/or hard of 
hearing, I have to say there is nothing but frustration for the providers and anywhere from 
frustration, anger, misunderstanding and danger for a person who is deaf or hard of 
hearing.  So there “are” interpreter services provided at least in the hospital setting I have 
worked in. These are usually via a video camera set up with an outsource agency that 
provides “translation” services for any language. In my experience the manner in which 
these services are rendered are not adequate for making sure a person has all the 
information they need to advocate for their own health care services in any of the above 
situations.   
  Picture a sick person, who has a condition serious enough to be hospitalized, at 
best a hearing person has a difficult time understanding what the doctors, nurses are 
communicating about their illness and care.  Most often patients are in bed, half reclined, 
waking up, and definitely not feeling well, and trying to understand what is going on.  A 
person who is deaf, in these same situations has a video monitor place on the side of their 
bed. The monitor has to found, where is it stored? The caregiver has to know how to use 
it? The connection has to be made. Is the Wifi working? Is it angled so the person in bed 
can actually see the interpreter?  Does the sick person have their glasses? can they see?  
Then the care-giver has to take time to have small bits of their conversation signed.  If 
you haven’t worked in a hospital, you might not know that the nursing assistants, nurses, 
social workers, doctors all are pushed by time. Taking time is not one of health care 
providers strong suit these days and that is due to a larger problem, but it is the fact.  
 All of us know what this is like for us go to routine appointments for their health 
yearly check ups to any number of outpatient procedures ordered by their doctors, or for 
testing, for management of on-going health issues.  Now add to that being a person who 
is deaf, and no one is available to interpret.  Imagine going to the same providers over 
time and requesting interpreters, and nothing is done, or set up ahead of time. I currently 
work in a hospital outpatient clinic and we do have a video hook up machine for 
interpreters, but the WIFI is not reliable so 9 out of 10 times it does not work.  
 Being able to understand what is being said, and offered in a health care situation 
is critical for a persons self-advocacy, well-being and emotional balance when dealing 
with something that could easily be scary and impact ones literal life.  
 I urge you to pass this bill  
Thank you  
Karin Spitfire  
karin  Spitfire 
Belfast
LD 976
April 2, 2023
P.O. Box 53
Belfast, ME 04915
Honorable Representatives
I want to speak in support of LD 976, an act to encourage the legislature to look into 
making a task force to improve communication access for deaf and hard of hearing in 
health care settings.
As a health care professional who has worked in private practice, nursing homes, in 
patient and out patient settings in Maine, with people who are deaf and/or hard of 
hearing, I have to say there is nothing but frustration for the providers and anywhere 
from frustration, anger, misunderstanding and danger for a person who is deaf or hard
of hearing.  So there “are” interpreter services provided at least in the hospital setting 
I have worked in. These are usually via a video camera set up with an outsource 
agency that provides “translation” services for any language. In my experience the 
manner in which these services are rendered are not adequate for making sure a 
person has all the information they need to advocate for their own health care services
in any of the above situations.  
 Picture a sick person, who has a condition serious enough to be hospitalized, at best
a hearing person has a difficult time understanding what the doctors, nurses are 
communicating about their illness and care.  Most often patients are in bed, half 
reclined, waking up, and definitely not feeling well, and trying to understand what is 
going on.  A person who is deaf, in these same situations has a video monitor place on
the side of their bed. The monitor has to found, where is it stored? The caregiver has 
to know how to use it? The connection has to be made. Is the Wifi working? Is it 
angled so the person in bed can actually see the interpreter?  Does the sick person 
have their glasses? can they see?  Then the care-giver has to take time to have small 
bits of their conversation signed.  If you haven’t worked in a hospital, you might not 
know that the nursing assistants, nurses, social workers, doctors all are pushed by 
time. Taking time is not one of health care providers strong suit these days and that is 
due to a larger problem, but it is the fact. 
All of us know what this is like for us go to routine appointments for their health 
yearly check ups to any number of outpatient procedures ordered by their doctors, or 
for testing, for management of on-going health issues.  Now add to that being a 
person who is deaf, and no one is available to interpret.  Imagine going to the same 
providers over time and requesting interpreters, and nothing is done, or set up ahead 
of time. I currently work in a hospital outpatient clinic and we do have a video hook 
up machine for interpreters, but the WIFI is not reliable so 9 out of 10 times it does 
not work. 
Being able to understand what is being said, and offered in a health care situation is 
critical for a persons self-advocacy, well-being and emotional balance when dealing 
with something that could easily be scary and impact ones literal life. 
I urge you to pass this bill 
Thank you 
Karin Spitfire 

