 
 
March 25, 2023 
 
Krista Campbell  
  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
  
Re: Testimony in favor of LD #976 
 Dear Member of the Committee Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
My name is Krista Campbell. My natural language is ASL. I would like to ask for your support in 
Bill #976. I have had several issues. I currently reside in Waterville.  In the past, I have lived in 
Bangor. Currently I am using health care services in Waterville. I have used Eastern Maine 
Medical Center and St. Joseph hospital on many occasions. My experience at Island hospital 
also proved to be frustrating as no interpreter was available. Thayer hospital has worked out 
nicely as they use Pine Tree Society Interpreting Service and are familiar with the services 
needed.  
 
 I have had to deal with:  
• Interpreters showing up at the wrong place.  
• Lack of qualifications of the interpreters I receive.  
• Interpreters controlling the situation instead of voicing for me.  
• Video Relay freezing up.  
•  Lack of local area competency from the contracting interpreting agency.  
• Appointments being rescheduled because there is no interpreter available.  
 
Last year, I went to hospital, and texted the interpreting agency to let them know that I needed 
an interpreter at St. Joseph hospital. The interpreter went to EMMC hospital because of a 
communication error by the interpreting agency.  This has happened during visit  to Acadia,  
doctors office,  MRI, and ER. This interpreting agency does not do well with communicating 
with deaf people or have experience with deaf culture and is best for other interpreting needs 
that serve other languages.  I often do not get an interpreter that fits my needs from this 
agency.  I call the interpreting agency in advance because the VRI freezes, and I get upset and 
leave. It is best for me to have a live interpreter, so I let them know ahead of time. But there 
are still issues that need to be resolved.  
 
A few years ago, the owner of the interpreting agency showed up to interpret my appointment, 
and she doesn’t sign well enough to interpret and she is not an interpreter of ASL. I was 
confused about where the real interpreter was.  
 
On another occasion, the hospital had to take my medication for the weekend, when checking 
out, I asked the staff to get my medication, but the interpreter took over the communication 
and told me it was in my bag, when it was not. The interpreter misunderstood what I was 
asking for and trying to control the situation. She would not voice what I said.  
  
On one visit to the ER, I received an interpreter that was not qualified and was better suited for 
students in school.  
 
I had an appointment scheduled a week ago, and the doctor’s office cancelled because there 
was no interpreter available. My appointment is now postponed another week. This has 
become quite frustrating as I am in a lot of pain.  
 
Please consider my frustrations and support bill #976. If you have questions please contact me.  
 
Thank you for your time,  
 
Krista Campbell  
 
*This information was signed by me,  and another person typed it for me.  I have read it.  
