 
Testimony of Malvina Gregory, MaineHealth 
in Support of LD 976, “Resolve, to Establish the Task Force 
on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods 
for Deaf and Hard-of-hearing Patients” 
Thursday, April 6, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is 
Malvina Gregory, Director of Interpreter and Cross Cultural Services at 
MaineHealth. Please accept this written testimony in support of LD 976, 
“Resolve, to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate 
Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of-hearing Patients,” on behalf 
of MaineHealth.  
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and New 
Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support our 
vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest in 
America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab – regardless 
of the language our patients speak.  
MaineHealth is dedicated to ensuring that our Deaf and hard-of-hearing 
patients have the tools and accommodations necessary to ensure them equal 
access to our programs and effective communication. This commitment to 
excellence and patient-centered care requires a constant process of feedback, 
staff training, and innovation.  
MaineHealth Interpreter & Cross-Cultural Services is proud to sponsor and 
support one of just two Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Patient and Family 
Advisory Council in the United States. Our Maine Medical Center Deaf and 
Hard-of-Hearing Patient and Family Advisory Council is comprised of hard-
of-hearing and Deaf members of our community, but also parents of Deaf 
individuals, and CoDAs (children of Deaf Adults). Its diverse representation 
guides us in thinking about how we shape our programs and plan for patient 
access in all aspects.   
The creation of a Task Force to study this dynamic is laudable and necessary. 
We have heard from our Council Members that communication barriers lead 
to delayed treatment and, ultimately, worsened health outcomes within their 
communities. Recent mandates from the Joint Commission1 and CMS2 
 
1 https://www.jointcommission.org/our-priorities/health-care-equity/Health Care Equity | The Joint Commission  
2 https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/agency-information/omh/health-equity-programsHealth Equity Programs | 
CMS  
further emphasizing reduction of health disparities and guaranteed language 
access within telehealth settings only make this more imperative. It is 
important that the State take the necessary steps to identify and measure care 
gaps as well as identify and disseminate successful best practices. State 
assessment and information sharing will not only identify current gaps, it will 
assist our hospitals to proactively plan and achieve a state of readiness for 
upcoming increased regulatory requirements.  
We would recommend that the Task Force expand the scope of its study to 
also include the availability of CART (Communication Access Real-time 
Translation) and the reliability of internet connections. Automatically 
generated voice transcriptions and caption are notoriously prone to error and 
should not be utilized in clinically critical settings. CART, which employs 
human transcriptionists trained in medical terminology, ensures accurate 
communication of complex medical symptoms, diagnoses, and treatment 
plans and is the recommended modality in health care settings. ADA 
guidance further specifies that if video remote interpreting options are chosen 
that “real-time, full-motion video and audio over a dedicated high-speed, 
wide-bandwidth video connection or wireless connection that delivers high-
quality video images that do not produce lags, choppy, blurry, or grainy 
images, or irregular pauses in communication.”3 Our Patient and Family 
Advisory Council members tell us that when this standard is not met, they are 
forced to depend on passing written notes, lip-reading, or family members for 
communication. Proposed rulemaking to Section 1557 of the Affordable Care 
Act, due to be formalized this summer, will only further strengthen these 
regulatory requirements prohibiting automated communication in medical 
settings and reinforcing the need for equity in telehealth.4 It would be useful 
for the State to assist hospitals in identifying service gaps in preparation of 
these more rigorous standards aimed at reducing health disparities.  
With that said, I thank Representative Dodge and the Health and Human 
Services Committee for their consideration of this important topic. Thank you 
for your time and consideration and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
 
 
 
3 https://www.ada.gov/resources/effective-communication/  
4 https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/08/04/2022-16217/nondiscrimination-in-health-programs-
and-activities   
