Comments in support of LD 976:  Resolve, to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to 
Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Patients  
 
My Name is Polly Lawson. I am an American Sign Language interpreter with 28 years of 
experience working in medical settings. I am certified by the Registry of Interpreters for the 
Deaf and hold a Core Certification Healthcare Interpreter credential via  the Certification 
Commission  for Healthcare Interpreters. I strongly support this bill . I share my two main 
reasons here.  
 
First, and foremost, is my belief that the only true way to solve a problem is to work directly 
with those who are experiencing  the problem. This task force will  bring to the table people who 
are deaf and hard of hearing to describe, firsthand , the barriers they face , not only to direct 
communication with their doctors and nurses, but also barriers to general healthcare 
information that is rarely provided in Ameri can Sign Language . Deaf and hard of hearing 
stakeholders are deeply invested in appropriate access to their healthcare and it is time to 
listen to their stated needs and to the solutions that they offer. The statewide  nature of this 
task force will allow f or statewide testimonials  from the deaf community , allowing for 
strategies for appropriate access to be tailored to regional needs and realities. Additionally, the 
task force will be a forum where  healthcare providers can describe the specific challenges t hey 
face while treating deaf and hard of hearing patients in less than appropriate access conditions. 
With both deaf and hard of hearing stakeholders and healthcare providers at the table, the 
barriers to access can be best defined and , hopefully,  resolved . 
 
Second, from my view as an interpreter  who works primarily in southern Maine, I have seen 
access to healthcare improve over the years, largely due to the passage of the Americans with 
Disabilities Act and the ongoing work of disability rights advocates.  Where there are resources, 
i.e., available qualified interpreters, access is generally requested and provided. However, there 
is a shortage of qualified interpreters, and a significant  shortage  north of Bangor . Furthermore,  
the Video Remote Interpreting ( VRI) that is often substituted for in person interpreters suffers 
from inadequate internet s peed , lack of availability of equipment, and l ack of  training for 
healthcare workers  on its effective use . But the most significant and fundamental barrier to 
appropriate access, from my view, is a persistent lack of understanding that American Sign 
Language (ASL) and English are very different languages. Therefore, the enormous  amount of 
healthcare informati on disseminated in writing from medical  offices, hospitals and on the 
internet is not accessible to people who depend on  ASL as their language  of true access. This 
written information includes prescription drug information, consent forms, advanced directiv es 
and hospital discharge instructions. Serious healthcare disparities come from such barriers. I 
believe any task force that includes culturally d eaf individuals will address this issue .  
 
I encourage this committee to establish this task force and begin the process of exploring how 
to ensure appropriate access to healthcare services to deaf and hard of hearing citizens of 
Maine, and to the many healthcare workers  who endeavor to provide their care . 
 
Thank you for your time and attention.  Polly Lawson, CI , CoreCHI  
