Address | City, St Zip Code 4/2/23 
MAINE LEGISLATURE 
STATE CAPITAL-AUGUSTA, MAINE 
First, I’d like to introduce myself. I am an ASL professor, Deaf Interpreter, and advocate. 
Through my years of both using interpreters and working as a professional interpreter, I have 
seen how interpreting services has evolved since my first interpreter in the 6th grade at Falmouth 
Middle School. 
I think it is important to stress patient choice in how medical care is given as well as how 
communication accommodations are provided. I had one friend with CP in the hospital in the 
Central Maine area that made a request for an on-site interpreter due to her CP seriously being 
impacted by her illness. The hospital refused to get on-site interpreters despite her continuous 
efforts to explain why she couldn’t access other type of interpreting services. The hospital 
denied her request for approximately 8 hours and stated that the VRI interpreter (remote via an 
iPad) was a “sufficient enough accommodation.”  
This makes me concerned for Deaf people in special circumstances. What about a woman 
giving birth to a baby- does she have to tilt her head, miss important moments of her birth, to 
watch an interpreter onscreen? It has happened. What of DeafBlind people who need on-site 
interpreter for tactile communication or accessibility to vision challenges? What of patients 
experiencing hallucinations? This “VRI will suffice” response is not feasible at in these 
circumstances.  
Deaf, Hard of hearing, DeafBlind, Deaf Disabled patients know what they need and are specific 
for a reason. Consider this, a lack of patient choice in getting their communication needs met is 
considered as a form of malpractice. Yes, when patients are denied VRI access and given the 
VRI option – it is not equitable for all patients nor all situations. Equitable interpreting services 
2 needs to be factored in patient care and written in policy to protect both the patients and the 
doctors from malpractice and wrongful treatment. 
VRI is a wonderful technology, we have come a long way to being able to be seen for intake in 
the triage room of the ED. This is the time interpreting services can be adjusted to determine 
proper communication access while finding out why they are there. However, VRI may not be 
able to successfully give the medical team the information needed to efficiently treat the patient. 
For more questions or further testimony, please reach out anytime at the below contact. 
Best,  
Regan Thibodeau, PhD, CDI, ASLTA Master, ASLPI 4+, CLIP-R 
Email: ARClingui@gmail.com  
Text: 207-409-2149 
 
 
 
