Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
 
RE: Testimony in favor of LR #976 
Dear Member of the Committee Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
I am Sandra K. Wood, a resident of Portland, and I am writing to express my strong support for LD #976 
to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-
of-hearing Patients. 
As a member of the Deaf community, I have personally experienced numerous barriers when trying to 
access healthcare services. One of the biggest challenges I have encountered is the limited access to 
qualified American Sign Language (ASL) interpreters in healthcare settings. This has made it difficult to 
communicate effectively with healthcare providers, which can lead to misunderstandings and 
misdiagnosis, and even inappropriate treatments. As a result, I have had to consistently fight for access to 
interpreters, on top of navigating a healthcare system that is already challenging for everyone. 
Many times I have experienced a significant barrier to acessing appropriate healthcare services. For 
instance, one time when I was in debilitating pain and could not move well, the provider forced me to use 
video remote interpreting (VRI) which was ineffective as I could not see the interpreter due to my 
inability to maneuver my head and body (due to the pain) to see the monitor.  I have had providers ask my 
son to interpret for me, which is inappropriate and puts the onus on the child for conveying complex 
medical information.  I have had times when no interpreter was provided, so the medical provider and I 
wrote back and forth, which typically means they write as little as possible, thereby preventing me from 
gaining a full understanding of my medical issues at hand. In these situations and others not mentioned 
here, I was not able to communicate effectively with the healthcare provider, which put my health and 
well-being at risk.  
There are many challenges that Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing patients face when trying to access healthcare 
services. The task force established by this resolve has the potential to make a significant difference in 
addressing these barriers.  
I believe that the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf and 
Hard-of-hearing Patients can make a significant difference in addressing these barriers. I am pleased to 
see that the task force will study accessibility to appropriate communication methods for Deaf and Hard-
of-Hearing patients in healthcare settings, including the availability of ASL interpreters and other 
communication technologies that can help to bridge the gap between healthcare providers and patients. 
I urge you to support this important legislation and take action to ensure that all patients, including those 
who are Deaf or Hard-of-Hearing, have equal access to healthcare services. Thank you for your time and 
attention to this matter. 
Sincerely, 
Sandra K. Wood, Ph.D.  
 
