 April 2, 2023  Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services Maine State Legislature 100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333-0100 RE: Testimony in favor of LR #976  Dear Committee Members, I support LD 976 because the implementation of a task force is necessary to gather data on increasing and improving communication access for Deaf, Hard of Hearing, and DeafBlind (D/HH/DB) patients in healthcare settings.  Maine must improve accessibility and communication methods for Deaf, Hard of Hearing, and DeafBlind patients. This includes; more competent ASL interpreters with medical expertise, training for medical workers on working with D/HH/DB individuals, and improved Wi-Fi connections for communication purposes at healthcare facilities. This work will result in positive health outcomes. As a Deaf individual, I have personally experienced numerous barriers in getting access to optimal healthcare services.  I constantly educate medical providers about having in-person ASL interpreters for specific health situations.  I have been subjected to spotty wifi connections when medical providers at doctor’s offices tried to connect me with VRI (Video Remote Interpreting) services. I have also been forced to reschedule several appointments due to a lack of access and accommodations.  As a result, getting accurate information from doctors has been difficult. When we (Deaf individuals) have medical challenges, we should not need to additionally struggle for equitable access to information about our health.  I have heard of many situations in the Deaf and Hard of Hearing community when people are denied quality access to healthcare. We have lived experiences and we need better access to medical information in order to understand how to take care of ourselves. The task force needs to see and 
hear these stories. Deaf and Hard of Hearing Mainers deserve communication equity in healthcare services and nothing less. I urge you to support this important legislation and take action to ensure that all patients, including those who are deaf or hard-of-hearing, have equal access to healthcare services. Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.Sincerely,Sitara Sheikh
