Tara Fairbrother, CMA AAMA 
Brewer 
RE: Testimony in Favor of LD #976 
Good afternoon, 
I have been a medical assistant in Maine for 26 years.  I have seen the struggles of 
patients with communication barriers.  All patients deserve accessible and appropriate 
communication methods. 
I have grandchildren who are deaf and hard of hearing.  It has been a struggle getting 
an interpreter for medical appointments.  They have been refused an in-person 
interpreter at the ER or a walk-in clinic for an unscheduled appointment.  It is difficult for 
children to rely on a computer screen or IPAD to communicate with an interpreter. I 
have also seen these computer screens or IPAD devices freeze up or crash, which results 
in the interpreter missing important information.  When an in-person interpreter has 
been requested at these appointments the answer that the nurse would give their 
mother was you interpret for us.  This is not appropriate.  A family member should never 
be relied upon for interpretation.  Parents need to be focused on what is being said and 
often are holding and comforting their children. The right to language services should 
not depend on a patient’s age. 
Regardless of the age of a patient relying on an IPAD for communication is not the 
answer.  These items freeze up, and the person on the other end may miss pertinent 
information.  Also, the patient should be able to speak to a person and not have to hold 
an IPAD up or keep their head turned during a procedure to focus on a screen to 
communicate.  These items pose a serious safety issue for Deaf and hard-of-hearing 
patients.  The patient cannot tell if they miss pertinent information and the person on 
the other end of these devices may not know what information they have missed due to 
internet connectivity issues.  Internet is not reliable; these devices crash and freeze 
sometimes and are not available in the instance they are needed.  
Patients who do not have the option to request an in-person interpreter may not seek 
the care they need due to this barrier causing harm to their health and this is 
unacceptable treatment.  We really need to come together and create an acceptable 
solution to this issue.  
 
 
Thank you for your time, 
 
 
Tara Fairbrother 
 
