Tristen Hellewell
Scarborough
LD 976
RE: Testimony in favor of LD# 976
Dear Member of the Committee Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services,
My name is Tristen Hellewell, a resident of Scarborough, and I am writing to express 
my support for LD #976, to Establish the Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate 
Communication Methods for Deaf and Hard-of-hearing Patients.
As a resident of Maine who lives and works in community with Deaf Mainers, I have 
serious concerns about language, communication, and cultural barriers Deaf 
colleagues and friends experience when accessing healthcare. One of the challenges 
often discussed is the overuse of video remote interpreting (VRI) in lieu of a 
(typically preferred) in-person American Sign Language interpreter. VRI is frequently
imposed on Deaf individuals in hospitals and medical settings around the state and 
subjects folks to insufficient bandwidth (leading to videos that freeze and cause 
problems for communication), insufficient training for medical staff on using VRI 
equipment, and interpreters on the screens that are not local and do not have a 
relationship with local Deaf Mainers nor understand regional dialects of American 
Sign Language. This is one of many barriers that the healthcare system, dominated by
individuals that hear and don’t understand American Sign Language, imposes on Deaf
people trying to access medical care. 
Everyone has a right to equitable language access in all areas of society, and most 
DEFINITELY in the healthcare system where understanding this information impacts
health, safety, and well-being. 
The Task Force on Accessibility to Appropriate Communication Methods for Deaf 
and Hard-of-hearing Patients can make a significant difference in addressing barriers 
for Deaf, Deafblind, hard-of-hearing, and late-deafened people in the state. It is vital 
that this task force better understand and make recommendations towards improving 
accessibility and communication methods for deaf and hard-of-hearing patients in 
healthcare settings. 
I urge you to support this important legislation and take action to ensure that all 
patients, including those who are deaf or hard of hearing, have equal access to 
healthcare services. Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.
Sincerely,
Tristen Evah Hellewell
