131st Maine Legislature 
  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
Testimony of Westbrook Housing Authority in Support of 
 
LD 658 "An Act to Increase Funding for and Stabilize the Independent Housing with 
Services Program Under the Department of Health and Human Services" 
 
14 April 23 
 
I am Christopher LaRoche, Executive Director of Westbrook Housing Authority, and I am 
testifying in Support of LD 258. 
I’d like to address is the ability to allow seniors to Age in Place, whether they are in Senior 
Affordable Housing properties or in their non-senior apartment, or their own home.  For over 20 
years, Maine DHHS-OADS has operated the Independent Housing with Services Program 
(IHSP).  This program has been operated by 7 nonprofit entities including Housing Authorities 
and Area Agencies on Aging.  This small initiative has proven to be a valuable resource to 
elderly households who cannot afford the basic supports to allow them to live independently in 
their own home (apartment or house).  At Westbrook Housing, we have identified that the 
average person with support can Age in Place and additional six years.  At a rate of $276.34 per 
month, to keep a person independent, it reduces the pressure on housing the older adults in 
supportive housing, which we are all aware of is going through its own crisis of costs and lack of 
inventory.  The current IHSP program has been forgotten and almost eliminated by the previous 
Administration.  The result is that the program, adjusted for inflation, is operating at a level of 
approximately 37% of its original funding level from over 20 years ago.  I want recognize the 
dedicated staff at DHHS-OADS for ensuring the survivability of this program over the past 10 
years.  And, for their recommended budget for the upcoming two year fiscal cycle.  We as the 
direct service providers have managed to efficiently delivered this program with limited funding 
resources while providing matched funs to offset the program costs. 
 
This modest bill recognizes the success of the IHSP program and increases funds so that the 
program is sustainable to offset increased costs related to personnel and meals.  The bill calls for 
a small funding of $2,500,000 per year that will allow for the existing IHSP program to be fully 
funded to operate at its original program levels, and create the platform to expand the program.  
The expansion of this proven and mostly unknown program can result in one of the most 
impactful housing and older adult care programs with the minimal amount of expense to the 
state.  The result will be the ability for low income older adults to continue to subsist in their own 
apartment and delay their need to be dependent upon an assisted living facility that is not an 
achievable financial model.  With the combination of the 20 Housing Authorities, Area on Aging 
Agencies, Community Action Programs, and other Housing and Service Providers, the 
infrastructure already exists to deliver an expanded program to assist older adults Age in Place 
Thank you for your time and your support of LD658 
 
