  
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
 
In Favor of LD 658 - An Act to Increase Funding 
for and Stabilize the Independent Housing with 
Services Program Under the Department of Health 
and Human Services 
 
Submitted on April 14, 2023 
 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Jena Jones, and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LDs 658. 
Maine’s Independent Housing with Services Program (IHSP) allows older Mainers access to 
affordable housing in addition to supportive services that enable residents to remain engaged in 
their communities with freedom and autonomy.  
Across the state organizations like Westbrook Housing Authority, Aroostook Area Agency on 
Aging and Southern Maine Agency on Aging ensure eligible older adults are connected to 
housing options that also include assistance with instrumental/activities of daily living, meal 
preparation, and homemaker services. The housing model involves congregated apartments that 
offer a rich and vibrant community life that puts choice at the forefront. 
The need for this critical program is only growing as Maine continues to grapple with a 
significant direct care workforce shortage. As the Department noted in a recently released report 
from the Commission to Study Long-term Care Workforce Issues, the numerous and dedicated 
efforts currently being made have only stabilized this challenge.1 Given that the need for in-
home care and support cannot presently be met for every Mainer in need, we are already seeing 
an increased need for facility-based care.  
These programs have felt the same pinch in staffing challenges but are further impacted by the 
low-wage jobs typically comprising the positions in these facilities. The primary distinction 
between the IHSP model and the assisted living program is that IHSP facilities do not offer 
medication administration services, and thus their workers do not require licenses that yield 
higher reimbursement rates making it difficult to attract workers in an already inimical climate.  
 
1 (Department of Health and Human Services, 2023)  

The funding provided in LD 658 will help to stabilize and expand a critically needed program for 
older Mainers at a time when investments must be made in lower-cost solutions to avoid more 
expensive consequences. Rates of older adult evictions are on the rise because of the scarcity of 
workers who provide care and support services at home and now adults 65 and older represent 
the fastest growing sector of the homeless population.2 As we’ve heard too often this session, too 
many older people who are experiencing these sorts of challenges are ending up in our hospitals 
with no way to be discharged.  
Maine’s IHSP offers invaluable options for secure housing and supportive services that provide 
autonomy while also making community accessible. These spaces offer the kinds of connection 
we would all wish to access in life – connection to care services and assistance with daily living, 
and connection to the communal hub of activity and experiences offered in the residential 
setting. The MCOA supports all efforts that allow us to age with choices and dignity and LD 
658n is no exception, we urge you to support it as well.  
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions.  
Jena Jones 
 
 
2 (Kushel, 2020)  
