, “ HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
i 54 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
A 
(207) 287-1400 
Suzanne Salisbury TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
134 Park Road 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Residence: (207) 899-6863 
Suzanne.Salisburv@legislature.maine.g0v 
April 14, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Suzanne Salisbury presenting 
LD 658, An Act to Increase Funding for and Stabilize the Independent Housing with Services 
Program Under the Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Sue Salisbury. I represent House District 128, which is part of 
the town of Westbrook. I am here today to introduce LD 658, An Act to Increase Funding for and 
Stabilize the Independent Housing with Services Program Under the Department of Health and 
Human Services. 
Living independently is something we all strive for. Some start thinking about it after high school 
graduation and some start thinking about it later. My kids are all over the map on this topic. As we get 
older, we start to feel the effects of aging on our bodies and realize where we once could take care of 
ourselves, we are again in need of help to manage basic daily tasks. 
Personally, I’m experiencing this period of transition with my mom who is currently living with us. It has 
been so wonderful to be able to offer her continued independence and dignity by helping with small daily 
tasks like preparing meals and cleaning up. She doesn’t need around-the-clock care or help with the most 
basic functions, but she beneﬁts from having a little extra help. Because we can offer this to her, she is 
able to maintain her normal routine, continue to see friends and live a full and purposeful life. For folks 
who don’t need the full-on, 24-hour care that assisted living facilities offer, DHHS Independent Housing 
with Services Program provides a perfect model for many older Mainers. 
Empowering older Mainers by ensuring they have the tools they need to live independently is critically 
important. It’s what we all hope for ourselves and our loved ones. I am so fortunate to live ina 
community that values our older neighbors and strives to provide them with opportunities to age with 
dignity in their own homes. I am thankful to Chris LaRoche from Westbrook Housing Authority for all of 
his work in this ﬁeld and for bringing this bill to me. To ensure that this important work can continue in 
Westbrook and across the state, I encourage the committee to support further funding of this account by 
voting “Ought to Pass” on LD 658. 
Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions you may have, although folks from 
Westbrook Housing Authority are here today and may be able to answer some of your questions in 
greater detail. 
District 128: Part of Westbrook
