   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in support of LD 1419, “An Act to Inform Fair Minimum Rates of Wages and 
Benefits in Bids for Public Contracts Using State and Federal Data”   
    
Arthur Phillips, Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Policy     
April 11, 2023     
 
Senator Tipping, Re presentative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I am here to testify in support of LD 1419, “An Act to Inform Fair Minimum 
Rates  of Wages and Benefits in Bids for Public Contracts Using State and Federal Data.”  
 
Prevailing wage laws at the state and federal level ensure that publicly funded construction 
projects pay workers a fair wage. Here in Maine, our state law applies to proje cts that cost 
at least $50,000. This bill would require the Department of Labor to  take into consideration  
wage data collected under the federal Davis -Bacon Act when determining prevailing wages 
under state law.   
 
Prevailing wage laws are an important mech anism to ensure the state is not contributing to 
low wages in the construction industry, by  undercutting the incentive for contractors to 
win bids by lowering  labor costs. The effectiveness of the law, however, depends on the 
quality of the data that infor ms it. Wage and benefit data collected under the federal Davis -
Bacon act is done so through a rigorous process to ensure federally funded projects are 
held to a decent labor standard. The Davis Bacon and Related Acts collectively appl y to an 
estimated $217  billion in federal and federally assisted spending per year, covering 1.2 
million US construction workers.i LD 1419 would enable Maine to benefit  from this work to 
better ensure workers are not being left behind.  
 
This bill is narrowly focused on improving data collection, but i t is important to highlight 
the many benefits of a properly functioning prevailing wage law. Research has shown 
prevailing  wage laws have no impact on total construction costs and are associated with 
projects that are  more often  completed on schedule , due in part to the efficiencies of a 
well-trained  workforc e. Prevailing wages help improve workers’ wages, reduce poverty, 
increase local hiring  and spending , and reducing racial income inequality. Prevailing wage  
laws  also help attract, develop,  and retain skilled workers, a critical priority for our state as 
we compete for workers with nearby states including Massachusetts.ii 
 
While th e impact of including Davis -Bacon Act data in determining prevailing wage rates 
remains to be seen, doing so will ensure Maine has the best data available to inform this 
important law. We urge you to support LD 1419.  
 
 
   
  
i “Five Facts About Davis -Bacon and Related Acts,” Jessica Looman, USDOL, April 2022, available at 
https://blog.dol.gov/2022/04/6/f ive-facts -about -davis -bacon -and-related -acts 
ii For more on the economic impacts of prevailing wage laws , see “Prevailing Wage Laws: What Do 
We Know?” Kevin Duncan and Russell Ormiston, Institute for Construction Economic Research, 2017, 
available at  http://iceres.org/wp -content/uploads/2014/10/prevailing -wage -review -duncan -
ormiston.pdf;  “Prevailing wages and government contracting costs: A review of the research,” 
Nooshin Mahalia, Economic Policy Institute, 2008, available at  https://files.epi.org/page/ -
/old/briefingpapers/215/bp215.pdf ; and  “An Examination of Minnesota’s Prevailing Wage Law Effects 
on Costs, Training, and Economic Development,” Frank Manzo and Kevin Duncan, 2018, ava ilable at 
https://midwestepi.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/mepi -csu-examination -of-minnesotas -prevailing -
wage -law-final.pdf . 
 
 
