205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, ME 04330 
£53: David Trahan, Executive Director 
‘X ~ ”' 
. . . 
SAM-ILA ." davsd.trahan@sportsmansalhanceofma|ne.org 
www . sa m i I a .0 rg 
Testimony In Opposition 
LD 90, An Act to Allow Persons 70 Years of Age or Older to Use a Sub-pemiittee to Harvest Deer. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM Institute for Legislative Action" 
February 6, 2023 
The Honorable Senator Lafontaine, Rep. Landry, members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, my 
name is David Trahan, I am the Executive Director of the Spo1tsman ’s Alliance of Maine-Institute for 
Legislative Action testifying in opposition to LD 90, An Act to Allow Persons 70 Years of Age or Older to Use 
a Sub-pennittee to Harvest Deer. 
We thank the sponsor of LD 90 for sponsoring this legislation, we believe it is well intended, but we camiot 
support it. There are many programs that beneﬁt senior hunters, and as a former legislator on this committee, it 
was my pleasure working on programs that assisted individuals with disabilities, of any age, to access all forms 
of hunting opportunities with exceptions to existing laws and regulations. Creating equality in opportunity isa 
goal for all of us to aspire to, but one principal that applies to hunting is, nothing is guaranteed and all of us 
have a shared responsibility to manage our wildlife populations. The resources of this state belong to all of us, 
equally. 
It appears this proposed bill allows a hunter or in some cases a hunter any age, including over the age of 70 to 
kill a deer for another hunter 70 or older. This is troubling because the concept assumes older and aging 
hunters have a diminished capacity and skill set to successfully hunt and harvest deer. There is no such dataI 
am aware of to back up that assumption. We have an existing disability permit process and would prefer using 
that system on a case-by-case basis. For that reason and our concern with altering our recently reformed 
antlerless deer permit system we cannot support this bill. 
1|Page
