Saco Main Street 15 Pepperell Square | Saco, ME 04072  207-286-3546  
 
 
 
Testimonial in Support of LD 1810 
 
I, Angela Presby, citizen of Saco, ME, am writing in support of LD 1810, An Act to Expand the 
Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit. 
As a lifelong resident of Saco, I also serve as Executive Director for Saco Main Street, a nonprofit 
dedicated to revitalizing our historic downtown. Our organization provides community events in 
the downtown area, which is adjacent to the majority of Saco’s Historical District. Many of the 
homes on our Main Street, the heart of our downtown, are falling into a state that need 
significant repairs. These are huge old homes and buildings that cost a significant amount just to 
heat, let alone adhere to the historic preservations’ guidelines on repair standards. They’ve 
purchased these homes for the love of their history, and now are forced to leave them standing 
in sub-par representation of their original glory.  This falls true for landlords who own our historic 
brick buildings on Main Street that are unable to utilize their top floors as apartments (the 
housing crisis is not lost on Saco – we could really use those apartments), due to the 
astronomical costs to upgrade their buildings and bring them to code.  
LD 1810 would give support to homeowners investing in exterior repairs for their homes. This bill 
has the potential to provide a transformational experience for Maine communities. So many 
older buildings throughout Maine are being repurposed and reclaimed, providing a renaissance 
in many downtowns; we’ve seen this successfully done with mill buildings in Biddeford and in 
Millinocket. This bill could contribute to downtown revitalization efforts by supporting 
homeowners and providing some financial relief to restore historic homes to their original glory, 
adding to the overall aesthetic of the community, and preserving Maine’s rich architectural and 
cultural history. 
 
 
Thank you for your support, 
Angela Presby, Executive Director Saco Main Street 

