                                                                                                      
2 Beech Street, Suite 203, Hallowell Maine 04037  
T: 207.622.6345 | Email: aball@mdf.org | www.mdf.org  
 
 
 
 May 8, 2023  
  Dear Members of the Taxation Committee  
 I am writing in full support of LD 1810 that would expand the Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit.  It will update 
the reporting requirements, improve the small credit to make it more user- friendly and accessible for income -
producing property owners, and create a new program to ensure that homeowners have t he same 
opportunity.   
 The Maine Downtown Center serves as the State Coordinator for the National Main Street Program (Maine has 10 Nationally Accredited Main Streets and 14 Downtown Affiliates) .  We also serve as a statewide resource 
for any community in terested in revitalizing their downtown.  We are implementing an over 40-year -old 
successful preservation -based approach to economic development in all that we do. For every dollar invested 
in one of Maine’s Nationally Accredited Main Street there is an ov er $20 return on investment.   
 LD 1810 will provide tools and improve tools th at are needed to rehabilitate and close the funding gap on so 
many projects. LD 1810 includes several  components that are timely and valuable such as including residential 
prope rties, weatherization costs, and raising the cost of eligible expenses for small commercial properties.  
$250,000 in eligible expenses is not enough in the market today for significant improvements to an historic 
property.  
 
Maine’s downtowns are drivers of Maine’s economy as places where entrepreneurs want to locate, people 
want to live, and travelers want to visit. Supporting and encouraging the rehabilitation of our downtown 
buildings and surrounding historic residential bu ildings is a win for all of Maine.  I urge you to adopt LD 1810.   
 Thank you for your consideration.  
Best,  
 
 
 Anne G. Ball  
Senior Program Director  
  
 
 

