Cara  Romano
Ellsworth 
LD 1810
Senate Chair Nicole Grohoski, House Chair Joe Perry, and members of the committee
on taxation, 
The Heart of Ellsworth is urging the Committee to adopt LD 1810 to expand the 
Maine Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit, as it believes that it would have a number 
of positive impacts on downtown communities across Maine.
One of the critical benefits of LD 1810 that is aligned with our mission is supporting 
heritage tourism in downtowns around the state. By preserving historic buildings and 
revitalizing Main Street communities, the bill would make Ellsworth and Maine a 
more attractive destination for visitors interested in history and architecture.
In addition, LD 1810 would generate interest in long-term downtown investment and 
save aging buildings in the downtown district. Revitalizing historic downtown areas 
can have deep, long-lasting positive impacts on communities and create more vibrant,
active commercial districts that will help to attract new businesses and residents to 
Maine downtowns.
Another benefit of LD 1810 is that it would create housing opportunities in the 
downtown district, making use of prime spaces that are now empty or, in some cases, 
used for storage. By incentivizing the rehabilitation of historic buildings, the bill 
would help to increase the availability of prime housing in downtown areas, which is 
directly addressing a pressing issue - housing shortages in many communities across 
the state.
Finally, the bill would also incentivize weatherization efforts. By requiring that 
rehabilitated buildings meet certain energy efficiency standards, the bill would help to
reduce energy consumption and support Maine's climate goals.
Overall, the Heart of Ellsworth organization believes that LD 1810 would be a 
valuable tool for the revitalization of historic downtown areas across Maine and for 
attracting interest in saving downtowns around the state.
Respectfully Submitted, 
Cara Romano
Heart of Ellsworth, Executive Director

