Claudia White
Standish
LD 1810
Dear Chairs and Members of the Committee: 
I write in support of Bill #LD 1810.  I support small business, rights of private 
owners, and historical preservation which are issues that may not seem to be 
compatible.   
I believe that this bill offers a great opportunity to encourage adaptive re-use of older 
landmark buildings that make up the stories, history and the “skylines” of our towns. 
I live in Standish for half the year at my ancesteral home (1780 ish) and in 
Washington DC the other half the year . DC is where I had 33 years working for the 
federal government in design, construction and renovation of many new, and historic 
buildings across the country. 
One example of adaptive re-use of a landmark building in Washington, D.C. you may 
be familiar with was the Old Post Office Building. It's original purpose was in the 
name but it was first renovated to provide modern office space, food servcies and 
space for small businesses in the 1980's.  It was revovated once again to serve as a 
Hotel I am sure you are familiar with called  Trump Hotel.  The stories that building 
could tell throughout its history!  It's  beauty and presence are an immense 
contribution to the economy and vitality of the  Pennsylvania Avenue corridor in the 
nation's capitol.   
Only last year Standish lost a landmark building in the center of the Village . Dr. 
Buzzells house  had been the home and office for a long sucession of “town doctors” .
It was demolished to make way for a supplemental building to expand a family 
business. Not knowing the purpose the new building  would serve, many of us hoped 
the old building could have been adapted to accommodate that need.  
Perhaps this tax credit bill would have provided enough incentive to the owner to try 
to adpat that building.  Another early Standish building was lost many years ago when
there seemed to be no compromise between a private owner's interests and historical 
preservation.  Since that time the Town's  Historic Preservation Committee has been 
defunct which is sad because there is no advocacy for our town's history and no forum
to discuss competing or shared interests. 
As I said I believe in private ownership rights, small business and historic 
preservation and I feel this Bill #LD1810 can be a cause for good to help find 
workable solutions between these issues. 
Thank you,
Claudia White, 190 Cape Road, Standish, Maine 04087
