      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
May 9 , 2023   
 
Re: LD 1810, An Act to Expand the Maine Historic Rehabilitation Credit and Establish a 
Weatherization Tax Credit  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Cullen Ryan , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine (CHOM ).  CHOM  houses Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocates on their behalf to 
see that everyone is included as part of the community.   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1810, An Act to Expand the Maine Historic Rehabilitation Credit 
and Establish a Weatherization Tax Credit.   
 
This bill amends the tax credit for historic properties by:  
1. Increasing the tax credit from 25% to 30% of the certified qualified rehabilitation expenditures of a 
taxpayer for a certified historic structure;  
2. Increasing the allowable certified qualified rehabilitation expenditures of a taxpayer from a maximum of $250,000 to a maximu m of $1,000,000 for a certified historic;  
3. Increasing the increased tax credit for a certified affordable housing project from 30% to 35% of 
certified qualified rehabilitation expenditures; and 
4. Increasing the increased tax credit for a certified affordable housing project from 30% to 45% of certified qualified rehabilitation expenditures.  
The bill establishes a credit for rehabilitation and weatherization of historic homes equal to 25% of the qualified exterior rehabilitation expenditures of a taxpayer who incurs at least $5,000 in expenditures for a certified historic home. It also provides for an increased credit of 30% of expenditures up to $75,000 under certain circumstances.  
 
LD 1810 would expand, enhance, and improve the Maine Historic Rehabilitation T ax Credit by 
updating the program reporting requirements, improving the small credit to make it more user -
friendly and accessible for income- producing property owners, and create a new program to ensure 
homeowners have the same opportunity.   And this bill  crucially responds to the 2021 analysis of 
the Maine Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit by the Office of Program Evaluation & Government 
Accountability (OPEGA). Th at report stated that the program’s structure and administration are 
sound and efficient, an d that the positive outcomes exceed the stated historic preservation goals 
while promoting affordable housing, job creation and economic growth.  
 
As the Committee knows, there is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine.  Incr easing the tax credits for certified qualified rehabilitation expenditures and for certified 
affordable housing projects as outlined in LD 1810 would significantly increase the number of 
affordable housing units funded through the program.   
 
There is an e xtraordinary unmet demand for affordable, quality housing for all populations.  In the 
past few years, resources have only allowed for about 180 -220 affordable housing units a year to 
come online, Despite MaineHousing and the Legislature increasing resources toward this, the need 
for affordable housing far exceeds the supply, especially for people with the lowest incomes.  LD 
1810 would not only assist in increasing the supply of affordable housing in Maine, it also: 
Supports heritage tourism; generates con struction investment; creates well paid jobs; revitalizes 
communities; and incentivizes weatherization efforts.  
 
Additionally, a potential proposed amendment which would increase the major rehab tax credit 
from $5 million to $7 million would be advantageou s.  The original $5 million tax credit was 
established in 2013.  Since that time Maine has seen costs increase dramatically due to inflation.  It 
is an ideal time to see this increased to the proposed $7 million.   
 
Please pass LD 1810 to provide Maine with an injection of resources to rehabilitate historic properties and at a scale that is commensurate with need.  We will all be far better for doing so.  
The time to invest in now.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell  
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick  
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 
John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth 
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
