Delilah Poupore
Biddeford
LD 1810
Good morning,
Thank you so much for considering 1810, to expand the Historic Rehabilitation Tax 
Credit. As the director of a Main Street program in Maine, I can tell you that this bill 
will help solve the employment crisis (and in turn, help small business retention, since
they are so connected).
A recent survey of business owners in Biddeford/Saco (140 respondents) said that 
gaining and retaining employees is their #1 issue, and further that addressing housing 
would be the #1 way to help.  
With 1810, homeowners will be more likely to add rental dwellings. In Biddeford, we
need as much affordable housing as we can find, and I know so many people who live
in someone's apartment above a garage. This bill would make more of that possible.
Speaking personally, I just sold my (old historic) home because it was too much to 
keep up.  We had been renting it to a low-income family. We could not afford the 
repairs.  1810 would have helped.  We sold it to someone from out of state, and I am 
not convinced they will be renting or selling to someone from a low-income or even 
low-middle income background.
On Main Street, the toughest buildings to bring up to code and full occupancy are the 
small historic buildings.  Larger developers are focussed on the mills, so we still have 
buildings owned by the people who run the business on the first floor. They 
traditionally do not have the capital to build out the upper floors for housing. This bill 
would make an incredible impact.
So, with 1810, you will:
-help local people continue to own their own homes,
-help local people build more housing that's affordable (within existing infrastructure)
-help local businesses attract and retain employees (because they're more about to find
housing)
-help local business owners who own their own building to fully occupy their 
buildings
-help local municipalities benefit from the increased taxes that come from a fully 
occupied downtown
Thank you for giving this your strongest consideration!
Sincerely,
Delilah Poupore
Heart of Biddeford

