 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                
Elizabeth Reynolds 
20 High Bluff Drive 
Kennebunk, ME 04043 
 
May 9, 2023 
 
Letter of Support for LD1810: An Act to Expand the Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit 
 
 
To Whom it May Concern, 
 
I am writing to express my ardent support for the proposed LD1810: An Act to Expand the Historic 
Rehabilitation Tax Credit. I work in Historic Preservation, communicating regularly with owners of historic 
residential properties. Making necessary improvements to historic homes in accordance with industry 
standards is often not feasible for many homeowners, especially those of low- or middle- income.  
This expansion of the historic rehabilitation tax credit program would incentivize many more homeowners 
to complete necessary repairs to their historic properties, improving the existing building stock and 
preserving the vernacular historic architecture composing much of the state’s built landscape. This 
program would also benefit homeowners who receive these tax benefits and could improve the appraisal 
value of their historic building assets. I am aware of similar programs that were implemented in other 
states to great success.  
As a preservation professional I have seen rehabilitation tax credits do wonders for derelict buildings and 
the surrounding communities. Many of the rehabilitation tax credit buildings I have worked would never 
have survived had the tax incentives not existed. I have seen these buildings go on to provide great benefit 
to their communities at large. 
It is my understanding that over one hundred projects were certified and placed in service in Maine using 
the Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit for income-producing properties between 2009 to 2019. Combined, 
these approved projects: 
 Generated $525 million in construction investment; 
 Rehabilitated 3.6 million square feet of commercial and residential space; 
 Created or preserved 1,911 housing units, of which nearly 1,300 were affordable; 
 Generated 200-700 full-time-equivalent (FTE) jobs through construction spending annually; and 
 Created nearly 700 new full-time, year-round jobs in local businesses. 
Please approve the proposed LD1810 to expand these benefits to Maine residents and protect our 
important historic residential building stock! 
Sincerely, 
 
Elizabeth Reynolds 
Director of Preservation 
Barba + Wheelock Architecture 
