 
 
 
LD 1810, An Act to Expand the Main Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit and Establish a Weatherization 
Credit   
Testimony in Support 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation;  
My name is Elizabeth Frazier, and I am submitting this testimony on behalf of the Maine Real Estate & 
Development Association in support of LD 1810, Resolve, to Prepare Preapproved Building Types. MEREDA is a 
statewide, membership-based organization founded in 1985, whose members include real estate owners, for—
profit and non—profit developers, bankers, property managers and other related professionals who are 
committed to supporting responsible development and real estate ownership throughout Maine. Through the 
work of its Public Policy Committee, MEREDA pursues a more fair, predictable, and practical policy environment. 
LD 1810 is intended to unlock the full potential of the Maine Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit (MHRTC) – one of 
the most successful and highly regarded tax expenditure programs in Maine. The MHRTC currently supports the 
rehabilitation of commercial buildings for a variety of uses, including affordable housing. Unfortunately, the 
structure of the current credit has made it challenging to make use of it for smaller-sized projects. Additionally, 
the current MHRTC program does not help with the rehabilitation and preservation of non-incoming producing 
properties, like housing.  
LD 1810 is also crafted to make it easier to rehabilitate income-producing properties, including historic mills, 
schools, and more, into affordable housing. The proposed legislation would raise the cap on a qualifying project 
to $1 million and provide a 45% credit for affordable housing projects. These small changes will affect big 
differences in the affordable housing community, which can make use of run-down historic properties that are 
less expensive to purchase but require more funding to rehabilitate.  
LD 1810 will also unlock the potential of historic homes to be used by a new generation and brought up to 
modern standards by providing a weatherization grant to homeowners of historic properties. You will hear some 
say that taxpayers should not spend money to help individual homeowners preserve the historic value in their 
privately held property. Certainly, that is a fair position, but it disregards principles of equity, diversity, and 
inclusion. By providing no assistance for the preservation of Maine’s important historic properties, we are 
ensuring that only the wealthy can afford to purchase them, maintain them, and benefit from their historic 
value. Surely, that is not how the State of Maine wishes to see its historic homes put to use.  
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1810.  
Thank you.  
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth M. Frazier, On Behalf of the Maine Real Estate & Development Association  
