 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 1810  (“An Act to Expand the Maine Historic 
Rehabilitation Credit and Establish a Weatherization Tax Credit ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
May 9, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  and members of the Joint Select  Committee on 
Taxation , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 w ith over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, s uch as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 1810  because it would expand the 
scope of the historic rehabilitation  tax credit and create a dditional  credit s for rehabilitation 
and weatherization of historic homes. Maine has some of the oldest housing stoc k in the 
country , some of which  are historic and need  significant updates  to make them livable and 
accessible to home buyers. Another concern with historic homes is their lack of modern 
energy efficienc ies causing many to be expensive and uneconomical  to operate.   In order to 
address the affordable housing shortage , we must not only build new homes and repurpose  
other structures – but we must also bring the old unused  housing back into service through 
rehabilitation  and weatherization . Making these pro perties  livable and more affordable  would 
provide additional housing suppl y while also preserv ing the integrity  of Maine’s historic 
homes .  
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 1810  and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
 
 
 
