   TALKA  
 
 TALKA S+T CONSULTING LLC      160 Craigie Street, Portland, ME 04102         
207.210.4117  May 7. 2023  
 
RE: Maine State Legislature LD 1810  
 
Dear  Members of the Maine Legislature  and specifically the Tax ation  Committee ; 
 
I am writing in support of bill LD1810 an Act to Expand the Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit. 
While previously living in Hartford, CT, our household was a recipient  of a tax credit for 
reimbursement of exterior improvements  we made to our house. Our house was in th e West End 
Histo ric District . Our neighbors  in the West End also enjoyed the financial benefits of the credit 
program and as such joined  to continue the improvement of that sector of Hartford  and its 
surrounds.  
 
I believe the same will happen in Maine  when the tax credit program offered in LD1810 is 
adopted. Not only will owners of properties gain from this legislation; the economy in general will 
benefit. Homeowners  will be incentivized to make improvement s that they would not have 
previously  considered due to cost. That in turn will generate  more construction related activity in 
the area. And a more soft reward will be the enhancement of the existing Maine communities 
which will attract new members to our growing history rich base.  
 
Please take careful consideration. I be lieve LR1810 is a worthwhile investment in Maine’s  
economic future  and its historic  legacy  
 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

Jeff Talka
Talka S + T Consulting, LLC
LD 1810
May 7. 2023
RE: Maine State Legislature LD 1810
Dear Members of the Maine Legislature and specifically the Taxation Committee;
I am writing in support of bill LD1810 an Act to Expand the Historic Rehabilitation 
Tax Credit. While previously living in Hartford, CT, our household was a recipient of 
a tax credit for reimbursement of exterior improvements we made to our house. Our 
house was in the West End Historic District. Our neighbors in the West End also 
enjoyed the financial benefits of the credit program and as such joined to continue the 
improvement of that sector of Hartford and its surrounds.
I believe the same will happen in Maine when the tax credit program offered in 
LD1810 is adopted. Not only will owners of properties gain from this legislation; the 
economy in general will benefit. Homeowners will be incentivized to make 
improvements that they would not have previously considered due to cost. That in 
turn will generate more construction related activity in the area. And a more soft 
reward will be the enhancement of the existing Maine communities which will attract 
new members to our growing history rich base.
Please take careful consideration. I believe LR1810 is a worthwhile investment in 
Maine’s economic future and its historic legacy
