Mickel Zuidhoek 
77 Blanchard Rd  
Cumberland ME 04021 
 
In Support of LD 1810. 
 
To the taxation committee of the Maine State Legislature, 
I am writing to advocate for LD 1810 as a Historic Preservation 
Professional and as a passionate member of the public who values what 
these buildings represent for the larger community. As a carpenter who 
spent my initial apprenticeship years in the Netherlands, I worked on 
several historic building projects specifically in and around Amsterdam. 
Having seen firsthand how such preservation projects are managed both at 
the local and national level I can say that it is a major influence on both the 
local and national culture. 
From the community standpoint the restoration and upkeep of these 
buildings is important to connect the town/city to its past while also 
building for the future. It is a reminder of the craftsmanship that has 
developed over centuries. This craftsmanship forms the basis of our 
building industry today and needs nurturing so that Maines historic 
preservation culture continues to thrive. 
The main benefit I see from this tax credit is the opportunity for more 
people to actively partake in the preservation of our history. While 
government and local bodies play the primary role in preserving our 
historical buildings those who own such a home also have a responsibility 
to make sure that the individual buildings’ heritage remains strong. I am 
currently in conversation with Greater Portland Landmarks to facilitate a 
program for homeowners of historical properties to become involved in a 
more practical manner with their own restoration work. Education is a vital 
part of preserving our historic homes and the more people are involved 
with their homes the more empowered they become in advocating for the 
continued preservation of our historical building stock.  
The more equity we can give historical homeowners the more sustainable 
the movement becomes. 
Thank you for the opportunity to advocate for this important legislation. 
Sincerely, 
Mickel Zuidhoek 
 
 
