 
 
 
511 Congress St, Suite 502 Portland ME 04101 | 207.774.5561 | info@portlandlandmarks.org  | portlandlandmarks.org  
 
 
 May 9, 2023  Taxation Committee  
131st Maine Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation:  
 
My name is Sarah Hansen,  and I am the Executive Dire ctor of Greater Portland Landmarks. 
Founded in 1964, our mission is to ensure that Greater Portland preserves its sense of place for all 
and builds vibrant, sustainable neighborhoods and communities for the future.  
 
Together with Maine Preservation, w e are here to offer  support for LD 1810 which will:  
• Improve the existing small credit by increasing the base credit from 25% to 30% and raising 
the qualified rehabilitation expenditure cap from $250,000 to $1,000,000.  
• Create a 25% tax credit for historic owner -occupied residences and ancillary structures with a 
minimum homeowne r expense of $5,000 and maximum $250,000. Energy efficiency and 
resiliency upgrades are included in the qualified expenditures.  
 
An additional 5% could be obtained:  
• by property owners at or below 120% of Area Median Income;  
• for properties that include an af fordable dwelling unit provided to a renter at or below 100% 
of Area Median Income; or  
• for properties that have been vacant for more than five years.  
 
In 2021, 
the Office of Program Evaluat ion and Government Accountability analyzed Maine's 
Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit  and found that the program's structure and administration are 
sound and efficient, and that the positive outcomes exceed the stated hi storic preservation goals 
while promoting affordable housing, job creation and economic growth. They also suggested that policymakers:  
• “work wit h MHPC and stakeholders to clarify the small project credit’s purpose so that its 
effectiveness can be measured in the future.” (p.32)  
• “consider whether expanding eligibility for the HTRC aligns with State policy priorities while weighing the costs and ben efits of expanding eligibility.” (p. 33)  
 
 
 
 
511 Congress St, Suite 502 Portland ME 04101 | 207.774.5561 | info@portlandlandmarks.org  | portlandlandmarks.org  
 
 
 In Portland alone, there are 12 historic districts encompassing just over 1,860 building s. Studies 
show that historic preservation investment also supports small business and good -paying labor jobs, 
improves property values, keeps money circulating in local economies, and catalyzes additional investment. In a draft  economic impact analysis of historic preservation in Portland, it is estimated 
that these projects create 218 direct jobs  and an additional 217 indirect and induced jobs every  year.  
 While these projects are supporting high -paying jobs, the costs to property owners continue to rise 
through increasing materials and labor costs. This tax credit provide s a necessary incentive for 
maintenance and weatherization. This will be a huge asset to property owners across the state and will ensure Maine has the right tools in place to address both our housing crisis and meet our 
ambitious climate goals.  
 
We’re offer ing an amendment that has been submitted electronically , and , to summarize, will do the 
following:  
- Clarifie s program eligibility  
- Updates reporting requirements  
- Corrects grammar, missing words,  and citations  
- Includes a clause with future -looking language for the homestead exemption to 
incorporate buildings that are currently vacant (referring to the incentive in 3.C.)   
- Clarifies the maximum credit of $62,500 or $75,000 for certain taxpayers, and the 
timeline in which it can be taken  
- Notes that both staff positions for the Maine H istoric Preservation Commission will 
need to be filled at the beginning of the program in order to write rules, develop program 
guidance and interact with the public  
For these reasons, Maine Preservation and Greater Portland Landmarks support the passage  of LD 
1810, so that all Mainers have the opportunity to support the places significant to them and their communities.  
 
We are available to answer questions and participat e in the working session. Please let us know if 
there is any additional information that we can provide.  
 Thank you.  
   
Sarah Hansen  
Executive Director 

