P.O. Box 488 
Yarmouth, ME 
*. MAINE 
P R E N O N info@mainepreservati0n.org 
207-8473577 
May 9, 2023 
Taxation Committee 
131st Maine Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Committee on 
Taxation: 
Maine Preservation is a statewide nonproﬁt organization dedicated to promoting and preserving 
historic places, buildings, downtowns, and neighborhoods, strengthening the cultural and 
economic vitality of Maine communities. 
Together with Greater Portland Landmarks, we express strong support for LD 1810, which will 
expand the Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit by updating the reporting requirements, 
improving the small credit to make it more user-friendly and accessible for income-producing 
property owners, and creating a new program to ensure homeowners have the same 
opportunity. 
From 2009 to 2019, 106 projects were certified and placed in service in Maine using the Historic 
Rehabilitation Tax Credit for income-producing properties. Combined, these approved projects: 
~ Generated $525 million in construction investment; 
o Rehabilitated 3.6 million square feet of commercial and residential space; 
~ Created or preserved 1,911 housing units, of which nearly 1,300 were affordable; 
o Generated 200-700 full-time-equivalent (FTE) jobs through construction spending 
annually; and 
~ Created nearly 700 new full-time, year~round jobs in local businesses. 
Our 2020 Economic Impact report found that HRTC projects have added over $166 million to 
local property tax rolls in host communities, including $17 million in new property tax revenue 
since 2010. The HRT C program has become a major local development tool in its own right with 
an another $19 million in new income and sales tax revenues estimated to have come into state 
coffers since 2008. To date, the program has generated $3 million more in state and local tax 
revenues than it has cost. 
In its analysis of the Maine Historic Rehabilitation Tax Credit, the Office of Program Evaluation 
and Government Accountability noted “that allowing historic homes, barns and other non- 
income producing buildings to access tax credits for historic rehabilitation could support 
Maine’s expressed goals around developing “quality of place” and community revitalization.
P.O. Box 488 
Yarmouth ME 
*. MAINE’ 
P R E l O N inf0@mainepreservation.org 
207-847.3577 
Making a credit available for Maine’s stock of historic houses could also support the State’s goal 
to increase affordable housing and decrease pressure on Maine’s housing market.... ” (p. 34). 
Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, 
Kentucky, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, North 
Dakota, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Utah, Wisconsin, Virginia, and West Virginia all have 
homeowner tax credit programs. In New York State, more than 3,000 projects have been 
completed since 2008 from the tip of Long Island to the shoreline of Lake Erie, with more than 
$65M of investment in private homes—equally split between urban and rural areas. 
However, Maine’s program will be unique in that it is designed to pair with existing ﬁnancial 
incentives such as Efﬁciency ME’s programs for weatherization and respond to policies like LD 
2003 by making use of existing structures to increase housing density. 
We receive inquiries from historic homeowners across the state seeking technical assistance and 
ﬁnancial support for their rehabilitation projects on a near daily basis. Having a tax credit that 
beneﬁts homeowners will provide much-needed support for ongoing stewardship, 
weatherization, and housing opportunities all over Maine. 
For these reasons, Maine Preservation and Greater Portland Landmarks support passage of LD 
1810, so that all Mainers have the opportunity to support the places signiﬁcant to them and their 
communities. 
We are available to answer questions and participate in the working session. Please let us know 
if there is any additional information that we can provide. 
Sincerely, 
raw Tara Kelly, Executive Director 
Maine Preservation
