Alison Hinson 
Yarmouth, Maine 
Good afternoon. My name is Alison Hinson and l’m a resident of Yarmouth. lam testifying at this public 
hearing for the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee in favor of bill LD 712, “An Act to Extend or 
Waive Requirements for Certain Teaching Certificates ”. 
This bill contains two proposed modifications. I will address each modification separately. 
The first modification asks that the one-year student teaching requirement for a teaching certificate, 
including conditional certificates, be waived if the individual holds a certificate from the National Board 
for Professional Teaching Standards for the following reasons: 
A minimum of three years of teaching is required for a Nationally Certified teacher. This means 
you have gone well beyond one year of student teaching required for a conditional 
certification. 
400 hours of rigorous work needed to complete the portfolio submission required to apply for 
national certification. In addition to the teaching requirements and is a substantial amount of 
time spent examining your teaching methodology 
To be nationally certified, you need to pass the scrutiny of teachers trained to assess the 
teacher's portfolio to ascertain a high level of teaching standards 
Only after these and other requirements are completed do you receive your National Teacher 
Certiﬁcation 
Because the National Certification focuses on overall teaching practices and standards more than 
individual certificate areas, the National Certification should apply to all conditional certifications. 
In a meeting with Courtney Belolan, the Director of Policy and Government Affairs for the Maine DOE, 
the following modifications to this bill were discussed: 
First modification - If the Education Commissioner has statutory authority to grant certification 
waivers, this should be added to the applicable section of the law. I have two documents from 
the Department of Education — one states that there are no waivers available and another 
states that waivers can be given. 
Second modification — The Department of Education is concerned about nationally certified 
teachers making a drastic certification switch. lust because a teacher may seemingiy be making 
a largejump from their original certification doesn't mean they don't have the qualifications for 
the new certificate. For example, if l was a personal trainer in addition to teaching business 
courses, it would not be a dramatic change for me to want a certification in physicai education. 
Therefore, a full look at the teacher's professional expertise should be considered when 
substituting National Certification for a year of student teaching.
The second proposal requests the option of extending an individual ’s conditional certification in the 
case of extenuating circumstances. 
Once a conditional certiﬁcation is acquired, the individual has three years to complete these 
requirements. There is currently no way to receive an extension for these three yea rs. 
Sometimes unexpected life circumstances can get in the way of completing these requirements within 
the three-year timeframe. Imagine working on your certification and receiving a medical diagnosis that 
requires all of your time and energy. Or a change in family circumstances that makes it impossible to 
teach for a few years. Or, last but not least, a pandemic that required some teachers to leave the 
classroom due to health issues. 
Having our teaching careers interrupted by things out of our control is not something we want. Having 
our conditional certification expire during this time due to extenuating circumstances is something that 
can be remedied by this proposed bill. 
Thank you.
