HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
,;_,< I 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
» 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 ArE&?', 
(207) 287-1400 
Arthur L. Bell MAINE RELAY 711 
ll Atlantic Reach 
Yarmouth. ME (l4(l% 
.-’\r1l1ur.Bcll ’i_'lY lcgisla1ure.muin=~.go\ 
Cell: (Z07) -ll5~l2l7 
Residence: (2()7)S-16-(I148 
Testimony of Rep. Art Bell presenting 
LD 712 “An Act to Extend or Waive Requirements for Certain Teaching 
Certificates" 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and fellow members of the 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs. l am Art Bell, and I represent House District #103, 
Yarmouth. I am here before you today to present LD 712, “An Act to Extend or Waive 
Requirements for Certain Teaching Certificates" 
This bill is essential to remedying our current teacher shortage. it will allow us to fill current 
gaps in our workforce and give aspiring educators real world experience to pair with their 
education. I have a constituent here in Yarmouth who has been trying to get certified asa 
Social Studies teacher here in Maine. The pandemic and other health issues interfered with her 
efforts to achieve her "Conditional Certification" . 
We are suggesting two simple amendments to the laws dealing with 
“Conditional. Certiﬁcation" which would enable her, and others who might be facing the same 
situation, to re-enter the work force as a teacher in Maine. 
The following are two changes requested to be made to “conditional teaching certificates ”: 
1. Extenuating Circumstances 
Current situation ~ conditional teaching certifications are valid for 3 years 
Requested change — Conditional teaching certifications are usually valid for three years. In the 
case of extenuating circumstances (pandemic, illness, inability to continue teaching for a period 
of time), the three-year certification can be extended. An extension request must be 
accompaniedby supporting documentation such as a doctor's note, superintendent request, etc’. 
2. National Board Certification used in lieu of one year of student teaching 
Current situation — conditional teaching certiﬁcations require one year of student teaching in that 
discipline - 
Requested change — A teacher who holds National Board Certiﬁcation from the National Board 
for Professional Teaching Standards (nbgtsorg) can use this certiﬁcation to fulfill the 
requirement for one year of student teaching. This certification can apply to any discipline of 
teaching. 
l am happy to try and answer questions, but l have my constituent here to testify, and others 
more knowledgeable than l, to help you better understand this bill. 
District 103 Yarmouth and Yarmoutll 
Primed on 1‘ccyclL<i Pipe!
