February 6, 2023 ------ Testimony on LD 230
Dear Senator Hickman and Committee Members:
Thank you for holding a public hearing on LD 230. I am writing in support of the proposed resolve, which 
would enable the City of Hallowell to obtain certain property from the Maine National Guard. 
The property is an in-holding surrounded by the popular Hallowell Public Recreation Area (The Res). It is 
a small diamond-shaped lot formerly used for a communication tower. Some of the foundation and 
anchors are still there. The lot has limited access and seemingly low potential for resale or re-
development. Additionally, the property is surrounded by an established system of motorized and non-
motorized recreational trails managed by the city in partnership with volunteer trail groups. 
This is a popular recreation destination for people in the region (especially for mountain biking). Bikers 
and hikers can also access public property and another trail system in the neighboring town of 
Manchester from The Res. Resale of this property for any use other than as a public park would likely 
affect the integrity of the overall trail system, especially if its resale facilitates new access routes to the 
lot. 
It seems unreasonable to expect that this property could be sold for market value. I understand that the 
MNG is reluctant to set a precedent that may affect their ability to sell other properties in the future. 
However, the configuration of this lot and its location in the middle of a public park makes this a unique 
situation. Additionally, the City would be a better steward for this property than the MNG, especially 
considering that the MNG did not even know they owned it until the City surveyed notified them. 
No assessment of potential environmental contamination at the site has been done. Should the City 
assume ownership of the lot, it be responsible for any potential clean-up in the future through its 
Brownfields redevelopment program. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. I urge you to vote in favor of LD 230. 
Best regards, 
Ben Godsoe, Hallowell resident
