HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
,5 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Dan Shagoury TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
P.O. Box 202 
Hallowell, ME 04347 
Phone: 207-242-2169 
Dan Shagou1y@,legislature.maine.gov 
February 6, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Dan Shagoury introducing 
LD 230, Resolve, to Require the Maine National Guard to Sell Certain 
Property in Hallowell 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Representative Dan Shagoury, and I represent 
House District 55 - the communities of Hallowell, Manchester and West Gardiner. I come before 
you today to introduce LD 230, “Resolve, to Require the Maine National Guard to Sell Certain 
Property in Hallowell. ” 
The City of Hallowell has a 160 acre park that serves the greater Augusta area. Formally called 
the Hallowell Reservoir Recreation Area, it is commonly known as “the Res.” Others following 
me will go into more detail about this lovely place and its uses. 
A survey a few years ago uncovered an interesting irregularity about this property — it turns out 
that there is a parcel of approximately seven acres within the Res that is actually owned by the 
National Guard. Neither the City nor the Guard was aware of this situation, and over the years 
trails have been built going through this property. 
To rectify this situation, Senator Hickman introduced a bill last session, LD 1852, to make the 
property available for sale. That bill passed, and this bill is the follow-up to provide a date by 
which the transfer of the property will be completed and to set the price. 
The date is set at June 30, 2024, which should allow for plenty of time for the paperwork to be 
completed, and the price in the bill is set at $1. 
I know this is unusual, and the Guard is concerned about setting a precedent, but I contend that 
this is an absolutely unique situation and there are several reasons for setting a minimum price 
for the property. 
The ﬁrst is that the property will continue to be used as a park, and the goal is to make the parcel 
conserved open land. The City will not be re-selling it or realizing any proﬁt from the transfer.
The second is that the property is essentially landlocked, as the only right of way is abouta 
quarter mile long through the park and some private land. The right of way is overgrown and 
goes through forest and bog land. This property would have little value to anyone else. 
Thirdly, the City“ . . .agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the State from all claims, including 
any enviromnental clean-up costs that may arise in connection with the land.” While there is no 
enviromnental hazard known to be there, as a former military site there is always a chance of 
this, and in that event clean-up costs could be considerable. 
Finally, the Guard did not even know it had the property, so it can hardly have been counting on 
realizing any money from its sale. 
Transfer of the land for a minimal price would show the Guard to be a good steward of the land 
and a responsible neighbor. 
Thank you for your consideration. I look forward to working with you on this bill, and I will be 
glad to answer any questions.
