February 6, 2023 
Senator Craig Hickman 
Chair, Joint Standing Committee on Veteran and Legal Affairs 
Maine State Senate 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
Subject: LD230 - Resolve, to Require the Maine National Guard to Sell Certain Property in Hallowell 
Honorable Senator Hickman and Committee Members, 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on LD230. l am in favor of the transfer of ownership of an 
approximately 7 acre lot from the Maine National Guard to the City of Hallowell. l am aware that several 
of my constituents will be addressing the recreational and environmental benefits of the property. I 
would like to address the financial aspect of LD230. 
l am Maureen AuCoin and l serve as President of the Hallowell City Council. One of my roles on this 
Council is to Chair the Finance Committee. Later today we will be meeting to begin our annual budget 
process. Each year we are faced with a list of expenditures that far outweigh our anticipated revenues. 
ln the past decade and a half, we have seen our mil rate nearly double in Hallowell. We are faced with 
difficult decisions each year about priorities. For example, we need to finance a long overdue new 
facility for our Publics Works department, replace costly essential equipment, and provide adequate I 
wages for our employees. In a small community of 2500 residents, the property owners feel the burden 
of the smallest additional expenditure. An additional $80,000 for land acquisition is simply not a viable 
expenditure to impose on our tax payers. 
These residents have been using this property for hiking, biking, birding, dog walking, snowshoeing, etc. 
for many decades. lf it hadn't been for the recent boundary survey, the majority of us would still be 
under the assumption that it was City owned property. As elected officials, whether on the State level or 
the local level, we strive to make decisions that benefit our community. This property is a beneﬁt to our 
community. Let's work together on this one. l respectfully request that you approve the transfer of this 
property to the City of Hallowell for a sale price not to exceed one dollar. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Maureen AuCoin 
Hallowell City Council, President
