min 1 lll Ill ll H1 \ I ll
i 
.-'-. §'.' *~w%1r‘". 
T 
April 5. 2023 E ' 
G 84 
Wig :ffl'§1r§§§§§S 
A 
Association 
PO Box 5234 
Augusta,ME04332 
Q 207.622.4461 
T 
info@mgfpa.org 
AE35Ui%T§@t €I 
IN OPPOSITION - LD 1132 An Act to Allow Certain Liquor Sellers to Conduct Off-premises 
Taste-testing Events and Retail Sales 
Dear Senator Hickman - Chair, Representative Supica - Chair, and the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director ofthe Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association 
(IVIGFPA). MGFPA is a business trade association representing more than 200 businesses within Maine’s food 
community; Main Street businesses including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, 
food and beverage producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service 
companies. 
In speaking with the bill sponsor to learn more, we understand the interest in this bill to permit for the tasting and sales 
of spirits off-site from the traditional brick and mortar agency retail store setting. lt appears to have originated from the 
request for a beer and wine, non-agency store, who has interest in partnering with a local agency store for tasting 
events (and spirits sales). 
While the intent is intriguing it causes some pause. ln speaking with members, there is concern regarding how this new 
permitted mobility interplays with licenses. Those who have invested in earning their agency store license question how 
it alters the market if now stores are mobile and able to move into their towns, competing with their offering. We would 
not want to see stores or off-site, unlicensed venues, partnering with other agency stores who are not permitted with 
one of the towns’ licenses. As you know, agency store licenses are both financial and capacity investments by the store. 
We also know in speaking with members that those who have secured their catering licenses can fulfill the tasting or 
serving interest and manufacturers similarly are permitted for tastings off—site such as at farmers’ markets. We cannot 
support the effort without understanding fully how all the license types may work together and we would want to 
ensure there are no unintended consequences or uneven playing fields created. 
We appreciate the |anguage ’s requirement for ”alcohol server course approved by the bureau" to address liability, 
safety, and customer experience. However, ‘alcohol server’ courses are typically geared towards on—premises staff 
opposed to off-premise sales training and the credentials may differ. This potentially would be an added level of 
complexity, and likely limiting the number of stores participating in the program. There are additional reservations 
which include what other type of permitted venues would be approved by the bureau. It becomes subjective to approve 
an off-site location, "a location other than the licensed premises that are not premises license." This may also cause 
further complications. 
A few initial conversations cause more opposition than support for l_D 1132. We do want to take this opportunity to 
note that as conversations continue about the evolving marketplace specific to consumer access and new sales 
opportunities, we advocate for future consideration to permit agency stores to creatively reach new customers. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. 
Christine Cummings 
Executive Director 
l\/laine Grocers & Food Producers Association l PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME 04332 l 207.622.4461 I inf0@mgfpa.org
