 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 5 , 2023  
 
Senator  Craig Hickman , Chair  
Representative  Laura Supica , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: L D 1132 - An Act to Allow Certain Liquor Sellers to Conduct Off -premises Taste -testing 
Events and Retail Sales  
 
Dear Senator  Hickman , Representative  Supica , and Members of the  Committee : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1132 , An Act to Allow Certain Liquor Sellers to 
Conduct Off -premises Taste -testing Events and Retail Sales , and the potential impact of the 
proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  is neither for nor against  
this bill  and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 1132  allows one spirits, wine and malt liquor taste -testing event per month to be held off 
the premises of an agency liquor store o r an off -premises retail licensee if the server has 
successfully completed an approved alcohol server course. This bill also allows sales for off -
premises consumption from off -premises taste -testing events at approved locations.  
 
The key piece that we ackn owledge and appreciate is the requirement included within this bill 
that anyone looking to host these taste -testing events must take a responsible beverage service 
education course. The provision of required education is a responsible and positively 
impact ful piece of this legislation. Providing and requiring responsible beverage service 
courses for liquor licens ees increases compliance with liquor law, creates new champions in 
the community invested in proper safeguards of public health, and ultimately red uces over-
service of alcohol as well as alcohol service to  youth.1 
 
The Maine CDC has just revitalized the existing State certified training for Responsible 
Beverage Sales and Service (RBS ) and has completed two rounds of train the trainer classes 
to increase the capacity of available in -person and virtual RBS trainers for Maine liquor 
license  holders . Right now this evidence -based effort does not have its own pool of financial 
support and has critically low c apacity statewide. We take this opportunity to  encourage  
promot ion of  this public health -centered program  in order to b etter stand by the  requirement  
in this and potentially future bill s and to promote stable health outcomes around alcohol use 
and compliance in the State.  
 
 
1 National Library of Medicine: “ Enlisting bars and restaurants in the prevention of intoxication and subsequent 
harms: why it matters ” https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21855753/   
 
 Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Directo r 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  

