1 
  
Janet T. Mills  
                Governor  
 
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL  
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION  
OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REGULATION  
35 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
04333- 0035 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Anne L. Head  
Commissioner , DPFR  
Director, OPOR  
  
 
April 26, 2023 
 Senator Anne Carney , Chair 
 
Representative Matt  Moonen, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  100 State House Station 
 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100  
 Re: LD 1699, An Act to Amend the Freedom of Access Act and Related Provisions  
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable M embers of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary : 
My name is Kristin Racine , and I am the staff attorney for the  Office of Professional and 
Occupational Regulation (OPOR), an umbrella agency within the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation (DPFR or Department) that provides support to 37 licensing boards and programs. 
I offer the following comments  in opposition to LD 1699, An Act to Amend the Freedom of 
Access Act and Related Provisions. 
 The bill: (1) expands the meaning of the term “public records” to include certain records relating  to 
tax-exempt organizations that receive more than 50% of its annual revenue from federal, state or 
municipal funding sources; (2) requires that an agency fully respond to a public records request within 60 calendar days unless the public body requests and is granted an extension of that deadline from the Public Access Ombudsman which must be memorialized in a written decision and be based on “good cause shown”; (3) requires that any agency of the executive or legislative branch notify the Office of Information Technology of and cooperate with that office in responding to any request for a public record that is an electronic communication stored on a state -owned computer 
system; and (4) caps the total fee that an agency, other than a school administrative unit, may charge for a public records request to not exceed $500.   Without speaking to (1) which does not directly affect OPOR or the Department, I draw your attention to the following considerations:   Mandating an agency fully respond to a FOAA Request Within 60 Calendar Days  
 FOAA already sets forth checks and balances to ensure that an agency is responding to a public records request in a timely but also balanced manner , so that responding to a request does not 
 
 
 
PHONE : (207)624- 8 615  (VOICE )   
OFFICES: GARDINER ANNEX,  76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE  
 
TTY users:  call Maine Relay 711   
 
 
FAX : (207)624 -8595  
  
  
 
  
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
LD 1699   
April 26, 2023 - Page 2 of 3 
 
 
2 
 disrupt the regular flow of agency business.  As far as we are aware, state agencies do not have 
dedicated FOAA staff to respond to requests.  In OPOR, I am the sole  staff attorney, who, in 
addition to other duties, responds to approximately fifty (50) FOAA requests per year.  These are requests above and beyond routine requests for a copy of draft board minutes  or lists of licensees.  
While some requests take a few  days
1 to respond to, others involve engaging in cloud- based 
electronic record searches that return hundreds of responsive records which can result in hundreds 
or even thousands of pages to compile, review and produce.  While 60 calendar days may seem like a lot of time, without dedicated staff to respond to requests, this would mandate that an agency prioritize a records request above other tasks and duties to execute the purpose of the agency; in the instance of OPOR, to protect the public.  
 While the bill builds in a system that allows the agency to seek an extension from the public access ombudsman, as a practical matter this would add uncertainty to the requester as to when they can expect to recei ve the records.  The ombudsman is in no better position to estimate the “good cause” 
that an agency has for estimating a response time longer than 60 days than the agency, and if the ombudsman needs to provide written decisions for all state agencies, this could just delay the process and the response time for the public requesting the records.    In short, this appears to be a solution in search of a problem.  State agencies are already mandated to act in good faith to provide time and cost estimates to a requester and to engage in a collaborative process to get the requester the precise records they are looking for in the least amount of time that is possible given the agency’s other duties.  If an individual disagrees with the response from the agency, they are able to seek relief in Superior Court.  1 M.R.S. § 409.  
 
Requires that any agency of the executive or legislative branch notify the Office of 
Information Technolog y of a records request  
 Mandating that a state agency contact OIT every time it receives a request for an electronic communication would turn a FOAA request into something resembling e- discovery in civil 
litigation.  Many times, an agency can quickly and efficiently retrieve a copy of the communication or communication(s) sought without engaging OIT or performing a cloud- based 
search of all communications.  Moreover, involving OIT requires creating a ticket request and then waiting for individuals in another  agency to retrieve the records.  If all state agencies 
needed to follow this proces s, this would only add to the burden of responding to a request and 
potentially slow down response times.  An agency is already required under the law to exercise the due diligence necessary to retrieve responsive records, and this added step is unnecessary.  
 Caps the total fee that an agency, other than a school administrative unit, may charge for a public records request to not exceed $500.   While it is not frequent that OPOR asks for fees in excess of $500 to cover the costs of responding to a request, it does happen.  If an individual is requesting “all communications” for a timeframe spanning several years and names multiple custodians, with records that need extensive redactions 
 
1 In 2021, the average time for OPOR to respond to a request (from the date received ) was 13.8 days; in 2022 it was 
20.5, and in 2023 thus far it is 11.9 days.   
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
LD 1699   
April 26, 2023 - Page 3 of 3 
 
 
3 
 due to confidential information, this can involve hours and hours of staff time.  FOAA permits an 
agency to charge a reasonable fee per hour for the actual cost for searching for, retrieving and compiling the reques ted public record, which includes  reviewing and redacting confidential 
information.  An agency may not charge a fee for the first 2 hours  of staff t ime, but after that time, 
may charge a fee of not more than $25 per hour.  By capping the fee at $500, the law is providing that an agency cannot c harge fees for agency time  expended beyond 22 hours (2 without charge, 
then 20 at $25/hour).  
 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments and I  would be happy to answer any 
questions  at the work  session.  
Sincerely,  
/s/ Kristin M. Racine  
 Kristin Racine  Attorney  
Office of Professional and  Occupational Regulation 
