 
 
 
 
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moon en, and Members of the Judiciary Committee:  
My name is Mary Alice Scott (she/her), and I am the Public Affairs Manager at the Maine Association of Nonprofits. MANP is a growing membership organization made up of over 1,000 
nonprofit members from all 16 cou nties. Since 1994, MANP has grown to become Maine’s 
comprehensive resource for the tools, knowledge, and connections nonprofits need to be effective 
and well -run.  
Please accept this testimony in opposition to LD 1699: An Act to Amend the Freedom of Access Act 
and Related Provisions. This bill would require that 501c3 charitable nonprofits who receive 50% 
or more of their funding from government sources be subject to Freedom of Access Act 
requirements.  
 As you all know, nonprofits are vital to Maine’ s economy and quality of life. You may not know that 
nonprofits employ 1 in 6 Maine workers and mobilize more than 400,000 volunteers each year. Most Maine nonprofits are very small and community -based. 88% have annual budgets less than 
$500,000. 61% have annual budgets under $50,000.  
While we believe that transparency is the cornerstone of responsible nonprofit management, the 
opening of nonprofit board & committee meetings to the public would drastically change the nature 
of nonprofit governance in ways t hat wouldn’t benefit the public good.  
We offer the following comments and questions:  
Receipt of public funding through arms -length transactions involving contracts or grants 
does not convert private independent nonprofit organizations into governmental 
instrumentalities.  Nonprofits are essential partners with the government in maintaining and 
promoting the public good throughout our state. Nonprofits provide many essential, high -impact  
and community -based services, often more effectively and efficiently th an government can, thereby 
reducing the burden on government.   
For profit businesses also receive government funding - for example, roadbuilders get 100% of 
their funding from the government. Why would they be exempt while nonprofits are not? It is 
because roadbuilders, like nonprofits, are hired to do a job on behalf of the government.  
There are already many levels of public accountability for nonprofits who accept 
government funding.   Most state contracts require a competitive process and the winning bid der 
must provide regular reports detailing progress toward contract goals.   Beyond state contract 
reporting, governmental funding also requires a great deal of reporting and oversight.  The 
acceptance of governmental grants in many cases, also requires ann ual financial audits by Certified 
Public Accountants, not to mention the IRS requirements to file an annual 990 form that is by law, 
available to the public.  
 
Revenue sources in nonprofit budgets look different from year.  While an organization may 
meet th e 50% threshold in some years, they may not in other years. Changing the public records 
requirements from year -to-year would be confusing and burdensome for the organization and for 
the public.  
 
 
Making board & committee meetings open to the public could have adverse effects on the 
responsiveness of the nonprofit sector. Nonprofits were created to fill a role that isn’t easily 
filled by governments or individuals. Nonprofits are private entities that were designe d to be more 
responsive than government, while bringing more resources to communities than individuals can. 
By extending FOAA requirements to this sector, you risk removing that responsiveness by imposing 
significant burdens on the decision -making structur es of organizations. Because the public needs to 
be notified and does not have the fiduciary responsibilities to an organization that the volunteer 
board and committee members have, bringing the public into meetings would require quite a few 
additional pre parations, decreasing an organization’s ability to be responsive to community needs. 
A typical nonprofit could have one board meeting and several committee meetings per month.  This 
would require that for all these meeting, the following additional steps b e taken:  
• Notify the press in a timely manner for some meetings  
• Provide a location that provides adequate security for the organization’s assets  
• Screen all documents to ensure appropriate confidentiality is maintained  
 
Thank you again for this opport unity to comment and we are happy to assist further.  
 
