 
  
 
 
 
LD 1699, An Act to Amend the Freedom of Access Act and Related Provisions 
 
April 26, 2023 
 
Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Stephen 
Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am 
writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in opposition  to LD 1699. 
We believe Maine’s Freedom of Access Act provides a reasonable time frame for state and local government 
agencies to respond to information requests, and we oppose the imposition of rigid statutory deadlines on 
responding to such requests. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Background.  Briefly, the Maine Freedom of Access Act (“FOAA”) grants the people of Maine a right of 
access to public records, while also protecting legitimate governmental interests and the privacy rights of 
individual citizens. In addition, the FOAA is intended to ensure the accountability of the government to the 
citizens of the State by requiring public access to the meetings of public bodies, including meetings of county 
commissioners. Individuals may submit requests to the pertinent public body or agency, such as county 
commissions, to produce certain public records, and the public body or agency responds to such request.  
 
What does LD 1699 do?  Among other things, Section 5 of LD 1699 requires that a body, agency or official 
subject to the FOAA fully respond to a public records request within 60 calendar days, and establishes a process 
through which the body, agency or official may request that the Public Access Ombudsman grant an extension 
of such deadline. Additionally, Section 7 of this bill provides that the total fee charged by an agency or official 
other than a school administrative unit in response to a single request made pursuant to the FOAA may not 
exceed $500.00.  
 
Discussion.  Counties receive numerous requests for public record pursuant to the FOAA each year and work 
diligently to respond to each individual request in a timely manner. The complexity and nature of each request 
varies and greatly affects the time and resources that are expended by staff to produce the requested records. 
While county staff is often able to fully respond to FOAA requests within 60 days, that timeframe is not always 
practicable. Similarly, while many requests made pursuant to FOAA do not exceed total fees of $500.00, some 
large FOAA requests that require the expenditure of significant county resources do exceed $500.00.  
 
Based on the experience of county staff, the time required to fully respond to a FOAA request and the total fee 
charged for each individual request greatly depends on the amount of time and resources expended by county 
staff in the production of the requested records. As a result, our Association is concerned with Sections 5 and 7 
of this bill as they relate to a statutory deadline to fully respond to a request and limitations on total fees that 
may be charged for an individual FOAA request. Accordingly, to the extent that this bill provides strict statutory 
limitations regarding timing to respond to requests and total fees that may be charged per individual request, we 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1699 
April 26, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 write in opposition. Very simply, there are simply times where it takes longer to respond than 60 days, and 
current law provides reasonable flexibility in this regard. Any change beyond this is unwarranted. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
 
 
 
