LD 535
An Act to Increase Access to Necessary 
Medical Care for Certain Minors 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary,
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield, Maine, here in firm opposition to LD 535.  Thank you 
for the opportunity to testify today.
I am here to expose the truth that gender transitioning is not health care, and this bill is not 
about providing necessary health care to children.
This bill gives children the authority to receive counseling and sign medical papers 
authorizing medical procedures regarding physical alterations to their bodies in attempts to 
change their sex.
This bill outlines circumstances under which a health care provider may provide gender-
affirming hormone therapy to a minor and emphasizes that the child may do so with or 
without their parent or guardian's consent.  Furthermore, it gives the health care provider 
power to judge if such alterations are n ecessary to save the child from harm he or she is 
experiencing or may experience in the future, and to deem the child competent to make such 
decisions on their own.
This completely disregards the fact that parents know their children better than anyone else. I 
recently heard testimony from a mother here in the state of Maine who testified that her 
daughter had been given breast binders and was using such altering devices after only having 
undergone two thirty-minute counseling sessions and one brief, ten-minute check-in with a 
school social worker, and that social worker never reached out to the child's parent at all.
How does one hour of discussion compare to over a decade of care by a loving and concerned 
parent? Why should the opinion of a medical provider be allowed to unilaterally override the 
will of those who have literally invested their lives in their children?
I am not overstating this or providing a hyperbolic interpretation of this bill. To quote the text 
of the proposed bill sent out late last night, “When a minor has provided written informed 
consent as set forth in section 3, or has provided informed consent and a Judge of the 
District Court allows a petition granting the minor majority rights for purposes of 
consenting to care as set forth in sections 3 and 4, there shall be a bar to an action by the 
parent or guardian of the minor on the grounds of battery, malpractice, or any other claim 
for providing the care without parental consent.”
If lawmakers, health care providers, or anyone else really care about the health of children, 
why bar input from those who care the most and know the most about their children?
Furthermore, testimonies from those who have personally experienced such surgeries and 
alterations reveal that rather than positively benefiting children, such alterations foster 
distress, instability, and suicidal inclinations.  The National Library of Medicine states that, 
“Data indicate that 82% of transgender individuals have considered killing themselves and 40% have 
attempted suicide, with suicidality highest among transgender youth.” 
And an article published in the Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism states, “Childhood 
gender dysphoria (GD) is not an endocrine condition, but it becomes one through iatrogenic puberty 
blockade (PB) and high-dose cross-sex (HDCS) hormones. The consequences of this gender-
affirmative therapy (GAT) are not trivial and include potential sterility, sexual dysfunction, 
thromboembolic and cardiovascular disease, and malignancy (1, 2). ...Children with GD will outgrow 
this condition in 61% to 98% of cases by adulthood.”1
So if this is about safety and health, listen to the science and save these children decades of grief and 
irreversible damage!
Girls as young as thirteen are undergoing double mastectomies, and boys as young as seventeen are 
undergoing full genital sex reassignment surgeries.  S ome transgender-identified patients are even 
being prescribed cross-sex hormones upon their very first visit to a clinic, according to Planned 
Parenthood. 2And the long-term effects of puberty blockers and cross-sex hormones have not been 
studied.3
To mutilate and mangle children in this way is an abuse of science and medical technology. To seek to 
legalize such practices is irresponsible and should not even be up for consideration. 
Jesus warned us in Matthew 18:10, “ Take heed that ye despise not one of these little 
ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in heaven.”
The Lord Almighty has a special protection plan in place for His children. His eyes are always upon 
them, and therefore, His eyes are also upon those who seek to do them harm.
Therefore, I urge you to do what is  right, do what is just, and do what is good. Choose abundant life 
for these children and their families and vote, “Ought not to pass” on the horrendous bill.  Thank you 
for your time.
______________________
1 https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article/104/3/686/5198654
2 https://www.plannedparenthood.org/planned-parenthood-greater-texas/patient-
resources/transgender-healthcare
3 https://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/growing-pains
