 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Committee on Judiciary 
 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  May 12, 2023  
 
RE:  SUPPORT – LD 535 , "An Act to Increase Access to Necessary Medical Care for 
Certain Minors" 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest and oldest professional physician association 
representing over 4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
The MMA is an inclusive community of members, affiliates, partners, and community members 
from every walk of professional life. 
 
A vast majority of our physician members do not view gender-affirming care as a threat. 
Approximately 1,200 13- to 17-year-olds in Maine identified as trans in a federal survey  published 
in 2022 — and this is likely an undercount. Much of the political rhetoric surrounding the issue 
misrepresents who is receiving such care and what treatments kids typically undergo. 
 
The stigma and discrimination trans people face often contribute to higher rates of stress and 
mental health problems compared to cisgender people, several studies have found . 
Transgender youth who take puberty blockers are significantly less likely to experience lifelong 
suicidal ideation  than those who want the care and don’t get it. Transition-related health care is 
often lifesaving and can be medically necessary for some people. 
 
Major medical associations support transition-related care. They include the American Academy 
of Pediatrics, the American Medical Association (AMA), the American Psychiatric Association 
(APA), and American Association of Clinical Endocrinology  (AACE) – endocrinology  is the study 
of hormones and endocrine glands and organs. Hormone-secreting glands and certain organs 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 in your body make up your endocrine system. 
 
“Gender-affirming care is medically-necessary, evidence-based care that improves the 
physical and mental health of transgender and gender-diverse people.” – AMA   
 
“We strongly oppose legislation that limits access of endocrine patients to established 
medical therapies recommended for treatment of transgender and gender diverse youth. 
AACE strongly believes that decisions impacting health care of endocrine patients are best 
left to the health professional, the patient, and the patient’s families like for all medical 
care.” – American Association of Clinical Endocrinology  
 
American Psychiatric Association Position Statement  
American Academy of Pediatrics Position Statement  
 
Gender-affirming care for transgender patients can cover pediatrics, psychiatry, and 
endocrinology. Accessing puberty blockers, hormone therapies and other transition-related care 
is commonly recognized as team-based with coordination among medical providers.  
 
Physicians may offer hormone treatments such as puberty blockers to patients under 18 to 
address gender dysphoria, which often worsens when bodies develop during adolescence. The 
“top” and “bottom” surgeries are rarely performed on minors (surgeries such as a phalloplasty, 
vaginoplasty or mastectomy). 
 
Physicians overwhelmingly follow a care timeline set up by major national and global medical 
organizations. For example, the Endocrine Society, and other professional medical groups, 
recommends waiting until a teenager can give informed consent — usually around age 16 — to 
start hormone therapy. Major medical organizations including the American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the World Professional Association for Transgender Health and the Endocrine 
Society have published guidelines on age-appropriate timelines for care. 
 
 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
  
Resources and References aor Committee Members: 
 
United States Endocrine Society 
Gender Dysphoria/Gender Incongruence Guideline Resources  
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
Health Care for Transgender and Nonbinary Teens   
Texas Medical Association  
Q&A: A Physician’s Approach to Gender-Affirming Care  
 
Thank you for your attention to our comments. We urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
