 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a resident of Portland, a 
pediatrician  in Lewiston , and I s erve  on the board of the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today to expres s our support for   
LD 535: An Act to Increase Access to Necessary Medical Care for Certain Minors .  
We ask that you vote Ought  to Pass on th is bill. 
 
As we have discussed with other proposed legislation  recently, confidentiality and 
independent consent fo r potentially sensitive health care issues are important 
components of adolescent health care.1  This is especially important for LGBTQ 
adolescents, as fewer than 40% of LGBTQ young people live in LGBTQ -affirming 
homes.2  Research increasingly suggests that familial acceptance or rejection 
ultimately has little influence on the gender identity of youth; however, it may 
profoundly affect young person’s  ability to openly discuss or disclose concerns 
about their identity , and ultimately their mental health .  A study of 433  
adolescents in Ontario who identified as trans revealed suicide attempt rates of 
4% among those with strongly supportive parents, and as high as 60% among 
those whose parents were not supportive.3 
 
Pediatricians strive to create a safe environment for parents and families to better 
understand and listen to the needs of their children while receiving reassurance 
and education.  We try to help adolescents understand their parents’ concerns as 
well.  Th e process of acceptance and understanding can be challenging and 
complex for families , and unfortunately  parental  acceptance isn’t always attained 
by adolescence, if at all.  For youth experiencing gender dysphoria, this can make 
the teenage years particul arly troublesome, as they enter puberty and develop 
secondary sex characteristics of their sex assigned at birth.  
 
Gender dysphoria is a well -recognized medical diagnosis with an established and 
effective treatment.  One aspect of treatment is social affir mation; the other is 
gender -affirming hormone therapy .  Gender affirming hormone therapy  allows 
adolescents to develop secondary sex characteristics of the opposite biological 
sex.  This therapy can  be life saving in the case of young adults struggling wit h 
gender dysphoria.   
  
Late adolescence is a pivotal time in the lives of all teens.  For those suffering from 
gender dysphoria, it can be either liberating or suffocating.  For those who have 
access to gender affirming care, they can look forward to fini shing high school and 
moving forward  to their next stage of life, be it higher education or the workforce, 
presenting themselves to the world in a manner  that they feel matches who they 
are inside.  For those who have been denied access to gender affirming  care, 
taking that next step can be incredibly distressing.  The thought of entering a new 
environment and meeting a new peer group while still physically presenting in a 
way that is incongruent with their internalized gender can be paralyzing.  
 
 
Allowing adolescents to make decisions about their own gender affirming care 
recognizes their autonomy and right to self -determination. It respects their 
personal experiences, feelings, and understanding of their own gender identity. It 
empowers young people to tak e ownership of their bodies and healthcare 
decisions, promoting a sense of agency and well -being.  
 
In Maine , laws and medical guidelines already permit adolescents to consent to 
certain medical treatments without parental consent .  These laws were  develope d 
based on extensive research, ethical considerations, and expert opinion, aiming to 
balance the best interests of the adolescent with their safety and well -being.   
Treatment for g ender dysphoria is time -sensitive, and delaying access to gender 
affirming care can have negative consequences. Allowing adolescents to 
independently consent to gender affirming care reduces potential barriers to 
accessing timely interventions, ensuring that they receive the care they need 
when they need it, which can l ead to better long -term outcomes.  
 
We believe this amended bill is thoughtful,  the level of counseling and education 
required of the adolescent is  incredibly thorough .  Ultimately , this bill is  designed 
to prioritize what is in the best interests of the ad olescent.   It ensures the y are 
fully informed on the consequences, benefits, and alternatives to gender affirming 
hormone therapy before allowing them to consent , and ensures they are able to 
access this medically necessary care .  We urge you to support th e health of this 
underserved population and vote  Ought to Pass on LD 535. 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
 
 
 
1 Sofya Maslyanskaya, Elizabeth M. Alderman; Confidentiality and Consent in the Care of the 
Adolescent Patient.  Pediatr Rev  October 2019; 40 (10): 508 –516.  
 
2 The Trevor Project. 2023 U.S. National Survey on the Mental Health of LGBTQ Young People.   
https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey -2023/assets/static/05_TREVOR05_2023survey.pdf    
 
3 Jason Rafferty, COMMITTEE ON PSYCHOSOCIAL ASPECTS OF CHILD AND FAMILY HEALTH, 
COMMITTEE ON ADOLESCENCE, SECTION ON LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, AND TRANSGENDER 
HEALTH AND WELLNESS, Michael Yogman, Rebecca Baum, Thresia B. Gambon, Arthur Lavin, Gerri 
Mattson, Lawrence Sagin Wissow, Cora Breuner, Elizabeth M. Alderman, Laura K. Gru bb, Makia E. 
Powers, Krishna Upadhya, Stephenie B. Wallace, Lynn Hunt, Anne Teresa Gearhart, Christopher 
Harris, Kathryn Melland Lowe, Chadwick Taylor Rodgers, Ilana Michelle Sherer; Ensuring 
Comprehensive Care and Support for Transgender and Gender -Divers e Children and 
Adolescents.  Pediatrics  October 2018; 142 (4): e20182162. 10.1542/peds.2018 -2162 
  

