 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
www.maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy Kilrain del Rio  
Advocacy & Programs Director  
 (207) 626 -7058, ext. 210  
kathy @mejp.org  
 
  
MEJ Testimony in Support of LD 535, An Act to Increase Access to Necessary Medical Care for 
Certain Minors  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Good  afternoon , Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Judiciary 
Committee . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio , I use she/her pronouns,  and I’m the Advocacy and 
Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider worki ng to increase 
economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. It’s that last aspec t of o ur work 
– equity – that brings us to testify in support of LD 535  today.  
 
Maine has long had laws in place that allow for adol escents to make informed decisions about 
their health care without parental consent for certain med ical services. Youth who are 
transgender should have the same rig ht to autonomy over their own b odies when they and 
their medical providers believe it is the best treatment for their wellbeing.  They should not be 
denied necessary health care because of the biases or lack of safety that they experience  from 
their pare nts. We know that affirming the gen der of transgender youth is the best way to 
reduce the myriad dispar ities experienc ed by this population, and LD 535 takes a measured  
approach to pro tecting the best interests o f transgender adolescents .  
 
Many studies have found that gender aff irming care supports the long -term wellbeing of 
transgender  youth. The man y services that can be pa rt of ge nder  affirming care have 
demonstrated positive impacts for  transgender youth, including lower rates of adverse mental 
health outcomes, stronger self -esteem, and improved qu ality of life .1 The American Academy of 
Pediatric s reco mme nds “that youth who identify as TGD [tran sgender and gender diverse]  have 
access to comprehensive, gender -affirming, and developmentally appropriate health care that 
is provided in a safe and inclusive clinical space .2 This legislation makes it possible to follow this 
recommendation with in a thoughtful structure for youth who are unable t o attain consent from 
paren ts. That structure  is not frivolous  – it is a reason ed approac h to ensure the safety and 
health  of transgender youth.  
 
Thank you for your thoughtful consideration of this  lifesaving legislatio n. By supporting this bill , 
you w ill be affirming the autonomy and identities of transgender youth thro ughout our state. 
Pleas e vote Ou ght to Pass on LD 535.  
 
1 https://opa.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/2022 -03/gender -affirmi ng-care -young -people -march -2022.pdf   
2 https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/ar ticle/142/4/e20182162/37381/Ensuring -Comprehensive -Care -
and-Support -for?autologincheck=redirected   
