 
43 Gabriel  Drive, Post Office  Box 587 
Augusta , ME 04332- 0587  
 t: 207.622.7524 | f: 207.622.0836  
www .MaineF amilyPlanning. org 
info@MaineF amilyPlanning.org 
 
 
 
Maine Family Planning  
Testimony in Support  of 
LD 535, An Act to Increase Access to Necessary Medical Care for Certain Minors  
May 1 5, 2023  
   Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable  members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary , Maine Family Planning is submitting testi mony  in support of LD 535, An Act to Increase Acce ss to Necessary 
Medical Care for Certain Minors.  
  Maine Family Planning provides full scope sexual and reproductive health care at 18 locations throughout the 
state and provide s pass -through funding for family planning services to 4 3 sub-grantee sites in cluding federally 
qualified health centers and school- based health centers. We have been providing gender -affirming hormone 
therapy since 2012, starting with one site in Lewiston, and now offered at nine of our clinics and via telehealth.   
 The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of Population Affairs defines gender- affirming 
care as “a supportive form of healthcare. It consists of an array of services that may include medical, surgical, mental 
health, and non -medical services for transgender and nonbinary people. For transgender and nonbinary children and 
adolescents, early gender -affirming care is crucial to overall health and well- being as it allows the child or adolescent 
to focus on social transitions and can increase their confid ence while navigating the healthcare system.”
i  
 
 In 2022, a peer -reviewed study was published in PLOS One , drawing from the largest survey of transgender 
adults in the United States, the U.S. Transgender Survey . This study, “ Access to gender -affirming ho rmones during 
adolescence and mental health outcomes among transgender adults ,”ii found that transgender people who began 
hormone treatment in adolescence had fewer thoughts of suicide, were less likely to experience major mental health disorders , and had fewer problems with substance abuse than those who started hormones in adulthood.
iii  
 
 Andrew Smith , a young adult fiction author,  is credited with the quote, “ People fear what they don't 
understand and hate what they can't conquer. ” This feels incredibly germane to the topic of transgender rights. 
Transgender people are estimated to represent between 0.5% and 1.5% of the population in the United Statesiv and 
they are estimated to experience violent victimization (rape, sexual assaul t, aggravated / simple assault) at four times 
the rate of cisgender (people who identify with the sex they were assigned at birth) people.v For the last several 
years, each year has broken the previous  year’s record for the number of anti- trans bills introduced nationwide.  
Trans existence is not some kind of  growing threat to our children that we need to protect them from . Trans people 
have always existed . And we can choose whether we face that fact with curiosity and compassion, or fear and 
domination. As  one of the largest providers of gender -affirming hormone therapy in our state, we implore the 
commi ttee to choose the former, vote ought to pass on LD 535, and stand with trans Mainers, not against them.  
 
 
i Gender -Affirming Care and Young People (hhs.gov)  
ii Access to gender -affirming hormones during adolescence and mental health outcomes among transgender adults | PLOS ONE  
iii Better mental health found among tra nsgender people who started hormones as teens | News Center | Stanford Medicine  
iv Trans -Pop-Update -Jun-2022.pdf (ucla. edu)  
v Transgender people over four times more likely than cisgender people to be victims of violent crime -  Williams Institute 
(ucla.ed u) 
