70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in strong opposition to LD 535, An Act to Increase Access to Necessary Medical Care 
for Certain Minors which is sponsored by Representative SHEEHAN of Biddeford. It continues to stun me 
how this majority is going after the things that have made this country great. Attacking the family may 
have been the worst but attacking law enforcement and now parents… draws into question – what does 
the majority want this state to look like? All acts coming from the lowest denominator, splitting people, 
telling them they are damaged. Is it a surprise then what we see in our state, people leaving, kids in 
utter confusion and the things government should be focusing on, instead being ignored as of course 
“there is an agenda to get through.” 
 
Then there is that word, necessary. One definition is simply: Needed or required. So, one majority’s 
thoughts on that word may go by the wayside when another majority comes into power. Policy should 
be clear and not left to the imagination. A few years ago, Sen. Harry Reed ended the filibuster in the US 
Senate as a way to get more favorable judges confirmed. He acted prior to an election and soon after…a 
different majority took over and set records for affirming judges they liked using the change as a 
catalyst. If you intend an action here for Maine, spell it out.  
 
The bill’s summary is condemning. This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208. This bill 
proposes to increase access to necessary medical care for certain minors. If you believe you are 
representing what is right, your party has the majority and you still cannot write down for the public to 
see what your intent it, there would seem to be some integrity issues in play. I would ask you to vote no 
on this concept draft and all concept drafts. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.  
   
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless. 
 
 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
  
 
 
