Penny Morrell 
864 Manchester Road 
\ Belgrade, Maine 04917 
\ 
(207) 4958550 
‘ Pmorrell2@roadrunner.com 
May 12, 2023 
Sen Carney, Rep Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, I am Penny Morrell of 
Belgrade, Maine. 
I oppose both of these bl"S before you today. 
IL.D 535, “An Act to Increase Access to Necessary Medical Care for Certain Minors" and 
L D. 1735, "An Act to Safeguard Gender-affirming Health Care" 
I oppose for the followmg reasons:\ 
Ll) 1735 is lawyer talk of which I’m having a hard time to follow, not being a lawyer. However, 
the title is enough to cause me to pause.
\ 
I attended the hearing when Secretary of State, then Representative /Shenna Bellows, said that not 
allowing a child to be what he is was child abuse. Here we are all these years later, and students 
m schools are being taught about gender instead of reading, writing, and arithmetic Never in 
our history have so many girls struggled with the gender question which tells me they were never 
troubled with it until being confronted with it and brainwashed. That, in my mind is real child 
abuse ‘e 
The doctor doesn’t get it wrong when a baby is born, and the sex‘ is declared There are only two 
sexes, male and female, very evident by body parts. To try to be anything other than how one 1S 
created 1S defying God and will not serve a person well. It’s been said that not allowmg a child 
to be what he (generic) identiﬁes as will cause mental and emotional stress that could lead to 
suicide and/or other abnormahties. However, the rise in child suicide has never been higher and 
confusion by our young is higher too. It has led to chaos, violence, and confusion, not peace. 
LD 535 was only a “concept draft” until the proposed amendment came out, I believe yesterday. 
As I read the amendment, it works in tandem with LD 1735 and goes even beyond, as I see it. 
Not allowing parents to be the sole arbiter of a child’s health is wrong. Schools, the government, 
and the courts do not have the same concem for the welfare of a child as do the parent(s). Ina 
civil society, the family, not the government, is the best environment for the care, nurture, and 
wellbeing of children 
Please vote “ought not to pass” on both LDs 535 and 1735. Thank you.
1
\/
