126 Sewall Street 
Augusta, Maine 04330-6822 Mainﬁ A|eX garter 
TFY/Volcga: (207)r63t2.-9438 POHCY Advocate 
www ma neequa _]US ice.org . . aCa,~ter@me3p Org People Policy Solutions 
Testimony in Support of LD 1226, 
An Act to Require MaineCare to Give a 60-day Notice Prior to Terminating Benefits 
April 12, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Alex Carter, I use she/her pronouns, and 
I am a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider working to increase 
economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. l am testifying in support of LD 
1226, introduced by Representative Ness. 
Whenever any of us face a change in health insurance coverage, it is helpful to have that 
information as soon as possible so we can figure out what our options are going forward. For 
low-income people transitioning off MaineCare, more notice is definitely a big help. 
it is not uncommon for MaineCare members to experience delays in receiving notices due to 
challenges with the postal service or because of frequent moves due to housing instability often 
experienced by people with low incomes. Receiving 60 days notice would allow a greater 
window for people to be notified and still allow time to figure out their next steps, even if there 
is a delay in receiving that notice. 
Additional time can help those losing MaineCare figure out if they have an option for coverage 
through their employer or what options are available to them on the ACA Marketplace. At 
Maine Equal Justice, we often hear from people who struggle to navigate complicated 
insurance options after leaving MaineCare. Having more time to review their options and seek 
out assistance would be very beneficial to Mainers who aren't familiar with those systems. 
Additional time will also allow people to figure out if they need any prescriptions refilled before 
a gap in coverage or whether they have urgent health needs to address with their providers 
before losing coverage. 
This change could also help address churn in our MaineCare program. Churn is what happens 
when individuals disenroll and then reenroll in a short period of time. One reason churn can 
happen is when someone who remains eligible misses their recertification process, which
2 
results in termination of their benefits. When the individual realizes they have lost their 
benefits, they then reenroll. During the gap in coverage, people can miss prescription refills or 
follow-up appointments with a provider. If they receive notice further in advance of losing 
coverage, they have more opportunity to catch the issue and contact DHHS before they lose 
coverage. 
For these reasons, we encourage you to support LD 1226. Thank you for your consideration.
