Claire Perry
Owls Head-Liberty(landowner)
LD 1826
Claire Perry  
Liberty/Owls Head   
Landowner-Hunter
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  1826
I am concerned that coyote has been automatically vilified as "the enemy" of healthy 
deer herds, when in fact, exactly the opposite has been proven to be true where deer 
thrive naturally.
Today, farmers all across the state are wishing to keep stable coyote families on their 
land. They have learned how to farm successfully with coyote as an ally, and they 
know the havoc that the random killing of them creates.
Having served on a IF&W Coyote Management Plan Committee 2020-2023, I am 
deeply concerned of the headset which dictates: "Kill as many coyotes as you can...all
year long...all across the state."  This headset went against the strong support of NOT 
killing them year-round....of instituting a Wonton Waste Law for them...and of 
gathering all the data possible by tagging, to know exactly where coyotes need to be 
culled, or IF they need to be culled. 
I am troubled that the ONE biologist that favored non-stop killing of our coyotes went
against best science policy of  FOUR other wildlife biologists; two specializing in 
canids-predation-and coyotes! That person works for SAM.  SAM's first priority is 
not best science managment....it is supporting the hunting/trapping/gun community. 
I do not want to see this "deer-yard management plan" make coyotes 
into a species to be vilified in general, or a new money-making opportunity being 
created for those with hunting camps, offering coyote killing weekends for the thrill 
of killing a species that does not deserve this type of headset.  
This testimony will make some of you angry.  Good.  I suggest you start to learn 
about our coyotes from other sources besides those with invested interests in killing 
them.  *Non-biased sources* of science based studies would be a good start.  
My hope is, those who are selected to be on this Parks and Land Management Board 
(concerning our deer-wintering yard management) knows the SCIENCE of coyotes 
(bear-eagles-bobcat) as well as the value of the predator/prey relationship... before 
they accept the position. I do not want to see again, two people from a highly funded 
special interest group, running the show.  And neither do most citizens from across 
the state.
