SAM ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, l\/[E 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@sa1notinaine.org 
Wwwsarnilatorg 
Testimony in Support- 
LD 1826, An Act to Designate Deer Wintering Areas Under the Jurisdiction of the 
Bureau of Parks and Lands 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM-Institute for 
Legislative Action 
Monday, May 8th 2023, 
The honorable Sen. LaFontaine, Representative Landry, members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, my name is David Trahan, I represent the 
Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine - Institute Legislative Action testifying in support 
of LD I826, An Act to Designate Deer Wintering Areas Under the Jurisdiction of 
the Bureau of Parks and Lands.
First, we would like to thank Senator Jackson for sponsoring LD 1826 on behalf of 
the SAM-ILA. 
Less than a lifetime ago, white-tailed deer were the heart and soul of the rural Maine 
hunting culture. Sportsmen and women ﬁ-om all over the country traveled to wild 
areas in northern Maine for the chance to harvest trophy deer. Hunting camps, guides 
and families-built friendships and shared stories about their deer hunting adventures 
through the generations. 
Unfortunately, predation and habitat loss have led to the collapse of the deer 
population in these same regions. At one time, ten percent of the landscape was deer 
wintering habitat, now it is just three percent. This loss of older growth forest habitat 
has created a one-dimensional forest that is unable to sustain deer and the other 
important wildlife species that depend on the same forest structure. 
Working with this committee, coalition partners that will follow me and the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, we instituted aggressive new 
protections policies to purchase, protect and enhance deer yards. 
First, we introduced and passed legislation to change the Land for Maine’s Future 
Program to prioritize land purchases that include deer wintering areas where the 
population and suitable wintering habitat is in decline and then successfully 
negotiated a $40 million, 4-year General Fund Appropriation to reinvigorate the 
Land For Maine’s Future Program. 
Second, in the last Legislative session, the SAM-ILA successfully lobbied 
lawmakers to reform our antlerless deer permit system and dedicate all new monies 
from this system to the same mission. This effort means another $4 million plus in 
state and federal monies will be available to conserve this important habitat.
LD 1826 is designed to align IFW’s new deer wintering area management with the 
Bureau of Public Lands (BPL). BPL owns and manages 35,800 acres of deer 
wintering habitat, LD 1826 would create the special designation of deer wintering 
habitat under BPL, similar to IFW’s deﬁnition and allows the two departments to 
enter into agreements to manage and share resource from the Deer Management 
Fund. It also directs the Departments to survey for existing and unmapped deer 
yards. We whole heartedly support this bill and would to thank each agency for their 
support putting this it together and their continued support for Maine’s wildlife and 
the habitat that supports it.
