Maine Coast, Heritage Trust 
A Statewide Land Conservation Urganizjation 
Testimony on LD 1826: 
An Act to Designate DWAs Under the Jurisdiction of BPL 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
committee, my name is Jeff Romano. I appreciate this opportunity to provide testimony on 
behalf of Maine Coast Heritage Trust in support of LD 1826. 
Maine Coast Heritage Trust conserves and stewards Maine's coastal lands and islands for their 
renowned scenic beauty, ecological value, outdoor recreational opportunities, and contribution 
to community well-being. We provide statewide conservation leadership through our work with 
land trusts, coastal communities, and other partners. Over the past five decades, we have 
conserved more than 185,000 acres in Maine. 
LD 1826 is part of a broader effort being led by land trusts and the Sportsman's Alliance of 
Maine to conserve important natural areas and outdoor recreational spaces throughout the 
state. In 2012 and again in 2021, our partnership was instrumental in prioritizing the 
conservation of Deer Wintering Areas (DWAs) within the Land for Maine's Future (LMF) 
program. To date, LMF has conserved four properties with valuable deer wintering habitat and 
the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) is working to line up future acquisitions. 
It is important to keep in mind that the conservation of DWAs is not just valuable for restoring 
the deer population; it also means the protection of habitat that is critical to nearly 50 non- 
game wildlife species. ln addition, well-managed DWAs have carbon sequestration benefits and 
provide greater diversity of forest habitats on the landscape. 
Conservation of new DWAs is important, but so is the management of existing ones. Today, the 
Bureau of Parks and Lands (BPL) manages more than 35,000 acres of deer wintering habitat. LD 
1826 is a straightforward proposal that will provide new tools for BPL and lFW to work together 
to ensure all DWAs on state-owned lands are managed cooperatively and effectively. We 
encourage the committee to support LD 1826.
