May 8 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife  
 
RE: LD 1826  – An Act to Designate Deer Wintering Areas Under the Jurisdiction of the 
Bureau of Parks and Lands  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Inland Fisheries & Wildlife , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the 
Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine . I appreciate this 
opportunity to submit written co mments in support of LD 1826 - An Act to 
Designate Deer Wintering Areas Under the Jurisdiction of the Bureau of Parks and 
Lands . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the  lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate.  
 
LD 1826 would allow the Depa rtment of Agricultu re, Conservation and Forestry ’s 
Bureau of Parks and Lands  (BPL)  to work with the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife to designate deer wintering areas  on BPL lands. It also allows BPL to access 
funds from the Ma ine Deer Management Fund to support management and 
stewardship of these designated deer wintering areas.  
 
This bill is part of a broader effort being led by the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine, land 
trusts, and TN C to conserve important natural areas and  outdoor recreational spaces 
throug hout the state. It builds upon many other successful initiatives , including work in 
2012 to include conservation and p rotection of deer wintering areas as a priority for 
acquisitions funded by the Land for Maine ’s Future program. That priority was 
reiterated in 2021 when the Governor and Legislature approved $40 million in new 
funding for LMF.  
 
The benefits of this bill go far beyond conserving critical deer wintering areas . These 
protections also benefit habitat for  more than 50 other non -game wildlife species and 
require forest management that maintains  a greater diversity of  tree type and age class 
in a region . Giving  BPL more  tools and  resources to protect deer winter ing areas is a 
win-win opportunity  for restoring deer popula tions and supporting forest habitats . 
 
TNC urges the committee to support LD 958. Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment and I am available to answer questions at any time.  
