TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 1826 
“An Act to Designate Deer Wintering Areas Under the Jurisdiction of 
the Bureau of Parks and Lands" 
PRESENTED BY: President Jackson of Aroostook 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Representative LAN DRY of Farmington 
And Senators: BLACK of Franklin, CURRY of Waldo, LaFOUNTA|N of Kennebec, 
Representatives: DILL of Old Town, FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor 
DATE OF HEARING: May 8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. l am Nate Webb Wildlife Division Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
support of L.D. 1826. 
This bill allows the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, Bureau of 
Public Lands (BPL) to designate, pursuant to a habitat management agreement with the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, deer wintering areas within BPL's 
jurisdiction that are high quality deer wintering habitat with a history of significant use 
by deer as "Deer Wintering Areas" . This designation allows BPL to access funding from 
the Maine Deer Management Fund to support the management of these parcels. The 
Bureau must manage the designated areas with deer conservation as the highest 
management priority but may also manage the areas to benefit other wildlife species 
that rely on mature softwood. 
The Department has a long history of working with BPL to support the wildlife and 
fisheries resources on Maine's public lands. We currently provide a full-time Wildlife 
Biologist position that works with BPL foresters and land managers to support the 
Bureau's habitat management efforts. This bill will allow BPL to carry out management 
actions to enhance critical wintering habitat for deer in northern, eastern, and western 
Maine. These management actions can be more costly than traditional commercial 
forest practices. The funds from the Deer Management Fund can be used to subsidize
these necessary but less profitable activities that help ensure the forest conditions are 
most supportive of wintering deer. The designation of these lands as deer wintering 
areas assures their long-term management for deer conservation and secures the return 
on the investment ofthe Deer Management Funds in that management. 
The Department has enjoyed a great partnership with BPL on managing Maine's public 
lands for the wildlife and fisheries resources found there. This bill allows both agencies 
to do even more for wintering deer on public lands in the areas of the state that are 
hardest for deer to survive. We encourage the Committee to support LD 1826 so this 
important work can continue. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
