SCARBOROUGH PHYSICAL THERAPY ASSOCIATES, P.A. 
51 U.S. Route One, Scarborough, ME 04074 
Telephone (207) 883-1227 Fax (207) sss-6199 
LD 1383, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for 
Phvsical and Occupational Therapy Services 
Public Hearing, April 13., 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services.7 
My name is Anne Ryan and I have been employed by Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates for 20 
years, the last 10 of which I have held the position of Billing and Patient Accounts Representative. 
I voice my support for LD 1383 due to my experience as a billing representative, and can state the 
following: 
v The need for authorizations for out-patient physical therapy is for the most part a cumbersome 
and time-consuming exercise. It places a barrier for effective and continuous care as ordered bya 
patient’s doctor. 
v At our clinic the majority of patients complete their course of treatment within a I2 visit 
timeframe. Were LD 1383 to pass, a signiﬁcant administrative burden would be liited. More 
importantly, patient care would not be interrupted due to the unpredictable actions of certain 
commercial insurance companies. This Bill would also be advantageous to patients who are 
referred to physical therapy for acute or post-surgical care. The latter come to us with a post- 
operative protocol from their surgeon. If authorizations are delayed or approved for two to three 
visit increments, recovery can be unnecessarily delayed to the detriment of the post-surgical 
patient. 
~ It is our clinic policy to verify the need for an authorization for all new patients. We rely on the 
information provided by commercial insurance companies to be both correct and up to date and 
act accordingly. It has been our experience that should a claim be denied because of erroneous 
information on the part of a commercial insurance, the steps needed to obtain a retro- 
authorization are cumbersome and delay patient treatment. It is our opinion that an authorization 
to continue therapy aﬁer 12 visits is not unreasonable if the process is effective, timely, and 
reﬂects a patient’s status and goals. 
0 Lastly, this bill would not be necessary but for the fact that some commercial insurers have 
contracted with utilization review companies who have willfully created an environment which 
appears to deliberately obfuscate the authorization process, which not only affects a provider ’s 
cash ﬂow but also causes confusion and distress to patients whose care is interrupted or denied. 
I encourage the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services to vote ‘Ought to Pass’ 
on this Bill. 
Respectfully, 
Anne K. Ryan, Billing and Patient Accounts Representative,
