Cayford, Edna 3 
From: Cat Kenney <ckenney@ube —more.com> 
Sent: Monday, April 10, 2023 10:18 PM 
To: Bailey, Donna; Perry, Anne; Brakey, Eric; Reny, Cameron; Arford, Poppy; Cluchey, Sally; 
Cyn/vay, Scott; Mastracclo, Anne-Marie; Mathieson, Kristi; Morris, Joshua; Nutting, 
Robert; Pringle, Jane; Swallow, Gregory; HCIFS; McCarthyReid, Colleen 
Cc: Gwen Simons 
Subject: Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1383 
This messae oriinates from outside the Maine Legislature.3 
Dear Senator Baily, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HCIFS committee: 
I am an orthopedic physical therapist that manages three orthopedic and sports physical therapy clinics 
throughout the state of Maine and we have been in business since 2016. I am writing to ask you to 
support LD 1383, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for Physical 
and Occupational Therapy Services. 
Our clinicians are very skilled at managing patient care and optimizing outcomes, therefore, we often see 
cases that have failed physical therapy in the past and their symptoms are chronic in nature, or they 
arrive with multiple body parts affected. We are asked to obtain prior authorization for many of these 
cases where the visits allotted do not appear to be based on diagnosis codes, patient complexity or the 
provider's plan of care and the number of visits dispensed appear arbitrary. This is similar to subsequent 
authorization requests for continuation of care, in which many of the requests don't require much clinical 
information, and they approve authorizations with low visit limits. This requires objective clinical 
changes to be made in a short amount of time and if this change is not deemed sufficient, it is determined 
that physical therapy is unnecessary. These expectations are unrealistic for patients managing chronic 
pain or post-operative limitations. 
This authorization process places an unnecessary burden on our clinical staff to complete progress 
reports with increased frequency, as well as the burden on our patients to continually disrupt progress 
by taking unnecessary time to collect data, and lastly to our front office staff to submit the authorization 
requests. This potential delay in the patient's progress with frequent progress reports or delays in 
authorizations only results in setbacks in progress and is cost prohibitive in the long run. 
With LD 1383, we would be able to provide care for these patients for 12 visits without disruption of 
care. This will save time, and healthcare dollars and increase access to care.
1
In respect of your time, I have limited all aspects in which this authorization process is burdensome and 
challenging for small private practices. Should you have an interest in other effects of this process I would 
be happy to discuss them further. 
Thank you for your time. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me. 
Cat Kenney, PT, DPT 
Physical Therapist/co-owner 
UBE Physical Therapy and Performance 
ube-more.com 
C: 207-949-0552 
PHYSICAL THERAPY 
_. ‘ 
AND PERFURMANGE 
The information contained in this transmission may contain privileged and conﬁdential information, including patient information 
protected by federal and state privacy laws. lt is intended only for the use of the person(s) named above. If you are not the intended 
recipient, you are hereby notiﬁed that any review, dissemination, distribution, or duplication of this communication is strictly prohibited. If 
you are not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply email and destroy all copies of the original message.
2
