 
April 12, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the joint standing committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
 
On behalf of Central Maine Healthcare’s Therapy Service Department, this letter is intended to state our 
support of Legislative Document No. 1383: An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization 
Requirements for Physical and Occupational therapy Services. This letter has been prepared in 
collaboration with our Patient Service Representatives, Office Coordinators and Clinical Managers at 
outpatient clinics in Oxford, Cumberland and Androscoggin County. This includes both not-for-profit and 
for-profit clinics in Lewiston/Auburn, Turner, Bethel, Rumford, Naples and Bridgton. This bill could help 
support optimized workflow for all therapy clinics, decreased wait times for patients to receive care and 
increased access to therapy services directly within the communities that these individuals live and 
work. 
When comparing workflows amongst insurance companies, the primary concerns are that it takes too 
long for authorizations to come in and that it is difficult to reach an actual person via phone in order to 
work through the patient case and reach a favorable outcome. Please see the following chart below that 
states our concerns and their impact in greater detail. 
Optimal Insurer 
Workflow Needs Improvement Insurer 
Workflow (i.e. Anthem, 
Wellcare and Liberty Mutual) Impact on Patient Care/Team Member 
Process 
Same day authorization 
for therapy services. 24-48+ hours, especially if 
needing to request more than 
the automatically approved 
visits. Increased wait time to service for 
patients. 
Authorize 12 visits at a 
time. 2-4 visits per authorization. Rationing care results in decreased 
access, increased wait time between 
appointments (gap in patient care up to 
several weeks) which impacts results. 
 
Progress note required for each auth 
(would normally be completed every 8-
10 visits, now needs to be every 2-4 visits 
if that’s all that were authorized). More 
paperwork results in increased therapist 
down time, decreased access and 
increased wait times for patients. 
Peer to peer is not 
required. Peer to peer is required and 
the insurance peer is often a 
nurse (not a therapist).  Increased downtime for therapists while 
waiting for call/on hold/waiting for 
transfer. Need to explain situation 
multiple times.  
Consistent process with 
authorization. Inconsistencies (some prefixes 
for Anthem are more difficult, 
specifically BAV and BEY). Unknown how long each phone call will 
take making it difficult to schedule 
authorization calls while maintaining 
other responsibilities. 
Use of portal for easy 
authorization and no 
need to sit on hold on 
the phone for hours. 
 
If not portal, auth can 
be achieved with 1 
phone call in 15 
minutes. Portal does not work with 
Anthem. Need to make phone 
calls and go through third 
party vendors (Carelon), calls 
get dropped, constant 
transfers. Can take up to 4 
hours to reach an actual 
person. Increased down time for office team. 
Increased wait time for patients to get 
scheduled appointment. 
Immediately enroll 
therapists NPI number 
with insurer.  Anthem takes weeks to enroll 
clinicians.  Inability for new hires to care for Anthem 
patients for first few weeks of 
employment.  
PTA services are 
covered. PTA may not be covered. Decreased access to care for the patient. 
 
Please note these specific scenarios for added support: 
1) Central Maine Therapy Services – Bates Street (Jamie Carter): Lymphedema patients are known 
to need prolonged services. We have patients that are approved (through Anthem) for only a 
few visits at a time. The PT has to do a peer to peer nearly every time and the patient ends up 
calling Anthem as well to get additional visits. This is very frustrating for the patient and 
therapist as it is known from time of referral that patient will need extended visits.  
2) Rumford Hospital – Outpatient Pediatric (Tara Hemingway): Child receiving speech therapy 
services for over a year, dad’s job changed insurance to Anthem. Initially when going online on 
January 4th, Anthem site noted no required authorization needed (screen print off saved). 
Checked again in February when going for OT authorization and site has changed stating 
authorization was needed for all three therapy services. Called Anthem in Mid-February to 
confirm this. Patient is receiving speech therapy although we are still waiting to see if previous 
appointments will be covered from January-February 14. OT was denied. 
Ultimately, many of these insurers are putting unnecessary barriers in place that ration care and 
decrease access to quality care for many patients. In addition, the workflow and processing delays 
paired with the inability to get timely assistance over the phone results in an increased workforce 
burden for our organization. We have had to create a new 40-hour position to help us process referrals 
and obtain prior authorization as our front office team members can’t be on hold with insurance 
companies while also providing service to the patients checking into and out of appointments.  
We appreciation your consideration of this bill and would be happy to provide additional examples or 
clarification to the above statements at any point.  
Sincerely,  
Central Maine Healthcare Therapy Services Department 
 
Supported by:  
Hillary Littlefield OTR/L (System Director for Therapy Services) 
Jessaka Nichols, OT/L (Clinical Manager – Bridgton and Rumford Hospital) 
Alexander Harris, DPT (Clinical Manager – Central Maine Therapy Services) 
Trina Sanborn (System Manager of Therapy Services Operations) 
Alyssa Coy (Office Coordinator – Bridgton Hospital) 
Jamie Carter (Office Coordinator – Central Maine Therapy Services) 
Tara Hemingway (Office Coordinator – Rumford Hospital) 
