 
 
MNPA.org 
PO BOX 135 Woolwich, ME 04579
207-621-0313
mainenpassociation@gmail.com
mnpa.org
       25+ Years of Independent Practice as Healthcare Providers for the People of Maine 
April 10,2023 
Re: LD 1383  
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, & distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, & Financial Services, 
       I am a Nurse Practitioner who resides in Stetson and practices in Bangor. I am writing on 
behalf of the Maine Nurse Pracitioner Association (MNPA) to urge you to support LD 1383 ‘An 
Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for Physical and 
Occupational Therapy Services.’  I have been working in Orthopedic Surgery Practices since 
1998. Prior to that I worked as a registered nurse and cared for trauma, orthopedic, stroke, 
head injured, neurologically impaired, chronic & acute pain, and spinal cord injured patients. 
        MNPA supports access to timely, appropriate, high quality, and best practice care to 
promote the best health outcomes for our patients. I have personally seen patients with less 
than desirable outcomes when treatment such as physical therapy, occupational therapy, 
physiatry/rehabilitation treatment, or pain treatment is delayed or denied. Some conditions in 
orthopedics that are particularly time sensitive are arthrofibrosis (scarring), frozen shoulder, 
sports injury, total knee replacement, bone tumor, recurrent ankle sprain, fragility fracture, as 
well as stroke, chronic pain syndrome, amputee, & are more likely to have delay in 
diagnosis,hospital readmission or limited function. There are limited rehabilitation facilities and 
insurance has criteria for them. I had two patients that could have returned to work much 
sooner if chiropractic care had not been delayed. I have seen patients  go to the emergency 
room for opioids as non-pharmacologic treatments were delayed/not approved. 
        Not every patient needs every form of service to get better, but patients suffer 
unnecessarily and can have negative, more costly outcomes with delayed care. It is also costly 
for provider or administrative staff time to do prior authorizations and cumbersome online 
follow-up communication, when we are just asking for standard care to treat our patients 
properly. It is costly and incovenient to the patient to go to multiple appointments instead of 
diagnosing the problem and starting treatment. There are best practices with treatment 
algorithms based on research that are used. Chronic pain and limited function cause suffering 
and use of limited societal resources as well as prevent people from returning to an active life. 
       We urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 1383 and appreciate your time in reading and 
considering this testimony. Please feel free to contact me if any questions as below. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Kathleen Forti-Gallant DNP,MNPA Legislative Committee co-chair 
Telephone # 207-621-0313/email= mainenpassociation@gmail.com      
Kathleen  Forti-Gallant 
Maine Nurse Practitioner Association
LD 1383
written testimony only; not virtual or in person
