,r TA ORTHOPAEDIC 
PHYSICAL THERAPY 
A S S ° C ’ A T E S 1068 Main Street, Suite A, Sanford, Maine 04073 (207) 324-eras fax: (844) 292-4021 
23 Hannaford Drive, Scarborough, Maine 04074 (207) 883-6789 fax: (844) 292-4021 
Testimony of Kenneth Simons, PT, DPT, OCS, MS 
Orthopaedic Physical Therapy Associates, Inc. 
Scarborough and Sanford, Maine 
In Support of LD 1383, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier 
Prior Authorization Requirements for Physical and Occupational Therapy Services 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable HCIFS Committee: 
My name is Dr. Kenneth Simons. I am a doctor of physical therapy. I'm a Board Certified Specialist in Orthopaedic 
Physical Therapy and residency and fellowship trained in manual therapy. I live and work in Scarborough. I have owned 
and operated Orthopedic Physical Therapy Associates in Sanford since 1990. I opened a second clinical location in 
Scarborough in 2006. 
I am also a founding member of the NorthEast Private Practice Network which consists ofapproximately 26 independent 
Physical Therapy practices with 38 locations throughout 28 Maine towns. 
I stand in support of LD 1383. This legislation will fix the prior authorization problems PTs have had with several payers. 
Anthem BCBS, however, is the only payer we are currently having problems with. Their subsidiary, Carelon, formerly 
know as AIM (American Imaging Management) requires an average of 3 prior authorization approvals for 10-12 PT visits. 
A survey of our network members indicates this takes an extra 2-3 hours of administrative time per Anthem patient— 
increasing the amount of time we have to spend on each 12 visit case by about 30%. This is not necessary at all when 
there is rarely over-utilization before visit 12 and Carelon auto-approves that many visits anyway! 
The specific procedures to complete a Prior Authorization (PA) request on the Carelon platform are onerous and 
burdensome. Unfortunately, as a solo provider in a small clinic, I am acutely aware of the details, as I file the PA requests 
myself. Each PA requires over 30 windows to navigate through. Much of the information gathered is data already known 
by the payor, but more importantly completely irrelevant to the condition of the patient. For example, it is necessary to 
enter the name and NPI of the Ordering Provider, Treating Provider and Servicing Facility, the member's phone number 
and email address. All of this information is required not only on the initial request but with each subsequent request to 
continue the care of the patient. None of the data is automatically populated. 
I have seriously considered going out of Network with Anthem, but it is the largest payer in this state and I would loosea 
large percentage of my business. 
Small providers like me need your help. Anthem is not saving anyone any money by requiring prior auth that is not 
necessary and driving costs up for providers. Please vote ”Ought to Pass” on LD 1383. 
I'm happy to answer any questions.
