April 10, 2023 
LD 1383 An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for Physical 
and Occupational Therapy Services 
In Support 
The Maine Occupational Therapy Association (MEOTA) represents occupational therapy 
practitioners who are members of the organization. This bill will allow practitioners to determine 
the number of visits required based on client needs. Typically, the number of visits needed for 
Occupational Therapy can only be determined after an evaluation that looks at multiple factors 
including all biological, psychological, and social influences involved. Having to obtain prior 
authorization for services before an evaluation is complete is leaving the determination of need 
to an individual who does not have the data needed to make that decision. It is impossible to tell 
if a client is in need of services based solely on history or medical diagnosis.  
As licensed professionals, it is our responsibility to determine the level of care required based on 
an evaluation. There are multiple of levels of service that can be provided based on the client 
need ranging from a single visit to include evaluation and education all the way up to 
recommending therapy five times a week for several months.  
This bill is prohibiting prior authorization in two specific cases. The first stops prior 
authorization for the first 12 visits of rehabilitation or habilitation services. It will limit the 
number of times that re-authorization can occur to every six visits or 30 days, whichever is 
longer, after these 12 visits for the same episode of care. Additionally, a carrier would not be 
able to require prior authorization for individuals who experience chronic pain for the first 90 
days after diagnosis and re-authorization every 6 visits or 30 days.  
With these limits, the therapist will spend less time completing administrative functions 
including submitting evaluations and other documentation to verify the need for services. The 
time not spent completing the administrative functions will increase the number of clients seen. 
This will have multiple benefits for all involved including additional clients receiving services 
reduced wait lists and times, increased revenue that would cover the cost of overhead.  
Another benefit of this bill is the response time required for authorization and additional 
information requests. There are times that authorization is requested and it can take up to a week 
to get approvals. In that time, a client cannot be seen for therapy, which can cause the condition 
to worsen to the point that they may need a higher level of care. This bill is asking that a carrier 
respond to a request within 24 hours of receipt. This will ensure that individuals are able to 
receive medically necessary services in a timely manner.  
In summary, this bill will improve the access to rehabilitation services to all individuals in 
Maine.  
Kimberly A. Davis, OTD, MS, OTR/L 
President, MEOTA 
