northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1383 An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for 
Physical and Occupational Therapy Services 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 13, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations providing testimony in support of this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with more than 10,000 employees statewide. 
 
I want to begin by thanking Senator Brenner for sponsoring this important legislation.  
Carrier administrative burdens and delayed authorizations are negatively impacting 
therapy patients in our care. Carrier response time often does not allow for treatment 
to begin when it should or allows for only the evaluation to occur.  This results in waiting 
for follow-up treatments which are time sensitive but delayed due to lack of timeliness 
in carrier authorization. 
 
Concerns expressed by our physical therapists and occupational therapists are 
consistent and statewide.  Prior authorization burdens include: 
 
• A process so highly inefficient and burdensome that staff are employed to 
manage the prior authorization work 
• Each carrier has a different prior authorization process that results in a highly 
inefficient workflow 
• One carrier contracts with a third party for prior authorization, the online 
process then results in a lengthy call with our therapists only to have a limited 
number of visits approved. The online service and the carrier are not always in 
agreement on prior authorization of services. 
• Carrier clinical review often does not consider the recommendations of the 
physician and therapist conducting the initial evaluation.   
• Acute post operative outpatient therapy visits are delayed waiting for 
authorizations followed by additional delays when additional visits are required 
• Authorization for additional visits includes sending clinical documents, making 
follow up calls, some require  a "peer to peer" phone call between the therapist 
and the insurance companies' clinical reviewer. This results in two outcomes, 
approval for a few limited number of additional therapy visits or most often a 
denial of additional care.  
 • Carriers are inconsistent in covering retroactive care when therapists provide 
services medically necessary for the patient. 
 
This bill prohibits prior authorization for new episodes of care for the first 12 visits and 
prohibits prior authorization for physical medicine or rehabilitation services provided to 
patients with chronic pain for the first 90 days following diagnosis.  The bill also 
establishes standards for timing of approvals, retroactive authorization and appeal. 
 
We ask that you support this important legislation. Thank you. 
