Please vote ”Ought to Pass” on 
LD 1383, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements 
for Physical and Occupational Therapy Services 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Melanie Blaney. I am the Practice Administrator at Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates. 
I have had the pleasure of working at Scarborough PT for the last 25 years. 
Over the years, the administrative burden imposed by many managed care health plans in our state has 
increased exponentially. We have gone from needing a PCP referral to also requiring a pre authorization 
from the insurance company, in addition to the PCP referral. 
The preauthorization process varies, depending on the insurance carrier. Some require preauthorization 
of services after a speciﬁc number of visits. Others partner with utilization management companies, 
requiring preauthorization beginning with the initiai visit. This process is by far the most time consuming 
and cumbersome process of all. 
For the ﬁrst request to authorize visits, providers submit basic information, inclﬁiilﬁg patiefit 75 '7‘
i 
demographics, a functional outcome score from a patient survey and answers to clinical questions that 
have either a yes or no answer or a multiple-choice answer. Questions such as: Did the injury or 
condition occur within the last 6 months, has the patient has had a surgery in the last 3 months, does the 
patient have a conﬁrmed diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders and select a condition from the 
following list that may impact treatment. There is no opportunity to provide any additional information. 
The questions requiring a response are not always the same questions, therefore Providers must read 
through evaluations which can be 5-6 typed pages long, to extrapolate the required information, which is 
quite time consuming. 
An average of 5-6 visits over an 8-week period is approved on the ﬁrst authorization. If additional visits 
are needed, the subsequent request process mirrors the ﬁrst. Again, no opportunity to provide a plan of 
care or status updates, aside from a change in the functional score. lf additional visits are granted, it is 
usually 2-4 visits and tends to be over a 4-week period. Providers spend 30-45 minutes on these 2 prior 
auth requests just to get auto-approved for a total of 7-10 visits. 
The third request and all subsequent requests require the same information as the ﬁrst two. However, 
these requests will always be pended for further review of medical records, regardless of whether all 
previously authorized visits were used (sometimes the prior auth time limit runs out before we have 
used all of the approved visits).
Providers are required to perform certain tests and measures required by the process that are not 
clinically relevant, if there is any hope of getting additional visits preauthorized. The medical necessity 
review takes at least 2 business days to be completed and many times additional visits are denied. 
In the event of a denial, Providers can call to speak with a reviewer. This entails signiﬁcant hold times 
and disrupts patient care. At times, Providers have been put on hold for nearly 2 hours, just waiting to 
speak with a reviewer, only to be disconnected. Upon conversation with Reviewers, Providers have been 
told to "rewrite the patient’s goals and submit a new request" or "discharge the current diagnosis and 
submit a request with a new diagnosis" (so the request for visits will be auto-approved for 4-6 more 
visits). This is absurd and only interferes with patient care! 
This is an administratively, time-consuming process we ﬁnd ourselves completing every few visits with 
our patients. Performing additional reevaluations, combing through daily notes and evaluation reports 
to ﬁnd information required for preauthorization submissions and Providers spending an abundance of 
time waiting on hold to speak with a reviewer to advocate for patients beneﬁts. 
Please help us end this madness by voting "Ought to Pass” on LD 1383. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Kindly, 
Melanie A Blaney 
Practice Administrator 
Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates, P.A.
