 
 Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
Neither For Nor Against 
 
LD 1383, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for Physical and 
Occupational Therapy Services 
 
April 13, 2023 
 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services.  
 
My name is Peter Hayes and I’m the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine. The 
HPA is a nonprofit that represents the purchasers of healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance 
healthcare value and to support and incentivize high-quality, affordable care. We have over 60 members, 
including some of the largest public and private employers and health trusts in Maine. Collectively, our 
members spend over a billion dollars annually providing health care for nearly one quarter of the 
commercially insured population in the state.  
 
I’m here today to testify neither for nor against LD 1383. We appreciate the concerns raised by bill 
supporters regarding the administrative requirements created by PT prior authorization processes, and we 
hope that the concerns shared today can spur conversation among the various stakeholders to consider 
improvements to the process that address some of the administrative concerns and delays raised by 
clinicians, while preserving an essential plan management tool for screening out inappropriate or over-
utilized care and services.  
 
Prior authorizations are an essential tool that plan sponsors leverage to ensure that plan resources are 
focused on appropriate care and guard against over-utilization.  We don’t believe that the solution to these 
administrative issues is to eliminate prior authorizations. Rather, we think the solution is to try to fix those 
issues so that we have a prior authorization system that meets the needs of plan sponsors without over-
burdening clinicians with unnecessary paperwork.  
 
I hope that today’s public hearing can serve as a catalyst for conversations among stakeholders on how to 
revise prior authorization processes to respond to the concerns raised here this afternoon. I believe that 
such a collaborative effort would more effectively address clinician concerns while preserving essential 
oversight.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share HPA’s feedback on LD 1383. I’d be happy to answer any questions 
and will be available for the work session.   
 
