Cayford, Edna 
From: Sarah SMPT <sarah@smpt.biz> 
Sent: Wednesday, April 5, 2023 9:01 AM 
To: Bailey, Donna; Perry, Anne; Brakey, Eric; Reny, Cameron; Arford, Poppy; Cluchey, Sally; 
Cyrway, Scott; Mastracclo, Anne-Marie; Mathleson, Kristi; Morris, Joshua; Nutting, 
Robert; Prlngle, Jane; Swallow, Gregory; HCIFS; McCarthyReid, Colleen 
Cc: Rafferty, Joe; Sayre, Daniel 
Subject: Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1383 
This message oriinates from outside the Maine Legislature. g V 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the HCIFS Committee: 
I am a constituent in your district. I am the billing and ofﬁce manager at Southern Maine Physical Therapy. I’m 
writing to ask you to support LD 13 83, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements 
for Physical and Occupational Therapy Services. This bill is scheduled for a public hearing in the HCIFS 
Committee on April 13. 
Insurance carriers have implemented burdensome, costly, and unnecessary prior authorization requirements in 
recent years that limit the number of therapy sessions a patient can receive. Carriers often authorize 6 visits with 
the initial request, which translates to about 3 weeks of therapy. Following requests require us to share medical 
records, treatment notes, and extensive reviews. Even when this additional information is provided, We are 
granted 2-4 more authorized visits. As you can imagine, this is not sufﬁcient time for a patient to make any 
signiﬁcant progress in their treatment. Anthem’s utilization review entity, AIM (recently renamed “Carelon”) 
frequently tell us prior authorization is required, making us spend many hours on the phone trying to get prior 
authorization when it really is not required by the patient's plan. The amount of administrative time spent on 
these issues is affecting the attention we are able to provide to our other patients and their concerns. 
Thank you in advance for your consideration. Please feel free to contact me if you need any further information. 
Respectfully, 
Sarah Williams 
2 Deer Run, Kennebunk, ME 04043 
207-479-2183, sarah@,smpt.biz 
Sarah Williams E Office Manager 
Southern Maine Physical Therapy 
449 Cottage Rd, South Portland, ME 04106 
l7 Lincoln St, Ste 016, Biddeford, ME 04002 
207—799—9700 I 207-799-9706 (fax) 
www.smpt.biz
1
