Cayford, Edna 
From: Sara Merrill <smerril|@scarboroughpt.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, April 4, 2023 2:32 PM 
To: Bailey, Donna; Perry, Anne; Brakey, Eric; Reny, Cameron; Arford, Poppy; Cluchey, Sally; 
Cyrvvay, Scott; Mastraccio, Anne-Marie; Mathieson, Kristi; Morris, Joshua; Nutting, 
Robert; Pringle, Jane; Swallow, Gregory; HCIFS; McCarthyReid, Colleen 
Cc: Millett, Rebecca; Carney, Anne 
Subject: Please vote "Ought to Pass LD 1383 
Follow Up Flag: Follow up 
Flag Status: Flagged 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. I a P rC 
a .. 1I 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HCIFS Committee: 
I am a physical therapist at Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates. I’m Writing to ask you to support LD 
1383, An Act to Regulate Insurance Carrier Prior Authorization Requirements for Physical and Occupational 
Therapy Services. 
I have been a PT for 35 yrs, 27 of them at Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates(SPTA). The burden that 
insurance companies have placed on providers over the years has grown to an inappropriate amount. Not only 
that, but they are authorizing fewer and fewer therapy sessions based on very little information from the 
provider. For example, AIM ( or Carelon as they are now called) uses a number generated by a one size ﬁtsa 
diagnosis form to make their determination. They do NOT read the skilled and thorough evaluation a therapist 
does that outlines the patient's plan of care, goals, treatment designed to meet those goals and rationale for this. 
They base their number of treatments authorized on a number generated from one form. VVhen asking for more 
visits after the initial authorization has been exhausted (Which can be as few as 4 visits!) they do not look at 
progress notes, and again look only at a number on a form. It is not until the third request for more visits that 
they then request the initial evaluation and most recent progress notes. There is nothing wrong with therapists 
having to substantiate why therapy is indicated and this is something we have always done in our 
initial evaluations. However, the process insurance companies now require is timing consuming for therapists as 
well as office staff. It makes designing a cohesive plan of care difﬁcult not knowing how many visits will be 
approved, It often disrupts the patient's plan of care. And it is not based on a clear picture of the needs of the 
patient which leads me to believe that the number of visits authorized is not truly based on the patient's need 
which should be determined by the referring physician and therapist. 
Insurance companies, especially Anthem BCBS, have been making it harder and harder for therapists to provide 
the care patients need, all the while paying providers LESS. SPTA is an independent locally owned business. 
We are a wonderful company that provides compassionate, high quality care but insurance companies are 
making it harder and harder to survive and serve our community. Please sign this legislation. 
Thank you in advance for your consideration. Please feel free to contact me if you need any further information. 
Respectfully, 
Sara Merrill, MPT 
51 Cottage Farms Rd 
Cape Elizabeth, ME 04107 
smerrill@sca:rbor0ugL1pt.com
1
207 939 4763 
Sara H. Merrill M.P.T. 
Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates 
This communication may contain material protected and governed by the Health insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). This e-mail is only for the personal and conﬁdential use of the individuals to which it 
is addressed and contains confidential information. lfyou are not the intended recipient, you are notified that you have 
received this document in error, and that any reading, distributing, copying or disclosure is unauthorized. If you have 
received this communication in error, please notify Scarborough Physical Therapy Associates, PA immediately by calling 
(207)883-1227 and destroy the message.
2
