 1 April 10, 2023  
Re: Testimony FOR LD 1238  “An Act to Require Reporting on the Percentage of Approved Care 
Being Delivered to Individuals ” 
Chairman Baldacci, Chairwoman Meyer, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am director of the Center for Community 
Inclusion and Disability Studies (CCIDS) at the University of Maine.  
I am also the parent of two 22 -year -olds, one of whom has autism and who has experie nced 
significant unmet needs of the sort that LD 1238 would require the Department to track and 
report about. Because this personal experience is so central to this bill  and to the 
recommendation I have to make on this bill , I have chosen to testify in my personal capacity —
though in my professional as well as personal capacity I strongly support robust data collection, 
because without robust data collection, the Legislature and the Department are unable to make 
data -based decisions.  
I understand that DHHS, through the directors of MaineCare Services and the Office of 
Behavioral Health, have expressed concerns about the specific reporting requirements in LD 
1238.  
Some reporting requirements already exist in unallocated language at PL 2021 c. 398 Sec. 
AAAA -7 (unallocated language about tracking unmet needs specifically due to workforce 
shortages , vacancies, and unfilled beds specifically due to workforce shortages  in LD 221 —the 
130th Legislature’s biennial budget bill ). 
I understand that t he Department also notes that the Essential Support Workforce Advisory 
Committee is also developing metrics about workforce. (The Department notes that that 
comm ittee reported at its March meeting on several measures in progress, though the most 
recent report from that committee that I found online is the February 2023 report about its 
December 2022 meeting .) 
But notwithstanding all this effort, key data is still missing. Missing data that hides from the 
Department and the Legislature how many people are experiencing the kind of unmet needs 
that my own son experienced —even when  he wasn’t on the Section 21 waitlist.  
The second annual report required by Sec. AAAA -7 was delivered in Feb ruary 2023. It details 
many workforce -related activities . But it does not include any data on unmet needs among 
people who should be receiving Home and Community Based Services (HCBS —MaineCare 
Sections 21, 29, 18, 20, and 19).  
I understand t he Department also questions how the legislation intends to define “approved 
care”. With that in mind, I note that existing statute at 34-B MRS §5003 -A(6)(B)(1) requires 
reporting on “unmet needs” in Sections 21 and 29 without defining what that means.  
To address these issues, I suggest that LD 1238 be amended thusly to refine the required 
statutory unmet need reporting about  the HCBS waivers:  
 2 34-B MRS A §5003 -A sub-§2 ¶I is enacted to read:  
I. Post quarterly reports on the department’s publicly accessible website, for each home 
and community -based services waiver from the United States Department of Health and 
Human Services, Centers fo r Medicare and Medicaid Services in which the State 
participates, data , broken down by each of the procedure codes that directly pertain to 
home support, shared living, work support, community support, career planning, 
employment specialist services, assis tive technology assessment, consultative services, 
counseling, occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, attendant care 
services, personal care services, respite care services, home health aide, medical social 
services, nursing, skilled nursi ng, community/work reintegration, self -care/home 
management reintegration, work ordered day club house, and non -traditional 
communication consultation, on the following metrics:  
(1) The number of aggregate hours appearing on Person -Centered Service Plans , 
(2) T he number of aggregate hours appearing on Person -Centered Service Plans  
that were actually delivered , 
(3) T he number of waiver recipients , by quarter,  whose Person -Centered Service 
Plan calls for the specific service, and  
(4) T he number of waiver recipients , by quarter,  who actually received less than 
80% of the units on their Person -Centered Service Plan for the specific service . 
 
