M a i n e C e n lje r for 1 W...”23‘ii2?.;£2.i?: 23; 
I ‘I Augusta, lvlE 04332 
1 Economic Policy 2°i"§§§J3.iL 
Testimony on LD 208, “An Act Concerning Home Care Services," and LD 1 238, “An Act 
to Require Reporting on the Percentage of Approved Care Being Delivered to 
lndividuals" 
April 10,2023 
Arthur Phillips, Economic Policy Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Policy 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee 
on Health and Human Services. My name is Arthur Phillips, and lam an analyst at the 
Maine Center for Economic Policy.- 
As we all know, there is a chronic under-supply of direct care workers to provide supports 
and services to older Mainers and people with disabilities. lam here to voice support for LD 
208 and LD 1238, both of which would improve our assessment of the challenges Mainers 
face accessing the care they need, and would inform what steps we must take to address 
these challenges. 
We believe low pay and low reimbursement rates are the fundamental sources of our 
chronic shortage of direct care. The impact of unden/aluing care work is, of course, felt 
most directly by care workers themselves and the people they serve; however, it effects our 
economy in myriad ways, as the task ofjuggling work and care responsibilities pulls people 
out of the labor force. These broader employment impacts harm families, workers, 
employers, the health care sector, the State's revenue base, and our overall economic 
prosperity. We at the Maine Center for Economic Policy will release a report this month 
that illustrates the enormous costs to our state of unden/aluing this work. 
Improving the information and data available for assessing the direct care shortage is 
critical for being able to solve it. The Department of Health and Human sen/ices ’ annual 
progress report on implementation of recommendations from the 2019 workforce 
commission, otherwise known as the AAAA report, provides some helpful information; 
however, the report is only provided once each year and is not detailed enough to 
accurately portray our state's needs. Making sure there is comprehensive data on waiting 
lists and the extent of approved care which Mainers are not receiving will improve our 
collective ability to adequately resolve the challenges we face. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
M f I ~ f 
Board of Directorsf i M’ M I f f 
I In f 
Barbara Burt, Chair’ Sandra Butler M/W f f ’ 
Stacy Mitchell M“ 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair l\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica lvlaurer
