0
. 
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of 
tag the Mame C0llI1Cll on Aging to the Committee on 
' 
Health and Human Services .....¢ .=—W _ ‘\
I 
Al 
fA
, 
p I 
In Favor of LD 1238 - An Act to Require Reportingi 
. 
I on the Percentage of Approved Care Being Delivered 
H I 
to Individuals and 
A B l N B It LD 208 - An Act Concerning Home Care Services 
4.i 
1‘ 
Submitted on April 10, 2023 
yggnjg... .
, 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. 
My name is Jena Jones, and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LDs 1238 and 208, but I will speak generally to 
LD 1238. 
For nearly a decade, legislators have struggled to ﬁnd solutions to Maine’s severe and pervasive 
essential support and care workforce shortage. You have created commissions, raised wages, 
established COLAs, reduced waitlists, and created a marketing campaign. The Departments of 
Health & Human Services (DHHS) and Labor have done so much to grow this workforce, from 
training, to job fairs, to sign-on and retention bonuses. Because of these efforts, Maine has just 
ranked 4"‘ in the nation in PHI’s Direct Care Workforce State Index. 
It’s clear we’ve made real progress in valuing this workforce, however, as DHHS says ina 
February 2023 report on the Commission to Study Long-term Care Workforce Issues, Second 
Annual Report Pursuant I0 PL 202]. c. 398. -Section AAAA- 7, all of these efforts have only 
stabilized this workforce. The report shows that 772 older people who are entitled Section 19 
waiver home care services (33%) — mostly women, all nursing home eligible, are receiving no 
care or only partial care because of the workforce shortage. It shows that 407 older people aren’t 
getting the home care they need under Section 63 (53%). While we don’t know where these 
people reside, we do know there are “care deserts” in Maine, areas where there are no workers 
available to provide services. 
One of Maine’s care coordination agencies has reported that each week about 15,000 hours of 
care go undelivered in Section 19 and Section 63. This is only one of several care coordination 
agencies. This information is reported by these agencies to the Department. Thus, it is not 
umeasonable to ask the Department to report all unstaffed hours for these MaineCare sections, 
and all other sections that rely on essential support and care workers to deliver care.
These programs provide assistance with instrumental/activities of daily living such as help with 
bathing and dressing, getting the dishes washed or taking out the trash and the consequences of 
not having access to them are severe. In addition to increasing the probability of older adults 
having to enter a facility for care and support when they cannot ﬁnd help at home, older Mainers 
are now facing increased rates of eviction because of this workforce crisis to the extent that 
people 65 years and older represent the fastest growing homeless population. ‘ 
We are at a critical point in trying to solve this workforce shortage. We will need to invest more 
resources to grow and sustain a larger essential support and care Workforce. However, we don’t 
know how many workers we need to attract to these jobs, nor what we’ll need to pay them to 
compete with other industries. Without understanding the scope of the problem and the places 
where the problems are most acute, we will not know how much money to allocate to the 
problem nor how to target those funds. More importantly, we cannot measure whether any 
actions we’re taking are having an impact on the overall problem. 
We can collectively agree that this is a challenge that must be resolved but how can we craft 
additional solutions when we lack the data to fully understand the scope of this issue or track the 
success of implemented actions? The intent of LD l238 is to drill down on undelivered approved 
hours for essential support services in both MaineCare and state funded programs, and to study 
how staffing shortages impact occupancy levels in facilities. If we cannot ﬁx the home and 
community-based workforce shortage, the people needing care will need to move into facilities 
for care, only we have too many unoccupied beds in facilities that cannot be ﬁlled due to low 
stafﬁng. Thus, we must also know how many workers are needed to operate facilities at full 
capacity. 
The model for geographically presenting this data already exists in the Children ’s Behavioral 
Health Data Dashboardz which can and should be replicated for all Mainers receiving essential 
care and support services across all MaineCare and state funded programs. As suggested in LD 
208, which the Maine Council on Aging ardently supports, applying the data to a visual 
presentation that will allow for geographic representation and more breakdown on those who are 
approved for care but are only receiving partial services will allow for a broader understanding 
of gaps in services and where to apply efforts on course correction. 
Without doubt there is great work being done across the state to ensure that all Mainers who need 
care receive it where and when it is needed. However, the changes needed will not manifest until 
we can comprehensively report on who needs care but isn’t getting it to understand the real scope 
of the deﬁcit. The intent of this bill is to supply the critical information necessary to develop 
urgent solutions to a challenge that Mainers have faced for far too long. We urge you to support 
LD 1238. 
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions. 
Jena Jones 
1(Kushe|, 2020) 
2 https:[/www.maine.gov/dhhs/ocfs/data-reports-initia ﬁves/childrens-behavioraI-health
