  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laurie Belden, a resident 
of Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of 
Maine (Alliance).  The Alliance is a network of home health care, hospice , home 
care and personal care providers across our State delivering in -home care to older 
adults and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to stay in their home 
and community.  
 
I’m here today to testify in support of LD 1238, An Act to Require R eporting on 
the Percentage of Approved Care Being Delivered to Individuals. Thank you to 
Rep. Cluchey for bringing the bill forward.  
 
LD 1238 has a similar goal to LD 208, which the Alliance also supports. Both bills 
call for regular reporting by the department to the public, in greater detail than 
what is currently done, regarding the amount of care people are receiving within 
certain MaineCare programs. We understand the constraints that are impacting 
care – primarily workforce shortages and low reim bursement rates for services.  
 
Neither of these bills serves as a solution to those problems.  However, what these 
bills attempt to do is to gather and share the information needed to better 
understand the scope of the problem, so that we may move in the di rection of 
adequate solutions.  
 
If the committee sees the merits of these two bills, we might suggest that they be 
combined, given their similar aim. The Alliance would be happy to work with the 
bill sponsors on a combined amendment.  
 
Thank you.  
 
Laurie Be lden  
Executive Director  
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
 Board of Directors  
 
President  
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President  
Daryl Cady  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Treasurer  
RJ Gagnon  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Secretary  
Laurie Bourgoin  
Home Hope & Healing  
 
 
Members  
Ken Albert  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Patricia Aprile  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Kyra Chamberlain  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Elaine Collins  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Chris Costello  
CHANS Home Health& Hospice  
 
Zetta Fogg  
McKesson Medical -Surgical  
 
Lisa Harvey -McPherson  
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice  
 
Adam LaMonica  
Maxim Healthcare Services  
 
Amy McVety  
Mount Desert Nursing Association  
 
Greg Pizzo  
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice  
 
Amy Shawley  
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice  
 Testimony in Support of  
LD 1238, An Act to Require Reporting on the Percentage of Approved 
Care Being Delivered to Individuals  
April 10, 2023  
 
 
