Lisa Wesel
Bowdoinham
LD 1238
Rep. Meyer, Sen. Baldacci and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services. 
My name is Lisa Wesel. I live in Bowdoinham with my husband and our 26-year-old 
daughter, Lidia. Lidia was born with a rare genetic condition called Dup15q, which 
causes intellectual disabilities and epilepsy. She receives services under Sec. 29 and is
on the waitlist for Sec. 21, which she will never receive. I also serve on the Lifespan 
Waiver Stakeholder Committee.
I am here to urge you to pass LD 1238, An Act to Require Reporting on the 
Percentage of Approved Care Being Delivered to Individuals.
Honestly, it’s inconceivable to me that this bill is even necessary. It’s like passing a 
bill requiring the DHHS to do its job. The DHHS spends millions of dollars 
supporting thousands of Mainers with disabilities. How is that they don’t already 
track how well they’re doing? 
There are some things we do know: We know that there are more than 2,000 Mainers 
with IDD on waitlists, struggling with less support than the state has determined they 
need. My daughter has been on the waitlist for six years. Some have been for more 
than a decade. Those waitlists are proof that our system of care is failing. I never 
thought I’d have a positive thing to say about the waitlists, but the one thing they do is
provide a data point – tangible evidence of the extent to which the state is falling short
of its obligation to care for people with IDD.
But the waitlists don’t tell the whole story, and LD 1238 will. Waitlists don’t tell the 
story of families who are not counted – those are the people who are technically off 
the waitlist. They have been approved for services but for whatever reason, they are 
not receiving them, or are receiving only a fraction of what they need to live full, safe,
and dignified lives. The stories they tell are heartbreaking, but they are invisible to the
state. Their numbers are not counted, and I fear they may fall even further into the 
shadows under the new Lifespan Waiver.
As you all know, the Lifespan Waiver will create a seamless system of care – no 
jumping from Sec. 29 to Sec. 21. That holds great promise for providing consistent 
support over the course of a person’s life. There would be no waitlisting of people as 
they move from one stage of life to another. But it’s critical that the state constantly 
monitor whether the system is working as intended – are people getting the level of 
service they qualify for? Is it enough? That is something that, for reasons I do not 
understand, the state doesn’t do now. People who are inadequately served under the 
Lifespan Waiver will become invisible. The state won’t track them, and we will have 
to rely, as we do now, solely on the desperate stories told by individual families.
Please pass LD 1238 to require the state to collect real data to track how well it is 
living up to its obligations to support Mainers with IDD.
Thank you.

