  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 10,  2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1238  – An Act to Require Reporting on the Percentage of Approved Care Being 
Delivered to Individuals  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information for your consideration related to  LD 1238  – An Act to 
Require Reporting on the Percentage of Approved Care  Being Delivered to Individuals . 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to co llect and publish data 
on a quarterly basis relating to care services provided by an essential support worker that 
have been authorized for reimbursement or direct payment under the MaineCare program, 
a federal waiver , or another state program.  
 
The Depart ment is certainly not opposed further exploring how we can improve our data – 
and much of that work is ongoing. Similarly, we can and do provi de data to the legislature , 
but the staffing efforts and systems work needed to comply with this bill are daunting and 
significant.  We also lack clarity on  exactly what is expected.  
 
Section 1A talks about “approved care” without defining it.  This could include a mix of 
services within a variety of offices and units. For example, a gency home supports are 
appro ved for a certain number of hours per week  while other  services are per diem or per 
15-minute. Requiring  a single , combined metric across all relevant services  would not be 
good practice.  
 
Section 3A of this bill would appear to require the Department to k now the volume of 
services “received ” (paid?) and report it as a ratio of the volume of service that were 
approved through a prior authorization process.  If this assumption is accurate, data would 
need to be pulled from four different offices: MaineCare, O ffice of Aging and Disability 
Services, Office of Child and Family Services, and Office of Behavioral Health.  Data 
collection of this magnitude would require  pulling, assembling, and cross -referencing 
claims from many different systems.  This would require significant staff effort in each 
office and a vendor to develop a  system for integrating information  across multiple existing 
systems.  It would likely also  require providers to submit additional data to the department , 
increasing their reporting burden.  
DocuSign Envelope ID: E3BE7024-67DE-428C-8845-8A36E9B30FEC
 
 Section 3B duplicates some of the reporting require ments  in P.L. 2021, ch 398, Sec. 
AAAA -7: 
 
Sec. AAAA -7. Annual reports for 5 years. No later than February 1st of each 
year from 2022 to 2026, the Department of Health and Human Services shall 
provide annua l reports to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
having jurisdiction over health and human services matters on the 
department's efforts and progress in implementing the recommendations of 
the Commission To Study Long -term Care Workforce Issues established by 
Public Law 2019, chapter 343, Part BBBBB, section 1. Annual reports must 
include available data related to unstaffed hours due to staffing shortages, 
vacancies for essential support workers and unfilled beds in residential care 
facilities an d nursing facilities due to staffing shortages. The department 
must include in its reports the efforts of the department to include 
stakeholders in relevant policy discussions related to commission 
recommendations. The joint standing committee of the Legis lature having 
jurisdiction over health and human services matters is authorized to report 
out legislation related to each annual report received to the legislative 
session in which the report was received.  
 
The bi ll as a whole also may conflict with or usu rp the role of the Essential Support 
Workforce Advisory Committee, established last session in P.L. 202 1, Ch. 688.  That group 
is tasked with looking at data and research related to the supply of essential workers and is 
well-positioned to work with the Department on improving available data over time.  At 
its most recent meeting in March, the Department reported on several measures in progress  
regarding access to direct care and support services.  
 
Section  3C is not clear if the requirement is limited to Department -maintained waitlists. I f 
the intent is to collect and report data on pr ovider -maintained waitlists  the effort required 
grows even fur ther and as noted above, would impose additional reporting burdens on 
providers . 
 
If this bill were to pass, reporting by March 1, 2024 is not attainable given the complexities 
and time required to comply with the bill.  
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert       Sarah Squirrell  
Director        Director  
MaineCare Services       Office of Behavioral Health  
DocuSign Envelope ID: E3BE7024-67DE-428C-8845-8A36E9B30FEC

