5, HQUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
ﬁe (207) 287-1400 
l 
Sally Cluchey TTY. MAINE RELAY "ill 
15 Brickyard Way 
Bowdoinlram, ME 04008 
Phone: (207) 814-8879 
SaiEr..Q1n§h@»:£eai1§Eisl.at\rr@-mairreasn; 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Sally Cluchey presenting in support of 
LD 1238, An Act to Require Reporting on the Percentage of Approved Care Being Delivered to 
Individuals 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Sally Cluchey and I represent House District 52, which 
includes the residents of Bowdoin, Bowdoinham, and Richmond. 
I am here today to present LD 1238. 
Home and cormnunity-based care in Maine is in a state of crisis. We do not have enough caregivers (i.e., 
essential support workers) to keep people living and aging safely at home, and we do not have enough 
caregivers working in our residential facilities. As a result, many Mairrers are going without necessary 
care, or receiving less than they require. 
Although HHS and the legislature have been working to address the Workforce shortage, we are missing 
key baseline data that will allow us to target the state's policies to the regions of the state that are most in 
need of additional workers. Currently, we do not know how many caregivers we need to solve the 
problem, and we don’t know where those caregivers are needed. This bill is designed to help the state 
get that data. 
We know that this data exists. I learned about this when I was caring for my mother. When she 
qualiﬁed for long-term managed care, a maximus assessment was performed. This is a functional needs 
assessment that Medicaid uses to identify necessary long-term services and supports, and it measured 
her ability to perfomr tasks related to daily living. The assessment said that she required 68 hours of care 
per week to accomplish things like eating, bathing, dressing, and toileting. 
Because the area in which my mother lived didn’t have home care agencies, I opted to manage her care 
through a consumer-directed program. This meant that I found, interviewed, hired, and managed her 
caregivers, and the caregivers were paid through a ﬁnancial intermediary that was reimbursed by 
Medicaid. Each week, when I logged in to approve timecards, I could see how many hours of care my 
mother received. Because of staffmg challenges, I saw that she routinely received fewer hours of care 
than what the assessment said she required. I could see the gap in care she was experiencing every week. 
District 52: Bowdoirrham, Richmond and Bowdoin (part)
That gap in care number is at the root of so many Mainers’ struggles. As I spoke to residents at their 
doors this fall, I realized just how common my story is. People all around the state are struggling to get 
the care they need, whether it is care for those who are aging, for those with physical and intellectual 
disabilities, or for those with behavioral health challenges. 
Understanding and tracking Maine’s home and community-based care gap is essential if we are 
going to stand a chance of closing it. Data currently tracked by the state does not consistently break 
down unmet need and approved hours, and it does not track differences across regions. By measuring 
the care gap as LD 1238 proposes, We’1l be able to say that, for example, patients in Washington County 
have an average care gap ofX hours per week. Equipped with that data, the state can then design 
speciﬁc incentives and approaches to increase the number of caregivers in that part of the state. 
I believe this bill would be a critical ﬁrst step to tackling the home and community-based care crisis in 
Maine. I am happy to try and answer any questions, and if there are questions I cannot answer I will 
Work with the Council on Aging and stakeholders from the IDD and behavioral health community to 
provide answers at the Work session. 
I hope that after the hearing and the work session, you’ll agree that we ought to pass LD 1238. Thank 
you for your time this afternoon. 
District 52: Bowdoinham, Richmond and Bowdoin (part)
