STATE or Mrxmt; 
‘ﬁg DEPAR'l‘MEN'l‘ or ADMlNlSTRA ‘l‘IVE & Fmnucmt SERVIUES 
Mg, BURTON M. CROSS BUILDING. 3RD FLOOR 
78 STATE HOUSE STATION 
‘ll Auousm, MAINE 04333-0078 v.. -4:» 
"*§§~'<' ‘l 
_SERVlNG THE PUBLIC AND DELIVERING ESSENTIAL SERVICES TO STATBGOVERNMENT , 
JANET T. MILLS KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONFR 
Testimony of Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
Department of Administrative and Financial Sen/ices 
testifying neither for nor against 
LD 735, An Act to Require the State to Hold a Public Hearing in a Municipality Before the 
State Constructs a Solar Project in That Municipality 
Sponsored by Sen. Pouliot 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Government, I am Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
for the Department of Administrative and Financial Sen/ices. I am providing testimony Neither 
for Nor Against LD 735. 
DAFS believes that this legislation is unnecessary given that the process by which a municipality 
has local control over the construction of a solar energy project on property owned by the State 
is already codified in Title 5, §1742-B pertaining to Municipal Building Ordinances. 
This section of statute, which applies to all projects undertaken by the Bureau of General 
Services, requires that BGS “provide written notiﬁcation to the municipal manager or, in the 
absence of a manager, the chair of the municipal ofﬁcers of a state construction project or public 
improvement within the boundaries of that municipality as soon as practicable after beginning 
the schematic design process.” 
“If a municipality intends to review and issue building permits on state construction 
projects and public improvements, the municipality must ﬁle a notice of intent with the 
bureau no later than 45 days following receipt of notiﬁcation by the bureau of the state 
construction project or public improvement. Once the required notice is ﬁled, the projects 
and improvements to state-owned or leased buildings must comply with municipal 
ordinances governing the construction and alteration of buildings, as long as the 
municipal building code standards are as stringent as, or more stringent than, the code 
for state buildings. Prior to requesting bids, the bureau shall obtain or it shall require the 
project designer to obtain municipal approval of the project plans and specifications. 
Contractors and subcontractors shall obtain all necessary municipal building permits and 
the project must be subject to municipal inspections. ” 
PHONE: (207)624-7800 www.Maine.g0v FAX: (207) 624-7804
“If a proposed public improvement is for new construction only and is not reviewed bya 
municipality, the state agency responsible for the new construction shall provide public 
notice of the project in the same manner as is required for notice of similar projects by 
ordinance of the municipality.” 
Through the permitting process and zoning ordinances municipalities already have the 
opportunity to impose home rule on state construction projects, and BGS works closely with the 
municipalities in which our construction projects are located to obtain the requisite approval. The 
permitting process is well defined and includes public notice, municipal review, and an appeals 
process. lt is unclear when in the permitting process the public hearing proposed by this bill 
would be layered. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. l am happy to answer any questions. 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 \v\vw.Z\/ ’!aii1e.gov FAX: (207)624 —?804
