ff.’ 
'3w 
\t»,, “E ;-51:‘ ll 
W_ __;_ p. 
_, 
. ‘ ‘Waste ' ' 
_,- 
Matthew G_P0u1iOf- 
- 
THE MAIN E SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 15 I ' 
13-lst Legislature - ' 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
V 
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR MATTHEW POULIOT 
V LD 735 .
. 
“An Act to Require the State to Hold a Public Hearing in a‘ Municipality Before the State 
A 
= ' s 
Constructs a Solar Project infThat Municipality ” '' 
. . u " 
w~
. _Public.Hearing:»March 16,- 2023 ~ 
I -~ 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Govermnent. I am Senator Matt Pouliot and I represent Senate District 15, which 
includes the towns of Augusta, Belgrade, China, Mount Vernon, Sidney and Vassalboro. I am 
here to present LD 735 “An Act to Require the State to Hold a Public Hearing in a Municipality 
Before the State Constructs a Solar Project in That Municipality. ” 
This bill is rather straightforward. It simply requires the State to hold a public hearing ina 
municipality where a solar energy project on property owned by the State is planned to be 
located prior to commencing construction on the project. » ~ 
For some of you, your travel here today involved passing by Maine’s newest highway solar array 
along the exits near Augusta placed by the Maine Department of Transportation over the past 
months. Some would say they are an eyesore; and I agree. However, what they look like is in the 
eye of the beholder, and not the reason why I am here today. As an ardent supporter of pro-solar 
policy, I have worked for nearly a decade now to make solar a more viable option in Maine. I am 
not putting this bill forward to slow down sensible solar development. 
Unfortunately, the issue at hand is a lack of transparency in the process by the Maine Department 
of Transportation. These projects along the highway were done without a public hearing with the 
people of Augusta and complete transparency. If any other landowner in Augusta wanted to put 
in a solar project they would have to hold a public hearing at city hall and, further, be permitted 
to do so. I believe and many of my constituents believe that the State of Maine should have to do 
the exact same thing. 
If the State constructs a building in a town, they have to follow all of the same permitting and 
public hearing rules and laws as a private business. This same principle should extend to projects 
State House: (207) 287-1505 * Fax: (207) 287-I527 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Matt.P0uIi0f@Iegislarz1re.maine.g0v * Web Sire: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
along the highways when installing solar arrays. The State should want to be a good neighbor 
and not want to force something that may not be wanted by local residents who have to live with 
the project daily. After hearing outrage from the community last year when these projects 
commenced, I spoke with Commissioner Van Note about these concerns and I was told no such 
public hearing was necessary because the solar arrays are on the federal highway right of way.I 
hope we can all agree that people should have the right to know what is going on in their 
community and have a chance to weigh in. The idea that the perceived public beneﬁt and A 
placement in a federal right of way should allow the Government to forgo this process does not 
seem to be the best approach for all involved. 
In closing, I would encourage this committee to support this common sense legislation. 
Thank you and I am happy to answer your questions.
