Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 735- An Act to Require the State to Hold a Public Hearing in a Municipality Before the State 
Constructs a Solar Project in That Municipality
March 16, 2023
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in support for LD 735, An Act 
to Require the State to Hold a Public Hearing in a Municipality Before the State Constructs a Solar 
Project in That Municipality on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests 
of municipal government before the Legislature. 
Where state projects have the potential to drastically change the view or character of a large area 
within a municipality, the concerns about those changes are fielded by municipal officials who have little 
ability to explain the rational or big picture goals of the department. Because those residents are also 
contributors to state operations, it behooves the state to be transparent and consult with them regardless of 
a procedural need to do so. 
Officials understand that there is no state requirement to comply with local zoning or site 
development standards for projects in the state’s right of way, however, there seems to be a disconnect for 
when the state deems such consultation as necessary, as evidenced by two different approaches to two 
solar projects in Augusta.  It was clear that the project that respected the local process was improved by 
the review process in the Bond Brook Recreation Area in 2021. In 2022, the option was not undertaken, 
and city officials have taken the brunt of the public complaints over a lack of consultation. 
No one is arguing that saving the taxpayers money on state consumption of power is an 
appropriate public policy. As the state has removed millions of dollars in property tax revenue from the 
capital city coffers by its extensively owned property, officials believe the least it can do is pay the 
residents of the community the respect of a public hearing to share federal best practices and state 
ambitions. A lack of public consultation damages faith in municipal government as much as it does state 
operations over which they have no control.
Officials as that you vote ought to pass on LD 735.  While as challenging as public consultation 
is, it remains the right thing to do and ultimately will save time in the long run by preventing wide spread 
public ire and shows respect for the time of the municipal officials who are forced to manage it.  
