Roberta Manter
Fayette
LD 735
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, Members of the State and Local Government 
Committee,
My name is Roberta Manter and I live in Fayette.  I am asking that you vote in favor of LD 
735. 
My husband has lived off grid for the past 50 years, and I joined him 40 years ago.  
Our daughter and her family now also live off grid.  We get our power from a solar 
array that takes up half of the sunny side of our roof, a bank of huge batteries, and a 
generator, so I have some knowledge of solar power.
In the winter we run the generator for several hours every evening, and often most of 
the day if it's cloudy.  After it snows we go out with a roof rake and clean the panels 
off so as not to waste sunny hours waiting for it to melt and slide off. In the summer 
we run the generator almost every evening, plus cloudy days or if we're doing a 
laundry. If we wanted to eliminate the need for the generator we would have to cut 
down a bunch more trees to get enough sun, and we'd have to double our number of 
panels and batteries - and that's just for summer use, and without an electric car.
Maine calls itself "Vacationland," and for good reason.  We depend heavily on the 
tourists who come to our state to enjoy our pristine mountains, lakes, and forests, and 
picturesque farmland.  Many towns have ordinances prohibiting things that make the 
town less attractive, such as junkyards, which might make their town less appealing 
for our guests.  
So I was shocked last fall, when I headed out of Augusta on Route 3 to go to 
Common Ground Fair, to see acres and acres of solar panels.  And that was before the
solar array went in at the junction of Rt 95 and Western Avenue.  And now I see that 
there are more going in along Rt 95 north of there.  Is this any way to greet our 
out-of-state visitors?
What will be the environmental impact of cutting down all the carbon-sequestering 
trees to make room for the panels and to clear the area in front of them so they can get
maximum sunlight?  What about the loss of land that could be used to grow food?  
We need to avoid being short-sighted, and consider the long term consequences of 
suddenly going whole-hog solar. 
I recently saw a documentary on PBS that spoke of concern over the amount of sea 
ice that is melting in Antarctica.  The light colored ice is important for reflecting heat 
away from the earth.  The sea, on the other hand, is dark, absorbs sunlight, and warms
the earth much more rapidly.  One factor I have not heard anyone consider is how 
much all those black panels are going to absorb heat and warm the planet.  The 
Antarctic doesn't get as much sun as we do at our latitude. Our daughter lives on a 
road that is part paved and part gravel, and she finds there is a noticeable difference in
the air temperature when you cross from one section to the other.  If a blackish road 
raises the temperature that much, what will all these solid black solar panels do? 
There is also the question, with that much acreage covered by solar panels, of how 
much toxic substances are leaching into the soil.  From there it will enter adjacent 
farmland, and eventually end up in our watershed.  And how will the panels be safely 
disposed of when they have lived out their serviceable life?  Is there a plan for 
removing all the concrete footings for the framework so the soil can return to its 
natural and usable state?  These are all factors which the public and Municipal 
Governments should be able to consider and voice their concerns.  Please vote LD 
735 ought to pass.  Thank you.
