HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
(207) 287-1440
TTY: (207) 287-4469
         Chad R. Perkins
                         POB 251
            Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426
   Residence: (207) 279-0927
         Fax: (207) 305-4907
        Chad.Perkins@legislature.maine.gov
                                                                                                                                  
20 Mar 23
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: LD 369,  An Act to Allow Repurposed Military Vehicles to Be Registered and 
Operated on Maine Roads
Committee Chair Senator Chipman, Committee Chair Representative Williams and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation,
  Thank you for allowing me to testify on LD 369,  An Act to Allow Repurposed Military Vehicles to 
Be Registered and Operated on Maine Roads .
   I was approached last week and asked by a constituent if I was aware of this bill. Imagine my surprise
as I thought it was already legal to register in the State of Maine most vehicles that had been purpose 
built for military use but had been retired from military service, the exception being tracked vehicles 
which I knew were prohibited from being operated on public ways. I was confused because in the past I
had seen a British Ferret scout car that was road legal, registered and privately owned by the director of
the Owl’s Head Transportation Museum; I had seen a variety of Swiss Pinzgauer utility vehicles 
operated in the state, including one that I had driven that was operated by a sporting camp in 
Piscataquis County; and I have seen American made M151 “Jeeps”, M998 HMMWVs, M35 Trucks 
and M977 HEMMTs, all privately owned or operated by municipalities, private search and rescue 
groups and other enterprises, on the road at one point or another.
   The constituent informed me that he had purchased a decommissioned M1070 HET, a vehicle I was 
very familiar with as both a former brigade level Master Driver and as an Abrams Tank Commander. 
The HET, or Heavy Equipment Transporter, is powered by a six cylinder 700 hp C-18 Caterpillar and  
can haul about 70 tons. For a small business owner, obtaining an operational HET from a DRMO 
source to haul forestry or construction equipment, at the fraction of the cost of a comparable civilian 
model truck, is a boon. He was obviously upset that he was no longer allowed to register the vehicle for
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville Township, &
Southeast Piscataquis
LD   369
Page 2
legal operation in the State of Maine and had wasted his precious investment dollars.
   I contacted the sponsor and was told that our legislature had previously banned the 
registration of all vehicles that were originally built for or operated by military forces.
   There are a variety of reasons that one might want to own, operate, and therefore 
register, a vehicle that was formerly used by a military entity. This could be a collector 
who uses a vehicle in a parade or event. While there may be exemptions for “organized 
veteran’s groups”, more often than not such organizations cannot afford to own, maintain
or operate these vehicles and it is individual members who provide historic pieces for 
these parades and functions. It could be for the general utility of the vehicle. In our state, 
there is at least one private, non-profit NGO search and rescue entity that owns 
HMMWVs, for example, and the Pinzgauer has proven to be so adaptable and reliable 
worldwide that it has been used by search and rescue groups, civilian government 
operations, outdoor enthusiasts, missionaries and even package delivery services. And of 
course, there are small business owners of all types that take advantage of repurposed 
military vehicles for a variety of reasons, from hauling heavy equipment to carrying 
water.
   I served as both a Master Driver for the Second Brigade of the Second Armored 
Division and the Non-Commissioned Officer In Charge of Driver Training for the 66th 
Armor Regiment after completing the US Army’s Master Driver Certification Course.  I 
can tell you that the vehicles in question are built to a rugged standard and every wheeled
vehicle in the Table of Organization and Equipment I trained drivers on were constructed 
to operated in regular traffic and on public ways with operational headlights, brake lights,
taillights and signal lights.  
   Based on my experience of contact with people who have owned demilitarized 
vehicles, owners tend to be collectors who are veterans; veterans who have been formerly
trained on those vehicles and have hundreds or thousands of operational hours driving 
them.  This presents a higher standard of safety then a municipal operator who has 
attended a 3 hour EVOC course followed by a road test and then operates that same 
vehicle only a dozen hours per year, at emergency speeds and under stress conditions, in 
the same vehicles but which are exempt from the current registration ban.
   Any additional argument on the lack of safety equipment is moot when you consider 
that the state still allows the registration of other vehicle (among them antiques, 
autocycles, horseless carriages, motorcycles, reconstructed vehicles and street rods) that 
lack many of the modern safety features of new vehicles.
   I would offer three amendments to the proposed bill though. Under the definitions 
section of  “Demilitarized vehicle” in  §101, sub-§20-A, I would include language  
similar to “any vehicle originally designed or built for military service from any country 
of origin” if foreign built vehicles are currently banned from registration. I would also 
remove section §458-C-A-3 to allow an owner/registrant to transfer the vehicle and allow
subsequent owners to register the vehicle, since I read the current language to say that the
vehicle can only be registered if there is a certificate of transfer from the government to 
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
the current registrant. Finally, I would also like to see section §458-C-A-6 changed or 
removed, as just the M1070 HET tractor weighs in at 41,000lbs and a HEMMT is 
42,000lbs.
   
   I encourage the committee to consider this legislation and support it with a vote of 
‘Ought To Pass’ with these amendments. I thank you for your time and will gladly 
answer any questions to my ability.
Respectfully,
Rep. Chad R. Perkins
District 31
ATT:
CF:
Committee Chair Senator Chipman
Committee Chair Representative Williams
Transportation Committee Members
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis

