. 2, ,r§"\.' 
g -_: _.
. 
%‘ °‘ 
James Libby, Ph.D. THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 22 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator James D. Libby 
Sponsor of L.D. 369, “An Act to Allow Repurposed Military Vehicles to Be Registered and 
Operated on Maine Roads” 
Public Hearing, Tuesday, March 20, 2023 
Cross Building, Room 220 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Transportation, 
My name is Jim Libby, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District # 22, comprised of the 
towns of Naples, Sebago, Baldwin, and Standish in Cumberland County; Hiram and Porter in Oxford 
County; and, Limington, Limerick, Cornish, Parsonsﬁeld, Newﬁeld, Acton, and Shapleigh, in the 
County of York. 
It is my honor to bring to your attention the contents of 369, “An Act to Allow Repurposed Military 
Vehicles to Be Registered and Operated on Maine Roads.” 
Committee members, I'd like to begin by discussing the purpose for bringing you a bill of this nature. 
This year, many of my constituents and yours were shocked to learn that they could not re-register 
their vehicles that were formerly military vehicles. This outcome appears to have come from 
legislation that passed in the previous legislature. 
I have taken the time to travel parts of the state to learn more about these vehicles. Believe it or not,I 
have found great joy and been in awe with the hundreds of ways that former military vehicles are being 
used by private citizens for both personal and public purposes. Special thanks go to Sam Gilpatrick, 
Captain of the Cornish Fire Department, who has spent hundreds of hours putting together testimony, 
information packets, and coordinating people from across the state who own military vehicles. I hope 
that you have read his testimony and that you come to understand the importance of these vehicles. 
Some of the work of the Secretary of State’s Office has been excellent as Well. I have been privileged 
to speak to Secretary Bellows at length, and to other staff members. They have provided time and 
information. They have been extremely responsive. But sometimes people simply disagree. 
After all the research that I have done, I ﬁnd it terrible that the state would nullify the property of 
hundreds of Maine citizens in the name of public safety, when in fact, these vehicles are safely 
operated on Maine roads and have been used in recovery efforts far and wide. 
The best way is to provide this committee information is to offer some excerpts from citizen’s feedback 
from around the state. I will focus on just three out of many, for the sake of time.
First, Daryl Fraser provides a great deal of technical detail in this note: 
Good aftemoon, 
My name is Daryl Fraser. I am a lifelong resident of Maine and Damariscotta. I have spent the 
last 26 years of my life in the automotive repair industry and am currently an ASE Master 
Technician and have held a Maine State Inspection License for the majority of those years. I am 
also a military vehicle owner and enthusiast. 
I am writing in regards to the registration and operation of retired military vehicles in civilian 
and municipal ownership in the State of Maine. Retired military vehicles have played an 
important role in private, commercial and municipal use largely beginning in the post war period 
when the U.S. Military unloaded tens of thousands of vehicles into the civilian market. There, 
they found a steady stream of buyers due to their affordability, capabilities and records of 
reliability. These facts have not changed. Military vehicles are still revered for their value and 
robust nature. 
Their commercial applications are endless as their all-terrain capabilities and heavy duty 
components lend themselves to a wide variety of tasks. They have been used in construction, 
recovery, tourism, agriculture, energy and more. These vehicles have allowed businesses, large 
and small, affordable and more often than not, superior, alternatives to commercial equipment 
for decades. 
And one must not forget their contribution to municipalities, large and small. Military vehicles 
have been and continue to be employed successfully in Fire Departments and EMA services not 
only in the State of Maine, but nationwide. It is rare to ﬁnd a ﬁre department in Maine that has 
not had a military vehicle in its stables. Their capabilities lend themselves to off road and high 
water rescue operations with ease. This is what they were built for. 
Much of the debate around civilian ownership and operation of military vehicles revolves 
around their safety and relationship to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. VVhile it is true 
that the Department of Defense is exempt from these standards, it does not mean that they do 
not adhere to them. Below is a quote taken from MIL STD ll8OB, Safety Standards For Military 
Ground Vehicles: 
“Although vehicles and equipment manufactured for, and sold directly to, the Armed Forces of 
the United States in conformity with contractual specifications are speciﬁcally exempted from 
the 
provisions of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (F MVSS), it is the established policy 
of 
the Army to comply with the intent of those standards as long as compliance does not degrade 
essential military characteristics. With the same limitation, compliance with applicable 
provisions 
of (Federal) Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (MCSR) is an Army requirement. 
This military standard provides guidance to assure proper safety characteristics associated with 
F MVSS are designed into military vehicles in a consistent manner. In establishing this standard, 
full consideration has given to the following constraint listed in order of precedence. 
(a) Military mission requirements. 
(b) Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and Motor Carrier Safety Regulations. 
(c) Requirements of friendly nations within whose borders US vehicles are operated by DoD 
personnel. ” 
Further reading of MIL STD 1180B will reveal that much of the safety standards developed 
and used by our military are based off and parallel F MVSS standards. 
Military vehicle owners and operators will attest to their “over built” nature. Robust braking 
systems, severe duty steering and suspension components and heavy duty electrical and 
lighting designed for tactical duty translate into vehicles that can serve, in their civilian roles, 
safely and reliably for decades. 
EPA standards also come up for discussion when considering “on road” use of military 
vehicles. While it is true that US Military vehicles are exempt from US EPA standards this isa
case of much debate. In order to streamline logistics, our US Military sources driveline 
components from numerous civilian contractors such as International, Navistar, Cummins, 
Detroit, Caterpillar, Allison, Continental, Teledyne, Rockwell and General Motors. The engines 
and driveline components found in civilian owned military vehicles are very often the same 
components found in civilian commercial vehicles that carry EPA certiﬁcations. 
MRSA Title 29(A) states “Off-road vehicles may not be registered in accordance with this Title. 
Vehicles owned and operated by government entities are not subject to the provisions of this 
section. ” This title is referenced to refuse or revoke registration of civilian owned military 
vehicles. However, military vehicles that are released to civilian ownership are most often 
accompanied by an SF97 Certiﬁcate T o Obtain Title. If the intent is for off road use only, these 
will be explicitly marked with “For Off Road Use Only” The intent of a normal, unmarked SF97 is 
for the holder to obtain a proper title with which to register and operate the vehicle.’ 
An often-overlooked area of repurposed military vehicles is their economic impact. Besides 
their affordability, there is a considerable network of parts and service dealers nationwide. 
These vendors, large and small, rely on the continued use of military vehicles post mission for 
their livelihoods. Some of these vendors have been servicing this industry since the immediate 
post War period. They distribute the multitude of surplus parts produced for the military for these 
vehicles. This group also includes vendors who have found their niche in producing decals, 
canvas items, wiring and hard to ﬁnd reproduction parts. These are small businesses that rely 
solely on the availability and continued use of surplus military vehicles. 
On a more subjective note, I would like to comment on the “hobby” of military vehicle 
ownership. This is a hobby with a considerable following not just in Maine but Worldwide. Those 
of us who own military vehicles, whether it be for personal use or commercial ventures, often 
consider ourselves stewards of history. These vehicles have served the men and women of our 
military faithfully and we take our role in their retirement seriously. It is truly a labor of love. We 
spend countless hours and untold dollars in their maintenance and upkeep to make sure that 
their usefulness continues post mission. These vehicles are a tangible representation of the 
best in American engineering, design, manufacturing and logistics and many of us feel it is our 
duty to faithfully ensure their continued use. Their presence in parades, car shows, 
touch-a—truck events and grocery store parking lots are almost always met with smiles, waves 
and positive comments and interests. The most rewarding moments for us as owners come 
from interactions with veterans and active duty service members. These meetings fuel our 
desire to continue to collect and operate these “living history” exhibits. To simplify, it isa 
rewarding hobby that is beneﬁcial to many. 
I submit this letter in support of LD369 and in the hopes that you will consider my arguments 
and support the continued use of surplus military vehicles in civilian ownership in Maine. Thank 
you. 
Respectfully, 
Daryl Fraser 
Damariscotta, ME 
Stephen A McLean provides more evidence: 
I am a licensed used car and truck dealer, and equipment dealer. Also, a Truck and Equipment 
Museum owner, as well as a 40+ year volunteer ﬁre department member. There is no reason that 
repurposed military vehicles should not be able to be titled or registered for “on road” use. These 
vehicles meet or exceed the federal standard for highway safety as well as EPA standards when using 
on road diesel fuel. The braking system on these vehicles is double what the common commercial 
truck on the road uses. The statement that these military vehicles are unsafe for the roads is ludicrous 
The State of Maine goes onto say that municipalities are except makes no sense either. If they are 
unsafe (which they are not) to be on the road, how can they be safe in emergency situations by ﬁre& 
police departments who are running to emergency calls at an accelerated speed. 
I have sold many of these vehicles to cities, towns, contractors, farmers, etc... For uses like snow
plowing, sanding, water tanks, wreckers, ramp trucks, dump trucks, etc. From testimony you can see 
these repurposed military vehicles are far safer than the common commercial vehicle traveling on our 
roads. 
I am sending this letter in support of Senator Libby’s Bill. 
S. A. McLean, Inc. 
Tim Cook writes (and this passionate letter really got my attention): 
If ex-military vehicles are NOT allowed to be registered and operated on Maine highways, including 
those OVER l0,000# then the State has just put me OUT OF BUSINESS along with the associated 
revenues. We operate a 1990 M936 Wrecker/ Recovery truck that has been called for (used) by just 
about every Law Enforcement agency in my area. My small company does NOT have 125-250 
THOUSAND dollars to replace this vehicle. Not to mention the myriad of logging companies, Fire 
Depts, rural towns and others who utilize these vehicles. I am VEHEMENTLY opposed to ANY 
legislation, suggestion or verbiage that will NOT allow use of these vehicles in ANY Weight class. 
Anyone who suggests these vehicles are not safe has never been involved with them. ALL were 
meeting the prevailing Federal standards for the time period they were manufactured in. 
[End of example letters] 
I am now going to clear the way for others to testify, but before I do, please understand that there are 
hundreds of people, if not thousands, who have put their lives into maintaining these vehicles. They 
stand to lose a lifetime of investment and pride in workmanship, but more importantly, many of these 
vehicles are lent for public purposes - and this is the way they are treated by the State of Maine. These 
people are being canceled. No consideration, no understanding, and certainly no apology. Your 
Committee is all that stands between cancel culture and letting cooler heads prevail. I certainly hope 
that you will join me in support of L.D. 369.
