March 6, 2023
Dear Members of the Transportation Committee.
I'm in complete support of LD 527,
An Act to Allow
Municipalities to Create Bicy cle and
Pedestrian Z ones with R educed Speed Limits.
I am sorry
that I missed my chance to testify
during the hearing on March 2nd but would like to contribute my ideas to you now.
As a resident of a rural road that is extremely popular for bicycling and walking, my neighbors
and I see the conflict between these healthy and enjoyable activities, and the posted 35 mph
speed limit. As with many roads, there are places with long site lines, limited driveways and
wide shoulders, but there the majority of the roadway is narrow, has blind spots and many
intersecting driveways. Roads should be
posted at
the lowest reasonable speed
, not the
highest.
We have contacted our local law enforcement and been told, “Nothing we can do, it's a State
issue. We can’t request a change unless there are accidents.” LD 527 provides an opportunity
for citizens to work with their municipality to PROACTIVELY make a speed limit change - before
we have a tragic accident!
There is a distinct need for lower speeds to encourage bicycling and walking and a feeling of
safety on our roadways - which are corridors to support MANY types of transportation, not just
automobiles. LD 527 directly supports the vision of Maine’s Active Transportation Plan, it
“Supports and improves people’s quality of life and ability to access jobs, education, businesses,
healthcare, essential services, social/recreational opportunities, and other destinations…”
And as the plan states, “A robust Active Transportation system statewide will support the Maine
Climate Action Plan and the Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020-2029 and enhance
the vibrancy of Maine’s cities, quintessential villages, and rural areas.”
A concern that I have with the proposed language is that it states, “Create a bicycle and
pedestrian zone without conducting a speed study in a downtown…” I hope that the bill extends
beyond downtown to areas where people gravitate for outdoor recreation and less congested
corridors for an enjoyable human powered commute.
Alicia Heyburn
215 Pennellville Road
Brunswick, ME

