March 2, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 527
An Act to Allow Municipalities to Create Bicycle and Pedestrian Zones
with Reduced Speed Limits
Greetings distinguished members of the Committee on Transportation:
My name is Angela King, and I submit this testimony on behalf of the Bicycle Coalition of
Maine (BCM) in support of  LD 527 An Act to Allow Municipalities to Create Bicycle and
Pedestrian Zones with Reduced Speed Limits.
The Bicycle Coalition of Maine is the statewide or ganization that advocates for bicyclists and
pedestrians. We work to make Maine better for bicycling and walking, and to protect the safety
and rights of vulnerable users of the public ways.
The BCM frequently hears complaints from Maine citizens about the threat posed by speeding
traffic on residential roads and downtown streets. These complaints are often driven by
frustration that their town will not reduce the speed limits, but municipalities in Maine have
extremely limited authority to change speed limits. Even spot changes in speed limits on local
roads require a MaineDOT  study . And because the DOT  methodology emphasizes 85th
percentile speeds in setting speed limits, if a study shows that 85th percentile speeds exceed the
posted limit, the posted speed limit may actually be increased.
LD 527 returns to local government and law enforcement the authority to reduce speed limits to
25 mph on certain low speed and low volume roadways without a formal MaineDOT  speed
study .
The roads in these bicycle and pedestrian zones must be low speed to begin with so that posted
reductions to 25mph will not create hazardous speed dif ferentials between drivers. Lowering the
speed limit of a road from 35 to 25 mph is a modest adjustment to an already relatively low
speed context.
The 6000 average annual daily traf fic volume tar get is based upon Federal Highway
Administration (FHW A) recommendations on the types of roads suitable for on-road bicycle
3 8  D i a m o n d  S t r e e t  |  P o r t l a n d ,  M E  0 4 1 0 1 
w w w . b i k e m a i n e . o r g | 2 0 7 - 6 2 3 - 4 5 1 1

facilities without physical separation from traf fic. On roadways with higher volumes or speeds
over 35 mph, FWHA  recommends fully separated facilities.
LD 527 also clarifies that a municipality can install safe traf fic calming measures such as speed
tables, curb extensions, and flex posts, to reinforce the lower speed limits of the bicycle and
pedestrian zones.
It is important to note that LD 527 still requires a municipality to consult with local law
enforcement regarding speeding violations, complaints and safety concerns before creating these
low speed zones.
BCM believes that LD 527 gives municipalities an appropriately limited authority to manage
speeding on their roadways by permitting specific, situational reduction of speed limits in certain
contexts. It will restore a measure of local control to one of a communities’  most important
shared assets: neighborhood streets.
BCM ur ges an Ought to Pass vote on this bill.
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine.
Sincerely ,
Angela King
Advocacy Manager
Bicycle Coalition of Maine
3 8  D i a m o n d  S t r e e t  |  P o r t l a n d ,  M E  0 4 1 0 1 
w w w . b i k e m a i n e . o r g | 2 0 7 - 6 2 3 - 4 5 1 1

