§2‘5 ..t'-£2" 
March 2, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 527' 
An Act to Allow Municipalities to Create Bicycle and Pedestrian Zones 
with Reduced Speed Limits 
Greetings distinguished members of the Committee on T ransportation: 
My name is Angela King, and I submit this testimony on behalf of the Bicycle Coalition of 
Maine (BCM) in support of LD 527 An Act to Allow Municipalities to Create Bicycle and 
Pedestrian Zones with Reduced Speed Limits. 
The Bicycle Coalition of Maine is the statewide organization that advocates for bicyclists and 
pedestrians. We work to make Maine better for bicycling and walking, and to protect the safety 
and rights of vulnerable users of the public ways. 
The BCM frequently hears complaints from Maine citizens about the threat posed by speeding 
traffic on residential roads and downtown streets. These complaints are often driven by 
frustration that their town will not reduce the speed limits, but municipalities in Maine have 
extremely limited authority to change speed limits. Even spot changes in speed limits on local 
roads require a MaineDOT study. And because the DOT methodology emphasizes 85th 
percentile speeds in setting speed limits, if a study shows that 85th percentile speeds exceed the 
posted limit, the posted speed limit may actually be increased.l 
LD 527 returns to local government and law enforcement the authority to reduce speed limits to 
25 mph on certain low speed and low volume roadways without a f0rmal,MaineDOT speed 
study. 
The roads in these bicycle and pedestrian zones must be low speed to begin with so that posted 
reductions to 25mph will not create hazardous speed differentials between drivers. Lowering the 
speed limit of a road from 35 to 25 mph is a modest adjustment to an already relatively low 
speed context., 
The 6000 average annual daily traffic volume target is based upon Federal Highway 
Administration (F HWA) recommendations on the types of roads suitable for on-road bicycle 
38 Diamond Street l Portland, ME 04101 
www.bikemaine.0rgl207-623-4511 w 
if
l 
ii
W 
ll 
it 
.<
Z
1 
@\ GBALITION g 
» 
as raarlaaa?
. 
facilities without physical separation from traffic. On roadways with higher volumes or speeds 
over 35 mph, FWHA recommends fully separated facilities. 
LD 527 also clariﬁes that a municipality can install safe trafﬁc calming measures such as speed 
tables, curb extensions, and ﬂex posts, to reinforce the lower speed limits of the bicycle and 
pedestrian zones. 
It is important to note that LD 527 still requires a municipality to consult with local law 
enforcement regarding speeding violations, complaints and safety concerns before creating these 
low speed zones. _ 
BCM believes that LD 527 gives municipalities an appropriatelylimited authority to manage 
speeding on their roadways by permitting speciﬁc, situational reduction of speed limits in‘ 
certain 
contexts. It will restore a measure of local control to one of a communities ’ most important 
shared assets: neighborhood streets. 
BCM urges an Ought to Pass vote on this bill. 
Thank you for your time and service to the people of Maine. 
Sincerely, 
Angela King 
Advocacy Manager 
Bicycle Coalition of Maine 
38 Diamond Street I Portland, ME 04101 
www.bikemaine.orgl207-623-4511l 
2; fl 
,\\ 
l»
4
