Jane Nichols-Ecker
Brunswick
LD 527
I would like to testify in support of L.D. 527, a bill that would allow towns to lower 
speed limits in their communities.
I have lived in our neighborhood of Brunswick for 26 years and the same speed limit 
signs were there before we moved here.  And yet, the neighborhood has greatly 
changed.  There are many more runners, walkers, and cyclists as well as pick up 
trucks and cars.  The speed limit has not changed.  It is alarming to hear and watch 
while walking, a car or truck come barreling down these secondary roads without 
slowing down at all.  They will even, without slowing, weave a round a bicyclist or 
runner onto the other side of the road in front of another oncoming car. I once asked a 
cautious Ray Labbe truck driver who was traveling back and forth several times a 
week over  a period of two years what he thought about our 35 mile mph speed limit 
and he replied " No one should be driving more than 20mph on this road".  
Several residents have brought this topic up at town meetings and I have to say that 
there has been little encouragement to believe that DOT would address this issue of 
speed locally.  I can't imagine that DOT would be opposed to towns having more 
authority in lowering speed limits when they as a department invest little staff and 
time in to trying to address this important issue.  Speed studies are a brief snapshot in 
time in an attempt to show what is actually happening in a neighborhood.  A speed 
study done on one of our neighborhood roads a couple of years ago merely showed 
over TWO days that most were obeying the speed limit of 35mph. It also included 
bicyclists.  However, the point is, that limit is too high. A speed limit is exactly that, a
limit.  It means that people may drive slower, but not 5,10, 15 mph over that, even 
when many agree that the 35 mph limit is too high.  The residents are aware of what is
going on in their communities, they are the experts.
I would be very interested in learning about the data that shows that  "speed limits too
low can increase the risk of accidents", as compared to accidents that occur because 
drivers are going too fast?  Read the data regarding increase in speed and fatalities 
since the onset of the pandemic.  I wonder where those roads are that have "artificially
low" speed limits that are ignored by drivers.  Does that make it ok as a justification 
to not lower a speed limit?  That is certainly a problem if those speed limits are 
thought, by the judgement of those drivers who chose to ignore those limits, only 
because it is deemed by the driver to be too slow.  That is very poor justification for 
not lowering a speed limit.  Those drivers should be fined, they should not be allowed
to make their judgement on what they consider to be an "artificially low" speed limit.
Remember the ad that was on signs all over the country several years ago,  "Speed 
Kills".  It originated as a result of data published by the National HighwayTraffic 
Safety Administration.
 
