STATE or MAINE 
'€ DEPARTMENT or TRANSPORTATION 
qiiigf] 16 STATE House STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0016
V 
Bruce A. Van Note 
Janet T. Mills 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
March 2, 2023 
Testimony of Karen Doyle 
Maine Department of Transportation 
Before the 131“ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Opposition to LD 527 
An Act to Allow Municipalities to Create Bicycle and Pedestrian Zones with 
Reduced Speed Limits 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, I am Karen Doyle, Director of Finance and Administration for the 
Maine Department of Transportation. MaineDOT respectfully opposes LD 527, An Act to Allow 
Municipalities to Create Bicycle and Pedestrian Zones with Reduced Speed Limits. Iwant to 
start by noting that the bill’s sponsor has expressed interest in meeting with MaineDOT officials 
to discuss potential amendments to the bill’s language. We are always happy to meet with 
legislators about their legislation and concerns and we intend to schedule such a meeting before 
the Work session for this bill. 
MaineDOT works closely with communities with programs like our Village Partnership 
Initiative to ensure downtowns are safe and accessible for all road users. However, this bill in its 
current form would lead to issues related to both safety and engineering. 
LD 527 proposes a new sub-section within 29-A MRSA §2075. It proposes to allowa 
municipality to create a bicycle and pedestrian speed zone on roadways where there is an annual 
daily traffic count of 6,000 motor vehicles or less. The bill allows for a municipality to set the 
speed limit in that zone to 25 miles per hour, without conducting a speed study. 
MaineDOT is the agency responsible for setting speed limits on both state and town roads with 
the approval of the Maine State Police. However, 29-A MRSA §207 5 gives municipalities the 
authority to set speed limits on local roads should they wish to assume the responsibility. 
According to the existing statute, if a municipality decides to take on this responsibility, they 
must notify MaineDOT and provide written notice of the speeds they set. In the last 20 years, 
four municipalities have requested this authority from MaineDOT, all four have since given back 
the responsibility to the department. 
THE \lr\lNE DEP.-\RTi\-IENT OF TRANSPORTNIION IS AN AFFIRU \Tl\’E A(TlON - EQUAL Ol’POR'l UNITY EMPLOIER 
PHUNE1 (207) 53‘!-3090 TT\ USERS CALL MAINE RELAX 711 FAX: (Z07) 624 3001 i
Q 
K 
ii 
i it 
‘§~ 
K:
vi
