February 23, 2023
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the joint Transportation Committee,
I'm Winston Lumpkins, Chair of the Portland Bicycle & Pedestrian Advisory committee.  Though, I’m
writing to you as an individual, as our monthly meeting isn't until the 13
th
March.
Thank you for considering this bill, it is a much needed step towards treating Maine's municipalities like
the capable entities they are, and allowing them to make their own assessments of dangerous road
conditions.
The Maine DOT’s monopoly over speed limits does little but create bad blood between them, municipal
governments & advocacy organizations.  It’is an overreach of the state government & ignores Maine’s
incredible diversity.  Maine is a large state in geographic terms, and its different municipalities have
different needs. What works in Dover-Foxcroft might not in Portland, or vice versa!  Municipalities must
be allowed to make decisions about traffic safety to best serve the people who’ve elected those
representative
municipal governments.
As written, this would set an important precedent, and should pass.
For it to make a significant difference in Southern & Western Maine, the following amendments should
be considered:
●
Increase the number of cars per day to at least 10k, or remove arbitrary limits entirely.
Moving the cap to 10k or 15k would still prevent Portland from making decisions about many of
our arterial roads, but would allow us to make some alternate routes safer and more appropriate
for neighborhood life. Alternatively, remove the cap entirely so that Portland's Planning & Public
Works Departments could finally be allowed to do their jobs.  Left at 6k, it will hardly make a
difference in Southern or Western Maine.
●
Allow it to apply to growing residential areas & dense residential areas,
not just
downtowns- Bicycles, Pedestrians & children exist outside of downtown.
●
Go beyond consultation with the local police force,
perhaps allowing neighborhood
organizations such as the ones we have in Portland to be consulted, or simply leave it up to the
Mayors, City & Town managers, and the people they employ to manage their streets.
I hope that this bill succeeds in being recommended to the full legislature, and that you consider the
amendments I’ve mentioned above.  Thank you for taking up this difficult issue at long last.
Sincerely yours,
Winston Lumpkins IV
(he/him/his) 
Chair, Portland Bicycle & Pedestrian Advisory Committee 
https://www.portlandbikeped.org/ 
winston.lumpkins@gmail.com 
207-408-1508 
72 Waterville Street, Apt 2, Portland Maine, 04101
Winston Lumpkins IV
Portland Maine
LD 527
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the joint 
Transportation Committee, 
I'm Winston Lumpkins, Chair of the Portland Bicycle & Pedestrian Advisory 
committee.  Though, I’m writing to you as an individual, as our monthly meeting isn't
until the 13th March.  
Thank you for considering this bill, it is a much needed step towards treating Maine's 
municipalities like the capable entities they are, and allowing them to make their own 
assessments of dangerous road conditions. 
The Maine DOT’s monopoly over speed limits does little but create bad blood 
between them, municipal governments & advocacy organizations.  It’is an overreach 
of the state government & ignores Maine’s incredible diversity.  Maine is a large state
in geographic terms, and its different municipalities have different needs. What works
in Dover-Foxcroft might not in Portland, or vice versa!  
Municipalities must be allowed to make decisions about traffic safety to best serve the
people who’ve elected those representative municipal governments.  
As written, this would set an important precedent, and should pass.
For it to make a significant difference in Southern & Western Maine, the following 
amendments should be considered:
*Increase the number of cars per day to at least 10k, or remove arbitrary limits 
entirely. Moving the cap to 10k or 15k would still prevent Portland from making 
decisions about many of our arterial roads, but would allow us to make some alternate
routes safer and more appropriate for neighborhood life. Alternatively, remove the 
cap entirely so that Portland's Planning & Public Works Departments could finally be 
allowed to do their jobs.  Left at 6k, it will hardly make a difference in Southern or 
Western Maine.
*Allow it to apply to growing residential areas & dense residential areas, not just 
downtowns- Bicycles, Pedestrians & children exist outside of downtown.
*Go beyond consultation with the local police force, perhaps allowing neighborhood 
organizations such as the ones we have in Portland to be consulted, or simply leave it 
up to the Mayors, City & Town managers, and the people they employ to manage 
their streets.
I hope that this bill succeeds in being recommended to the full legislature, and that 
you consider the amendments I’ve mentioned above.  Thank you for taking up this 
difficult issue at long last.  
Sincerely yours, 
~Winston 
Winston Lumpkins IV (he/him/his)
Chair, Portland Bicycle & Pedestrian Advisory Committee
https://www.portlandbikeped.org/
winston.lumpkins@gmail.com
207-408-1508
72 Waterville Street, Apt 2, Portland Maine, 04101

