Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government: 
I'm writing today to ask you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1102 An Act to Authorize a Recall Election for a 
School Board Member.
The text of LD 1102 reads nearly identically to Title 30-A ยง2505 Recall of Municipal Officials with the 
exception of the following section:
9. Limitation of recall.  An elected official may be the subject of a recall petition under this section only if 
the official is convicted of a crime, the conduct of which occurred during the official's term of office and the 
victim of which is the municipality. 
Section 9 was deliberately withheld from LD 1102 such that a recall effort could be initiated for any, or no 
reason at all.  This would only lead to politically motivated recall distractions rather than the removal of 
someone who was actively harming the district they were elected to serve.  In a time when school districts are 
the new political battleground for our on-going culture war this would only further pull the focus away from 
improving student outcomes.
Lastly districts have the right to make policies (and many already have) that allow for recalls in their district if 
that is what their community wants.  We don't need a statewide answer to something that isn't a problem.
Christina Small
Windham
Christina Small
Windham
LD 1102
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government: 
I'm writing today to ask you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1102 An Act to 
Authorize a Recall Election for a School Board Member.
The text of LD 1102 reads nearly identically to Title 30-A ยง2505 Recall of Municipal 
Officials with the exception of the following section:
9. Limitation of recall.  An elected official may be the subject of a recall petition 
under this section only if the official is convicted of a crime, the conduct of which 
occurred during the official's term of office and the victim of which is the 
municipality. 
Section 9 was deliberately withheld from LD 1102 such that a recall effort could be 
initiated for any, or no reason at all.  This would only lead to politically motivated 
recall distractions rather than the removal of someone who was actively harming the 
district they were elected to serve.  In a time when school districts are the new 
political battleground for our on-going culture war this would only further pull the 
focus away from improving student outcomes.
Lastly districts have the right to make policies (and many already have) that allow for 
recalls in their district if that is what their community wants.  We don't need a 
statewide answer to something that isn't a problem.
Christina Small
Windham
