Testimony for PRIE 
We are a small group in RSU 24 trying to remove pornography from the libraries in our school district. 
Elementary schools (K-5) in our district are located in the small towns of Winter Harbor’s Penninsula 
school, Steuben’s Ella Lewis School, Franklin’s Mountain View School, Waltham’s Cave Hill School and 
the new Charles Sumner Learning Center (6-12) in Sullivan. Other towns making up RSU 24 are 
Eastbrook, Gouldsboro, Mariaville, and Sorrento. The school board vote is done by weighed votes based 
on the towns population. Franklin and Gouldsboro have the largest population and their combined  
 voting power comprises 43% of any voting issue. The smaller towns also have one board member and  
their power % ranges from 3.6% to 16.2%. 
Our group SOS (Spotlight On Schools) originated when a parents daughter brought home the book 
Gender Queer. The mother was outraged to see such pornographic literature was in our school high 
school/middle school library. The mother made a formal request to challenge the book at a school board 
meeting. The school board meeting was attended by nearly 100 people. People who signed up to speak 
 at the meeting were given three minutes to speak. Many people spoke to have such materials removed 
 from the library and many representing the LGTBQ community also spoke to have the books remain in 
 the library. The nine member school board voted (9-3) in favor of keeping the books in the library. 
Our SOS group meets on Saturday mornings to discuss and plan out next move(s). We have members in 
each town whose school board member voted to keep the pornographic materials in the library be 
recalled. In the town I live in (Sorrento) there is no ordinance for the recall of elected officials. I have 
made a written request to have the town create a recall ordinance for any elected official. I will be 
presenting four samples of ordinances from towns having ordinances allowing any elected official can be 
recalled. It is my goal to get people to recognize just how much filthy and disgusting material is in the 
public school system. It is not our goal to ban any books! We simply want child friendly and 
educationally valuable material used appropriately throughout and across all curriculum's. 
At this Wednesday’s (4/19/23) selectman’s meeting I plan remind our selectman’s group and interested 
citizens to develop a recall ordinance. We now have only a two select person’s group due to a recent 
resignation. And to make matters even more difficult the first selectman is the husband of the person I  
am trying to recall from the school board. ( can anyone say, “conflict of interest”) (Don’t ya just love  
small town politics) The first selectman himself is under lots of local scrutiny due to heavily implied 
improprieties. I plan to take the position, that because of the towns negligence to have a recall  
ordinance I am going to site the fact that Maine being one of the nineteen states having the right to  
recall status, the town of Sorrento can not impede my civil right to exercise a recall of the school board  
member, I have gathered more than enough signatures to meet the state standards for recall and that I 
desire the town to hold a special recall election ASAP. 
Clay Savage 
Sorrento ME 04677 
Clayton Savage
Sorrento
LD 1102
Clayton Savage testimony Sorrento current recall in-work with Select board.
