LD 1102 “An Act to Authorize a Recall Election for a School Board Member” 
 
 Good morning Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and the Committee of State and Local 
Government. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of 
LD 1102 “An Act to Authorize a Recall Election for a School Board Member.” 
 
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find how 
dysfunctional our local and state government officials act towards the everyday citizens. It is imperative 
to hold all public servants, including elected officials, accountable for their actions when they go against 
the wishes and concerns of the constituents. By passing this bill, it’ll put those on notice who provide 
substandard services, disrespect respect and lack of concern towards their constituents on notice, do 
your job or you can and will be replaced. This is called accountability, something that is severely lacking 
in today’s society.  
 
I request this committee to vote “ought to pass” LD 1102 “An Act to Authorize a Recall Election 
for a School Board Member.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
 
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1102
LD 1102 “An Act to Authorize a Recall Election for a School Board Member”
Good morning Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and the Committee of State 
and Local Government. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am 
submitting my testimony in support of LD 1102 “An Act to Authorize a Recall 
Election for a School Board Member.”
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find 
how dysfunctional our local and state government officials act towards the everyday 
citizens. It is imperative to hold all public servants, including elected officials, 
accountable for their actions when they go against the wishes and concerns of the 
constituents. By passing this bill, it’ll put those on notice who provide substandard 
services, disrespect respect and lack of concern towards their constituents on notice, 
do your job or you can and will be replaced. This is called accountability, something 
that is severely lacking in today’s society. 
I request this committee to vote “ought to pass” LD 1102 “An Act to Authorize a 
Recall Election for a School Board Member.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)
