Ivy Corliss
Winthrop
LD 1102
LD 1102 - An Act to Authorize a Recall Election for a School Board Member
YES to LD 1102
As a current elected school board member I am 100% in support of LD 1102 for the 
following reasons.
As elected officials it is our job to represent the district to the utmost best of our 
ability in a Non-Bias, professional manner which reflects upon the school district 
respectfully and honorably. How can we expect our students to live by the integrity 
and morals of our schools if we are not leading by example. If I was not acting in a 
professional unbiased manner I would want to be held accountable and recalled so we
can ensure that the best interest of our schools are being held to the highest standards. 
We have a right to elect school board members they therefore we should also have the
right to recall school board members.
I have personally witnessed school board members act extremely unprofessionally 
abusing their powers violating their ethical promise and the laws in which they swore 
an oath to uphold and follow. These actions of blatant disrespect are well documented
and were conducted willingly and do reflect poorly upon school values and morals. 
What kind of message are we sending and supporting if we allow school board 
members to act like this as representatives of our districts. Their bias and personal 
political views they have publicly displayed during school board meetings have sent a
direct message to students and their families; ensuring them that their rights will not 
be fairly and equally protected.
School board members that are abusing their positions and powers do so knowing 
they are invincible and cannot be held accountable or recalled. This is why it is 
extremely important to have accountability measures in place and allow districts the 
ability to safeguard their schools and students from this abusive power having the 
right to Recall these elected officials. 
School Policy - NEPN/NSBA Code: BCB “Conflict of Interest” states the following
School Committee service is a matter of public trust. In making decisions that affect 
the Public Schools, School Committee members have the duty to act in the interest of 
the common good and for the benefit of the people they represent. A conflict of 
interest may arise when there is an incompatibility between a School
Committee member’s personal interest and their responsibilities as an elected official 
in a matter proposed or pending before the School Committee. School Committee 
members have a legal and ethical responsibility to avoid not only an actual conflict of 
interest, but the appearance of conflict of interest as well.
Appearance of Conflict of Interest - A School Committee member should do nothing 
to give the impression that their position or vote on an issue is influenced by anything 
other than a fair consideration of all sides of a question. School Committee members 
shall attempt to avoid the appearance of conflict of interest by disclosure and/or by 
abstention.
Other policies Noted:
NEPN/NSBA Code: BCA  “Board Member Code of Ethics” 
NEPN/NSBA Code: BCA-E  “Board Member Code of Ethics signature form”

