Testimony in Support of LD 1102 HD 697, An Act to Authorize a 
Recall Election for a School Board Member 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government, 
My name is Jennifer White, and lam a resident of Gray. l am also a taxpayer in 
Windham (RSU 14) where l own real estate and a business. l am testifying before 
you this morning to show my support for LD 1102 HD 697, An Act to Authorize a 
Recall Election for a School Board Member. lam also in support of LD 1181 HD 
0753, An Act to Allow for the Recall of an Elected Municipal Official for Any 
Reason. 
We are living in unprecedented times across our state when it comes to building 
respectful and trusting relationships between tax-paying parents and school 
boards. When Covid 19 hit and our public-school students began doing classes on 
zoom and learning from home, parents naturally became more aware and 
involved in their child's learning. This was not a bad thing as I have always 
believed that the best scenario for every child is that parents and teachers work 
together to support the education of our children. As the owner of a childcare 
center for the past 24 years, we have provided educational programs including 
Pre-K and Before & After School Programs. l have always found that children 
beneﬁt from open and respectful communication between parents and teachers. 
Recently, l have become aware of what is occurring during school board meetings. 
l am seeing and feeling the tension between parents and school board members. 
These parents and taxpayers are given three minutes to express their concerns to 
the board without any responses. They show up week after week hoping this 
might be the week that the school board will take action on a matter. Frustrations 
build and most times they leave feeling very discouraged and hopeless. 
What is happening right now is that there are instances of school board ofﬁcials 
with unethical behavior without any repercussions. This is making tensions even 
higher. Recently, there was an incident at a RSU 14 school board meeting wherea
school board member walked across the stage and ﬂipped concerned parents her 
middle ﬁnger. There was a whole row of students sitting there who were part of 
the audience to this unfortunate display. lt was unprofessional, unethical, and an 
embarrassment to the community. At the next meeting, she addressed parents by 
denying that she intentionally did it instead of apologizing for her actions. That 
evening, the school board voted to censure her which is a public acknowledgment 
that what she did was wrong and that her actions were not a reﬂection of the 
school board. Apparently, this is the only action that the school board can take. 
There is no way to remove a school board member for unethical behaviors. Her 
action of giving parents the ﬁnger was bad enough but lying about it afterwards 
was even worse. 
What does this kind of behavior teach our students? What recourse does a school 
district have ifthere is a school board member who should be recalled? I 
understand that some may say that this should be handled at the local level, but 
this is clearly a much larger issue that the state should rule on. Allowing taxpayers 
to utilize a recall measure doesn't ensure that the school board member would be 
removed from their duties. It only gives them a voice at the voter box. By not 
allowing voters to decide whether a school board member should remain or be 
replaced, we are widening the divide in our communities. Please vote Ought to 
Pass and give parents and taxpayers a pathway to vote for recall when its 
necessary. 
Respectfully, 
Jennifer White 
Gray,ME
