Joshua Smeltzer
Windham
LD 1102
Dear State and Local Government Committee Members,
My name is Joshua Smeltzer.  My wife, Nicole, and I live in Windham and our 
children attend schools in RSU14.
I am writing to testify against L.D.s 1102, 1443, and 1181.
School board members are elected municipal officials.  They are already subject to 
recall under Title 30-A, Chapter 121, ยง2505 "Recall of Municipal Officials," if 
convicted of a crime against the municipality.
L.D. 1102 would subject board members to recall for no specified reason whatsoever. 
L.D. 1443 is vague and does not define terms and phrases such as "misconduct" or 
"rights and interest of the public."  L.D. 1181 is duplicitous of many existing local 
ordinances and charters.
The effect of any one of these bills is to one, overturn the will of the people expressed
at the ballot box on election day, two, politicize education more than it already is, and 
three, create an undue burden on municipal finances, municipal employees' time, and 
the time and finances of residents.  These bills would also subject board members to a
constant threat of recalls over disagreements, severely affecting the administration of 
public schools.
Regarding RSU14, board members serve a three year term.  Those terms are 
staggered among board members.  Elections for seats are held every other year, not 
just the same years as federal elections.  These proposed laws would have the effect 
of creating an endless cycle of semi-annual, expensive elections.
Thank you for your consideration.
Regards,
Joshua Smeltzer
P.S.-Please note that one of the speakers that testified this past Friday is David Arthur 
Kendall of Hancock.  Mr. Kendall is a lifetime registered sex offender for crimes he 
committed in Florida.  His victims were under the age of sixteen.   There exact ages 
are not known at this time.
In March, Mr. Kendall came to Windham High School to speak at a board meeting 
about supposed transgender cults grooming students at schools.  RSU14 
administration made the Windham Police aware of Mr. Kendall after finding out the 
next day that he is a registered sex offender.  The matter remains under investigation 
with local and state law enforcement.
Those supporting book bans brought him to the school knowing his background, but 
did not notify the RSU, the Board, or members of the public of his place on the sex 
offender registry.  They hid this information and now refer to him by David Arthur, 
claiming he is not the same person.  His testimony is not credible.  Those who 
associate with him are not credible.  He is a liar, going by various versions of his 
name to hide his identity, and he refuses to take responsibilities for his crimes.
