ig:wii)i)L 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
ms a ON Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBUC EDUCATION ADVOCATES Website: wWW'mSmaWeb ‘c0m MalneSd\oolSuperln\cndenlsAmodulion 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. llO2 
AN ACT TO AUTHORIZE A RECALL ELECTION FOR A SCHOOL BOARD MEMBER 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Govermnent Committee. I am 
Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1102. 
School board members, once elected or appointed, attest to an oath “to faithfully discharge, to the best of my 
abilities, the duties incumbent on me as ‘Director of ‘x’ school department according to the Constitution and 
laws of the State. So help me God.” As stated within the oath, the Constitution and the laws of the state are to 
be followed by all school board members. Within Title 20-A §l00l, duties are given to each school board of 
Maine’s public schools and not to individual school board members. Chapter l0l, Subchapter 1: School 
Boards - Duties of school boards - School boards shall perform the following duties. [PL 1981, c. 693, §§5,8 
(NEW)-l 
l. General duties. They shall have the duties prescribed to them in this Title. 
There are 22 duties prescribed to school boards within this subchapter. 
School board members and their roles are different from that of selectmen, legislators, or other elected 
municipal ofﬁcials. These folks are responsible and responsive to those who elect them. While school board 
members are elected/appointed at the municipal level, their duties are, as noted above, prescribed by the 
Constitution and laws of the state. 
School board members serve until they resign, are defeated within an election, or are dismissed when they 
miss three meetings in a row and their absences are unexcused (by statute and policy). School board members 
together form the governance team of their district. They only have authority when acting together in an 
ofﬁcially called meeting and take action within that meeting. 
The charge provided to school boards is an extremely important one, and they take this duty extremely 
seriously. They have responsibility for the safety, care, and education of all students within the district, and 
oversight of the full operation of the school district. No decision is made lightly and decisions are made based 
on what is in the best interest of the organization (the students and the school district). Parents play a key role 
in the education of the students, as important partnerships are developed between school staff and 
administrators for the beneﬁt of the students. With the key players being students, parents, teachers, support 
staff, administrators, superintendent and school board, the school board is the governing body making 
decisions for the school district. Therefore, some decisions considered or made by school boards are 
extremely difficult, and to some members of the public are going to seem controversial. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E, King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Exgguﬁyg ])j|-ecu);
L.D. 1102, An Act to Authorize a Recall Election for a School Board Member has some major ﬂaws. The 
largest ﬂaw is that a school board member under L.D. 1102 can be recalled “for any reason.” Yes, you heard 
that right — “for any reason.” Think about situations that come before school boards: votes on budgets that 
affect staff positions or programs such as athletics, school construction location decisions, school closure 
decisions, votes to protect the rights of students under the Human Rights Commission Act or Title 5, Chapter 
337, §4553, votes to consider a policy revision, or votes to consider changes to the morning start time for 
students. Each of these have positions that will be viewed differently by community members within the 
school district. We live in a democracy. We encourage exploration of ideas, work through these explorations 
and then with a motion and a vote, make a determination as to the direction a school district will go based on 
the majority of opinion voiced on any particular item. There will be people who will be pleased and those who 
will not be pleased with any particular decision. 
But to recall for any reason... “I didn’t like the way you voted on a policy presented for a ﬁrst reading; ” “I 
didn’t like the way you voted to cut the athletics budget;” “I didn’t like the response you provided within 
public forum on the consideration of placement of the new school;” “I didn’t like the vote you made to keepa 
book in the school library. ” School boards are frequently called upon to make decisions that may displease at 
least one constituency, and it is not hard to imagine that this bill will fuel far more recalls. Another example, 
may be the union not liking the board’s approach in negotiations could leverage their effort by threatening 
recall of some of the members whom it perceives to be hostile to their agenda. 
Voters may make a decision to not re-elect a school board member during the next election, however, to be 
able to initiate a recall petition “for any reason” based on the difﬁcult work and decisions that are needing to 
be made at the school board level in the view of the members of MSSA and MSBA is irresponsible. 
The second major ﬂaw is the low percentage of voters needed, 10% of the number of votes cast in the 
municipality in the last gubernatorial election, required in order to initiate a petition for recall. This is an 
extremely low threshold. So if, for example, 794 votes were cast in the gubernatorial election, 79 signatures 
would be needed. This could result in regular use of the recall process and a high board turnover rate. It also 
could be abused by those seeking to bully board members into silence. 
A third ﬂaw is no threshold required for a number or percentage of votes needed to be cast within the recall 
election. While 10% of the votes cast in the gubernatorial election, there is no number or percentage 
requirement for the recall election itself. According to L.D. 1102, with no percentage indicated, one (1) vote 
could be cast and determine the result of the election. All it says is “if a majority of voters vote to remove the 
school board member, the recall takes effect on the date the election results are recorded pursuant to this 
subsection. ” 
The other aspects of the proposed bill are procedural and typical of most recall petitions, with some variation. 
The three major reasons why this bill should not move out of this committee are why MSSA and MSBA urge 
the State and Local Government Committee to vote ONTP on L.D. 1102.
