[EXT]:Print1 Copy as needed 
Wendy Brum <wendybrum7@gmail.com> 
Thu 4/20/2023 1;51 PM 
To: Print 8L Marketing Services 1259 <print.marketing1259@Staples.com> 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of The Joint Standing Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is Wendy Brum. 
l am here today in support of the proposed bill LD 1102. I am in favor of a bill that would put into 
place a course of action for the removal of a sitting school board member for violations of unethical 
conduct 
LD 1102 is necessary as there is currently no such definitive language addressing unethical Qstonduct 
to date. I have raised two grown children successfully through the RSU14 school system and never 
before felt the need to attend dry, boring budget meetings until recently. Three months ago my 
community erupted and I decided to attend a meeting. One meeting turned into another then 
another. Weeks in I personally witnessed unethical-r ﬁconduct when a current sitting board member 
gave the concerned parents at one such meeting the middle finger! lt is recorded and has gone viral. 
Other examples of unethical miconduct are available. 
As a concerned citizen and taxpayer l reserve the right to hold accountable any school board member 
of any wrong doings. They should remember that it is an honor to hold such a position as they are 
elected officials of we the people! We are bringing to your attention this need to address and clarify a 
code of law immediately. LD 1102 will provide a structure outlining what is true and responsible 
conduct by ALL elected members of the school board. We as citizens and taxpayers can no longer 
watch rogue board members of RSU14, "do what thoust wilt!" We are asking to put into lawa 
disciplinaiy and recall process currently void on the books. No more resting back comfortably, no 
more feeling untouchable! I appreciate your critical response and concern to this matter. 
Respectfully, 
Concerned citizen, parent and grandparent of RSU14.
