  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso   
In Support of LD 430  
“An Act to Provide Translation Services for Hospital Patients ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services    
Tuesday, March 14 , 2023  
  
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Health and Human Services , I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to 
End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in Support of LD 430, “An Act to Provide Translation 
Services for Hospital Patients.”   
 
Medical professionals are often the first people that hear from survivors about what 
is happening or has happened to them . It is critically important that our medical providers  
prioritize creating the conditions that allow for safe and suppor ted disclosure . Providing the 
ability to communicate with a patient  in their primary language is a critical part of that. For 
those who are experien cing  abuse or violence  from a partner or family member, it is 
particularly important that the person providing interpretation services is not a child or a 
family member , as that will almost always restrict the patient’s ability to be fully transparent 
about their experiences, concerns and needs.  
 
MCEDV would s uggest the Committee consider a minor language modification to 
appropriately name an adult providing interpretation  services as an “adult interpreter” in 
lieu of “adult translator.”  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to be heard . It is sound public policy  that supports 
Maine’s most vulnerable citizens , and we urge you to support it.  
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650-4356  
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org   
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers  (DVRCs)  across the 
state, as well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine.  Last year, these programs together served more 
than 12,000 Maine survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children.   
