Testimony of Malvina Gregory, MaineHealth
In Opposition to LD 430, “An Act to Provide Translation 
Services for Hospital Patients”
Friday, March 17, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is 
Malvina Gregory, Director of Interpreter and Cross Cultural Services at 
MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in opposition to LD 430, “An Act to 
Provide Translation Services for Hospital Patients,” on behalf of 
MaineHealth. 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab – 
regardless of the language our patients speak. 
Federal law requires hospitals to take reasonable steps to make language 
services available to persons with limited English proficiency. 
Additionally, the Joint Commission, which accredits hospitals and is often 
a condition of licensure for Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement, 
requires that hospitals provide interpreting and translation services so that 
patients receive information about their care in a manner he or she 
understands. To that end, for our patients who prefer to use a language 
other than English or who have limited English proficiency, we provide 
interpreter (spoken) services at all times via telephone or video services. 
Last year, Maine Medical Center’s Emergency Department treated 
patients who spoke 37 different languages, and this service was available 
to each of those patients. Annually, we see over 100 languages throughout 
MaineHealth’s affiliated programs.
While technology has enabled real-time access to professional interpreters 
in over 200 languages, translation (written) services have not been as 
quick to advance. Real-time machine translation services, such as Google 
Translate, have been shown in studies to be highly inaccurate and 
dangerous. Professional written translations still require the labor of a 
human translator. Additionally, we have found that some of the 
translations provided “out of the box” via electronic health record 
platforms, like Epic, provide inaccurate written translations and require manual review by a 
professional translator to ensure patients are provided accurate information. Instead, our care 
team members utilize the “teach back method” to ensure our patients comprehend and 
understand documents for entering into treatment, receiving treatment, prescriptions, and 
discharge instructions. Using interpreter services, we ask the patient to communicate this 
information back and, if they are literate, we ask that they write the information in their native 
language. Additionally, patients can request their prescription label be printed in their native 
language. 
As a system, we are committed to providing all patients with culturally appropriate information 
in a language they understand. We are striving to manually translate the most commonly used 
written materials in our top languages, but this is a massive undertaking that is taking a 
significant amount of time to ensure the translations are accurate. Additionally, with over 100 
languages within our health system, it would not be possible to account for every possible 
treatment and discharge scenario that may occur in every language we encounter. 
While we appreciate and support the intent of the legislation before you today, we fear that it 
would force hospitals to use machine technology to translate written documents, which could 
compromise patient safety by providing false or inaccurate translations. With that said, I urge the 
Committee to vote “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 430. 
Thank you for your time and consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have. 
