LY- 
§%g¢1ir§_r1 
W B ﬁ ./‘ﬁg\ 
.\..,¢1 \’ I‘ /xv‘ 
. _;". W '1l’I1:p5 (1\‘\ 
Jeremy D. Forbes 
Chief Deputy 
Nathan C. Thayer 
Jail Adnnnistrator 
Paul G. Mitchell 
Major 
Carl L. Ronco 
Captain 
David B. Lambert 
Captain 
Michael Perry 
Lieutenant 
Lori Marks 
Lieutenant 
Administration, 
Police & Civil Division 
Mylinda Badger 
Julie Edmonson 
Stacy Thistlewood 
l Layman Way 
Alfred, Maine 04002 
207-324-1113 
Fax: 324-3496 
Corrections Division , 
Kelly Burnham 
207-324-9001 
Fax: 459-2562 York County Sheriff ’s Office 
Sheriﬁ’ William L. King Jr. 
March 13, 2023 
L.D. 673 - An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to 
Develop a Nonresidential Law Enforcement Training Program 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Bill King, and I am the Sheriff of York County. 
I am optimistic that there is a bill to establish a nonresidential law enforcement training 
program. While the Maine Criminal Justice Academy (MCJA) does a great job of 
training our law enforcement ofﬁcers, my concern is that the current demand is straining 
their resources. Additionally, a nonresidential structure to the Academy may assist with 
diversifying our applicant pool to better reﬂect the communities we serve. 
In my experience, it is always a challenge to get an applicant in the Academy. Because 
their resources are limited, oftentimes, the agency is not told that a seat is available until 
shortly before the academy commences. 
When preparing this testimony, I reviewed the MCJA website and scrolled through three 
pages of agencies seeking employees. Even with the recruiting challenges experienced 
across the state, obtaining timely basic training continues to be an issue. Allowing the 
Academy to develop and implement a nonresidential law enforcement program has the 
potential to dramatically increase the Academy’s output by hamessing proven technology 
by having a remote site and streaming instruction in the same fashion as many other 
industries and educational institutions. 
Clearly, with law enforcement, some training must be conducted in person, but the Board 
of Trustees will have the ability to structure and develop the program to select the blocks 
of instruction that are appropriate for remote instruction. 
As stated, providing an option of a nonresidential program may also increase and 
diversify the applicant pool. Cadets that are parents or have extended family obligations 
or perhaps those with property to maintain, would have a pathway to seek a law 
enforcement career. 
It also bears mentioning that we currently have a waiver program. In this program, the 
Academy reviews the training that the applicants have received from another state and if 
it meets the standards, the applicant is granted a training waiver, allowing them to forego 
the current residential program. 
For example, two fonner NYPD Ofﬁcers recently obtained waivers to work at the 
Kermebunk Police Department. As is the case in many police departments throughout 
the United States, NYPD does not have a residential academy That said, it is my 
understanding that the residential component is not necessarily a requirement for the 
waiver. 
I appreciate the opportunity to share my support for LD 6'7 3, and I am sorry that my 
schedule did not allow me to be here in person. 
Sincerely, 
Sherif illiamL.
