South  Berwick  Police  Dept.
1 FARMGATE  ROAD
SOUTH  BERWICK,  MAINE  03908
TEL.  207-384-2254
FAX:  207-384-3305
Date:  03/10/2023
To: Sen. Beebe-Center,  Rep.  Salisbury,  and distinguished  members  of the Criminal  Justice  
and Public  Safety  Committee
From:  Chief  David  S. Ruger
Reference:  LD 673 – An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Non-
Residential Law Enforcement Training Program
I am writing this in support of LD 673.  I am a graduate of the non-residential 95th Maine Criminal 
Basic Police School held in Portland, Maine.  Many of the cadets I attended class with in 2001 are 
now sergeants and/or administrators.  I have always believed the non-residential academies will— 
and do— provide the same curriculum as the residential BLEPT and produce the same 
educated/trained officers that the new BLEPT produces.  At no time after graduation from the 
police academy do officers get sent off on long term deployments like in the military, so I ask why 
we deploy officers away for 18 weeks away from their support of family and loved ones.  The 
cadets will still receive the same education as a residential academy and in no way will a non-
residential academy hinder a career.  
York Police Chief Owen Davis and I are just two examples that non-residential police academies 
produce highly trained and educated long-term career officers that rose through the ranks. 
Many other states provide a collegiate style academy that produce well trained officers that fulfill 
long-term careers.  These same non-residential officers rise throughout the ranks and flourish as 
future leaders and administrators.  So, I ask, why is Maine so particular about a residential 
academy?  
The MCJA has two sessions per year which generally a new candidate will have to wait 6 months 
to a year before they are accepted into the BLEPT program. Commission on Accreditation for Law 
Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) accredited departments have guidelines that prohibit new 
candidates from working as a police officer until they graduate from the basic police academy or 
risk losing their certification. This gold standard agency certification is important to residents and 
demonstrated commitment to community-oriented policing philosophies. The candidate pool 
during these post-COVID times is extremely limited, and if a candidate simply cannot wait to get 
their career started at a CALEA based department, then they simply move on to another agency 
that allows part-time certified officers to work a full schedule until they can attend the academy.  

I know there has been talk about sending our candidates to possibly New Hampshire, which has a 
non-residential academy, or another state and having the MCJA waive the certification so there 
would be a minimal wait time to get a new officer trained.  Why does Maine waive non-residential 
academies from other states?  MCJA are saying those non-residential academies are equal to the 
Maine residential academy, while also saying adopting such a model is lowering the standards in 
Maine.  The waiving process is lopsided when you are looking at from the outside in.  I find that 
Maine needs to loosen up the “good ole boy” attitude that we are better not different.  Officers will 
receive the same education and training from a non-residential Maine Police Academy period.  If 
that was not the case, then I would not be in the seat that I currently hold as the Chief of South 
Berwick Police Department.   Thank you for taking the time to read this .
Chief of Police David S. Ruger  
