T o w n  o f  C a r a t u n k
O f f i c e  o f  S e l e c t m e n
P O  B o x  1 8 0    C a r a t u n k ,  M a i n e   0 4 9 2 5
2 0 7 . 6 7 2 . 3 0 3 0
c a r a t u n k s e l e c t m e n @ m y f a i r p o i n t . n e t
Criminal Justice & Public Safety Committee
State House Room 436 March 13, 10am
LD 673 – An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Nonresidential Law 
Enforcement Training Program
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice & Public 
Safety Committee:
My name is Elizabeth Caruso, the First Selectman of the Town of Caratunk, and I am testifying in support of 
LD 673.
Many small, rural towns have no local law enforcement and are reliant on the county sheriff’s office and the 
state police. Citizens in rural areas many times wait hours, not minutes, for help to come. Given that both 
departments have shortages across the state, and given that it has become increasingly difficult to fill vacant 
positions, it is clearly evident that something must be done to address this dire situation and help to fill these 
law enforcement vacancies. With the wide-ranging coverage areas these officers are responsible for, it is likely 
that citizens would be waiting increasingly unreasonable and dangerous periods of time due to lack of sufficient 
staffing.
Due to the ever-increasing waves of lawlessness sweeping across our nation, coupled with the loss of officers 
due to attrition, retirement and harassment, Maine must work now to overcome this growing crisis in 
recruitment. A non-residential program will make it more feasible and attractive to new recruits.
Currently, Maine receives transfers of officers from outside of the state – even from states whose law 
enforcement training models are non-residential. It’s only logical for Maine to offer an equitable program and 
join 50% of our country in offering non-residential training programs to accommodate dearly needed new 
recruits and rebuild Maine’s law enforcement levels once again. 
Please support our citizenry as well as our law enforcement officers. They need our support. Please vote yes 
for this effort and also to fund the extra staffing required to maintain the program and to develop additional 
paths to certification as the Department of Public Safety has requested
Thank you for your time, your service, and for your vote in support of LD 673.
Respectfully submitted,
Elizabeth  Caruso
Elizabeth Caruso
First Selectman/Chair
Board of Selectmen
207.672.3030 
