,/ Maine Sheriffs ’ Association 
_ ' $2 u 1: 
One Team, One Alission '1 '~. 
e go X. / ti» t. .» 
_ grQI 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, ls‘ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"“ Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President-at-Large _- Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
March 13, 2023 
L.D. 673 — An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a 
Nonresidential Law Enforcement Training Program , 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Jason Trundy. I am the Sheriff of 
Waldo County and here on behalf of the Maine Sheriffs Association. 
Maine sheriffs discussed this bill and those present voted to oppose L.D. 673 — An Act to Direct 
the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Nonresidential Law Enforcement Training 
Program. Maine Sheriffs ’ legislative policy committee met and discussed this bill in great detail 
and the majority of our members voted to oppose L.D. 673. 
Maine sheriffs voiced many concerns about the impact of this bill should it be enacted. The 
greatest concern voiced was the need for consistency. Sheriffs who began their careers by 
attending the Academy share a vast wealth of knowledge from their residential experiences and 
most feel strongly that this training cannot be replicated in a nonresidential program. 
Other concerns that were brought forward include the concern of trainer burnout. With a ﬁnite 
number of trainers, and many law enforcement agencies lending professionals to contribute to 
the Academy’s trainings, how would we protect the integrity of those trainers by developing an 
off-site program that did not require residency? These trainers are an invaluable resource fora 
profession that is grappling with critical staffing shortages. We need to protect this resource by 
not adding an additional expectation for nonresidential training. 
U.S.NeWs has again found Maine law enforcement to be rated the best in the nation and we 
collectively agree that the training provided by the Maine Criminal Justice Academy lays the 
foundation for that accolade. As proud alumni of this trusted establishment, we urge you to vote 
Ought Not To Pass on L.D. 673. 
I welcome any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Sheriff Jason Trundy 
O/B/O Maine Sheriffs ’ Association
