 
  
 
TOWN OF KITTERY 
Office of the Town Manager 
200 Rogers Road, Kittery, ME 03904 
Telephone: 207-475-1329 Fax: 207-439-6806 
kamaral@kitteryme.org   
 
 
March 20, 2023 
 
Members of the Criminal Justice & Public Safety Committee 
 
Dear Senator Beeb-Center and Representative Salisbury, 
 
We write today in support of LD673 to allow nonresidential programs for the Criminal Justice 
Academy.  The current model has become a barrier to addressing the public safety needs of the 
State and is directly impacting the public safety of our communities. 
 
We have been in a slow growing crisis in terms of recruiting and retaining quality law 
enforcement officers.  The crisis is the result of retirements, negative attitudes towards law 
enforcement, and generally less desirable schedules and demands, especially early in one’s 
career.  The unnecessary bottle-neck of having a single Criminal Justice Academy, for the State 
of Maine, exacerbates the recruitment and retention challenges without offering any discernable 
benefits. 
 
The concept of having nonresidential programs and regional programs is well tested throughout 
the country.  These models better support the public safety needs of their communities, allow 
for more students to receive the vital training, and lower costs for the sponsoring community 
due to travel and housing.  They are also less burdensome for the trainee who may have life 
circumstances that make it difficult to be away at a residential program for weeks at a time.  
 
Consistency is a non-issue.  We witness throughout the state and country consistency in 
minimum required learning objectives and outcomes across the spectrum of professions and 
specifically public safety related roles such as Firefighter, BLS and Paramedic, law degrees, etc.  
In fact, the diversification of these learning settings and organizers tends to result in innovation, 
improvement through collaboration and competition, and better outcomes overall. A monopoly 
rarely produces better outcomes. 
 
Finally, having nonresidential programs removes a costly barrier for communities to provide 
Cadres and trainers.  Nonresidential programs can reasonably be expected to see a growth in 
the number of available trainers and Cadres due to greater accessibility, the reduction in time 
away from home and agency, and a lower cost to the communities.   
 
 
 
 Kendra Amaral  
Town Manager 
 

2 
  
 
 
The current approach to the Criminal Justice Academy is outdated and does not provide the 
best outcomes for the communities or for the law enforcement officers.  It is time Maine 
modernize its Criminal Justice Academy to achieve better outcomes and support the struggling 
public safety profession. 
 
Sincerely, 
Kendra Amaral       Chief Robert Richter 
Town Manager       Kittery Police Department 
 
 
