Testimony  in support of LD 673: An Act to Direct  the Maine  Criminal  Justice  Academy  to 
Develop  a Nonresidential  Law Enforcement  Training  Program  
 
Presented  by: Matt  Tifft,  Chairperson  for the Public  Services  and Social  Sciences  Department,  
Central  Maine  Community  College  
 
 
Senator  Beebe -Center,  Representative  Salisbury  and members  of the Joint  Standing  
Committee  on Criminal  Justice  and Public  Safety,  my name  is Matt  Tifft, I live in Turner,  and I 
am the Chairperson  of the Public  Service and Social  Sciences  Departm ent at Central  Maine  
Community  College.   I overse e seven programs  including  associate  degrees  in Crimina l Justice,  
Forensic  Science,  Conservation  Law Enforcement,  Justice  Studies,  Social  Sciences,  Psychology,  
and an Advanced  Certificate  in Police  Operations.   I am also in the dissertation  stage  of my PhD 
in Public  Policy  and Educational  Leadership  program  through  the Muskie  School  of Public  
Service,  and writing  a dissertation  titled,  “Exploring  Police  Training  Outcomes” which  is an 
investigat ion into best practices  at college -based  law enforcement  academies  and paramilitary,  
boot-camp  style academies  in the United  States.   I am submitting  this written  statement  to testify  
in favor  of LD 673, An Act to Direct  the Maine  Criminal  Justice  Academy  to Develop  a 
Nonresidential  Law Enforcement  Training  Program.  I would  also like to thank  the sponsor,  Rep. 
Lajoie  for sponsoring  this bill. 
 
Since  I began teaching  at CMCC  in 2011,  I have  taught  hundre ds of students  who had the 
desire  to serve  their community  in the capacity as law enforcement  officer s.  The alumni  of my 
programs  have  successfully  completed  the Basic  Law Enforcement  Training  Program  (BLETP)  
at the Maine  Criminal  Justice  Academy  and have  served  with over 50 of Maine’s 146 municipal,  
county,  and state law enforcement  agen cies.  I have  also taught  many  students  who were  hired  as 
law enforcement  officers  and did not successfully  compl ete the BLETP.  In rare cases,  students  
failed  the BLETP  for reasons  such as poor academic  performance  and integrity  issues .  However , 
most  students  who did not successfully  complete  the BLETP , or gave  up on their law 
enforcement  pursuits  after learning  about  the structure  and demands of the BLETP , had other  
reasons.   These  include : 
 
- The mental  and emotional  strain  resulting  from  social  isolation  from  their support  
network.   
- Single  parents , in my experience  mostly  mothers,  who do not have  the family support  to 
care for their young  ones while  being away during  the week  for 18 weeks  of training .  
- Parents  who care for special  needs  children  who cannot  provide  the support  for their 
children  during  the week  for 18 weeks  of training.  
- Muslim students  who were concerned  about  daily  religious obligations  (e.g., prayer  and 
fasting)  that may not be feasible  in a boot-camp  setting.  
- The thought  of enduring  18 weeks  of a “boot-camp” environment  when there  are myriad  
other  well-paying  occu pations  that are availabl e. 
 
Maine  faces  a persisten t recruitment  crisis  for police  positions  across  the state.  At a time 
when  the deman ds for officers  to be socially  responsible,  guardians  of democracy  has never  been  
greater , it is time we rethin k the environment  and training  methods  we employ  to ensure  the 
values  and attributes  of our officers  are aligned with societal  expect ations .  Instead  of sustaining  
the barrie rs that have  kept otherwise  worthy  candidates  from  participating  or successfully  
complet ing the current  BLETP  model , Main e needs  to consider  alternative s, especially  as 50% of 
the law enforce ment  training  models  across the country  are non-residential,  with more  heading in 
that direction  as time goes on. 
 
I understand  that LD 673 calls for additional  staff for the Maine  Criminal  Justice  Academy,  
and that some  CJPS  committee  members  have  shared  concerns  with providing  more  staff.   I 
believe  that the Central Maine  Community  College  can assist with accomplishing  the objectives  
of LD 673 by helping  to minimiz e, or perhaps  eliminate  completely  the need  for more  staff.   I 
have  two scenario s to present  for consideration:  
 
Scenario  #1:  Last summer,  a group  of police  chiefs  from  central  and southern  Maine  invited  me 
to participate  in a series of discussions  about  how to facilitate  a BLETP  at Central Maine  
Community  College.   The police  chiefs were  frustrated  with the persistent  backlog  of cadets  
waiting  to attend  the BLETP  (exacerbated  by the COVID  labor  short age), that the current  model  
was not keeping  pace with the deman d to bring  departments  up to adequate  staffing  levels,  as 
well as the economic  and budgetary  strain departments  were  experienc ing as a result  of the 
continued  labor  shortages.   I spoke  with CMCC  President  Betsy  Libby,  and we crafted  a plan to 
host the BLETP  on CMCC’s campus , to be run as a daytime academy  that would  allow cadets  to 
go home  at the end of the day.  Despi te the break  from  the traditional  resident ial model , the 
group  believed  this concept  was more  aligned with the realities  of police  work  in the sense  that 
officers  have  to learn  how to decompress  at the end of their shifts  and return  home  to their 
families. 
 
Auburn  Police  Chie f Jason  Moen  present ed the proposal  for CMCC  to host a BLETP  to 
the MCJA  Board of Trustees  last fall.  He explained  that no additional  staff would  be necessary,  
as Portland Police Department  was willing  to provide  an officer  to serve as the coordinator  in 
exchange  for cadet  slots, and there  is no shortage  of officers  eager  to teach  in the central  Maine  
region.   The coordinator  would  manage  the day-to-day aspects  of the BLETP  including  
schedul ing, being  a back -up instructor,  communicating  with MCJA,  and providing  the 
admi nistrative  support  on-site.  The firearms  and emergency  vehicle  operations  training  weeks  
would  still be completed  in tandem  with the residential  BLETP ; both of these  training  sessions  
take place  off-site from  MCJA .    
 
The proposal  was ultimately  tabled,  with the MCJA  reviewing  committe e citing  
administrative  challen ges, instructor  availability,  and an overall  sense  that it would  be diffic ult to 
maintain  “MCJA  standards ” with an off-site BLETP.   I do not believe  that any of the challenges  
presented  by the committee  could  not have  been  worked  through , and would  be open  to 
discussions  on how to be proceed  with this model.  
 
Scenario  #2:  This option  has not been widely  discussed  at this time,  but I would  propose  shifting  
Maine’s law enforcement  training  to a competency -based  model.   Under  this scenario,  the MCJA 
Boar d of Trustees  would set the industry  stand ards and the curriculum  requirements  for law 
enforcement  training in Maine  and oversee  a state licensing  exam .  I would  offer  to facilitate  a 
committee  to explore  the ways  Maine’s community  college  criminal  justice  programs  could  align 
their curricul ums to meet  those standards .  Maine’s community  colleges  have  a rich history  in 
vocational , hands -on learning  and provide  the most  suitable  environment s for law enforce ment  
training  in higher  educ ation  institutions .  For example,  CMC C’s Criminal  Justice  Program  
already  teaches  such concepts  as the history  of law enforcement,  civil rights  issues,  criminal  
invest igations,  communication,  legal  issues,  etc.  Our progra ms also provide  hands-on instruction  
in tactical  patrol  skills,  de-escalation,  defense  tactics,  officer  fitness  and wellness,  and much  
more.   CMCC  is also in the final construction  stages  of a 4000 square -foot simulation  building  
that would  allow  for tactical patrol  skills , forensic  investigations,  and virtually  any simulation  
exercise  needed  for basic  law enforce ment  training.  
 
 Upon  completion  of the training  curriculum , and much  like the nursing  model  in the state 
of Maine,  graduates  would sit for a licensing  exam .  After  successful ly completing  their state 
licensi ng exam s, graduates  would  have  the ability  to apply  to work  at any law enforcement  
agency  in Maine .  This would  have  far-reaching  benefits , not only for Maine’s law enforcement  
agencies  but also to Maine’s taxpay ers.  For example,  unde r the current  model,  prospective  
police  applican ts endure a lengthy  screening  process  that includes  an oral board  panel interview,  
psychological  and polygraph  examinations,  and background  checks  before  they are officially  
hired  by an agency.   These processes  require  massive  amounts  of time and resources , for an 
applicant  who might not successfully  complete  the BLET P.  After  the screening  phase,  each 
agency  then fronts  the money  for their new hire’s BLETP  tuition,  and the training  equipment  
needed  to attend  the resid ential  academy .  The up-front  costs  also include  uniform s, duty belts, 
firearms,  and other  tools  necessary  for duty after the academy .  Most  law enforcement  executi ves 
would  agree  that $30,000 - $35,000 is an approximate  figure  for these  costs.   This is money  well 
spent,  so long as that cadet  successfully  complete s the BLETP.   Law enforcement  agencies  (and 
in turn, the taxpayers)  are rolling  the dice under  the current  system,  in hope s that the new hires  
are able to successfully  complete  the BLETP ; a lot of time and resources  are lost when  new hires  
do not successfull y complete  the BLETP , further  perpetuating  department  vacancies.   Under 
Scenario  #2, the up-front  costs  are substantially  reduced , considering  the low-cost of college  
tuition  at Maine’s community  colleges  (at the current  time,  recent  high school  graduates  attend  
Maine’s community  college s for free) .  This scenario  would  not only remove  barriers  to police  
training  but would  result in a substan tial savings  to Maine’s taxpaying  citizens  in the long run.   
 
 Thank  you for considering  my thoughts  and ideas on how to improve  access  to police  
training  and remove  barriers  for potential  police  candidates.   I would  be honored  to speak  
directly  to the Criminal  Justice  and Public  Safety  Committ ee to explore  a new,  more  inclusive  
and sustainable  model  for Maine’s law enforcement  training . 
 
Since rely,  
 
Matthew  R. Tifft 
Dept.  Chair,  Public  Service  and Social  Sciences  
Central  Maine  Community  College  
1250  Turner  Street  
Aubur n, Main e 04210  
mtifft@cm cc.edu   
(207)  713-6701 (cell) 
Matthew Tifft
Auburn
LD 673
Testimony in support of LD 673: An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice 
Academy to Develop a Nonresidential Law Enforcement Training Program
Presented by: Matt Tifft, Chairperson for the Public Services and Social Sciences 
Department, Central Maine Community College
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Matt Tifft, I live in Turner, and I 
am the Chairperson of the Public Service and Social Sciences Department at Central Maine 
Community College.  I oversee seven programs including associate degrees in Criminal 
Justice, Forensic Science, Conservation Law Enforcement, Justice Studies, Social Sciences, 
Psychology, and an Advanced Certificate in Police Operations.  I am also in the dissertation 
stage of my PhD in Public Policy and Educational Leadership program through the Muskie 
School of Public Service, and writing a dissertation titled, “Exploring Police Training 
Outcomes” which is an investigation into best practices at college-based law enforcement 
academies and paramilitary, boot-camp style academies in the United States.  I am 
submitting this written statement to testify in favor of LD 673, An Act to Direct the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Nonresidential Law Enforcement Training Program. I 
would also like to thank the sponsor, Rep. Lajoie for sponsoring this bill.
Since I began teaching at CMCC in 2011, I have taught hundreds of students who had
the desire to serve their community in the capacity as law enforcement officers.  The 
alumni of my programs have successfully completed the Basic Law Enforcement 
Training Program (BLETP) at the Maine Criminal Justice Academy and have served 
with over 50 of Maine’s 146 municipal, county, and state law enforcement agencies.  
I have also taught many students who were hired as law enforcement officers and did 
not successfully complete the BLETP.  In rare cases, students failed the BLETP for 
reasons such as poor academic performance and integrity issues.  However, most 
students who did not successfully complete the BLETP, or gave up on their law 
enforcement pursuits after learning about the structure and demands of the BLETP, 
had other reasons.  These include:
- The mental and emotional strain resulting from social isolation from their support network. 
- Single parents, in my experience mostly mothers, who do not have the family support to care
for their young ones while being away during the week for 18 weeks of training. 
- Parents who care for special needs children who cannot provide the support for their children
during the week for 18 weeks of training.
- Muslim students who were concerned about daily religious obligations (e.g., prayer and 
fasting) that may not be feasible in a boot-camp setting.
- The thought of enduring 18 weeks of a “boot-camp” environment when there are myriad 
other well-paying occupations that are available.
Maine faces a persistent recruitment crisis for police positions across the state.  At a 
time when the demands for officers to be socially responsible, guardians of 
democracy has never been greater, it is time we rethink the environment and training 
methods we employ to ensure the values and attributes of our officers are aligned with
societal expectations.  Instead of sustaining the barriers that have kept otherwise 
worthy candidates from participating or successfully completing the current BLETP 
model, Maine needs to consider alternatives, especially as 50% of the law 
enforcement training models across the country are non-residential, with more 
heading in that direction as time goes on.
I understand that LD 673 calls for additional staff for the Maine Criminal Justice 
Academy, and that some CJPS committee members have shared concerns with 
providing more staff.  I believe that the Central Maine Community College can assist 
with accomplishing the objectives of LD 673 by helping to minimize, or perhaps 
eliminate completely the need for more staff.  I have two scenarios to present for 
consideration:
Scenario #1:  Last summer, a group of police chiefs from central and southern Maine 
invited me to participate in a series of discussions about how to facilitate a BLETP at 
Central Maine Community College.  The police chiefs were frustrated with the 
persistent backlog of cadets waiting to attend the BLETP (exacerbated by the COVID 
labor shortage), that the current model was not keeping pace with the demand to bring
departments up to adequate staffing levels, as well as the economic and budgetary 
strain departments were experiencing as a result of the continued labor shortages.  I 
spoke with CMCC President Betsy Libby, and we crafted a plan to host the BLETP 
on CMCC’s campus, to be run as a daytime academy that would allow cadets to go 
home at the end of the day.  Despite the break from the traditional residential model, 
the group believed this concept was more aligned with the realities of police work in 
the sense that officers have to learn how to decompress at the end of their shifts and 
return home to their families.
Auburn Police Chief Jason Moen presented the proposal for CMCC to host a BLETP 
to the MCJA Board of Trustees last fall.  He explained that no additional staff would 
be necessary, as Portland Police Department was willing to provide an officer to serve
as the coordinator in exchange for cadet slots, and there is no shortage of officers 
eager to teach in the central Maine region.  The coordinator would manage the 
day-to-day aspects of the BLETP including scheduling, being a back-up instructor, 
communicating with MCJA, and providing the administrative support on-site.  The 
firearms and emergency vehicle operations training weeks would still be completed in
tandem with the residential BLETP; both of these training sessions take place off-site 
from MCJA.   
The proposal was ultimately tabled, with the MCJA reviewing committee citing 
administrative challenges, instructor availability, and an overall sense that it would be
difficult to maintain “MCJA standards” with an off-site BLETP.  I do not believe that 
any of the challenges presented by the committee could not have been worked 
through, and would be open to discussions on how to be proceed with this model.
Scenario #2:  This option has not been widely discussed at this time, but I would 
propose shifting Maine’s law enforcement training to a competency-based model.  
Under this scenario, the MCJA Board of Trustees would set the industry standards 
and the curriculum requirements for law enforcement training in Maine and oversee a 
state licensing exam.  I would offer to facilitate a committee to explore the ways 
Maine’s community college criminal justice programs could align their curriculums to
meet those standards.  Maine’s community colleges have a rich history in vocational, 
hands-on learning and provide the most suitable environments for law enforcement 
training in higher education institutions.  For example, CMCC’s Criminal Justice 
Program already teaches such concepts as the history of law enforcement, civil rights 
issues, criminal investigations, communication, legal issues, etc.  Our programs also 
provide hands-on instruction in tactical patrol skills, de-escalation, defense tactics, 
officer fitness and wellness, and much more.  CMCC is also in the final construction 
stages of a 4000 square-foot simulation building that would allow for tactical patrol 
skills, forensic investigations, and virtually any simulation exercise needed for basic 
law enforcement training.
Upon completion of the training curriculum, and much like the nursing model in the
state of Maine, graduates would sit for a licensing exam.  After successfully 
completing their state licensing exams, graduates would have the ability to apply to 
work at any law enforcement agency in Maine.  This would have far-reaching 
benefits, not only for Maine’s law enforcement agencies but also to Maine’s 
taxpayers.  For example, under the current model, prospective police applicants 
endure a lengthy screening process that includes an oral board panel interview, 
psychological and polygraph examinations, and background checks before they are 
officially hired by an agency.  These processes require massive amounts of time and 
resources, for an applicant who might not successfully complete the BLETP.  After 
the screening phase, each agency then fronts the money for their new hire’s BLETP 
tuition, and the training equipment needed to attend the residential academy.  The 
up-front costs also include uniforms, duty belts, firearms, and other tools necessary 
for duty after the academy.  Most law enforcement executives would agree that 
$30,000 - $35,000 is an approximate figure for these costs.  This is money well spent, 
so long as that cadet successfully completes the BLETP.  Law enforcement agencies 
(and in turn, the taxpayers) are rolling the dice under the current system, in hopes that 
the new hires are able to successfully complete the BLETP; a lot of time and 
resources are lost when new hires do not successfully complete the BLETP, further 
perpetuating department vacancies.  Under Scenario #2, the up-front costs are 
substantially reduced, considering the low-cost of college tuition at Maine’s 
community colleges (at the current time, recent high school graduates attend Maine’s 
community colleges for free).  This scenario would not only remove barriers to police 
training but would result in a substantial savings to Maine’s taxpaying citizens in the 
long run.  
Thank you for considering my thoughts and ideas on how to improve access to 
police training and remove barriers for potential police candidates.  I would be 
honored to speak directly to the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee to 
explore a new, more inclusive and sustainable model for Maine’s law enforcement 
training.
Sincerely, 
Matthew R. Tifft
Dept. Chair, Public Service and Social Sciences
Central Maine Community College
1250 Turner Street
Auburn, Maine 04210
mtifft@cmcc.edu 
(207) 713-6701 (cell)

