ii? g ~ :._ ji
I 
g . _§;' 1 
House or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 stare HOUSE srrrrrors 
AUGUSTA. 3:IAIN'E 04333-000: 
Michel Lajoie ( 20?) 287-1400 
2?’? °1dGYs=ﬂR<-‘ed rrr; MAINE RELAY an Lewiston_ ;‘vz‘§:' O=i2-HZ: 
Cell: {2o?;- H3-7119 
Michael.Laioiefi§legislamre.mamegot ‘ 
March 13, 2023 
Testimony of Representative _-Michel Lajoie i?'22‘?'0t1'tlCl?1g 
LD 673, An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a 
Nonresidential Law Enforcement Training Program 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice am1’PubEic Safety 
Good morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and fellow honorable members of 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Michel Lajoie, and I represent 
House District 96, which includes a portion of Lewiston. I am here before you today to introduce 
LD 673, An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Nonresidential 
Law Enforcement Training Program. 
The need for this bill was brought to my attention by the Auburn Police Department. 
Current statute governing basic law enforcement training specifies that in order for an individual to 
meet the curriculum requirements, the training must take place in a residential setting. LD 6Y3 
would add a non-residential option to the existing statute and would provide additional staffing 
resources to the Board of the Maine Criminal Justice Academy for the purpose of evaluating and 
developing curriculum for a non-residential basic law enforcement training program as a means of 
increasing candidate recruitment. Requiring candidates to commit to a residential program isa 
barrier to some individuals pursuing a career in law enforcement. 
Further, a non-residential model would help meet staffing requirements by attracting a broader pool 
of members of the community who may be excellent officers but who are also primary caregivers 
for young children or aging parents that simply cannot find the coverage or support they would 
need to complete an 18-week training away from home. 
Allowing the Board of the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to evaluate and develop the curriculum 
will ensure that standards for training outcomes are maintained and in consultation with the 
communities they serve. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
District 96: Pan of Le’-sirston
