M I\/tonne l\/lUﬁICl[3CI| 
Association 
60 COMMUNlTY DRIVE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-9486 
(207) 623-8428 
www.memun.org 
Testimony of The Maine Municipal Association 
In Support Of 
LD 673 - An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Nonresidential Law 
Enforcement Training Program' 
March 13, 2023 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in strong support of LD 673, 
An Act to Direct the Maine Criminal Justice Academy to Develop a Nonresidential Law Enforcement 
Program, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal 
government before the Legislature. This bill is part of our Legislative Policy Committee ’s priority 
platform as established by our 70-member LPC, who are elected by the councils and selectboards of 
municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
As an opening, we are asking for a change to the written language in proposed legislation. The 
revisor’s ofﬁce used the word “or” where it should be “and” as the intent is not to replace one program 
with another but expand the programs available to maximize recruitment options. 
The development of a non-residential academy is not a new request from municipal agencies, but 
it is one that has been challenging for municipalities to advance in part, because of the lack of political 
will to appropriately fund and staff the academy, while at the same time demanding more and more 
mandated training. This consistent approach stymes efforts to strengthen diversity in our workforce and 
attract mature candidates through developing alternative approaches to certiﬁcation. There are currently 
well over 300 vacancies state-wide and a “silver tsunami” looming. 
The current training delivery model is hides the true cost for its provision because it relies on 
“volunteer ” instruction while starving the organizational structure from resources to be innovative and 
responsive in delivery. Starving the organizational structure of necessary curriculum development and 
coordination resources because it is at the mercy of the state budget masters results in an imbalance in 
response to the needs of shared stakeholders and devalues that volunteer input. That is why municipal 
officials adopted this effort as part of MMA’s platform because those discussions haven’t advance with 
stakeholders outside this body in part because of decisions made in this body. 
The Maine Criminal Justice Academy has been chronically underfunded and staffed for decades, 
and municipalities subsidize a signiﬁcant portion of instructional delivery via payroll, which alone
provided an estimated $453,088 or nearly a half a million dollars in 2021 to the task. This is a very 
conservative estimate that assumes a base level salary of $26.54 per hour multiplied by the numbers of 
hours donated by municipally funded or municipal tax assessed law enforcement ofﬁcers, (Municipal and 
County agencies) and does not include the cost of replacing the individual on a shift, overtime pay, cost of 
travel, or cost for sending officers to receive it. In reality, that payroll subsidy is likely closer to over $1 
million. 
» 
Waiting lists are not the reason for this bill. While the pandemic backlog of training spaces 
created an acute problem, particularly for agencies with the gold standard of police agency accreditation 
established by the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA), waiting lists 
and twice a year Basic Law Enforcement Training Programs (BLETP) are not the reason for this bill. It 
would, however, eliminate the possibility of experiencing this in the future as we face a wave of 
anticipated retirements and planned vacancies. 
Lowering training standards is not the goal of this bill. Officials have heard that non- 
residential academies are somehow deficient though 50% of the U.S. has moved to the longer collegiate 
model in collaboration with the state and regional education partners. Additionally, MCJA accepts the law 
enforcement credentials from those very states and calls them comparable. Residential or non-residential 
is not the basis for adequacy. This argument falls ﬂat when used to qualify education as adequate or 
inadequate. It is the curriculum and quality of instruction that is most crucial as evidenced by the existing 
waiver process. Ofﬁcials are asking the board to lead that curriculum development so it’s adequacy 
should not be an issue. 
New Hampshire, our neighbor to the south, provides non-residential programing in both a full 
time and part-time model. Included in my testimony is a breakdown of states and how this is approached 
elsewhere. 
Eliminating the residential academy is not the intent of this bill. Communities seek to attract 
applicants from their communities with life experience and a passion for service. Unfortunately, the 
singular model of basic training delivery is a barrier to those individuals who have parental and family 
caring obligations. These individuals are far more likely to invest in service to their own communities, 
develop deep community relationships, and remain with an agency for a long period of time. They also 
have developed life experience making their decision-making skill sets better informed. The residential 
only model makes it hard for more mature applicants to shift to a policing career later in life, right when 
they make some of the best candidates when they must spend 18 weeks away from their families. The 
residential model is important for individuals from agencies 2-4 hours away from Vassalboro and remains 
important particularly for rural Maine, and young candidates. 
Municipal ofﬁcials have advanced this effort to address the crisis of recruitment and to emphasize 
how important it is for this body to fully fund additional training mandates as they are advanced and 
support the expansion of permanent staffing at Maine Criminal Justice Academy when requested. 
Mandated training is a burden on both state and local governments, and this is a shared resource. There is 
an abundance of certiﬁed instructors in the state who are able to deliver in both models and that will 
require coordination staff. However, their availability to continue in that role is rapidly evaporating 
without addressing the model’s barriers to recruitment and the lack of return to communities for that 
instruction. 
When the members of the legislature view academy appropriation only through the lens of 
increases in position counts, they are not saving taxpayer dollars. Such decisions further burden 
municipalities who provide the bulk of the “donated” officer time and make it harder for restricting the
ability to develop deeper training. Starving necessary and shared multi-agency resources leads to worse 
and more expensive policy. That donation is a far greater cost to the property taxpayer than providing the 
permanent stafﬁng necessary to grow and adapt curriculum. 
Currently, ofﬁcials are aware there is an ongoing review of the training currently offered at the 
academy and its alignment to the role of police ofﬁcer. That report is not expected to be completed until 
2024 and is unlikely to be retumed with a judgement that the current 18-week BLETP is adequate. 
Additionally, there are multiple bills set to come before this committee requiring additional mandated 
training There is a foreseeable crisis mounting with a simple solution that is entirely avoidable if the 
legislature would add additional language to the statute governing the academy to enable both the existing 
residential program and a non-residential program to be developed lead by the board with regard to 
curriculum requirements. 
Municipal officials as that you change the statute to provide both a non-residential anda 
residential academy with standards and curriculum designed by the academy’s governing body and the 
permanent stafﬁng necessary to do so.
