TEBSTIMONY OF mlﬂigmu nan Parke “A3599” L.D. 943, “An Act to Enhance Privacy and Aaoaﬂwﬂ5 
Prohibit Shipping Companies from www.nunt:.mi
D Maintaining Records of Firearm and (2°"l'1“'11' 
Ammunition Shipments” H .A 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Brian Parke and I am the 
President and CEO of the Maine Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick. 
The Association is comprised of more than 1,700 member companies, whose employees 
make up a large portion of the 34,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in 
Maine. 
l am here today to testify in opposition to LD 943. 
While no expert on the shipping of firearms, we have heard from carrier members about this 
bill and their ability to comply with it should it become law. ln fact, we understand there isa 
distinct probability that carriers would have to shut down all firearms shipments to Maine if it 
passed as written. 
As part of their firearms shipping compliance program, carriers require firearms shippers to 
use firearms-approved account numbers for all firearms shipments. They presume that every 
shipment on those account numbers contain a firearm for the purposes of monitoring those 
shipments as they move through their delivery networks in an effort to prevent loss and theft. 
As a result of this process, lt’s safe to assume they know when a shipment contains a 
firearm, the name and address of the shipper, and the name and the address of the recipient 
However, they DO NOT know, or have the desire to know, any information about the make, 
model, caliber or serial number of a firearm. The only exception to this is when a firearm is 
found outside of its packaging in the network, because then security uses this information to 
identify and return the firearm to the rightful owner.
lf the concern of the sponsor is that carriers shouldn’t maintain data that can link the make, 
model, caliber or serial number of a firearm to a particular individual, we are willing to work 
with them to develop a solution that will allow our members to maintain name and address 
information and that packages contained A firearm without the specificity of the firearm. 
Otherwise, if passed as written, they will likely cease firearm shipments into and out of Maine 
to prevent a violation of Maine law. 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify. I would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or at the Work Session.
