,, HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
it 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Adam Lee TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
87 Western Promenade 
Auburn, ME 04210 
Residence: (207) 312-4057 
Adam.Lee@legislature.mainegov 
May 12,2023 
Testimony of Rep. Adam Lee presenting 
LD 1876, An Act to Enhance Legislative Participation in the Governor's Use of Emergency 
Powers 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the State and Local 
Government Committee, my name is Adam Lee and I represent House District 89, which 
includes a portion of the Auburn community. I am here before you today to present LD 1 8 76, An 
Act to Enhance Legislative Participation in the Governor 's Use of Emergency Powers. 
I Want to be crystal clear: For me, this bill has nothing to do with the current chief executive, for 
whom I proudly campaigned and voted for twice. Nor, for me, does this bill have anything to do 
with masks, vaccines, social distancing, Covid-19, or conspiracy theories regarding any of these. 
Instead, this bill has everything to do with the bedrock notion that our government is one in 
which a legislature comprised of 186 people who represent geographically, ethnically, racially, 
ideologically, and religiously diverse and varied people are best positioned to make policy for 
our geographically, etlmically, racially, ideologically and religiously diverse state. 
While I can understand that in emergency circumstances, it is more efﬁcient for a single person 
advised by a cadre of talented, intelligent, but nevertheless unelected individuals to make 
decisions for the people, that efﬁciency comes at the expense of having these decisions made by 
the individuals closest to the people. \7Vhen decisions are made without including all 
voices through their representatives to the State Government, it can hardly be said that those 
decisions are made by the people. Accordingly, this bill stresses the importance and policy- 
making primacy of the legislative branch in the event of a declared emergency. 
It does this in 4 primary ways: 
1. It requires that when an emergency is declared, the Governor ’s emergency management 
actions pursuant to the statute must be done in direct consultation with the Legislative 
Council. While the Legislative Council’s suggestions will not bind the Governor ’s 
actions, this Will ensure that the legislature has a statutory mechanism that ensures those 
actions are taken after constructive dialogue with the legislative leaders; 
District 89: Part of Auburn
2. It provides that actions taken by the Govemor must be narrowly tailored to address the 
speciﬁc public health or safety emergency giving rise to the declaration of the 
emergency. This is essential to ensuring that the declaration of an emergency doesn’t 
become the executive ’s foot in the door to nullify legislative power and conduct state 
government in a manner inconsistent with the proper balance of powers. With this in 
mind, the bill provides the Superior Court jurisdiction to issue temporary restraining 
orders or preliminary injunctions against executive actions in excess of the narrow 
tailoring required by statute. Because it’s essential that the Govern0r ’s powers not be 
unjustly constrained, the bill provides for an expedited appeal of any issuance of a TRO 
or preliminary injunction to the Law Court; 
3. During the state of emergency, it requires the Governor to provide a written weekly 
brieﬁng to the Legislative Council detailing all actions taken pursuant to the emergency 
powers and how and Whether those actions have helped abate the emergency; 
4. Finally, it requires a 3/5 majority of both houses to continue an emergency longer than 30 
days. For reference, that would be 91 Representatives and 21 Senators. I chose 3/5 
because my time in the House has informed me that 2/3 can, unfortunately, be too 
difﬁcult a hurdle to reach on things that seem to me to be unquestionably simple, anda 
simple majority can be too easily achieved on a partisan basis alone. I believe that 3/5, 
particularly in light of other protections created for the legislature by this bill, is 
achievable through the consensus building a declaration of emergency should require. 
I fully understand that there is perhaps nothing more annoying and cliche than having someone 
read the Federalist papers to you to elucidate a point about the separation of powers. With that in 
mind, sorry, but I’m about to read from the Federalist papers to elucidate a point about the 
separation of powers. In Federalist 51, James Madison Wrote: 
“If men were angels, no government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither 
external nor internal controls on govermnent would be necessary. In framing a government 
which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficult lies in this: You must ﬁrst 
enable the government to control the govemed; and in the next place, oblige it to control itself. A 
dependence on the people is no doubt the primary control on the government; but experience has 
taught mankind the necessity of auxiliary precautions. ” 
In reviewing this bill, I ask that you keep an open mind and not imagine this as a constraint on 
this chief executive, but rather imagine the person whom you least trust with the authority 
provided for by the emergency powers statute. Now let’s craft auxiliary precautions that will 
effectively ensure that the legislature is an effective check on that person. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
District 89: Part of Auburn
