Testimony for the Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement, and Business 
March 28, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business. 
My name is Charlene Virgilio, I am here today to testify in support of LD 1115, An Act Regarding 
Economic Development Funds for Federally Recognized Indian Tribes. 
lam a member of Penobscot nation and live in Old Town and join this hearing today as the Executive 
Director of Four Directions Development Corporation which is a Native Community Development 
Financial Institution located in Orono, Maine. Our mission is to improve the social and economic 
conditions of the Wabanaki tribes. Over 20-years, we have closed just under $20M in home, small 
business, and community loans and have delivered more than 3,500 hours of financial counseling and' 
home buyer education for the tribal communities we serve. 
Despite our efforts, the tribes still face numerous challenges when it comes to economic development. 
Historically, centuries of colonization and displacement have resulted in economic and social 
marginalization causing tribal communities to suffer from high rates of poverty, unemployment, and 
underemployment. 
One of the key issues that has hindered economic development in tribal communities is a lack of access 
to capital and credit. Because many tribal lands are held in trust by the federal government, they cannot 
be used as collateral for loans. This has made it difficult for tribal entrepreneurs and businesses to 
secure financing for their ventures. 
In addition, our tribal communities are located in rural and isolated areas, which make it difficult to 
access markets, transportation, and infrastructure. This limits the types of businesses and industries that 
are viable in these areas.~ 
Given these facts, I am here to support LD 1115 which will help address these issues. The intent of this 
legislation is to have 10% of the available funds in the Community Development Block Grant Program to 
be provided on an equitable basis to the federally recognized Indian tribes in this State. The federal 
allocation to Maine for these Block Grants is $21,725,080 in Fiscal Year 2023-24 and slightly higher for 
2024-24, the proposed set-aside from the federal funding represents a significant opportunity for tribes. 
Having access to these funds, where statute and policy allows, would provide much needed funding to 
address housing rehabilitation and construction needs, economic development, including job creation 
and retention, infrastructure improvements, services and planning and administrative costs associated 
with community development projects. 
This injection of funding will not only fuel Tribal efforts but will also create better economic results in 
the most rural parts of Maine, including Aroostook and Washington counties.
For the proposed set aside, we should, for now and for the purpose of the Public Hearing, focus on why 
a set aside is a good idea, and then work on any issues with the bill to produce amended language that 
will allow for some changes to be made to further the cause that is proposed and highlighted in the 
legislation. 
Separate legislation on New Market Tax Credits would direct the Department of Economic and 
Community Development to develop, in consultation with federally recognized Tribes in Maine, a plan 
for ensuring the tribes have equitable access to the proposed State Model of the Federal New Markets 
Tax Credit Program to ensure the tribes can attract capital for smaller scale project that can't be 
addressed through the Federal program. ‘ 
Both LD 1115 and the New Market Tax Credit legislation are critical components to help the tribes 
address funding shortfalls and capital gaps. Although there is still much work to be done to achieve 
economic self-sufficiency and prosperity for tribal communities in Maine, LD 1115 and the proposed 
State model for NMTC can start to have an immediate impact. 
As a Native non—profit CDFI, FDDC is uniquely positioned to support the tribes with this legislation. We 
support the legislation and respectfully request tribes be included in the comprehensive bill that will 
also be worked on soon. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify today. 
Charlene Virgilio 
Executive Director 
Four Directions Development Corporation 
20 Godfrey Drive 
Orono, ME 04473
