 
1 
 Testimony of the Wabanaki Alliance  in support of  
LD 1115 An Act Regarding Economic Development Funds for Federally Recognized Indian 
Tribes  
Presen ted for the Public Hearing Before the  Maine Legislature’s  Committee on Innovation , 
Development , Economic  Advancement  and Business  
March 28, 202 3 
 
Sen. Curry , Rep. Roberts , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee  on Innovation , 
Development , Economic  Advancement  and Business ; my name is John Dieffenbacher -Krall. I 
reside in Old Town, and I am the Executive Director of the Wabanaki Alliance . The group was 
founded in June 2020 by the five federally recognized nations in what we today call the State of 
Maine, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, Mi’kmaq Nation, Passamaquoddy Tribe at 
Motahkmikuk, Passamaquoddy Tribe at Sipayik, and Penobscot Nation.  The Wabanaki Alliance 
was created to educate the people of Maine about the need for securing the sovereignty of  
Wabanaki Nations .  
 
The Wabanaki Alliance supports LD 1115 . We thank Rep. Coll ings for introducing th is 
bill.  
 
 The bill would allocate  10% of the available funds in the Community Development 
Block G rant Program to be provided on an equitable basis to the federally recognized Indian 
tribes in this State . Dedicating a stable source of revenue to Wabanaki Nations f or economic 
development would benefit them and the surrounding Maine communi ties. Wabanaki Nations 
have suffered suppressed economic development as do cumented in the report Economic and 
Social  Impacts of Restrictions  on the Applicability of  Federal Indian Policies  to the Wabanaki 
Nations  in Maine .  
 
While Indian Country has enjoyed a boo m of pr osperity since the onset of the modern 
self-determination era  in federal Indian policy measured at 61%, Wabanaki Nations have only 
grown 9%1. LD 1115 would correct for some of the historic  suppression of Wabanaki economic 
development.  The committee is well aware that the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, Mi’kmaq 
Nation, Passamaquoddy Tribe at Motahkmikuk, and Passamaquoddy Tribe at Sipayik  live i n 
some of the poorest areas within the State of Maine.  The Harvard research referenced earlier 
found that t he constraints imposed by the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act  have diminished 
Maine GDP by an estimated $330 million including the lo ss of 2 ,743 jobs in regions needing 
more employment opportunities  and the loss of $39 million in local and state revenue.2 
 
The Wabanaki Alli ance urges the Committee  on Innovation , Development , Economic  
Advancement  and Business  to vote ought to pass on this bill.  
 
1 Kalt, Joseph P. , Medford, Amy Besaw,  Taylor, Jonathan B. (2022) Economic and Social  
Impacts of Restrictions  on the Applicability of  Federal Indian Policies  to the Wabanaki Nations  
in Maine . Harvard Project on A merican Indian Economic Development, 
https://ash.harvard.edu/sites/hwpi.harvard.edu/files/ash/files/wabanaki_report_vfin_for_dist_202
2-12-09.pdf?m=1670635016 , p. 16.  
2 Ibid, p. 40  
