Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee On Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, 
I am Barbara Maurais, a resident of Windham. Thank you to Representative Fay of Raymond for 
sponsoring LD 666, An Act to Support Community-based Volunteer Organizations.  I am 
submitting this testimony in SUPPORT of LD 666.
I am currently serving on the board of directors of Windham Neighbors Helping Neighbors, a 
community based, volunteer non-profit 501 c3 organization. Our mission is to provide one-time 
emergency assistance to Windham residents experiencing a critical need for fuel, help direct 
individuals to appropriate long-term resources, and promote a culture of neighbors helping neighbors.  
As coordinator of our annual Facebook auction and a member of our yearly Gala, I have seen our 
community members donate products, items, services, and money so that our neighbors in need can 
receive emergency fuel assistance.  The contributions, both large and small, are local, consistent, 
and demonstrate the care and concern that our residents have for those in need.  This model works, 
and we are fortunate that back in 2007 our Windham legislative team of Bill Diamond, Gary Plummer, 
and Mark Bryant worked with other key residents of Windham to establish our non-profit and build a 
solid foundation that has grown over the years.
In 2010, I was honored to be one of the founding members of MaineLyme, a non-profit group whose 
mission was to decrease the prevalence of Lyme Disease and other tick-borne diseases through 
education and awareness.  We were six individuals who saw a need for advocacy, and we created 
the non-profit from scratch. With few resources on how to properly build the organization, scrounging 
anywhere we could get information, and without a template, it took us agonizing months to get the 
non-profit established.
Please support LD 666 so that more small, community based, volunteer non-profits could be created 
by having access to technical resource and skill development available to them through the 
Department of Economic and Community Development so that more local organizations could be 
established throughout the state.  We know that the model works, we know that Mainers are frugal; to 
me it makes sense that we provide tools so that more Maine residents can benefit from community-
based supports.  In these non-profit groups, the monies raised go directly to folks in need, with no 
paid staff.  I believe that the benefit to local communities who are able to establish similar nonprofits 
would have a great impact with a very small cost.  
I appreciate the work that Representative Fay and others have done in supporting our volunteer non-
profit boards and thank her for submitting the bill.
Thank you for your consideration.
Barbara Maurais
48 William Knight Rd,
Windham, ME
barbmaurais@gmail.com
207.653.0994  
Barbara Maurais
Windham
LD 666
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee On Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, 
I am Barbara Maurais, a resident of Windham. Thank you to Representative Fay of Raymond 
for sponsoring LD 666, An Act to Support Community-based Volunteer Organizations.  I am 
submitting this testimony in SUPPORT of LD 666.
I am currently serving on the board of directors of Windham Neighbors Helping Neighbors, a 
community based, volunteer non-profit 501 c3 organization. Our mission is to provide 
one-time emergency assistance to Windham residents experiencing a critical need for fuel, 
help direct individuals to appropriate long-term resources, and promote a culture of neighbors
helping neighbors.  As coordinator of our annual Facebook auction and a member of our 
yearly Gala, I have seen our community members donate products, items, services, and 
money so that our neighbors in need can receive emergency fuel assistance.  The 
contributions, both large and small, are local, consistent, and demonstrate the care and 
concern that our residents have for those in need.  This model works, and we are fortunate 
that back in 2007 our Windham legislative team of Bill Diamond, Gary Plummer, and Mark 
Bryant worked with other key residents of Windham to establish our non-profit and build a 
solid foundation that has grown over the years.
In 2010, I was honored to be one of the founding members of MaineLyme, a non-profit group 
whose mission was to decrease the prevalence of Lyme Disease and other tick-borne 
diseases through education and awareness.  We were six individuals who saw a need for 
advocacy, and we created the non-profit from scratch. With few resources on how to properly 
build the organization, scrounging anywhere we could get information, and without a 
template, it took us agonizing months to get the non-profit established.
Please support LD 666 so that more small, community based, volunteer non-profits could be 
created by having access to technical resource and skill development available to them 
through the Department of Economic and Community Development so that more local 
organizations could be established throughout the state.  We know that the model works, we 
know that Mainers are frugal; to me it makes sense that we provide tools so that more Maine 
residents can benefit from community-based supports.  In these non-profit groups, the monies
raised go directly to folks in need, with no paid staff.  I believe that the benefit to local 
communities who are able to establish similar nonprofits would have a great impact with a 
very small cost.  
I appreciate the work that Representative Fay and others have done in supporting our 
volunteer non-profit boards and thank her for submitting the bill.
Thank you for your consideration.
Barbara Maurais
48 William Knight Rd,
Windham, ME
barbmaurais@gmail.com
207.653.0994  

