,-
I 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (207) 287-1400 
Raymond, ME 04071 M 711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
I eSSica.F a}/@legiSlaturc.mai11c.gov 
March l0, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay presenting 
LD 666, An Act to Support Community-based Volunteer Organizations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business 
Good morning Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee. My name is Jessica Fay, and I represent 
House District 86, which includes Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland. I am here before you today 
to introduce LD 666, An Act to Support Community-based Volunteer Organizations. 
A few years ago, a friend involved with a local theater group and I were chatting about whether they should 
formalize their organization. She had tried to ﬁnd some technical assistance with this question and wanted to 
better understand how to go about becoming a non-proﬁt organization. This group has put on some fantastic 
performances in our area. They are really good at theater, but had little experience in whether or how to 
formalize their organization. 
There are many supports available for existing non-proﬁt organizations and for small-business start-ups, but 
Where does a small volunteer community-based organization go for assistance if they want to formalize their 
organization? 
This is the question that the Hon. Patrick Corey asked me when he called me last fall and said he had an idea for 
a bill. 
Just yesterday a friend posted on social media that she was looking for information about creating a 501-C3. I 
wanted to reply, but I wasn’t sure where to send her. As I have had conversations in the lead up to crafting this 
bill the theme seemed to be “that’s a great idea, I think such and such might be helpful” and then I’d call the 
suggested group on the list and they would suggest I reach out to some other group. It occurs to me that this is 
exactly why we need to create a well-publicized place for volunteer community-based organizations to go for 
technical assistance as they decide how to best serve their community. 
I hope the committee ﬁnds this a worthy policy for DECD to implement. Volunteer community-based 
organizations provide some of the glue that holds our districts together. They help feed, clothe, entertain, and 
care for our communities and nurturing them is the right thing to do. 
Thank you for your time and I look forward to working with the committee to ﬁnd the right solution to this 
problem. 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
