Good afternoon. Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of 
the Committee On Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business, I am Patrick Corey and I live in Windham. I'd like to thank 
Representative Fay for sponsoring LD 666, An Act to Support 
Community-based Volunteer Organizations and wish to speak in 
SUPPORT. 
Today I serve as the president of a small, but successful community-based, 
all-volunteer non-profit called Windham Neighbors Helping Neighbors. We 
provide emergency heating fuel assistance for people that fall through the 
cracks in our community. We serve people that are in involved in an 
application process, don't qualify for a program like LIHEAP, or are on fixed 
incomes. Windham Neighbor's was founded in 2007 by the Honorables Bill 
Diamond, Mark Bryant, and Gary Plummer. Former State Senator Diamond 
really took the lead and had the capacity to pull together all of the elements 
to create a truly great organization that has flourished. We only help 
Windham residents. 
When fuel oil prices went up last year we went into fundraising mode with 
incredible success. We get a lot of calls from people in outlying 
communities and agencies we cannot help based on our mission. Given 
that, I started considering if other communities could start similar 
organizations. Of course, without someone like Bill, I don't believe many 
could pull this off.
Generally, when I see a problem that needs to be solved, my first thought is 
not government. When I think about DECD’s work with private industry and 
small business, I wonder if similar services could be offered to non-profits, 
not unlike the work of the Maine Office of Business Development. 
Some of my biggest legislative successes were when I brought bills that 
were not prescriptive. l’m glad to see this bill puts rule making in DECD’s 
hands so that they can best determine how to help these necessary 
organizations flourish. 
My community holds Windham Neighbor ’s in pretty high esteem. I know 
this because they are generous in their support and when I look at my 
board, I have the best of the best helping out to achieve our mission. Due 
to our all-volunteer make-up, nearly every dollar we raise is converted to 
BTUs to heat our community. We are able to help our neighbors stay warm 
during the winter because we’re focused and local. We’ve attracted 
recognized community leaders who’ve worked to make us a local priority. 
I would like to thank this committee in advance for your careful 
consideration of this bill. l’d also like to thank Representative Fay for not 
only submitting this bill, but doing a lot of the leg work in finding where 
these organizations can best be served. Remember, these small, local, 
non-profits are some of the most colorful and strongest threads that hold 
together the fabric of our communities. Have a great day.
