Janet T. Mills _ Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor V Commissioner ’s Ofﬁce 
11 State House Station 
3' 
.| 109 Capitol Street 
J°“““°.M.' L”“'b"’“” PM)‘ ,» Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
C°"‘""“'°"e1’ *"’ 
Tel: (207) 2s7-3707; Fax: (207) 2s7-3005 
TTY: om 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Office of Child and Family Services' 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 474 An Act to Improve Collaboration Between Mandated Reporters and 
Law Enforcement in the Investigat7' on of Alleged Child Abuse and Neglect 
Sponsored by: Representative Meyer 
Hearing Date: March 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Bobbi Johnson, Associate Director of Child Welfare Services at the 
Office of Child and Family Services. I am here today to testify in support of LD 474, An Act to Improve 
Collaboration Between Mandated Reporters and Law Enforcement in the Investigation of Alleged Child 
Abuse and Neglect and would like to offer the following information for your consideration. Thank you 
to Rep. Meyer for sponsoring this Department bill. 
LD 474 would change statute to require a medical provider who makes a mandated report of suspected 
child abuse and/or neglect to disclose that same information to law enforcement upon request. This 
proposal would also provide immunity for a person who makes a report of suspected abuse and/or 
neglect when they are participating in good faith in a law enforcement investigation or criminal justice 
proceeding. 
This bill would improve information sharing among key parties involved in investigating child abuse 
and/or neglect and was developed by a workgroup consisting of OCFS staff, legal experts, and 
representatives law enforcement and the medical community. The workgroup was established as the 
result of a 2021 report from Casey Family Services and Collaborative Safety which included a 
recommendation that OCFS establish joint protocol agreements between law enforcement, hospitals, and 
child welfare to govern situations where there is suspected abuse and/or neglect in order to support 
communication and coordination. That report was the result of a Safety Science review of several child 
fatalities that occurred in 2021 and the findings from those reviews formed the basis for the report’s 
recommendations. 
OCF S has developed this proposal in close collaboration with representatives of both law enforcement 
and the medical community. Both entities have indicated that the proposed language will support 
information sharing by more explicitly allowing for disclosure and providing immunity for those who 
participate in law enforcement investigations or criminal justice proceeding related to child abuse and/or 
neglect. In situations involving suspected child abuse and/or neglect the circumstances frequently 
require OCFS to partner with medical personnel and law enforcement to ensure the safety and well- 
being of the children and ensure those who perpetrate abuse and/or neglect are appropriately held 
accountable for their actions. OCFS is pleased to be able to present this proposal which will serve to 
enhance these partnerships and improve the safety of children and families. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and to 
make myself available for questions at the work session.
