20160165.1 
20211841.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Support of  
L.D. 474, “An Act To Improve Collaboration Between 
Mandatory Reports And Law Enforcement In The 
Investigation Of Alleged Child Abuse And Neglect” 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
March 14, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 
Services; my name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of the 
Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in support of LD 
474.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer 
official and personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; 
to secure a unity of action in law enforcement matters; to enhance 
the standards of police personnel, police training and police 
professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality 
of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law 
Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law 
enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
As the bill summary states, this proposal requires that a member 
of the staff of a public or private medical institution, agency or 
facility or person in charge of the institution, agency or facility or 
the designated agent who made a mandated report disclose the 
same information the member or person reported to the 
Department of Health and Human Services to a law enforcement 
officer upon request of the law enforcement officer.  The bill also 
provides immunity for a person who made a report of suspected 
abuse or neglect who is participating in good faith in a law 
enforcement investigation or criminal justice proceeding relating 
to suspected abuse or neglect. 
We support LD 474 because Maine children deserve the best from 
the people responsible for protecting them. And that means that 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20160165.1 
20211841.1 there needs to be collaboration between partners and trust in the 
system from the community.  
As to the collaboration, law enforcement officers are often 
involved in almost every aspect of a child protection case. We 
work with DHHS to ensure that the children in our state can grow 
up in healthy and safe environments. Communication between 
DHHS and our law enforcement officers is essential for the 
welfare of the children both entities are trying to protect. If we 
respond to a call, it is crucial that we know the complete story of 
the situation before we go in – have there been multiple reports of 
abuse or neglect, the severity or type of suspected abuse, the 
suspected abuser, etc. - so that we are prepared with critical 
information to best address the situation at hand and ensure all 
measures are being taken to  make sure the child is safe. Access to 
those reports made to child protective services can make a 
significant difference and those reports can save lives.  
As to the trust, we know that our state has experienced devastating 
and heart shattering losses during the past few years. Children 
whose lives were tragically cut short due to horrific abuse and 
neglect will never have the chance to grow up and make their 
impact on the world. How can these senseless deaths not affect all 
of us?   
Our neighbors and community need to know that they can make a 
difference. They should know that if they are acting in good faith 
and report suspected abuse to law enforcement, they don’t need to 
fear that there could be consequences from that reporting. 
Providing immunity to these individuals opens up an avenue to 
make sure that our children are protected and safe. If it can save 
even one life then it is a policy worth supporting.  
Please support LD 474 so that no child falls through the cracks. 
And, on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want 
to thank you for your work on this Committee.  
