I‘/||—|A 
Maine Hospital Association 
MAINE'S LEADING 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
COMMENTS OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
In Support Of 
LD 474 — An Act to Improve Collaboration Between Mandatory Reporters and Law Enforcement in the 
Investigation of Alleged Child Abuse and Neglect 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representatives Meyer and members of the Heath and Human Services 
Committee, my name is J efﬁey Austin and I’m hear to testify in support of LD 474 on behalf of 
the Maine Hospital Association. 
The Maine Hospital Association (MHA) represents all 36 community-govemed hospitals 
including 33 non-proﬁt general acute care hospitals, 2 private psychiatric hospitals, and 1 acute 
rehabilitation hospital. 
Hospitals and others are ‘mandatory reporters of abuse’ under Maine law. 
The mandatory reporter statutes require us to provide information to DHHS in certain 
circumstances. , 
As you know, Maine hospitals must also comply with both state and federal privacy laws. Those 
laws generally prohibit hospitals ﬁom sharing information without the consent of the patient, or 
legal representative. 
In cases of child abuse, the individual who can withhold consent on behalf of the child may be the 
abuser. 
Accordingly, both state and federal law expressly authorize disclosure without patient (or legal 
representative) authorization if certain conditions are met. 
Current Maine law requires disclosure to DHHS without authorization. 22 MRSA §401l-A. 
In many cases, law enforcement is frequently on scene at the hospital during a mandatory report 
situation and DHHS is not.
DHHS and law enforcement get a bit frustrated when the hospital provides one level of infonnation 
to DHHS and another level (frequently less) to law enforcement. Meanwhile, DHHS and law 
enforcement are trying to ﬁgure out how to proceed. 
This bill would require that we give the same information to law enforcement that we give to 
DHHS. 
While we generally oppose mandates, we see no reason to oppose this one. Given the very high 
stakes, the request from both DHHS and a broad range of law enforcement ofﬁcials, and the very 
limited effort necessary on our part, we support this legislation. 
To be clear, law enforcement will not be receiving mandatory reports similar to DHHS. Hospitals 
must report all suspected cases to DHHS. We will only be providing reports to law enforcement 
upon their request and when they have an open investigation. Law enforcement is not going to get 
reports if they are not involved. 
As to the statutory path to sharing information, attached to this testimony are three documents that 
can walk you through that path under both federal and state privacy laws. 
Thank you for accepting our testimony. 
P a g e 2 I2 
THEMHA. one |(2o7) 622-4794 |33 FULLER ROAD IAUGUSTA, ME 04330
Lb H74 
P-2" 
OCR HIPAA Privacy 
December 3, 2002 
Revised April 3, 2003 
DISCLOSURES FOR PUBLIC HEALTH ACTIVITIES 
[45 CFR 164.512(b)] 
Background 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule recognizes the legitimate need for public health authorities and 
others responsible for ensuring public health and safety to have access to protected health 
information to can'y out their public health mission. The Rule also recognizes that public health 
reports made by covered entities are an important means of identifying threats to the health and 
safety of the public at large, as well as individuals. Accordingly, the Rule permits covered 
entities to disclose protected health information without authorizationlfor speciﬁed public health 
purposes. 
How the Rule Works 
General Public Health Activities. The Privacy Rule permits covered entities to disclose 
protected health information, without authorization, to public health authorities who are legally 
authorized to receive such reports for the purpose of preventing or controlling disease, injury, or 
disability. This would include, for example, the reporting of a disease or injury; reporting vital 
events, such as births or deaths; and conducting public health surveillance, investigations, or 
interventions. See 45 CFR l64.5l2(b)(l)(i). Also, covered entities may, at the direction ofa 
public health authority, disclose protected health information to a foreign government agency that 
is acting in collaboration with a public health authority. See 45 CFR l64.5l2(b)(l)(i). Covered 
entities who are also a public health authority may use, as well as disclose, protected health 
information for these public health purposes. See 45 CFR l64.5l2(b)(2). 
A “public health authority ” is an agency or authority of the United States govemment, a 
State, a territory, apolitical subdivision of a State or territory, or Indian tribe that is responsible 
for public health matters as part of its ofﬁcial mandate, as well as a person or entity acting under 
a grant of authority from, or under a contract with, a public health agency. See 45 CFR 164.501. 
Examples of a public health authority include State and local health departments, the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). 
Generally, covered entities are required reasonably to limit the protected health 
information disclosed for public health purposes to the minimum amount necessary to 
accomplish the public health purpose. However, covered entities are not required to makea 
minimum necessary determination for public health disclosures that are made pursuant to an 
individual ’s authorization, or for disclosures that are required by other law. See 45 CFR 
164.5 02(b). For disclosures to a public health authority, covered entities may reasonably rely on
l
OCR HIPAA Privacy 
December 3, 2002 
Revised April 3, 2003 
a minimum necessary determination made by the public health authority in requesting the 
protected health information. See 45 CFR 164.5 14(d)(3)(iii)(A). For routine and recurring 
public health disclosures, covered entities may develop standard protocols, as part of their 
minimum necessary policies and procedures, that address the types and amount of protected 
health information that may be disclosed for such purposes. See 45 CFR 164.5 l4(d)(3)(i). 
Other Public Health Activities. The Privacy Rule recognizes the important role that 
persons or entities other than public health authorities play in certain essential public health 
activities. Accordingly, the Rule permits covered entities to disclose protected health 
infonnation, without authorization, to such persons or entities for the public health activities 
discussed below. 
-—}* ' Child abuse or neglect. Covered entities may disclose protected health 
information to report known or suspected child abuse or neglect, if the report is 
made to a public health authority or other appropriate government authority that is 
authorized by law to receive such reports. For instance, the social services 
department of a local government might have legal authority to receive reports of 
child abuse or neglect, in which case, the Privacy Rule would pennit a covered 
entity to report such cases to that authority without obtaining individual 
authorization. Likewise, a_( Q1/_QI:§_Q entity vc _oul_d__r_e_pgr_t_sugl1 _ _cag:§_to the police 
.. .d@Parlm9I.1£W11eI1 Q19 2911.2? d@nar11n9nt.i§_r<1uthQriz¢=d l°Y_1?‘. ’!!_9I.§9§iX €E§l!9l!-_ "-7 repo1_t_s. _<§e3_4§_Q_gE@4;_§ ‘l}§_b)(_l)§ii). See also 45 CFR 512(¢) for information 
regarding disclosures about adult victims of abuse, neglect, or domestic violence. 
- Quality, safety or effectiveness of a product or activity regulated by the FDA. 
Covered entities may disclose protected health information to a person subject to 
FDA jurisdiction, for public health purposes related to the quality, safety or 
effectiveness of an FDA-regulated product or activity for which that person has 
responsibility. Examples of purposes or activities for which such disclosures may 
be made include, but are not limited to: 
> Collecting or reporting adverse events (including similar reports regarding 
food and dietary supplements), product defects or problems (including 
problems regarding use or labeling), or biological product deviations; 
> Tracking FDA-regulated products; 
> Enabling product recalls, repairs, replacement or lookback (which includes 
locating and notifying individuals who received recalled or withdrawn 
products or products that are the subject of lookback); and 
> Conducting post-marketing surveillance.
2
OCR HIPAA Privacy 
December 3, 2002 
Revised A prii 3, 2003 
See 45 CFR 164.512(b)(l)(iii). The “person” subject to the jurisdiction of the 
FDA does not have to be a speciﬁc individual. Rather, it can be an individual or 
an entity, such as a partnership, corporation, or association. Covered entities may 
identify the party or parties responsible for an FDA-regulated product from the 
product label, from written material that accompanies the product (know as 
labeling), or from sources of labeling, such as the Physician ’s Desk Reference. 
Persons at risk of contracting or spreading a disease. A covered entity may 
disclose protected health information to a person who is at risk of contracting or 
spreading a disease or condition if other law authorizes the covered entity to 
notify such individuals as necessary to can'y out public health interventions or 
investigations. For example, a covered health care provider may disclose 
protected health information as needed to notify a person that (s)he has been 
exposed to a communicable disease if the covered entity is legally authorized to 
do so to prevent or control the spread of the disease. See 45 CFR 
l64.5l2(b)(1)(iv). 
Workplace medical surveillance. A covered health care provider who provides 
a health care service to an individual at the request of the individual ’s employer, 
or provides the service in the capacity of a member of the employer ’s workforce, 
may disclose the individual ’s protected health information to the employer for the 
purposes of workplace medical surveillance or the evaluation of work-related 
illness and injuries to the extent the employer needs that information to comply 
with OSHA, the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), or the 
requirements of State laws having a similar purpose. The information disclosed 
must be limited to the provider ’s ﬁndings regarding such medical surveillance or 
work-related ilhress or injury. The covered health care provider must provide the 
individual with written notice that the information will be disclosed to his or her 
employer (or the notice may be posted at the worksite if that is where the sen/ice 
is provided). See 45 CFR 164.5l2(b)(1)(v). 
Frequentlv Asked Questions 
To see Privacy Rule FAQs, click the desired link below: 
FAQs on Public Health Uses and Disclosures 
FAQs on ALL Privacy Rule Topics
3
OCR HIPAA Privacy 
December 3, 2002 
Revised April 3, 2003 
(You can also go to http://answers.hhs.gov/cgi-bin/hhs.cfg/php/enduser/std_al;;php, then 
select "Privacy of Health Infonnation/HIPAA" from the Category drop down list and 
click the Search button.)
4
AUTHENTICATED 
U.S. GOVERNMEN1 
INFORMATION LB I-H1-l 
em; PET; S5\5L~.es-ik €_ 
[\u"fu\¢_,(L\'Z_-Px ﬁuﬂmii 
,.._ 
P-.0 \-2. 
§l64.5'l2 
health information direc ly relevant to 
such person's involve t with the in- 
dividual's health car or payment re- 
lated to the individu 1's health care. 45 CFR Sublille A ('l0—'|-I7 Ediﬁon) 
pick up filled prescriptions, med al son to 
agtpon behalf of the individual J0 
suppli , X-rays, or other similar fcéms 
(ii) A Wvered B it!’ may use 01‘ <1'1S- ) Uses and disclosures for d‘ aster re- 
close protected ealth information to 11' fpu1‘p03e3_ A cove;-ed Qnﬁjgy may use of prcte ected health l1JfOI‘l’Il9,$iO 
l1?/ 
2‘ » 
(iﬂﬁlllding i ellliifying 01‘ 1009»ﬁiI1g). tion to a public or pri -afte entity au- notify. 0!‘ ass’ . '6 in the 11°'°iﬁ°9-91°11 
<1;/for disclose protected health informa- 
familir me ber. a personal renresentw thorized by law or by i s charter to as- 
tive of t e individual, or another fier- 
son re onsible for the care of tl§9”indi- 
vidugi of the individual ’s locati n, gen- 
8? condition, or death. Anytguch use 
0 disclosure of protected 9 alth infor- 
mation for such 1'1Ol3ifi0$ll1Ol1 purposes 
must be in accordance , ith paragraphs 
(b)(2), (b)(3), (b)(4), or (€, )(5) of this sec- sist in disaster relic-ii, ‘ efforts, for the 
purpose of coordinating with such enti- 
ties the uses ogfdisclosures permitted 
by paragraph .( )(1)(ii) of this section. 
The requireni ﬁnts in paragraphs (b)(2), 
(b)(3), or (bﬁﬁ) of this section apply to 
such us§§"and disclosures to the extent 
that the covered entity, in the exercise 
of %r6'fessional judgment, deter?i- ﬁes 
tha the requirements do not int rfere 
vidual present. f the lIldiVidl1 _3.1 iS ﬁsh the ability to respond 0 the 
present for, 1 r otherwise available emergency Oimumstances 
prior to, a use or disclosure permitted (5) Uses and disclosures w en the indi_ tion, as applicable.
/ (2) Uses and osures with the indi- 
by paragre- ﬁn (b)(1) of this section an has the leéipeeity to make health are 
decisions, the covered entity ma use 
or di lose the protected healt infor- 
m ion if it: 
(i) Obtains the individua ‘s agree- 
ment; 
(ii) Provides the indi ‘dual with the 
opportunity to object )0 the disclosure, 
and the individual does not express an 
objection; or /' 
(iii) Reasonably infers from the cir- 
cumstances, lq;a'§ed on the exercise of 
professional ‘/judgment, that the indi- vidual is deceased. If th individual is 
deceased, a covered en i=t' y may disclose 
to a family membe%r other persons 
identified in parag aph (b)(1) of this 
section who werye involved in the indi- 
vidual‘s care G/or payment for health 
care prior t the individual ‘s death’, 
grot§cted ﬁliéé.lth informatign of th§?‘in- 
ivi ua a is re evant 0 sucl_f' per- 
son’s li-nyolvement, unless doing’: so is 
inconsistent with any priorgexpressed 
pr/eference of the individu3,l that is 
lgiiown to the covered entity. 
vidual does not obJect to the (118010-,f ’;E65 FR 62802, Dec. 28, 200J01"as amended at 6'! 
sure. 
if £4? 
(3) Li ited uses and disclosures when 
the értiiviclual is not present. If the4i’ndi- 
vid al is not present, or thhe;/oppor- 
tiﬁity to agree or object to 1; e use or 
disclosure cannot praoticably be pro- 
vided because of the ind}v’i'dual’s inca- 
pacity or an emergency» circumstance, 
the covered entity may, in the exercise 
of professional judgment, determine 
whether the disclosure is in the best in- 
terests of the individual and, if so, dis- 
close only the’ protected health inforl 
mation thatﬁls directly relevant t;%¢‘ﬁl6 
person's iifyolvement with the in vid- 
ual’s care or payment related et’o4he in- 
dividual ’s health care or need d for no- 
tifipdtion purposes. A co cred entity 
may use professional ju ent and its 
make reasonable inf noes oi‘ the indi- 
vidual’s best inter in allowing a per- FR sazvo, Aug. 14, 2oog;""'1a FR sees, Jan. 2t. 
2013]‘ 
I 
§164.512 Uses and disclosures for 
which an authorization or oppor- 
tunity to agree or object is not re- 
quired. 
A covered entity may use or disclose 
protected health information without i 
the written authorization of the indi- 
1vidual, as described in §l64.508, or the 
opportunity for the individual to agree 
or object as described in §164.5l0, in the 
, situations covered by this section, sub- 
| ject to the applicable requirements of 
rthi section. When the covered entity 
‘is required by this section to inform 
F the individual of, or when the indi- 
vidual may agree to, a use or disclosure 
entity's information and the individ- 
ual‘s agreement may be given orally. experience with gn practice to Elfpermitted by this section, the covered 
1322 
        
E3 Department of Heollh and Human Services § 164.512 
, 
2 c.\ ----V _ 7. _.__ __. _-. _ . . _ W.‘ 
(a) Standard: Uses and disclosures re- 
quired by law. (1) A covered entity may 
use or disclose protected health infor- 
mation to the extent that such use or 
disclosure is required by law and the 
use or disclosure complies with and is 
limited to the relevant requirements of 
such law. 
(2) A covered entity must meet the 
requirements described in paragraph 
(c), (e), or (f) of this section for uses or 
ymm_%_m 
(B)                                   
if is (b) Standard: Uses and disclosures for 
public health activities —(1) Permitted 
uses and disclosures. A covered entity 
may use or disclose protected health 
information for the public health ac- 
tivities and purposes described in this 
paragraph to: 
(i) A public health authority that is 
authorized by law to collect or receive 
such information for the purpose of 
preventing or controlling disease, in- 
jury, or disability, including, but not 
limited to, the reporting of disease, in- 
jury, vital events such as birth or 
death, and the conduct of public health 
surveillance, public health investiga- 
tions, and public health interventions; 
or, at the direction of a public health 
authority, to an official of a foreign 
government agency that is acting in 
collaboration with a public health au- 
thority; 
_(ii) A public health authority or 
other appropriate government author-_ 
:_1'_ty_g,uthprized ‘by law to receive repprtsg 
__ sf child abuse or neglect; ___ 
(iii) Aw persoifsiibject to the jurisdic- 
tion of the Food and Drug Administra- 
tion (FDA) with respect to an FDA-reg- 
ulated product or activity for which 
that person has responsibility, for the 
purpose of activities related to the 
quality, safety or effectiveness of such 
FDA-regulated product or activity. 
Such purposes include: 
(A) To collect or report adverse 
events (or similar activities with re- 
spect to food or dietary supplements), 
product defects or problems (including 
problems with the use or labeling ofa 
product), or biological product devi- 
ations;' 
(B) To track FDA-regulated products; 
(C) To enable product recalls, repairs, 
or replacement, or lookback (including 
locating and notifying individuals who 
have received products that have been recalled, withdrawn, or are the subject 
of lookback); or 
(D) To conduct post marketing sur- 
veillanoe; 
(iv) A person who may have been ex- 
posed to a communicable disease or 
may otherwise be at risk of con- 
tracting or spreading a disease or con- 
dition, if the covered entity or public 
health authority is authorized by law 
to notify such person as necessary in 
the conduct of a public health inter- 
vention or investigation; or 
(v) An employer, about an individual 
who is a member of the workforce of 
the employer, if: 
(A) The covered entity is a covered 
health care provider who provides 
health care to the individual at the re- 
quest of the employer:I 
(1 ) To conduct an evaluation relating 
to medical surveillance of the work- 
place; or 
(2) To evaluate whether the indi- 
vidual has a work-related illness or in- 
jury; 
(B) The protected health information 
that is disclosed consists of findings 
concerning a work-related illness or in- 
jury or a workplace-related medical 
surveillance; 
(C) The employer needs such findings 
in order to comply with its obligations, 
under 29 GFR parts 1904 through 1928, 30 
OFR parts 50 through 90, or lllldﬂl‘ state 
law having a similar purpose, to record 
such illness or injury or to carry out 
responsibilities for workplace medical 
surveillance; and 
(D) The covered health care provider 
provides written notice to the indi- 
vidual that protected health informa- 
tion relating to the medical surveil- 
lance of the workplace and work-re- 
lated illnesses and injuries is disclosed 
to the employer: 
(1) By giving a copy of the notice to 
the individual at the time the health 
care is provided; or 
(2) If the health care is provided on 
the work site of the employer, by post- 
ing the notice in a prominent place at 
the location where the health care is 
provided. 
(vi) A school, about an individual 
who is a student or prospective student 
of the school, if: 
1323 
{_c. 5164.512 
(A) The protected health information 
that is disclosed is limited to proof of 
immunization; _ 
(B) The school is required by State or 
other law to have such proof of immu- 
nization prior to admitting the indi- 
vidual; and' 
(G) The covered entity obtains and 
documents the agreement to the disclo- 
sure from either: 
(1) A parent, guardian, or other per- 
son acting in loco parentis of the indi- 
vidual, if the individual is an 
unemancipated minor; or 
(2) The individual, if the individual is 
an adult or emancipated minor. 
(2) Permitted uses. If the covered enti- 
ty also is a public health authority, the 
covered entity is permitted to use pro- 
tected health information in all cases 
in which it is permitted to disclose 
such information for public health ac- 
tivities under paragraph (b)(1) of this 
s_e_<=_ti.0n. ____g___ ,
, 
(c) Standard: Disclosures about victims 
of abuse, neglect or domestic violence —(1) 
Permitted disclosures. Except for reports 
of child abuse or neglect permitted by 
paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section, a 
covered entity may disclose protected 
health information about an individual 
whom the covered entity reasonably 
believes to be a victim of abuse, ne- 
glect, or domestic violence to a govern- 
ment authority, including a social 
service or protective services agency, 
authorized by law to receive reports of 
such abuse, neglect, or domestic vio- 
lence: 
(i) To the extent the disclosure is re- 
quired by law and the disclosure com- 
plies with and is limited to the rel- 
evant requirements of such law; 
(ii) If the individual agrees to the dis- 
closure; or 
(iii) To the extent the disclosure is 
expressly authorized by statute or reg- 
ulation and: 
(A) The covered entity, in the exer- 
cise of professional judgment, believes 
the disclosure is necessary to prevent 
serious harm to the individual or other 
potential victims; or 
(B) If the individual is unable to 
agree because of incapacity, a law en- 
forcement or other public official au- 
thorized to receive the report rep- 
resents that the protected health infor- 
mation for which disclosure is sought 45 CFR Subtille A ('l0—'l-'17 Edilion) 
is not intended to be used against the 
individual and that an immediate en- 
forcement activity that depends upon 
the disclosure would be materially and 
adversely affected by waiting until the 
individual is able to agree to the dis- 
closure. 
(2) Informing the individual. A covered 
entity that makes a disclosure per- 
mitted by paragraph (c)(1) of this sec- 
tion must promptly inform the indi- 
vidual that such a report has been or 
will be made, except if: 
(i) The covered entity, in the exercise 
of professional judgment, believes in- 
forming the individual would place the 
individual at risk of serious harm; or 
(ii) The covered entity would be in- 
forming a personal representative, and 
the covered entity reasonably believes 
the personal representative is respon- 
sible for the abuse, neglect, or other in- 
jury, and that informing such person 
would not be in the best interests of 
the individual as determined by the 
covered entity, in the exercise of pro- 
fessional,jg,dgmen_t,. 
(d) Standard: Uses and disclosures for 
health oversight activities —(1) Permitted 
disclosures. A covered entity may dis- 
close protected health information toa 
health oversight agency for oversight 
activities authorized by law, including 
audits; civil, administrative, or crimi- 
nal investigations; inspections; licen- 
sure or disciplinary actions; civil, ad- 
ministrative, or criminal proceedings 
or actions; or other activities nec- 
essary for appropriate oversight of: 
(i) The health care system; 
(ii) Government benefit programs for 
which health information is relevant to 
beneficiary eligibility; 
(iii) Entities subject to government 
regulatory programs for which health 
information is necessary for deter- 
mining compliance with program 
standards; or 
(iv) Entities subject to civil rights 
laws for which health information is 
necessary for determining compliance. 
(2) Exception to health oversight activi- 
ties. For the purpose of the disclosures 
permitted by paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section, a health oversight activity 
does not include an investigation or 
other activity in which the individual 
is the subject of the investigation or 
activity and such investigation or 
1324
Department of Heullh and Human Services § 164.512 
other activity does not arise out of and 
is not directly related to: 
(i) The receipt of health care; 
(ii) A claim for public beneﬁts re- 
lated to health; or 
(iii) Qualification for, or receipt of, 
public benefits or services when a pa- 
tient’s health is integral to the claim 
for public benefits or services. 
(3) Joint activities or investigations. 
Nothwithstanding paragraph (d)(2) of 
this section, if a health oversight ac- 
tivity or investigation is conducted in 
conjunction with an oversight activity 
or investigation relating to a claim for 
public benefits not related to health, 
the joint activity or investigation is 
considered a health oversight activity 
for purposes of paragraph (d) of this 
section. 
(4) Permitted uses. If a covered entity 
also is a health oversight agency, the 
covered entity may use protected 
health information for health oversight 
activities as permitted by paragraph 
(gL9,Lthis_s.e,ction._ m._._____ ,_ .1 
(Q (e) Standard: Disclosures for judicial 
and administrative proceedings —(1) Per- 
mitted disclosures. A eovered entity may 
disclose protected health information 
in the course of any judicial or admin- 
istrative proceeding: 
(i) In response to an order of a court 
or administrative tribunal, provided 
that the covered entity discloses only 
the protected health information ex- 
pressly authorized by such order; or 
(ii) In response to a subpoena, dis- 
covery request, or other lawful process, 
that is not accompanied by an order of 
a court or administrative tribunal, if: 
(A) The covered entity receives satis- 
factory assurance, as described in para- 
graph (e)(1)(iii) of this section, from 
the party seeking the information that 
reasonable efforts have been made by 
such party to ensure that the indi- 
vidual who is the subject of the pro- 
tected health information that has 
been requested has been given notice of 
the request; or 
(B) The covered entity receives satis- 
factory assurance, as described in para- 
graph (e)(1)(iv) of this section, from the 
party seeking the information that 
reasonable efforts have been made by 
such party to secure a qualified protec- 
tive order that meets the requirements 
of paragraph (e)(1)(v) of this section. (iii) For the purposes of paragraph 
(e)(1)(ii)(A) of this section, a covered 
entity receives satisfactory assurances 
from a party seeking protected health 
information if the covered entity re- 
ceives from such party a written state- 
ment and accompanying documenta- 
tion demonstrating that: 
(A) The party requesting such infor- 
mation has made a good faith attempt 
to provide written notice to the indi- 
vidual (or, if the individual ’s location 
is unknown, to mail a notice to the in- 
dividual ‘s last known address); 
(B) The notice included sufficient in- 
formation about the litigation or pro- 
ceeding in which the protected health 
information is requested to permit the 
individual to raise an objection to the 
court or administrative tribunal; and 
(C) The time for the individual to 
raise objections to the court or admin- 
istrative tribunal has elapsed, and: 
(1 ) No objections were filed; or 
(2) All objections filed by the indi- 
vidual have been resolved by the court 
or the administrative tribunal and the 
disclosures being sought are consistent 
with such resolution. 
(iv) For the purposes of paragraph 
(e)(1)(ii)(B) of this section, a covered 
entity receives satisfactory assurances 
from a party seeking protected health 
information, if the covered entity re- 
ceives from such party a written state- 
ment and accompanying documenta- 
tion demonstrating that: 
(A) The parties to the dispute giving 
rise to the request for information 
have agreed to a qualified protective 
order and have presented it to the 
court or administrative tribunal with 
jurisdiction over the dispute; or 
(B) The party seeking the protected 
health information has requested a. 
qualiﬁed protective order from such 
court or administrative tribunal. 
(v) For purposes of paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section, a qualified protective 
order means, with respect to protected 
health information requested under 
paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section, an 
order of a court or of an administrative 
tribunal or a stipulation by the parties 
to the litigation or administrative pro- 
ceeding that: 
(A) Prohibits the parties from using 
or disclosing the protected health in- 
formation for any purpose other than 
1325
§ 164.512_ 
the litigation or proceeding for which 
such information was requested; and 
(B) Requires the return to the cov- 
ered entity or destruction of the pro- 
tected health information (including 
all copies made) at the end of the liti- 
gation or proceeding. 
(vi) Notwithstanding paragraph 
(e)(1)(ii) of this section, a covered enti- 
ty may disclose protected health infor- 
mation in response to lawful process 
described in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this 
section without receiving satisfactory 
assurance under paragraph (e)(1)(ii)(A) 
or (B) of this section, if the covered en- 
tity makes reasonable efforts to pro- 
vide notice to the individual sufficient 
to meet the requirements of paragraph 
(e)(1)(iii) of this section or to seeka 
qualified protective order sufficient to 
meet the requirements of paragraph 
(e)(1)(v) of this section. 
(2) Other uses and disclosures under 
this section. The provisions of this para- 
graph do not supersede other provi- 
sions of this section that otherwise 
permit or restrict uses or disclosures of 
(f) Standard: Disclosures for law en- 
forcement purposes. A covered entity 
may disclose protected health informa- 
tion for a law enforcement purpose toa 
law enforcement official if the condi- 
tions in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f')(6) 
of this section are met, as applicable. 
(1) Permitted disclosures: Pursuant to 
process and as otherwise required by law. 
A covered entity may disclose pro- 
tected health information: 
(i) As required by law including laws 
that require the reporting of certain 
types of wounds or other physical inju- 
ries, except for laws subject to para- 
graph (b)(1)(ii) or (c)(1)(i) of this sec- 
tion; or 
(ii) In compliance with and as limited 
by the relevant requirements of: 
(A) A court order or court-ordered 
warrant, or a subpoena or summons 
issued by a judicial officer; 
(B) A grand jury subpoena; or 
(C) An administrative request, in- 
cluding an administrative subpoena or 
summons, a civil or an authorized in- 
vestigative demand, or similar process 
authorized under law, provided that: 
(1) The information sought is rel- 
evant and material to a legitimate law 
enforcement inquiry; 45 CFR Subtitle A ('lO—'l—'l7 Edition) 
(2) The request is specific and limited 
in scope to the extent reasonably prac- 
ticable in light of the purpose for 
which the information is sought; and 
(3) De-identified information could 
not reasonably be used. 
(2) Permitted disclosures: Limited infor- 
mation for identification and location 
purposes. Except for disclosures re- 
quired by law as permitted by para- 
graph (f)(1) of this section, a covered 
entity may disclose protected health 
information in response to a law en- 
forcement official's request for such in- 
formation for the purpose of identi- 
fying or locating a suspect, fugitive, 
material witness, or missing person, 
provided that: 
(i) The covered entity may disclose 
only the following information: 
(A) Name and address; 
(B) Date and place of birth; 
(G) Social security number; 
(D) ABO blood type and rh factor; 
(E) Type of injury; 
(F) Date and time of treatment; 
(G) Date and time of death, if appli- 
cable; and 
(H) A description of distinguishing 
physical characteristics, including 
height, weight, gender, race, hair and 
eye color, presence or absence of facial 
hair (beard or moustache), scars, and 
tattoos. 
(ii) Except as permitted by paragraph 
(f)(2)(i) of this section, the covered en- 
tity may not disclose for the purposes 
of identification or location under 
paragraph (i')(2) of this section any pro- 
tected health information related to 
the individual ‘s DNA or DNA analysis, 
dental records, or typing, samples or 
analysis of body fluids or tissue. 
(3) Permitted disclosure: Victims ofa 
crime. Except for disclosures required 
by law as permitted by paragraph (f)(1) 
of this section, a covered entity may 
disclose protected health information 
in response to a law enforcement offi- 
cial‘s request for such information 
about an individual who is or is sus- 
pected to be a victim of a crime, other 
than disclosures that are subject to 
paragraph (b) or (c) of this section, if: 
(i) The individual agrees to the dis- 
closure; or 
1326(1
Department of Health ond Humon Services § 164.512 
(ii) The covered entity is unable to 
obtain the individual ‘s agreement be- 
cause of incapacity or other emergency 
circumstance, provided that: 
(A) The law enforcement official rep- 
resents that such information is needed 
to determine whether a violation of 
law by a person other than the victim 
has occurred, and such information is 
not intended to be used against the vic- 
tim; 
(B) The law enforcement official rep- 
resents that immediate law enforce- 
ment activity that depends upon the 
disclosure would be materially and ad- 
versely affected by waiting until the 
individual is able to agree to the dis- 
closure; and 
(G) The disclosure is in the best in- 
terests of the individual as determined 
by the covered entity, in the exercise 
of professional judgment. 
(4) Permitted disclosure: Decedents. A 
covered entity may disclose protected 
health information about an individual 
who has died to a law enforcement offi- 
cial for the purpose of alerting law en- 
forcement of the death of the indi- 
vidual if the covered entity has a sus- 
picion that such death may have re- 
sulted from criminal conduct. 
(5) Permitted disclosure: Crime on prem- 
ises. A covered entity may disclose to a. 
law enforcement official protected 
health information that the covered 
entity believes in good faith con- 
stitutes evidence of criminal conduct 
that occurred on the premises of the 
covered entity. 
(6) Permitted disclosure: Reporting 
crime in emergencies. (i) A covered 
health care provider providing emer- 
gency health care in response to a med- 
ical emergency, other than such emer- 
gency on the premises of the covered 
health care provider, may disclose pro- 
tected health information to a law en- 
forcement official if such disclosure ap- 
pears necessary to alert law enforce- 
ment to: 
(A) The commission and nature ofa 
crime; 
(B) The location of such crime or of 
the victim(s) of such crime; and 
(C) The identity, description, and lo- 
cation of the perpetrator of such crime. 
(ii) If a covered health care provider 
believes that the medical emergency 
described in paragraph (f)(6)(i) of this section is the result of abuse, neglect, 
or domestic violence of the individual 
in need of emergency health care, para- 
graph (f)(6)(i) of this section does not 
apply and any disclosure to a law en- 
forcement official for law enforcement 
purposes is subject to paragraph (c) of 
_this.sec.ti_o,n.._._ __ ,,___;:_:_ _ ___ _ 
(g) Standard: Uses and disclosures 
about decedents —(1) Coroners and med- ( 
ical examiners. A covered entity may 
disclose protected health information 
to a coroner or medical examiner for 
the purpose of identifying a deceased 
person, determining a cause of death, 
or other duties as authorized by law.A 
covered entity that also performs the 
duties of a coroner or medical exam- 
iner may use protected health informa- 
tion for the purposes described in this 
paragraph. 
(2) Funeral directors. A covered entity 
may disclose protected health informa- 
tion to funeral directors, consistent 
with applicable law, as necessary to 
carry out their duties with respect to 
the decedent. If necessary for funeral 
directors to carry out their duties, the 
covered entity may disclose the pro- 
tected health information prior to, and 
in reasonable anticipation of, the indi- 
vid\1a1's de.aLh- 
(h) Standard: Uses and disclosures for 
cadaveric organ, eye or tissue donation 
purposes. A covered entity may use or 
disclose protected health information 
to organ procurement organizations or 
other entities engaged in the procure- 
ment, banking, or transplantation of 
cadaveric organs, eyes, or tissue for the 
purpose of facilitating organ, eye or 
_tissue dona,t_T Qn anitransplantation, __ 
(i) Standard: Uses and disclosures for 
research purposes —(1) Permitted uses and 
disclosures. A covered entity may use or 
disclose protected health information 
for research, regardless of the source of 
funding of the research, provided that: 
(1) Board approval of a waiver of au- 
thorization. The covered entity obtains 
documentation that an alteration to or 
waiver, in whole or in part, of the indi- 
vidual authorization required by 
§164.508 for use or disclosure of pro- 
tected health information has been ap- 
proved by either: 
(A) An Institutional Review Board 
(IRB), established in accordance with7 
OFR 1c.10'7, 10 CFR 745.107, 14 CFR. 
1327
5164.512 
1230.107, 15 CFR 27.107, 16 CFR 1028.107, 
21 CFR 56.107, 22 GFR 225.107, 24 GFR 
60.107, 28 CFR 46.107, 32 CFR 219.107, 34 
CFR 97.107, 38 OFR 16.107, 40 CFR 26.107, 
45 CFR 46.107, 45 OFR 690.107, or 49 GFR 
11.107; or 
(B) A privacy board that: 
(1) Has members with varying back- 
grounds and appropriate professional 
competency as necessary to review the 
effect of the research protocol on the 
individual ’s privacy rights and related 
interests; 
(2) Includes at least one member who 
is not affiliated with the covered enti- 
ty, not affiliated with any entity con- 
ducting or sponsoring the research, and 
not related to any person who is affili- 
ated with any of such entities; and 
(3) Does not have any member par- 
ticipating in a review of any project in 
which the member has a conﬂict of in- 
terest. 
(ii) Reviews preparatory to research. 
The covered entity obtains from the re- 
searcher representations that: 
(A) Use or disclosure is sought solely 
to review protected health information 
as necessary to prepare a research pro- 
tocol or for similar purposes pre- 
paratory to research; 
(B) No protected health information 
is to be removed from the covered enti- 
ty by the researcher in the course of 
the review; and 
(C) The protected health information 
for which use or access is sought is nec- 
essary for the research purposes. 
(iii) Research on decedent's informa- 
tion. The covered entity obtains from 
the researcher: 
(A) Representation that the use or 
disclosure sought is solely for research 
on the protected health information of 
decedents; 
(B) Documentation, at the request of 
the covered entity, of the death of such 
individuals; and 
(C) Representation that the protected 
health information for which use or 
disclosure is sought is necessary for 
the research purposes. 
(2) Documentation of waiver approval. 
For a use or disclosure to be permitted 
based on documentation of approval of 
an alteration or waiver, under para- 
graph (i)(1)(i) of this section, the docu- 
mentation must include all of the fol- 
lowing: 45 CFR Subtitle A (‘I0-I-‘I7 Edition) 
(i) Identification and date of action. A 
statement identifying the IRB or pri- 
vacy board and the date on which the 
alteration or waiver of authorization 
was approved; 
(ii) Waiver criteria. A statement that 
the IRB or privacy board has deter- 
mined that the alteration or waiver, in 
whole or in part, of authorization satis- 
fies the following criteria: 
(A) The use or disclosure of protected 
health information involves no more 
than a minimal risk to the privacy of 
individuals, based on, at least, the 
presence of the following elements; 
(1) An adequate plan to protect the 
identifiers from improper use and dis- 
closure; 
(2) An adequate plan to destroy the 
identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with conduct of the re- 
search, unless there is a health or re- 
search justification for retaining the 
identifiers' 
or such retention is other- 
wise required by law; and 
(3) Adequate written assurances that 
the protected health information will 
not be reused or disclosed to any other 
person or entity, except as required by 
law, for authorized oversight of the re- 
search study, or for other research for 
which the use or disclosure of pro- 
tected health information would be 
permitted by this subpart; 
(B) The research could not prac- 
ticably be conducted without the waiv- 
er or alteration; and 
(C) The research could not prac- 
ticably be conducted without access to 
and use of the protected health infor- 
mation. 
(iii) Protected health information need- 
ed. A brief desoription of the protected 
health information for which use or ac- 
cess has been determined to be nec- 
essary by the institutional review 
board or privacy board, pursuant to 
paragraph (i)(2)(ii)(C) of this section; 
(iv) Review and approval procedures. A 
statement that the alteration or waiv- 
er of authorization has been reviewed 
and approved under either normal or 
expedited review procedures, as fol- 
lows: 
(A) An IRB must follow the require- 
ments of the Common Rule, including 
the normal review procedures (7 CFR 
1c.10B(b), 10 CFR 745.108(b), 14 CFR 
1230.108(b), 15 CFR. 27.l08(b), 16 CFR 
1328
Depcrlmeni of Health and Human Services § 164.512 
l02B.10B(b), 21 CFR 56.10B(b), 22 GFR 
225.108(b), 24 CFR 60.10B(b), 28 GFR 
46.l08(b), 32 CFR 2l9.108(b), 34 CFR 
9'l.10B(b), 38 CFR 16.10B(b), 40 CFR 
26.10B(b), 45 OFR. 46.108(b), 45 CFR 
690.10B(b), or 49 CFR. 11.10B(b)) or the ex- 
pedited review procedures (7 OFR 
1c.110, 10 CFR. 745.110, 14 CFR 1230.110, 
15 CFR 27.110, 16 CFR 1028.110, 21 CFR 
56.110, 22 CFR 225.110, 24 CFR 60.110, 28 
_CFR 46.110, 32 CFR. 219.110, 34 CFR. 
97.110, 38 GFR 16.110, 40 CFR. 26.110, 45 
CFR. 46.110, 45 CFR 690.110, or 49 CFR 
11.110); 
(B) A privacy board must review the 
proposed research at convened meet- 
ings at which a majority of the privacy 
board members are present, including 
at least one member who satisfies the 
criterion stated in paragraph 
(i)(1)(i)(B)(2) of this section, and the al- 
teration or waiver of authorization 
must be approved by the majority of 
the privacy board members present at 
the meeting, unless the privacy board 
elects to use an expedited review proce- 
d\u'e in accordance with paragraph 
(i)(2)(iv)(C) of this section; _ 
(C) A privacy board may use an expe- 
dited review procedure if the research 
involves no more than minimal risk to 
the privacy of the individuals who are 
the subject of the protected health in- 
formation for which use or disclosure is 
being sought. If the privacy board 
elects to use an expedited review proce- 
dure, the review and approval of the al- 
teration or waiver of authorization 
may be carried out by the chair of the 
privacy board, or by one or more mem- 
bers of the privacy board as designated 
by the chair; and 
(v) Required signature. The docu- 
mentation of the alteration or waiver 
of authorization must be signed by the 
chair or other member, as designated 
by the chair, of the IRB or the privacy 
(i) Standard: Uses and disclosures to 
avert a serious threat to health or safety- 
(1) Permitted disclosures. A covered enti- 
ty may, consistent with applicable law 
and standards of ethical conduct, use 
or disclose protected health informa- 
tion, if the covered entity, in good 
faith, believes the use or disclosure: 
(i)(A) Is necessary to prevent or less- 
en a serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of a person or the 
public; and 
(B) Is to a person or persons reason- 
ably able to prevent or lessen the 
threat, including the target of the 
threat; or 
(ii) Is necessary for law enforcement 
authorities to identify or apprehend an 
individual: 
(A) Because of a statement by an in- 
dividual admitting participation ina 
violent crime that the covered entity 
reasonably believes may have caused 
serious physical harm to the victim; or 
(B) Where it appears from all the cir- 
cumstances that the individual has es- 
caped from a correctional institution 
or from lawful custody, as those terms 
are defined in §164.501. 
(2) Use or disclosure not permitted. A 
use or disclosure pursuant to para- 
graph (j)(1)(ii)(A) of this section may 
not be made if the information de- 
scribed in paragraph (j)(1)(ii)(A) of this 
section is learned by the covered enti- 
ty:‘ 
(i) In the course of treatment to af- 
fect the propensity to commit the 
criminal conduct that is "the basis for 
the disclosure under paragraph 
(j)(1)(ii)(A) of this section, or coun- 
seling or therapy; or 
(ii) Through a request by the indi- 
vidual to initiate or to be referred for 
the treatment, counseling, or therapy 
described in paragraph (j)(2)(i) of this 
section. 
(3) Limit on information that may be 
disclosed. A disclosure made pursuant 
to paragraph (j)(1)(ii)(A) of this section 
shall contain only the statement de- 
scribed in paragraph (j)(1)(ii)(A) of this 
section and the protected health infor- 
mation described in paragraph (f)(2)(i) 
of this section. 
(4) Presumption of good faith belief. A 
covered entity that uses or discloses 
protected health information pursuant 
to paragraph (j)(1) of this section is 
presumed to have acted in good faith 
with regard to a belief described in 
paragraph (j)(1)(i) or (ii) of this section, 
if the belief is based upon the covered 
entity's actual knowledge or in reli- 
ance on a credible representation bya 
person with apparent knowledge or au- 
thority. 
(k) Standard: Uses and disclosures for 
specialized government functions —(1) 
1329            
§l64.512 
Military and veterans activities —(i) 
Armed Forces personnel. A covered enti- 
ty may use and disclose the protected 
health information of individuals who 
are Armed Forces personnel for activi- 
ties deemed necessary by appropriate 
military command authorities to as- 
sure the proper execution of the mili- 
tary mission, if the appropriate mili- 
tary authority has published by notice 
in the FEDERAL REGISTER the following 
information: 
(A) Appropriate military command 
authorities; and 
(B) The purposes for which the pro- 
tected health information may be used 
or disclosed. 
(ii) Separation or discharge from mili- 
tary service. A covered entity that isa 
component of the Departments of De- 
fense or Homeland Security may dis- 
close to the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (DVA) the protected health in- 
formation of an individual who isa 
member of the Armed Forces upon the 
separation or discharge of the indi- 
vidual from military service for the 
purpose of a determination by DVA of 
the individual's eligibility for or enti- 
tlement to benefits under laws admin- 
istered by the Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs. 
(iii) Veterans. A covered entity that is 
a component of the Department of Vet- 
erans Affairs may use and disclose pro- 
tected health information to compo- 
nents of the Department that deter- 
mine eligibility for or entitlement to, 
or that provide, benefits under the laws 
administered by the Secretary of Vet- 
erans Affairs. 
(iv) Foreign military personnel. A cov- 
ered entity may use and disclose the 
protected health information of indi- 
viduals who are foreign military per- 
sonnel to their appropriate foreign 
military authority for the same pur- 
poses for which uses and disclosures 
are permitted for Armed Forces per- 
sonnel under the notice published in 
the FEDERAL REGISTER. pursuant to 
paragraph (k)(l)(i) of this section. 
(2) National security and intelligence 
activities. A covered entity may disclose 
protected health information to au- 
thorized federal officials for the con- 
duct of lawful intelligence, counter-in- 
telligence, and other national security 
activities authorized by the National 45 CFR Subiille A (10—l—'l7 Edition) 
Security Act (60 U.S.G. 401, et seq.) and 
implementing authority (e.g., Execu- 
tive Order 12333). 
(3) Protective services for the President 
and others. A covered entity may dis- 
close protected health information to 
authorized Federal officials for the pro- 
vision of protective services to the 
President or other persons authorized 
by 18 U.S.C. 3056 or to foreign heads of 
state or other persons authorized by 22 
U.S.G. 2'l09(a)(3), or for the conduct of 
investigations authorized by 18 U.S.G. 
871 and 879. 
(4) Medical suitability determinations. 
A covered entity that is a component 
of the Department of State may use 
protected health information to make 
medical suitability determinations and 
may disclose whether or not the indi- 
vidual was determined to be medically 
suitable to the officials in the Depart- 
ment of State who need access to such 
information for the following purposes: 
(i) For the purpose of a required secu- 
rity clearance conducted pursuant to 
Executive Orders 10450 and 12968; 
(ii) As necessary to determine world- 
wide availability or availability for 
mandatory service abroad under sec- 
tions 101(a)(4) and 504 of the Foreign 
Service Act; or 
(iii) For a family to accompany a 
Foreign Service member abroad, con- 
sistent with section 101(b)(5) and 904 of 
the Foreign Service Act. 
(5) Correctional institutions and other 
law enforcement custodial situations —(i) 
Permitted disclosures. A covered entity 
may disclose to a correctional institu- 
tion or a law enforcement official hav- 
ing lawful custody of an inmate or 
other individual protected health infor- 
mation about such inmate or indi- 
vidual, if the correctional institution 
or such law enforcement official rep- 
resents that such protected health in- 
formation is necessary for: 
(A) The provision of health care to 
such individuals; 
(B) The health and safety of such in- 
dividual or other inmates; 
(C) The health and safety of the offi- 
cers or employees of or others at the 
correctional institution; 
(D) The health and safety of such in- 
dividuals and officers or other persons 
1330
Department of Health and Human Serv 
responsible for the transporting of in- 
mates or their transfer from one insti- 
tution, facility, or setting to another; 
(E) Law enforcement on the premises 
of the correctional institution; or 
(F) The administration and mainte- 
nance of the safety, security, and good 
order of the correctional institution. 
(ii) Permitted uses. A covered entity 
that is a correctional institution may 
use protected health information of in- 
dividuals who are inmates for any pur- 
pose for which such protected health 
information may be disclosed. 
(iii) No application after release. For 
the purposes of this provision, an indi- 
vidual is no longer an inmate when re- 
leased on parole, probation, supervised 
release, or otherwise is no longer in 
lawful custody. 
(6) Covered entities that are government 
programs providing public benefits. (i)A 
health plan that is a government pro- 
gram providing public benefits may 
disclose protected health information 
relating to eligibility for or enrollment 
in the health plan to another agency 
administering a government program 
providing public benefits if the sharing 
of eligibility or enrollment informa- 
tion among such government agencies 
or the maintenance of such informa- 
tion in a single or combined data sys- 
tem accessible to all such government 
agencies is required or expressly au- 
thorized by statute or regulation. 
(ii) A covered entity that is a govern- 
ment agency administering a govern- 
ment program providing public bene- 
fits may disclose protected health in- 
formation relating to the program to 
another covered entity that is a gov- 
ernment agency administering a gov- 
ernment program providing public ben- 
efits if the programs serve the same or 
similar populations and the disclosure 
of protected health information is nec- 
essary to coordinate the covered func- 
tions oi‘ such programs or to improve 
administration and management relat- 
ing to the covered functions of such 
programs. 
(7) National Instant Criminal Back- 
ground Checlc System. A covered entity 
may use or disclose protected health 
information for purposes of reporting 
to the National Instant Criminal Back- 
ground Check System the identity of 
an individual who is prohibited from ices 5 164.514 
possessing a firearm under 18 U.S.C. 
922(g)(4), provided the covered entity: 
(i) Is a State agency or other entity 
that is, or contains an entity that is: 
(A) An entity designated by the State 
to report, or which collects informa- 
tion for purposes of reporting, on be- 
half of the State, to the National In- 
stant Criminal Background Check Sys- 
tem; or 
(B) A court, board, commission, or 
other lawful authority that makes the 
commitment or adjudication that 
causes an individual to become subject 
to 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(4); and 
(ii) Discloses the information only to: 
(A) The National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System; or 
(B) An entity designated by the State 
to report, or which collects informa- 
tion for purposes of reporting, on be- 
half of the State, to the National In- 
stant Criminal Background Check Sys- 
tem; and 
(iii)(A) Discloses only the limited de- 
mographic and certain other informa- 
tion needed for purposes of reporting to 
the National Instant Criminal Back- 
ground Check System; and 
(B) Does not disclose diagnostic or 
(1) Standard: Disclosures for workers’ 
compensation. A covered entity may 
disclose protected health information 
as authorized by and to the extent nec- 
essary to comply with laws relating to 
workers‘ compensation or other similar 
programs, established by law, that pro- 
vide benefits for work-related injuries 
or illness without regard to fault. 
[65 FR 82802, Dec. 2B, 2000, as amended at 67 
FR 53270, Aug. 14. 2002; 78 FR 5699. Jan. 26. 
2018; '18 FR 84266, June '1. 2013; 81 FR 395, Jan. 
6, 2016] clinicaL.i P_. °5L-_ 
C) 
§164.514 Other requirements relating 
to uses and disclosures of protected 
health information. 
(a) Standard: De-identification of pro- 
tected health information. Health infor- 
mation that does not identify an indi- 
vidual and with respect to which there 
is no reasonable basis to believe that 
the information can be used to identify 
an individual is not individually identi- 
fiable health information. 
1331\
r
P-5 
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
§1711-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information 
(CONTAINS TEXT WITH VARYING EFFECTIVE DATES) 
1. Deﬁnitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms 
have the following meanings. 
A. "Authorized representative of an individual “ or "authorized representative" means an 
individual's legal guardian; agent pursuant to Title 18-C, section 5-803; agent pursuant to Title 
18-C, Article 5, Part 9; or other authorized representative or, after death, that person's personal 
representative or a person identiﬁed in subsection 3-B. For a minor who has not consented to health 
care treatment in accordance with the provisions of state law, "authorized representative" means 
the minor's parent, legal guardian or guardian ad litem. [PL 2017, c. 402, Pt. C, §44 (AMD); PL 
2019, 0.417, Pt. B, §14 (AFF).] 
A-1. "Authorization to disclose" means authorization to disclose health care information in 
accordance with subsection 3, 3-A or 3-B. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, C. 
512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF).] 
B. "Disclosure" means the release, transfer of or provision of access to health care information in 
any manner obtained as a result of a professional health care relationship between the individual 
and the health care practitioner or facility to a person or entity other than the individual. [PL 1999, 
c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 
60 (AFF).] 
C. "Health care" means preventative, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance or 
palliative care, services, treatment, procedures or counseling, including appropriate assistance with 
disease or symptom management and maintenance, that affects an individual's physical, mental or 
behavioral condition, including individual cells or their components or genetic information, or the 
structure or function of the human body or any part of the human body. Health care includes 
prescribing, dispensing or fumishing to an individual drugs, biologicals, medical devices or health 
care equipment and supplies; providing hospice services to an individual; and the banking of blood, 
sperm, organs or any other tissue. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, 
§7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
D. "Health care facility" or "facility" means a facility, institution or entity licensed pursuant to this 
Title that offers health care to persons in this State, including a home health care provider, hospice 
program and a phannacy licensed pursuant to Title 32. For the purposes of this section, "health 
care facility" does not include a state mental health institute, the Elizabeth Levinson Center, the 
Aroostook Residential Center or Freeport Towne Square. [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEVV); 
PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
E. "Health care information" means information that directly identiﬁes the individual and that 
relates to an individual's physical, mental or behavioral condition, personal or family medical 
history or medical treatment or the health care provided to that individual. "Health care 
information" does not include information that protects the anonymity of the individual by means 
of encryption or encoding of individual identiﬁers or information pertaining to or derived from 
federally sponsored, authorized or regulated research govemed by 21 Code of Federal Regulations, 
Parts 50 and 56 and 45 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 46, to the extent that such information is 
used in a mamer that protects the identiﬁcation of individuals. The Board of Directors of the Maine 
Health Data Organization shall adopt rules to deﬁne health care information that directly identiﬁes 
an individual. Rules adopted pursuant to this paragraph are routine technical rules as deﬁned in 
Title 5, chapter 3'75, subchapter II-A. 
"Health care information" does not include information that is created or received by a member of 
the clergy or other person using spiritual means alone for healing as provided in Title 32, sections 
Generated 
09.212022 §17l1-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information [1
MRS Title 22. §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
2103 and 3210. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 
1999, 1;. 790, Pt. A, §§5s, so (AFF).] 
F. "Health care practitioner" means a person licensed by this State to provide or otherwise lawfully 
providing health care or a partnership or corporation made up of those persons or an ofﬁcer, 
employee, agent or contractor of that person acting in the course and scope of employment, agency 
or contract related to or supportive of the provision of health care to individuals. [PL 1999, c. 
512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, 0. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 
(AFF).] 
G. "Individual" means a natural person who is the subject of the health care information under 
consideration and, in the context of disclosure of health care information, includes the individual's 
authorized representative. [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW);P _L 1997, 0. 793, Pt. A, §10 
(AFF).] 
H. "Third party" or "3rd party" means a person other than the individual to whom the health care 
information relates. [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
[PL 2017, 0.402, Pt. C, §44 (AMD); PL 2019, 0.417, Pt. B, §14 (AFF).] 
2. Confidentiality of health information; disclosure. An individual ‘s health care information is 
conﬁdential and may not be disclosed other than to the individual by the health care practitioner or 
facility except as provided in subsection 3, 3-A, 3-B, 6 or 1 1. Nothing in this section prohibits ahealth 
care practitioner or health care facility from adhering to applicable ethical or professional standards 
provided that these standards do not decrease the protection of conﬁdentiality granted by this section. 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
3. Written authorization to disclose. A health care practitioner or facility may disclose health 
care information pursuant to a written authorization signed by an individual for the speciﬁc purpose 
stated in the authorization. A written authorization to disclose health care information must be retained 
with the individual's health care information. A written authorization to disclose is valid whether it is 
in an original, facsimile or electronic form. A written authorization to disclose must contain the 
following elements: 
A. The name and signature of the individual and the date of signature. If the authorization is in 
electronic form, a unique identiﬁer of the individual and the date the individual authenticated the 
electronic authorization must be stated in place of the individual's signature and date of signature; 
[PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
B. The types of persons authorized to disclose health care information and the nature of the health 
care information to be disclosed; [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, 
- 
§10 (AFF).] 
C. The identity or description of the 3rd party to whom the information is to be disclosed; [PL 
1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
D. The speciﬁc purpose or purposes of the disclosure and whether any subsequent disclosures may 
be made pursuant to the same authorization. An authorization to disclose health care information 
related to substance use disorder treatment or care subject to the requirements of 42 United States 
Code, Section 290dd-2 (Supplement 1998) is govemed by the provisions of that law; [PL 2017, 
c. 407, Pt. A, §72 (AMD).] 
E. The duration of the authorization; [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. 
A, §10 (AFF).] 
F. A statement that the individual may refuse authorization to disclose all or some health care 
information but that refusal may result in improper diagnosis or treatment, denial of coverage ora 
§171 1-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
claim for health beneﬁts or other insurance or other adverse consequences; [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. 
A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
G. A statement that the authorization may be revoked at any time by the individual by executing a 
written revocation, subject to the right of any person who acted in reliance on the authorization 
prior to receiving notice of revocation, instructions on how to revoke an authorization anda 
statement that revocation may be the basis for denial of health beneﬁts or other insurance coverage 
or beneﬁts; and [PL 1997, C. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, 0. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
H. A statement that the individual is entitled to a copy of the authorization form. [PL 1997, c. 
793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
[PL 2017, 0. 407, Pt. A, §72 (AMD).] 
3-A. Oral authorization to disclose. When it is not practical to obtain written authorization under 
subsection 3 from an individual or person acting pursuant to subsection 3-B or when a person chooses 
to give oral authorization to disclose, a health care practitioner or facility may disclose health care 
information pursuant to oral authorization. A health care practitioner or facility shall record with the 
individual's health care information receipt of oral authorization to disclose, including the name of the 
authorizing person, the date, the information and purposes for which disclosure is authorized and the 
identity or description of the 3rd party to whom the information is to be disclosed. 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
3-B. Authorization to disclose provided by a 3rd party. When an individual or an authorized 
representative is unable to provide authorization to disclose under subsection 3 or 3-A, a health care 
practitioner or facility may disclose health care information pursuant to authorization to disclose that 
meets the requirements of subsection 3 or 3-A given by a 3rd party listed in this subsection. A health 
care practitioner or facility may determine not to obtain authorization from a person listed in this 
subsection when the practitioner or facility determines it would not be in the best interest of the 
individual to do so. In making this decision, the health care practitioner or facility shall respect the 
safety of the individual and shall consider any indicators, suspicion or substantiation of abuse. Persons 
who may authorize disclosure under this subsection include: 
A. The spouse ofthe individual; [PL 1999, C. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NE\/V); PL 1999, C. 512, Pt. A, 
§7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
B. A parent ofthe individual; [PL 1999, C. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 
(AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
C. An adult who is a child, grandchild or sibling of the individual; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pi. A, §5 
(NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
D. An adult who is a sibling of the individual's parent or that sibling's spouse or a child of a sibling 
of the individual or a child of a sibling of the individual's spouse, related by blood or adoption; 
[RR 2021, c. 2, Pt. B, §106 (COR).] 
E. An adult related to the individual, by blood or adoption, who is familiar with the individual's 
personal values; and [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); 
PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
F. An adult who has exhibited special concern for the individual and who is familiar with the 
individual's personal values. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 
(AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
[RR 2021, c. 2, Pt. B, §106 (COR).] 
E; §17l 1-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information [3
MRS Title 22. §1711-C. CONFlDENT|AL|TY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
4. Duration of authorization to disclose. An authorization to disclose may not extend longer 
than 30 months, except that the duration of an authorization for the purposes of insurance coverage 
under Title 24, 24-A or 39-A is governed by the provisions of Title 24, 24-A or 39-A, respectively. 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
5. Revocation of authorization to disclose. A person who may authorize disclosure may revoke 
authorization to disclose at any time, subject to the rights of any person who acted in reliance on the 
authorization prior to receiving notice of revocation. A written revocation of authorization must be 
signed and dated. If the revocation is in electronic form, a unique identiﬁer of the individual and the 
date the individual authenticated the electronic authorization must be stated in place of the individual's 
signature and date of signature. A health care practitioner or facility shall record receipt of oral 
revocation of authorization, including the name of the person revoking authorization and the date.A 
revocation of authorization must be retained with the authorization and the individual's health care 
information. 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pi. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
.. .. i..§ ..'~Z§.t2Q£6E_Q;1...,.M-am.-=.. ._. ,_z;, , 
6. Disclosure without authorization to disclose. A health care practitioner or facility may 
disclose, or when required by law must disclose, health care information without authorization to 
disclose under the circumstances stated in this subsection or as provided in subsection ll. Disclosure 
may be made without authorization as follows: 
A. To another health care practitioner or facility for diagnosis, treatment or care of individuals or 
to complete the responsibilities of a health care practitioner or facility that provided diagnosis, 
treatment or care of individuals, as provided in this paragraph. 
(1) For a disclosure within the ofﬁce, practice or organizational affiliate of the health care 
practitioner or facility, no authorization is required. 
(2) For a disclosure outside of the ofﬁce, practice or organizational affiliate of the health care 
practitioner or facility, authorization is not required, except that in nonemergency 
circumstances authorization is required for health care information derived from mental health 
services provided by: 
(a) A clinical nurse specialist licensed under the provisions of Title 32, chapter 31; 
(b) A psychologist licensed under the provisions of Title 32, chapter 56; 
(c) A social worker licensed under the provisions of Title 32, chapter 83; 
(d) A counseling professional licensed under the provisions of Title 32, chapter 119; or 
(e) A physician specializing in psychiatry licensed under the provisions of Title 32, chapter 
36 or 48. 
This subparagraph does not prohibit the disclosure of health care information between a 
licensed pharmacist and a health care practitioner or facility providing mental health services 
for the purpose of dispensing medication to an individual. 
This subparagraph does not prohibit the disclosure without authorization of health care 
information covered under this section to a state-designated statewide health information 
exchange that satisﬁes the requirement in subsection 18, paragraph C of providing a general 
opt-out provision to an individual at all times and that provides and maintains an individual 
protection mechanism by which an individual may choose to opt in to allow the state- 
designated statewide health information exchange to disclose that individual's health care 
information covered under Title 34-B, section 1207. 
§1711-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information J§Z"§L"J§§
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
--;» 
\\_ 
1.1:-->- —-y This subparagraph does not prohibit the disclosure without authorization of health care 
information covered under this paragraph to a health care practitioner or health care facility, or 
to a payor or person engaged in payment for health care, for purposes of care management or 
coordination of care. Disclosure of psychotherapy notes is governed by 45 Code of Federal 
Regulations, Section 164.508(a)(2). A person who has made a disclosure under this 
subparagraph shall make a reasonable effort to notify the individual or the authorized 
representative of the individual of the disclosure; [PL 2013, c. 326, §1 (AMD).] 
B. To an agent, employee, independent contractor or successor in interest of the health care 
practitioner or facility including a state-designated statewide health information exchange that 
makes health care information available electronically to health care practitioners and facilities or 
to a member of a quality assurance, utilization review or peer review team to the extent necessary 
to carry out the usual and customary activities relating to the delivery of health care and for the 
practitioner's or facility's lawful purposes in diagnosing, treating or caring for individuals, including 
billing and collection, risk management, quality assurance, utilization review and peer review. 
Disclosure for a purpose listed in this paragraph is not a disclosure for the purpose of marketing or 
sales; [PL 2011, c. 347, §7 (AMD).] 
C. To a family or household member unless expressly prohibited by the individual or a person 
acting pursuant to subsection 3-B; [PL 1999, C. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, 
§7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
D. To appropriate persons when a health care practitioner or facility that is providing or has 
provided diagnosis, treatment or care to the individual in good faith believes that disclosure is made 
to avert a serious threat to health or safety and meets the conditions, as applicable, described in 45 
Code of Federal Regulations, Section 164.512(i) (2012). A disclosure pursuant to this paragraph 
must protect the conﬁdentiality of the health care information consistent with sound professional 
judgment; [PL 2013, c. 289, §1 (AMD).] 
E. To federal, state or local govermnental entities in order to protect the public health and welfare 
when reporting is required or authorized by law, to report a suspected crime against the health care 
practitioner or facility or to report information that the health care facility's ofﬁcials or health care 
practitioner in good faith believes constitutes evidence of criminal conduct that occurred on the 
premises of the health care facility or health care practitioner; [PL 2011, c. 572, §1 (AMD).] 
E-1. To federal, state or local govermnental entities if the health care practitioner or facility that is 
providing diagnosis, treatment or care to an individual has determined in the exercise of sound 
professional judgment that the following requirements, as applicable, are satisﬁed: 
(1) With regard to a disclosure for public health activities, for law __enfo_rcem_ent pur'po _s_es_or 
Te?i<¥5IFééiI1§ti5 ﬁ'éI§¢3itf6ii'i.@Lé1.2(b),.(<=)_Qr ti) _<2Q12_).tr1 .9$t be .¥11et;eI1<1 
(2) With regard to a disclosure that pertains to a victim of domestic violence or a victim of 
sexual assault, the provisions of 45 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 164.5l2(c)(l)(iii)(A) 
(2012) and Section l64.5l2(c)(l)(iii)(B) (2012) must be met. [PL 2013, c. 289, §2 (NEW).] 
E-2. To federal, state or local govermnental entities if the health care practitioner or facility that is 
providing diagnosis, treatment or care to an individual has determined in the exercise of sound 
professional judgment that the disclosure is required by section 172?; [RR 2015, c. 1, §17 
(COR).] 
F. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (RP); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, 
Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
F -1. As directed by order of a court or as authorized or required by statute; [PL 1999, C. 512, Pt. 
A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
gspgglgbezd z §l7l1-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information I5 that pertains to vii_$tiiT1§'o'f_§bi1'si'>ijeglect_or a5rifeE_ti'e violence, the provisions, of _4§_Cg_d_e__9t;
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
F—2. To a governmental entity pursuant to a lawful subpoena requesting health care information to 
which the governmental entity is entitled according to statute or rules of court; [PL 1999, c. 512, 
Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
F—3. (TEXT EFFECTIVE ON CONTINGENCY: See PL 2013, c. 528, §12) To the Maine 
Health Data Organization as required by and for use in accordance with chapter 1683. Health care 
information, including protected health information, as deﬁned in 45 Code of Federal Regulations, 
Section 160.103 (2013), submitted to the Maine Health Data Organization must be protected by 
means of encryption; [PL 2013, c. 528, §1 (NEW); PL 2013, c. 528, §12 (AFF).] 
G. To a person when necessary to conduct scientiﬁc research approved by an institutional review 
board or by the board of a nonproﬁt health research organization or when necessary for a clinical 
trial sponsored, authorized or regulated by the federal Food and Drug Administration. A person 
conducting research or a clinical trial may not identify any individual patient in any report arising 
from the research or clinical trial. For the purposes of this paragraph, "institutional review board" 
means any board, committee or other group formally designated by a health care facility and 
authorized under federal law to review, approve or conduct periodic review of research programs. 
Health care information disclosed pursuant to this paragraph that identiﬁes an individual must be 
returned to the health care practitioner or facility from which it was obtained or must be destroyed 
when it is no longer required for the research or clinical trial. Disclosure for a purpose listed in this 
paragraph is not a disclosure for the purpose of marketing or sales; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 
(AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
H. To a person engaged in the assessment, evaluation or investigation of the provision of or 
payment for health care or the practices of a health care practitioner or facility or to an agent, 
employee or contractor of such a person, pursuant to statutory or professional standards or 
requirements. Disclosure for a purpose listed in this paragraph is not a disclosure for the purpose 
ofmarketing or sales; [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, 0. 793, Pt. A, §1O(AFF).] 
I. To a person engaged in the regulation, accreditation, licensure or certiﬁcation of a health care 
practitioner or facility or to an agent, employee or contractor of such a person, pursuant to standards 
or requirements for regulation, accreditation, licensure or certiﬁcation; [PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, 
§8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §1O (AFF).] 
J. To a person engaged in the review of the provision of health care by a health care practitioner 
or facility or payment for such health care under Title 24, 24-A or 39-A or under a public program 
for the payment of health care or professional liability insurance for a health care practitioner or 
facility or to an agent, employee or contractor of such a person; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 
(AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
K. To attorneys for the health care practitioner or facility that is disclosing the health care 
information or to a person as required in the context of legal proceedings or in disclosure to a court 
or governmental entity, as determined by the practitioner or facility to be required for the 
practitioner's or facility's own legal representation; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, 
c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
L. To a person outside the ofﬁce of the health care practitioner or facility engaged in payment 
activities, including but not limited to submission to payors for the purposes of billing, payment, 
claims management, medical data processing, determination of coverage or adjudication of health 
beneﬁt or subrogation claims, review of health care services with respect to coverage or 
justification of charges or other administrative services. Payment activities also include but are not 
limited ‘to: 
(1) Activities necessary to determine responsibility for coverage; 
(2) Activities undertaken to obtain payment for health care provided to an individual; and 
§l7l1-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information 0€?2nl:I;I;g
MRS Tille 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
(3) Quality assessment and utilization review activities, including precerti ﬁcation and 
preauthorization of services and operations or services audits relating to diagnosis, treatment 
or care rendered to individuals by the health care practitioner or facility and covered by ahealth 
plan or other payor; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); 
PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
M. To schools, educational institutions, youth camps licensed under section 2495, correctional 
facilities, health care practitioners and facilities, providers of emergency services or a branch of 
federal or state military forces, information regarding immunization of an individual; [PL 2009, 
0.211, Pt. B, §17(AMD).] 
N. To a person when disclosure is needed to set or conﬁrm the date and time of an appointment or 
test or to make arrangements for the individual to receive those services; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. 
A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
O. To a person when disclosure is needed to obtain or convey information about prescription 
medication or supplies or to provide medication or supplies under a prescription; [PL 1999, C. 
512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 
(AFF).] 
P. To a person representing emergency services, health care and relief agencies, corrections 
facilities or a branch of federal or state military forces, of brief conﬁrm ation of general health status; 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. 
A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
Q. To a member of the clergy, of information about the presence of an individual in a health care 
facility, including the person's room number, place of residence and religious affiliation unless 
expressly prohibited by the individual or a person acting pursuant to subsection 3-B; [PL 1999, c. 
512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 
(AFF).] 
R. To a member of the media who asks a health care facility about an individual by name, of brief 
confirmation of general health status unless expressly prohibited by the individual or a person 
acting pursuant to subsection 3-B; [PL 2015, c. 370, §4 (AMD).] 
S. To a member of the public who asks a health care facility about an individual by name, of the 
room number of the individual and brief conﬁrmation of general health status unless expressly 
prohibited by the individual or a person acting pursuant to subsection 3—B; [PL 2017, c. 203, §2 
(AMD).] 
T. To a lay caregiver designated by an individual pursuant to section 1711-G; [PL 2021, c. 398, 
Pt. MMMM, §3 (AMD).] 
U. To a panel coordinator of the matemal, fetal and infant mortality review panel pursuant to 
section 261, subsection 4, paragraph B-1 for the purposes of reviewing health care information of 
a deceased person and a mother of a child who died within one year of birth, including fetal deaths 
after 28 weeks of gestation. For purposes of this paragraph, "panel coordinator" has the same 
meaning as in section 261, subsection 1, paragraph E and "deceased person" has the same meaning 
as in section 261, subsection 1, paragraph B; and [PL 2021, c. 398, Pt. MMMM, §4 (AMD).] 
V. To a panel coordinator of the Aging and Disability Mortality Review Panel pursuant to section 
264, subsection 5, paragraph B, subparagraph (4) for the purposes of reviewing health care 
information of an adult receiving services who is deceased, in accordance with section 264, 
subsection 5, paragraph A. For purposes of this paragraph, "panel coordinator" has the same 
meaning as in section 264, subsection 2, paragraph B. [PL 2021 , C. 398, Pt. MMMM, §5 (NEVV).] 
[PL 2021, C. 398, Pt. MMMM, §§3-5 (AMD).] 
ct
r ssfggrggi z §171 1-C. Confidentiality of health care information I7
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
7. Conﬁdentiality policies. A health care practitioner, facility or state-designated statewide health 
information exchange shall develop and implement policies, standards and procedures to protect the 
conﬁdentiality, security and integrity of health care infonnation to ensure that information is not 
negligently, inappropriately or unlawfully disclosed. The policies of health care facilities must provide 
that an individual being admitted for inpatient care be given notice of the right of the individual to 
control the disclosure of health care information. The policies must provide that routine admission 
forms include clear written notice of the individual's ability to direct that that individual's name be 
removed from the directory listing of persons cared for at the facility and notice that removal may result 
in the inability of the facility to direct visitors and telephone calls to the individual. 
[PL 2011, c. 373, §1 (AMD).] 
8. Prohibited disclosure. A health care practitioner, facility or state-designated statewide health 
information exchange may not disclose health care information for the purpose of marketing or sales 
without written or oral authorization for the disclosure. 
[PL 2011, c. 373, §2 (AMD).] 
9. Disclosures of corrections or clariﬁcations to health care information. A health care 
practitioner or facility shall provide to a 3rd party a copy of an addition submitted by an individual to 
the individual's health care information if: 
A. The health care practitioner or facility provided a copy of the original health care record to the 
3rd party on or aﬁer February 1, 2000; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, C. 512, 
Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
B. The correction or clariﬁcation was submitted by the individual pursuant to section 1711 or 
1711-B and relates to diagnosis, treatment or care; [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, 
c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
C. The individual requests that a copy be sent to the 3rd party and provides an authorization that 
meets the requirements of subsection 3, 3-A or 3-B; and [PL 1999, c. 512, Pi. A, §5 (AMD); PL 
1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
D. If requested by the health care practitioner or facility, the individual pays to the health care 
practitioner or facility all reasonable costs requested by that practitioner or facility. [PL 1997, c. 
793, Pt. A, §8 (NE\/\/); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pl. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
10. Requirements for disclosures. Except as otherwise provided by law, disclosures of health 
care information pursuant to this section are subject to the professional judgment of the health care 
practitioner and to the following requirements. 
A. A health care practitioner or facility that discloses health care information pursuant to subsection 
3, 3-A or 3-B may not disclose infonnation in excess of the information requested in the 
authorization. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, 0. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, 
c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
B. A health care practitioner or facility that discloses health care information pursuant to 
subsections 3, 3-A, 3-B or 6 may not disclose information in excess of the information reasonably 
required for the purpose for which it is disclosed. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, 
c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
C. If a health care practitioner or facility believes that release of health care information to the 
individual would be detrimental to the health of the individual, the health care practitioner or facility 
shall advise the individual and make copies of the records available to the individual's authorized 
representative upon receipt of a written authorization. [PL 1997, C. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 
1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
§17l l-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information o°;}?£‘Z'§$§§
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
D. If a health care practitioner or facility discloses partial or incomplete health care information, 
as compared to the request or directive to disclose under subsection 3, 3-A, 3—B or 6, the disclosure 
must expressly indicate that the infonnation disclosed is partial or incomplete. [PL 1999, c. 512, 
Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
11. Health care information subject to other laws, rules and regulations. Health care 
information that is subject to the provisions of 42 United States Code, Section 290dd-2 (Supplement 
1998); chapters 710-B and 711; Title 5, section 200-E; Title 5, chapter 501; Title 24 or 24-A; Title 
34-B, section 1207; Title 39-A; or other provisions of state or federal law, rule or regulation is governed 
solely by those provisions. 
[PL 2009, 0. 387, §2 (AMD).] 
12. Minors. If a minor has consented to health care in accordance with the laws of this State, 
authorization to disclose health care information pursuant to this section must be given by the minor 
unless otherwise provided by law. 
[PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §10 (AFF).] 
13. Enforcement. This section may be enforced within 2 years of the date a disclosure in violation 
of this section was or should reasonably have been discovered. 
A. When the Attomey General has reason to believe that a person has intentionally violated a 
provision of this section, the Attorney General may bring an action to enjoin unlawful disclosure 
of health care information. [PL 1997, C. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, C. 793, Pt. A, §10 
(AFF).] 
B. An individual who is aggrieved by conduct in violation of this section may bring a civil action 
against a person who has intentionally unlawfully disclosed health care information in the Superior 
Court in the county in which the individual resides or the disclosure occurred. The action may seek 
to enjoin unlawful disclosure and may seek costs and a forfeiture or penalty under paragraph C. 
An applicant for injunctive relief under this paragraph may not be required to give security asa 
condition of the issuance of the injunction. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 
512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
C. A person who intentionally violates this section is subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000, 
payable to the State, plus costs. If a court ﬁnds that intentional violations of this section have 
occurred after due notice of the violating conduct with sufﬁcient frequency to constitute a general 
business practice, the person is subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 for health care 
practitioners and $50,000 for health care facilities, payable to the State. A civil penalty under this 
subsection is recoverable in a civil action. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, 0. 512, 
Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, C. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
D. Nothing in this section may be construed to prohibit a person aggrieved by conduct in violation 
of this section from pursuing all available common law remedies, including but not limited to an 
action based on negligence. [PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (NEW); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 
(AFF); PL 1999, 0. 790, Pt. A, §§58, 60 (AFF).] 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, 0. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
14. Waiver prohibited. Any agreement to waive the provisions of this section is against public 
policy and void. 
[PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §8 (NEW); PL 1997, c. 793, Pt. A, §1O (AFF).] 
15. Immunity. A cause of action in the nature of defamation, invasion of privacy or negligence 
does not arise against any person for disclosing health care information in accordance with this section. 
ggglgbezd z §1711-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information |9
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
This section provides no immunity for disclosing information with malice or willful intent to injure any 
person. 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
16. Application. This section applies to all requests, directives and authorizations to disclose 
health care information executed on or after February 1, 2000. An authorization to disclose health care 
information executed prior to February 1, 2000 that does not meet the standards of this section is 
deemed to comply with the requirements of this section until the next health care encounter between 
the individual and the health care practitioner or facility. 
[PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §5 (AMD); PL 1999, c. 512, Pt. A, §7 (AFF); PL 1999, c. 790, Pt. A, 
§§58, 60 (AFF).] 
17. Repeal. 
[PL 2001, c. 346, §1 (RP).] 
18. Participation in a state-designated statewide health information exchange. The following 
provisions apply to participation in a state-designated statewide health information exchange. 
A. A health care practitioner may not deny a patient health care treatment and a health insurer may 
not deny a patient a health insurance beneﬁt based solely on the provider's or patient's decision not 
to participate in a state-designated statewide health information exchange. Except when otherwise 
required by federal law, a payor of health care beneﬁts may not require participation in a state- 
designated statewide health information exchange as a condition of participating in the payor's 
provider network. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §2O (RPR).]I 
B. Recovery for professional negligence is not allowed against any health care practitioner or 
health care facility on the grounds of a health care practitioner's or a health care facility's 
nonparticipation in a state-designated statewide health information exchange arising out of or in 
comlection with the provision of or failure to provide health care services. In any civil action for 
professional negligence or in any proceeding related to such a civil action or in any arbitration, 
proof of a health care practitioner's, a health care facility's or a patient's participation or 
nonparticipation in a state-designated statewide health information exchange is inadmissible as 
evidence of liability or nonliability arising out of or in connection with the provision of or failure 
to provide health care services. This paragraph does not prohibit recovery or the admission of 
evidence of reliance on information in a state-designated statewide electronic health information 
exchange when there was participation by both the patient and the patient's health care practitioner. 
[PL 2011, 0. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
C. A state-designated statewide health information exchange to which health care information is 
disclosed under this section shall provide an individual protection mechanism by which an 
individual may opt out from participation to prohibit the state-designated statewide health 
information exchange from disclosing the individual's health care information to a health care 
practitioner or health care facility. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
D. At point of initial contact, a health care practitioner, health care facility or other entity 
participating in a state-designated statewide health information exchange shall provide to each 
patient, on a separate form, at minimum: 
(1) Information about the state-designated statewide health information exchange, including a 
description of beneﬁts and risks of participation in the state-designated statewide health 
information exchange; 
(2) A description of how and where to obtain more infonnation about or contact the state- 
designated statewide health information exchange; 
I §l7l l-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information o(si§Iz:.rz?d:g
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
(3) An opportunity for the patient to decline participation in the state-designated statewide 
health information exchange; and 
(4) A declaration that a health care practitioner, health care facility or other entity may not 
deny a patient health care treatment based solely on the provider's or patient's decision not to 
participate in a state-designated statewide health information exchange. 
The state-designated statewide health information exchange shall develop the fonn for use under 
this paragraph, with input from consumers and providers. The form must be approved by the ofﬁce 
of the state coordinator for health infonnation technology within the Govemor‘s ofﬁce of health 
policy and ﬁnance. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
E. A health care practitioner, health care facility or other entity participating in a state-designated 
statewide health infonnation exchange shall communicate to the exchange the decision of each 
patient who has declined participation and shall do so within a reasonable time frame, but not more 
than 2 business days following the receipt of a signed form, as described in paragraph D, ﬁom the 
patient, or shall establish a mechanism by which the patient may decline participation in the state- 
designated statewide health infonnation exchange at no cost to the patient. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. 
A, §20 (RPR).] 
F. A state-designated statewide health information exchange shall process the request of a patient 
who has decided not to participate in the state-designated statewide health information exchange 
within 2 business days of receiving the patient's decision to decline, unless additional time is needed 
to verify the identity of the patient. A signed authorization from the patient is required beforea 
patient is newly entered or reentered into the system if the patient chooses to begin participation at 
a later date. 
Except as otherwise required by applicable law, regulation or rule or state or federal contract, or 
when the state-designated statewide health information exchange is acting as the agent of a health 
care practitioner, health care facility or other entity, the state-designated statewide health 
information exchange shall remove health infonnation of individuals who have declined 
participation in the exchange. In no event may health information retained in the state-designated 
statewide health information exchange as set forth in this paragraph be made available to health 
care practitioners, health care facilities or other entities except as otherwise required by applicable 
law, regulation or rule or state or federal contract, or when the health care practitioner, health care 
facility or other entity is the originator of the information. [PL 201 1, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
G. A state-designated statewide health information exchange shall establish a secure website 
accessible to patients. This website must: 
(1) Permit a patient to request a report of who has accessed that patient's records and when the 
access occurred. This report must be delivered to the patient within 2 business days upon 
veriﬁcation of the patient's identity by the state-designated statewide health information 
exchange;' 
(2) Provide a mechanism for a patient to decline participation in the state-designated statewide 
health infonnation exchange; and 
(3) Provide a mechanism for the patient to consent to participation in the state-designated 
statewide health infonnation exchange if the patient had previously declined participation. [PL 
2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
H. A state-designated statewide health information exchange shall establish for patients an 
alternate procedure to that provided for in paragraph F that does not require Internet access. A 
health care practitioner, health care facility or other entity participating in the state-designated 
statewide health information exchange shall provide infonnation about this altemate procedure to 
Generated 
09.28.2022 §1711-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information I11
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
all patients. The information must be included on the form identiﬁed in paragraph D. [PL 2011, 
c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
I. A state-designated statewide health information exchange shall maintain records regarding all 
disclosures of health care information by and through the state-designated statewide health 
information exchange, including the requesting party and the dates and times of the requests and 
disclosures. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
J. A state-designated statewide health information exchange may not charge a patient or an 
authorized representative of a patient any fee for access or communication as provided in this 
subsection. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
K. Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection to the contrary, a health care practitioner, 
health care facility or other entity shall provide the form and communication required by paragraphs 
D and F to all existing patients following the effective date of this subsection. [PL 2011, c. 691, 
Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
L. A state-designated statewide health information exchange shall meet or exceed all applicable 
federal laws and regulations pertaining to privacy, security and breach notiﬁcation regarding 
personally identiﬁable protected health information, as deﬁned in 45 Code of Federal Regulations, 
Part 160. If a breach occurs, the state-designated statewide health information exchange shall 
arrange with its participants for notiﬁcation of each individual whose protected health information 
has been, or is reasonably believed by the exchange to have been, breached. For purposes of this 
paragraph, "breach" has the same meaning as in 45 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 164, as 
amended. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
M. The state-designated statewide health infonnation exchange shall develop a quality 
management plan, including auditing mechanisms, in consultation with the ofﬁce of the state 
coordinator for health information technology within the department, who shall review the plan 
and results. [PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
[PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (RPR).] 
20. Exemption from freedom of access laws. Except as provided in this section, the names and 
other identifying information of individuals in a state-designated statewide health information exchange 
are conﬁdential and are exempt from the provisions of Title 1, chapter 13. 
[PL 2011, c. 373, §4 (NE\/\I).] 
SECTION HISTORY 
RR 1997, c. 2, §44 (COR). PL 1997, c. 793, §A8 (NEW). PL 1997, c. 793, §A10 (AFF). PL 
1999, c. 3, ,§§1,2 (AMD). PL 1999, c. 3, §§3,5 (AFF). PL 1999, c. 512, §A5 (AMD). PL 1999, 
c. 512, §A6, 7 (AFF). PL 1999, c. 790, §§A58,60 (AFF). RR 2001, 0. 1, §26 (COR). PL 2001, 
c. 346, §1 (AMD). PL 2009, c. 211, Pt. B, §17 (AMD). PL 2009, c. 292, §3 (AMD). PL 2009, c. 
292, §6 (AFF). PL 2009, c. 387, §§1, 2 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 347, §§6-8 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 
373, §§1-4 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 572, §1 (AMD). PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §20 (AMD). PL 2013, 
c. 289, §§1, 2 (AMD). PL 2013, c. 326, §1 (AMD). PL 2013, c. 528, §1 (AMD). PL 2013, c. 
528, §12(AFF). RR 2015, c. 1, §17 (COR). PL 2015, 0.218, §1 (AMD). PL 2015, C. 370, §§4, 
5 (AMD). PL 2017, c. 203, §§2-4 (AMD). PL 2017, c. 402, Pt. C, §44 (AMD). PL 2017, c. 402, 
Pt. F, §1 (AFF). PL 2017, c. 407, Pt. A, §72 (AMD). PL 2019, c. 417, Pt. B, §14 (AFF). PL 
2021, 0. 398, Pt. MMMM, §§3-5 (AMD). RR 2021, c. 2, Pt. B, §106 (COR). 
The State of Maine claims a copyright in its codiﬁed statutes. If you intend to republish this material, we require that you include 
the following disclaimer in your publication: 
All copyrights and other rights to statutory text are reserved by the State of Maine. The text incfuded in this publication reﬂects 
changes made through the Second Regular Session of the 130th Maine Legislature and is current through October I, 2022. The 
12 | §17l 1-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care infomiation o(;?;$g§g
MRS Title 22, §1711-C. CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH CARE INFORMATION 
text is subject to change without notice. It is a version that has not been oﬂicially certified by the Secretary of State. Refer to the 
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated and supplements for certiﬁed text. 
The Office of the Revisor of Statutes also requests that you send us one copy of any statutory publication you may produce. Our 
goal is not to restrict publishing activity, but to keep track of who is publishing what, to identity any needless duplication and to 
preserve the State's copyright rights. 
PLEASE NOTE: The Revisor's Ofﬁce cannot perform research for or provide legal advice or interpretation of Maine law to the 
public. If you need legal assistance, please contact a qualiﬁed attomey. 
§l711-C. Conﬁdentiality of health care information l13
