    
PO Box 7860 Portland, ME 04112 (207) 774-5444 www.aclumaine.org    TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ.  LD 474 – Ought Not To Pass  An Act to Improve Collaboration Between Mandatory Reporters and Law Enforcement in the Investigation of Alleged Child Abuse and Neglect  Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  March 15, 2023 Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am policy director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to oppose LD 474, that would require medical agencies that are mandated reporters to speak to police without a warrant or subpoena.  If enacted, this bill would require staff of a medical institution that made a report to the Department of Health and Human Services (the “Department”) as a mandated reporter of suspected child abuse, to disclose “the same information” to police that the mandated reporter submitted to the Department.  There are already ways for law enforcement to obtain information from medical providers: using subpoenas and warrants. These are tools with safeguards in place—court oversight—that are meant to ensure fairness while allowing police to still obtain information. It is unclear why these existing methods are insufficient tools to investigate child abuse. Additionally, the Department is already able to release to law enforcement the very information this bill seeks to disclose. 22 M.R.S. §4008(2)(A-1) (“The department may disclose relevant information in the records to…[a] law enforcement agency, to the extent necessary for reporting, investigating and prosecuting an alleged crime”). Because the Department is already entitled to divulge this information and the medical providers are only to repeat “the same” information that they divulged to the Department, the bill does not aid investigations but does add burdens to our already overworked healthcare workers.  Children deserve to be safe. In order to keep them safe, we do not need to bend long-established, important legal safeguards in place. We ask you to vote ought not to pass. 
