 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 799 
 
An Act to Fund Patrol Positions for the Penobscot County Sheriff's Office  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
March 13, 2023  
 
Senator Be ebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety,  greetings .  My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to oppose  LD 799 because it would 
expand a fundamentally flawed arm of state government.  
If enacted, this bill would establish an ongoing, annual appropriation of $ 1,243,262  to 
fund six new patrol positions in the Penobscot County Sheriff’s office. This new expense, and 
these new positions, are entirely unnecessary. Our state expenditures must  reflect our values. 
Over the past few years, it has become inescapably clear that we have relied on the policing 
institutions in our country to solve challenges better suited to our healthcare, housing, and 
educational systems. The results have been disas trous for everyone, but especially for nonwhite 
Mainers, poor Mainers, and Mainers with disabilities. Our constitutional values of freedom from 
unreasonable state intrusions, of liberty and dignity, are not advanced by the criminalization of 
poverty or men tal health challenges. Adding new patrol  positions to the Penobscot County 
Sheriff’s office would be a continuation of failed systems .1 Given the opportunities that we have 
to invest in housing and health care, choosing instead to fund new patrol position s is a missed 
opportunity.  
We urge you to vote ought not to pass . 
 
1 See Callie Ferguson and Erin Rhoda, Penobscot County Jail guards sexually harassed their co -workers 
and kept their jobs , Apr. 1, 2019, BDN, available at 
https://www.bangordailynews.com/2019/04/01/mainefocus/penobscot -county -jail-guards -sexually -
harassed -their-coworkers -and-kept-their-jobs/ .  
