 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 799, An Act to Fund Patrol Positions for the Penobscot County Sheriff’s Office  
 
March 13, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee neither for nor against LD 799. Briefly, as with LD 756, we support the intent of 
the bill, but we believe this issue cuts across all Maine counties and should be part of a statewide solution. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Since the very beginning of the Maine State Police service, state troopers have had the important 
function and duty of patrolling Maine’s highways. They have done, and continue to do, an excellent job. 
However, as time has gone on, the mission of the Maine State Police has expanded in ways that also benefit 
Maine people, but a consequence of this expanded mission is that fewer state police officers have been available 
for highway patrol. A lack of state funding, and hiring challenges, has also hampered the ability of the Maine 
State Police to keep up with highway patrol, particularly in the rural areas of Maine like Penobscot County. 
 
Over time, partly as a result of local desire for expanded highway patrol, and partly to backfill patrol services 
previously provided by the Maine State Police, county sheriff departments have picked up a greater share of 
highway and rural patrol. In some of the more urban counties, the vast bulk of highway patrol is provided by 
sheriff deputies. In Maine’s more rural counties, there is a mix of coverage by county sheriff departments and 
the Maine State Police. 
 
This bill raises an important issue: to what degree should important rural and highway patrol services be 
provided by the Maine State Police, which is funded by state taxpayers, and to what degree should such services 
be provided by county deputies, who are funded by local property taxpayers. An even broader question is: what 
level of service do we want, particularly since demand for services seems to be going up, not down. 
 
LD 799 provides a glimpse into this issue from the lens of a single Maine county that has very rural parts: 
Penobscot County. If approved, it would call for a General Fund appropriation beginning in fiscal year 2023-24 
to the Department of Public Safety for the Penobscot County Sheriff’s Office to hire six new patrol positions. 
 
However, as noted earlier, rural patrol is not just a Penobscot County issue. It is a statewide issue impacting all 
Maine counties, particular our most rural ones. For this reason, MCCA does not believe the solution is to pass a 
bill that only addresses one county. In making this statement, we want to make clear that we do not oppose a 
solution that includes Penobscot County; however, we want to make sure all counties are addressed by any 
solution. 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 799 
March 13, 2023 
Page 2 
 
  
As it turns out, our Association has been working with multiple stakeholders over the past year on this important 
issue of rural patrol. We have engaged with sheriffs, municipalities, the Department of Public Safety, and others 
to better understand the needs and challenges of different groups, and all agree that there is a problem. What has 
not emerged is a clear solution. With this in mind, the Association worked with Rep. Anne Graham who has 
submitted LD 630, An Act to Ensure Rural Law Enforcement Services in Maine , which is a concept draft 
allowing for stakeholders to identify the level of rural patrol needed, who is best-positioned to provide that 
service, and then determine how such services should be paid for. A General Fund appropriation to pay for local 
sheriff service is certainly one possible solution. There may be others, and we are open to exploring them. 
 
Ultimately, because county commissioners are responsible for the cost of the sheriff’s office in every county, our 
members are very cognizant of the burden placed on local property taxpayers who pay for such services. With 
this in mind, we are motivated to look very carefully at all options, including options that provide relief to local 
property taxpayers.  
 
In sum, we appreciate the intent and spirit behind LD 799, and we very much understand the challenges being 
confronted in Penobscot County. However, we believe that any solution undertaken by the Legislature must be 
statewide and address each of Maine’s impacted counties. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard A. Dutremble, President, MCCA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
