20226502.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 1149,  
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons Accused by 
Requiring Notification of Those Rights 
Submitted by Chief Charles Rumsey  
April 3, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief 
of the Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the 
Maine Chiefs of Police Association in Opposition to LD 1149.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to establish 
an accused  person's  right  to  be  notified  of  the  person's  rights  before  
a  custodial  interrogation  in  a criminal investigation. 
We are in opposition to LD 1149 because the courts already provide the 
protection that this bill seeks to provide. In 1966, the United States Supreme Court 
held, in Miranda v. Arizona , that the Fifth Amendment serves to protect people 
when “their freedom of action is curtailed in any significant way.”  From that point, 
the Supreme Court has made clear that Miranda is a part of our national culture, 
and it and the Maine Supreme Court have set the rules that law enforcement must 
follow. Miranda  is case law, shaped by multiple court decisions over decades - it 
is nuanced and cannot be captured by a simple constitutional change.  
There is always a balance between protecting a potential victim’s right to 
closure and the potential defendant’s right to the Fifth Amendment protections. But 
this balance is already considered by the United Supreme Court and the Maine 
Supreme Judical Court. The courts create necessary exceptions to the rule, like the 
public safety exception which allows a police officer to question a suspect before 
reading them their Miranda Rights in order to protect the public. However, this bill 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
20226502.1 does not consider any of the many exceptions to Miranda . For example, law 
enforcement might ask someone who threatened to harm a local school if they were 
working with anyone else. That response could help saves lives, and it is important 
to ensure that law enforcement are not worried about asking the question for fear 
that it might harm a court case down the road.  
If this legislation passes, then there will be unforeseen and deleterious 
consequences to law enforcement and public safety. For example, it is unclear if 
there is going to be any potential civil penalties associated with this constitutional 
amendment. Like, if failure to read Miranda  would trigger a 1983 civil rights case. 
We are doing everything we can to keep and recruit qualified law enforcement 
officers who want to be in the job to protect the public. If this does create a civil 
liability, then we know that creating a civil liability will drive good people away 
from the job.  
We want to assure you that the Courts have already achieved the goal of this bill 
and they will not hesitate to protect a defendant’s constitutional rights. Therefore, 
we vehemently believe the legislation before you is not needed.  
For these reasons, we hope that you will vote in opposition to LD 1149. And, on 
behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank you for your 
work on this Committee.  
