 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1149 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: L.D. 1149, Resolution, P roposing an Amendment to the Constitution  of Maine to Strengthen 
the Due P rocess Rights of Persons Accused by Requiring Notifica tion of Those Rights  
 
DA: April  3, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1149 .  
 
LD 1149 would significantly expand the war nings that must  be provided to individuals who 
are questioned  by and interact with law enforcement .   Not all  the rights in Article 1, section 6 apply  
at the time of questioning  (e.g., copy of charges that don ’t yet exist, confrontation of witnesses , jury 
trial rights) .    The  requirement would necessitate  extended  discussions between law enforcement  
and citizens regarding  when certain rights apply at wh at stages, the potential for error in explaining 
the nuanc es of those rights, increased litigation, and significant confusion on the part of  citizens .   
Constitutionalizing  the warning itself, as opposed to the underlying rights already listed in the 
Cons titution, means that failure to give the warning amounts  to a constitutional  violation, which can 
have both evidentiary and liability  consequen ces.   
 
Involuntary confession s may not be used in criminal proceedings.   Failure to provide 
warnings when required results in exclusion of evidence , which provides significant  incent ive to 
follow  the law.    As with LD 748, t he proposal would likely result in significant confusion for all 
parties involved in routine law enforcement -citizen encounters , and conflicting decisions from 
courts addressing parallel civil and criminal proceedings arising out of the same circumstances.   In 
light of Maine ’s robust caselaw e xcluding unwarned and involuntary statements , as well as court 
rules and caselaw recognizing and protecting the other listed rights , CLAC does not see the need for 
an additional constitutional  provision  that will likely create  unintended negative consequences.  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
