CLAC MEMORANDUM/TESTIMONY 
LD 1149 (Opposed) 
TO: Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matt Moonen 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC) 
c/0 laura.yustak@maine.gov 
RE: L.D. 1149, Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Strengthen 
the Due Process Rights of Persons Accused by Requiring Notiﬁcation of Those Rights 
DA: April 3, 2023 
The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following 
testimony in opposition to LD 1149. 
LD 1149 would significantly expand the warnings that must be provided to individuals who 
are questioned by and interact with law enforcement. Not all the rights in Article 1, section 6 apply 
at the time of questioning (e.g., copy of charges that don’t yet exist, confrontation of witnesses, jury 
trial rights). The requirement would necessitate extended discussions between law enforcement 
and citizens regarding when certain rights apply at what stages, the potential for error in explaining 
the nuances of those rights, increased litigation, and significant confusion on the part of citizens. 
Constitutionalizing the warning itself, as opposed to the underlying rights already listed in the 
Constitution, means that failure to give the warning amounts to a constitutional violation, which can 
have both evidentiary and liability consequences. 
Involuntary confessions may not be used in criminal proceedings. Failure to provide' 
wamings when required results in exclusion of evidence, which provides signiﬁcant incentive to 
follow the law. As with LD 748, the proposal would likely result in signiﬁcant confusion for all 
parties involved in routine law enforcement-citizen encounters, and conﬂicting decisions from 
courts addressing parallel civil and criminal proceedings arising out of the same circumstances. In 
light of Maine’s robust caselaw excluding unwarned and involuntary statements, as well as court 
rules and caselaw recognizing and protecting the other listed rights, CLAC does not see the need for 
an additional constitutional provision that will likely create unintended negative consequences. 
*CLAC is an advisory body established by the Legislature. 17-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357. It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.
