STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
State House Station 42 
45 Commerce Drive, 
Augusta, Maine 
043 33-0042 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCI-IUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cnmr 
Testimony of Paul Cavanaugh, DPS FOAA records officer, Legislative 
Liaison, and MSP Staff Attorney 
IN REGARD TO LD 1149 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to 
Strengthen the Due Process Rights of Persons Accused by Requiring 
Notiﬁcation of Those Rights 
Senator Carney, Rep. Moonen and distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Paul Cavanaugh, and I am the 
FOAA ofﬁcer and legislative liaison for the Department of Public Safety and 
the Staff Attorney for the Maine State Police. For over 30 years I was, and 
remain part time as, an Assistant District Attomey here in Maine. I am here 
today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine 
State Police regarding LD 1149; We support the due process rights of persons 
accused of crime but oppose this resolve. 
The resolve proposes to add a single sentence to Article 1, section 6 of the 
Maine Constitution: “The accused has a right to be notiﬁed of the rights 
described by this section before a custodial interrogation ” . We understand 
the sponsor’s intent is to incorporate the so-called Mfiranda warnings into the 
Maine Constitution. However, as drafted this proposed constitutional 
amendment would go much farther than that. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE
Recently, the United States Supreme Court ruled that While the warning is 
required before commencing a custodial interrogation, a failure to give 
Miranda warnings is not a basis for an off1cer’s civil liability if sued fora 
violation of the suspect’s Constitutional rights because the warnings are 
court created and the remedy is for the court to impose the exclusionary rule. 
In Miranda, rather than pointing to text in the constitution, the Court 
interpreted the Constitution to ﬁnd that in order to fulﬁll the protection 
against self-incrimination, a police officer has to infonn the suspect of 
certain rights before proceeding With a custodial interrogation. In that 
decision, Vega v. T ekoh, the Court stated the proper remedy for a defendant 
is to exclude the evidence at trial — thus eliminating any incentive fora 
police officer to violate the accused’s rights. While the Maine Law Court 
has a pending case that will answer the question of Whether the Maine 
Constitution also requires Miranda Warnings, defendants in Maine courts do 
have the protection of the exclusionary rule if a statement is made ina 
custodial interrogation and in violation of their Miranda rights. 
However, the amendment, as drafted goes much farther than addressing the 
treatment of custodial interrogations. Currently, the Miranda Warning 
provides 4 statements of rights and two questions: 
(J) You have the right to remain silent. 
(2) Anything you say can and will be used against you in a court of law. 
(3) You have the right to an attorney. 
(4) If you cannot aﬂord an attorney, one will be provided for you. 
Do you understand the rights I have just read to you? 
With these rights in mind, do you wish to speak to me?” 
The proposed amendment requires law enforcement to advise a suspect of 
his rights per Art. 1 §6 before a custodial interrogation may commence. The 
rights in §6 that a suspect would need to be advised of are: 
(l) the right to be heard by the accused and counsel to the accused, or either, 
at the election of the accused; 
(2) to demand the nature and cause of the accusation, and have a copy 
thereof; 
(3) to be confronted by the Witnesses against the accused; 
(4) to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in favor of the 
accused; 
(5) to have a speedy, public and impartial trial, and, except in trials by 
martial law or impeachment, by a jury of the vicinity; 
(6) to not be compelled to furnish or give evidence against himself or 
herself; and 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COIVEASSION * EXCELLENCE
(7) to not be deprived of life, liberty, property, or privileges, but by 
judgement of that person's peers or the law of the land. 
How would this amendment work in practice? The officer would have to 
tell the accused that they have a right to confront the witnesses against them, 
but not now; they have a right to a copy of the accusation, but not until they 
get to court; OR would those being witnesses against and a copy of the 
written accusations must be present at the custodial interrogation? Evena 
cursory review of the rights implicated, and the nature of a criminal 
investigation will show that the proposed Amendment will not provide any 
protection to civil rights but will have a profound chilling effect on law 
enforcement investigations. 
Since it was ﬁrst decided in 1966 the contours of the protections announced 
in Miranda have become well known and well understood by citizens of our 
state and nation as well as by police and prosecutors. In real life whena 
suspect is in custody and being interrogated can be a very ﬂuid situation that 
can be dissected by lawyers and judges years later with beneﬁt of hindsight. 
The Legislature should tread very carefully before creating new 
constitutional language that will take years to be understood and very 
difficult to amend, While also attempting to create new civil liability for law 
enforcement ofﬁcers in the meantime. 
Maine law enforcement respects the rights of suspects. Miranda warnings 
are required by the SCOTUS and will continue to be provided. This 
Constitutional Amendment, though well intentioned, has the potential to 
upend law enforcement in Maine. Consequently, We oppose LD 1149. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I 
thank you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions 
that you might have. 
lNTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-7088 (Fax)
