 
1 | Pa g e  
 
Members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee and the many people who 
tirelessly work  to shape and advance Maine's Medical Cannabis Program, thank you.   
 
My name is Andrew Thacher. I am a registered medical patient in the Program and co -
founder of Seed2Health LLC, a self -funded firm that supports volunteer members of 
Seed2Health Learning Health Alliance.   The Alliance is evolving as an open forum rather 
than a legal entity among people who share a common vision.   We call th is vision 
"learning health". Our office is at Tech Place in Brunswick on the former naval base.   
 
I am speaking today as a registered patient and a member of the Alliance.   This 
weekend, a few  of us met to discuss our enthusiastic support for LD 1819, An Act to 
Create the Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission and the Medical Cannabis 
Alternative Health Board. We concluded with a few language suggestions that we hope 
will make this Bill even better.  
 
The research potential that will be funded under this Bill is exactly what the state needs 
to illuminate the unique qualities that Program stakeholders - especially its registered 
patients - are learning.   Bringing this learning together through funded research will 
continue to position Maine as the leading market for advancing medical cannabis and 
the making of tomorrow's beneficial plant science.   We see ca nnabis science as a 
catalyst for this work.  
 
With regard to the Research Fund, the fluid and dynamic nature of this rapidly evolving 
understanding must be served by an equally dynamic research agenda - one that is not 
shaped in law today but one that is ad justed over time by a competent Board as new 
understanding ebbs and flows.  
 
To build on the metaphor of a rising tide that lifts all boats, our language suggestions  - 
we hope  - seek to assure that research funded by the Board illuminates qualities of a 
"tide" - Maine's unique capabilities among all US States - to lift our nation's 
understanding of all beneficial plant "boats".  
 
The research findings we envision under this program will inform what we all need to 
know - findings that should be accessible unde r a form of creative commons copyright 
allowing open source use without added costs for use or access.   To be clear, our 
position is that Maine ’s public funds should not fund research that advances proprietary 
interests and benefits . 
 
2 | Pa g e  
 
 
What  might be researched? Our s hared vision of learning health is about health that 
learns from our collective experiences.   The Alliance is creating an open source and 
trusted "mark" that will convey qualities and enable capabilities upon which we can rely 
when using cannabis —or any b eneficial plant —for our own health maintenance or 
health recovery.  
 
Learning health is learning what works together...and what doesn't.   When you see this 
mark, you will know that learning health is at work - safely, confidentially, securely , and 
as cost -effectively as we - together - can achieve.  
 
To shape Learning Health, we have been researching and meeting here in Maine for 
years .  We now see whole plant and whole person health as a valued complement to 
any medical, spiritual, dietary and health discipli ne. Nearly 50 meetings and 1,000's of 
hours together, we are considering everything from seed to health - our eye always on 
how to add value and lower cost.   Cannabis is medicine that the sickest among us can 
least afford.   
 
Topics of our research include aspects of testing and how to optimize the benefit of test 
results for consumers who want to know and understand the meanings of these tests 
and implications to their health.   These tests are paid by us - the consumer - when we 
pay for cannabis products. The results should be meaningful to us  and those upon 
whom we rely for regulating and cultivating/providing the products we are consuming.  
 
Through our research, we are crafting an open -source  and generative  “consensus 
guidance ” for what we've been calling "intelligent testing." Questions we seek to  answer  
ever more usefully through learned experience  include:  
• What do we want to know about the 50+ terpenes that our labs can now 
determine?    
• How do we want to see and learn about this information and, as well, toxicity and 
"potency " results - not just THC and CBD, but the other 100+ cannabinoids that 
contribute differently to health balance within our Endocannabinoid 
Systems/"ECS".    
• Which detection limits are best for what plants and products?  
• When can one-size-fits-all reporting and labelling be useful and when might it 
not? 
 
 
3 | Pa g e  
 
Beyond testing, we are asking and researching questions about labelling, educating, 
growing and other aspects of cannabis and ECS health.   To facilitate consistent ways of 
characterizing cannabis and Endocannabinoid System health - we also are developing a 
type of dictionary  that ultimately will serve as an open -source ontology.   We need this 
globally as an open -source resource  for cross -markets learning with rapidly evolving 
emerg ence of  tomorrow' s "semantic web".  
 
Thank you for this Bill and the work that you are all doing to bring it forward.  
 
Suggestions on the Draft Bill Language  
 
Language suggestions below are provided following  a cursory review of the Bill.   These 
suggestions will be reviewed  and revised further for review during the VLA work session . 
 
Language  suggestions - not reflected below but discussed - addressing topics including 
respective roles and membership of the Commission vs the Board will be provided at 
the work session.  
 
[Proposed new text is italicized  and bracketed].    
 
Proposed deleted text is in red with strikethrough .  
 
Text of the Bill (beginning with Bill Summary text)  
 
SUMMARY  
This bill makes changes to the medical cannabis and adult use cannabis laws, including:  
 
1. Creating the Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission with membership 
consisting of stakeholders in the medical cannabis industry in the State to  study, analyze 
and report findings about the  administration  
 
[cultivation, regulation, safety, efficacy and other qualities of medical ] 
 
and medical use of  
 
[cannabis to the Legislature and to ] 
 
 
4 | Pa g e  
 
make recommendations for improvement and nominate members to the Medical 
Cannabis Alternative Health Board;  
 
Of note: Comments about the distinct roles of t he Commission vs the Board and 
need for inclusion of complementary perspectives/expertise are not reflected in 
this testimony.  
 
2. Creating the Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board to collect and provide 
information and administer grants to support ob jective scientific research on the  
 
[safety and efficacy health effects ] 
 
efficacy  of harvested cannabis as part of  
 
[complementary health and ] 
 
medical treatment and the health effects of harvested cannabis used as part 
of medical  treatment. The board’s s taffing and activities are funded by the Medical Use 
of Cannabis Fund;   
 
5.  Medical cannabis research grant program established.  The medical cannabis 
research grant program, referred to in this subsection as "the program," is established 
within the depart ment to provide grant money to support objective scientific research, 
including observational and clinical trials and existing research, on the  
 
[safety and efficacy health effects ] 
 
efficacy  of harvested cannabis as part of  
 
[complementary health and ]  
 
medical treatment.  
 
 
1. Commission established.   The Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission, 
established in Title 5, section 12004 -I, subsection 52 -D and referred to in this section as 
"the commission," is created for the purposes of studying, analyzing  and reporting findings 
about the  
 
5 | Pa g e  
 
 
[cultivation, regulation, safety, efficacy and other qualities of ] 
 
administration of and  medical use of cannabis under this chapter and making 
recommendations for improvement.  
 
§2430 -J.  Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board  
 
1. Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
following terms have the following meanings.  
 
A.  "Complementary health plant -based medicines and practices" means a range of  
 
[health and medical therapies using plant -based medicines that complement]  
 
medical therapies using plant -based medicines that are beyond the scope of conventional 
medicine but may be used alongside traditional medicine and practices in  the treatment 
or prevention of disease or ill health.  
 
B. "Ingestion modality" means the manner in which cannabis has been ingested or 
introduced into a person's body, including inhaling combusted cannabis, inhaling 
vaporized cannabis, through internasal spray, buccal administration and  administration 
by topical  
 
[, vaginal ] 
 
or rectal methods.  
 
C. "Institutional review board" means a  federally funded  committee that  
 
[has been formally designated to review and monitor biomedical research involving 
human subjects and ] 
 
is responsible for overseeing research involving human participants and ensuring that 
human research participants are not mistreated and that their rights are protected.  
 
[D. Harvested cannabis means cannabis that has been grown in the State of Maine by a 
currently registere d licenses within Ma ine's Medical Cannabis Program ].  
 
6 | Pa g e  
 
 
 
6. Duties.  The duties of the board are to carry out the purposes of the medical cannabis 
research grant program under section 2430, subsection 5, including:  
 
A. Administering the medical cannabis res earch grant program by soliciting, reviewing, 
evaluating, approving and awarding grants governed by subsection 7 to promote 
research, conduct studies, perform analysis and evaluate complementary health plant -
based medicines and practices, including the saf ety, effectiveness, proper use and best 
practices in  
 
[cultivating, testing, labeling ] 
 
manufacturing, administering and using the medicines; and  
 
 
7. Grants.   Grants awarded by the board are governed by this subsection.  
 
A. A grant may be awarded for obje ctive scientific research, including observational and 
clinical trials and existing research, on the efficacy of harvested cannabis as part of 
medical treatment and the health effects of harvested cannabis used as part of medical 
treatment, including:  
 
(1) The 
 
[cultivating, testing, labeling ] 
 
manufacture, processing, safety, effectiveness, administration or use of complementary 
health plant -based medicines and practices;  
 
(4) Collaborate with researchers, institutions and governments in other jurisdictions and 
internationally .  Note: While a  good criteria best left to the Board to determine, not law.  
