Arleigh A Kraus 
May 8, 2023 
LD1819 An Act to Create the Maine Medical Cannabis Advisoiy Commission and the Medical Cannabis 
Alternative Health Board 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Arlelgh Kraus. l am a registered cannabis caregiver with a B.S. in 
biochemistry, an organic farmer, and business owner in Warren. l am a founding member of the Maine 
Craft Cannabis Association, a member of Seed2Health Learning Health Alliance, a board member of 
Medical Marijuana Caregivers of Maine, the Chair of the Adult and Medical Cannabis Committee for the 
Town of Warren, and lam a founding member of the Cannabis Council of Maine. l have been a caregiver 
in Maine for over 10 years. 
l am part of a group currently engaged in cannabis research here in Maine which is self funded. Topics of 
our work include all matters relating to cannabis. We are scientists, anthropologists, doctors, patients, 
engineers. Together we want to learn and understand what is working and what is not for both the 
cannabis plant and personal health. 
For example one area of plant health we have been studying is uptake and sources of heavy metals in 
cannabis. There are multiple variables which affect heavy metal concentration in cannabis and this is 
something we as a group are interested in learning more about. Heavy metals include cadmium, arsenic, 
lead, cobalt and others. Heavy metals may be acceptable in products of one mode of use but not 
another. Fertilizers and products which are regarded as safe for use on crops such as spinach or 
strawberries may cause extreme hyperaccumulation of metals in cannabis. This is an example of one 
area of research being done currently in the state by Seed2Health. This is work which beneﬁts all; from 
the patient to the cultivator. 
The funding which has already been promised for medical cannabis research and is in statute should be 
accessible to those who are working to study and learn more about this valuable plant. 
Encouraging innovation and discoveries in cannabis science can be helped along by the passing of this 
bill. Wnat we do not need or want is research being captured by only pharmaceutical companies, 
universities, or giant corporations. While there is a place for research to be conducted by these 
organizations we must create space for innovators here in the state to discover, learn, and report findings. 
Opening up finances for medical cannabis research will help all patients and program participants and 
uses funds already decreed by law for this purpose. 
l urge you to vote to pass this bill. 
Respectfully, 
Arleigh Kraus I. 
it 
ii 
ll
. 
ll 
ll 
‘l
l
