Senator Hickman and members of the VLA Commi Ʃee,  
My name is Edward Phipps. I am a registered Medical Cannabis Caregiver, a member of the Maine Cra Ō 
Cannabis Associa Ɵon, and a Shaper Par Ɵcipant of the Seed2Health Learning Alliance. I am submi ƫng my 
tesƟmony today in support of LD 1819.  
There has been much debate as of late regarding the viability of Maine’s Medical Cannabis Program. 
Despite this, I believe there are two undeniably posi Ɵve facts that reﬂect the success of the program. 
The ﬁrst, is that is has oﬀered a founda Ɵon for legal cannabis in the state. It has oﬀered an opportunity 
to business owners, pa Ɵents, poliƟcians, and regulators to experience  and learn about cannabis on all 
levels. The second is that it has undeniably provided high quality cannabis in an accessible way to a wide 
variety of pa Ɵents that ﬁnd comfort and relief in medical cannabis in ways that no other industry or 
products can oﬀer.  
The debate about the Medical Program largely relates to how it should or should not be regulated. It is a 
healthy debate that deserves perspec Ɵve from all sides. The problem with these debates  is not whether 
any one person’s perspec Ɵve is right or wrong. It is the lack of access to accurate and transparent data 
upon which all good decision making should be rendered. Especially, when thousands of people’s 
livelihood, health, and freedom are at stake.  
This is why I tes Ɵfy in support of LD 1819. This opportunity will allow the collec Ɵon and objec Ɵve 
analysis of data surrounding cannabis we all sorely want, and the program is persistently lacking. Some 
would say the Medical Program is ﬂawed. This could be said about any cannabis program.  The Medical 
Program does not need to be ﬁxed. It needs to evolve. With clear and shared understanding. To 
accomplish in an intelligent way that works, we all need more research and more data so that we have a 
ﬁrm ground to stand on when discussing daily prac Ɵces as well as regulatory advancement.  
There is an understandable concern regarding the adverse eﬀect of industry favorable bias in this 
Commission as proposed . However, there is always bias in all scien Ɵﬁc research. No one perspec Ɵve can 
oﬀer accurate unbiased data. This is why science not only embraces but requires research from many 
perspecƟves.  
Can we improve on this structure as proposed? I believe through the produc Ɵve conversa Ɵon a work 
session oﬀers we can. Common denominators, cross referencing and challenging diﬀerent groups 
perspecƟves is how we balance bias with fact. This Commission will not only oﬀer the much-needed 
perspecƟve from those with hands on experience in the ﬁeld, but also by deﬁni Ɵon oﬀer a diversity of 
perspecƟves given the diﬀerence in required backgrounds from each member. That experience alone is 
data. WaiƟng to be collected and used in a produc Ɵve and science -based way. This Commission may be 
just one step forward for the collecƟon of data, but it is an impera Ɵve one.   
 
Sincerely,  
Edward Phipps 
