$q.$;-I: D ADMINISTRATIVEK! FINANCIAL SERVICES 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS POLICY KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
162 STATE HOUSE STATION °°MM‘*S1°NER 
.‘.§.g?;§~.@;;f;>; ; 19 UNION STREET I 
FIRST FLOOR ormca or CANNABIS POLICY 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0162 
JANET T. MILLS JOHN HUDAK 
GOVERNOR onuzcron 
May 8, 2023 
Re: LD 1819 — An Act to Create the Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission and the' 
Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board' 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs: 
My name is John Hudak, and I am the Director of the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP). I am 
before you today to provide testimony on behalf of our office in opposition to LD 1819. 
I want to note from the outset that I believe increased research into cannabis or other plant-based 
products as a medicine should not be hindered, manipulated, or impeded. To that end, the Office 
has signiﬁcant concerns about the structure and function of the institutions developed in this 
legislation, potential threats to the legitimacy of research conducted under the auspices of these 
institutions, and limitations in the expertise of those evaluating potential research proposals. I 
will discuss each in turn. 
First, this legislation creates two institutions: the Medical Camiabis Advisory Commission and 
the Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board. The former oversees the latter. The Commission 
will be composed entirely of industry stakeholders, which could and surely will include 
individuals with business interests in medical cannabis as well as patients. It does not solicit 
feedback from other stakeholders, such as public health officials, state or local law enforcement, 
municipal ofﬁcials, or anyone from the Executive branch. 
Among the duties of the Commission is to “solicit, evaluate, and nominate members” to the 
Alternative Health Board. This legislation fails to provide any alternative means by which' 
individuals would be solicited, evaluated, or nominated to that Board. This circumstance can 
create conﬂicts of interest and can also call into question whether the individuals selected to the 
Alternative Health Board represent the best qualified candidates to carry out the duties of that 
board or whether they simply serve as an extension of the interests that already exist in Maine’s 
Medical Cannabis Program. 
Second, the duties of the Commission include “conducting research and collecting and analyzing 
data about the use, safety, efficacy, and best practices in medical cannabis manufacturing, 
dispensation, and use in the State. Such research would also be subject to myriad questions about 
its authenticity, if the conduct of that research includes individuals with financial interests in the 
ﬁndings. Those concerns about the independence of the research are compounded if those studies 
are not subject to review by third-party, unbiased, scientifically-trained, independent researchers. 
This arrangement would create blurring effect between research done by the Commission with 
Phone: (207)287-3282 Fax: (207) 287-2671 
www.maine.g0v/dafs/ocp/
direct ﬁnancial interests in the Medical Cannabis Program and that of the Alternative Health 
Board which is ostensibly intended to fund research by outside experts. 
Third, the structure of the Alternative Health Board also raises ethical and conﬂict of interest 
questions. While some members have a clear background in science, other members come from 
groups either with ﬁnancial interest in the Medical Cannabis Program and/or who do not require 
any background, expertise, or training in the evaluation or conduct or scientiﬁc research. 
Typically, govemment institutions that fund research will have extemal peer reviewers evaluate 
the merit of proposals. Those external peer reviewers are selected based on their background, 
expertise, training, and scholarly and research records. This is the system employed by the 
National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health, to name two. That system 
preserves the integrity of the selection of funded projects, the quality of the funded projects, and 
remains independent in ways that provide conﬁdence in the work. This legislation fails to 
provide these types of protections. 
Taking off my hat as the Director of OCP, I can tell you that as a Ph.D.-trained researcher who 
has had government grants fund my scientiﬁc research, I would be deeply skeptical of work 
being produced and/or funded by institutions like the ones designed here. This legislation falls 
short of any measure of scientiﬁc standards. I am certain that I would be among many scientists 
skeptical of such an arrangement. 
On a ﬁnal, more technical note, the individuals involved in both the Commission and the 
Alternative Health Board require backgrounds in cannabis. However, the Alternative Health 
Board is broadly charged with supporting research into “complementary health plant-based 
medicines and practices. ” This language would surely include inquiry into the use of plant-based 
psychedelics, as well. Under the design of the Alternative Health Board, either cannabis research 
would be favored over research into other plant-based medicines because of the Board’s inherent 
interests or the individuals evaluating proposals into non-cannabis plant-based medicines would 
be even less equipped to make such determinations about the merits of such research proposals. 
We thank the committee for its time, and we will do our best to answer any of your questions. 
Phone: (207) 287-3282 Fax: (207)287-2671 
www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/
