 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 8, 2023  
 
Senator  Craig Hickman , Chair  
Representative  Laura D. Supica , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1819 - An Act to Create the Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission and the 
Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board  
 
Senator  Hickman , Representative  Supica , and Members of the  Committee  on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information  about  LD 1819 - An Act to Create the 
Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission and the Medical Cannabis Alternative Health 
Board , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
This bill makes changes to the medical cannabis and adult use cannabis laws, including:  
1.  Creating the Maine Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission with membership 
consisting of stakeholders in the medical cannabis industry in th e State to study, analyze 
and report findings about the administration and medical use of cannabis to the 
Legislature, make recommendations for improvement and nominate members to the 
Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board;  
2.  Creating the Medical Cann abis Alternative Health Board to collect and provide 
information and administer grants to support objective scientific research on the efficacy 
of harvested cannabis as part of medical treatment and the health effects of harvested 
cannabis used as part of medical treatment. The board’s staffing and activities are funded 
by the Medical Use of Cannabis Fund; and  
3.  Eliminating the Cannabis Advisory Commission under the adult use cannabis laws . 
   
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  has concerns about  LD 1819  
and offers the following comments  for your consideration.  
 
The existing Cannabis Advisory Commission under the Adult Use Cannabis Program (AUCP) 
consists of a broad membership from numerous sectors impacted by cannabis l egalization, 
including cannabis industry stakeholders, State of Maine Leadership, professionals engaged in 
public health policy, law enforcement, attorneys, and representation to help focus on health 
equity. The benefit of a large, diverse membership of th e commission is the ability to entertain 
unique perspectives and consider a variety of experiences in the development of 
recommendations related to the industry, public health, and public safety. Removal of the 
 
 Cannabis Advisory Commission under the AUCP a nd simultaneously developing a separate 
Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission with membership limited to industry stakeholders  
alone eliminates the ability to entertain these unique perspectives. Discussions around the 
cannabis industry often forgo the high ly important conversations of upholding public health and 
safety.  
 
Regarding the proposed development of the Medical Cannabis Alternative Health Board, the 
Maine CDC has a few concerns to be considered by the Committee if this legislation is  to be 
enacted . Similar to the Medical Cannabis Advisory Commission, the proposed membership of 
this board is limited largely to industry stakeholders and again eliminates the opportunity for 
diverse professional expertise and perspectives. These perspectives are especi ally essential when 
funding grant proposals to study efficacy and impacts of medical treatments, as they help ensure 
unbiased, ethical, and well -rounded study proposal and design. Maine CDC suggests  including at 
least one professional from the public healt h field who is not directly tied to the cannabis 
industry, one health equity expert, one non -industry pediatrician, as well as no less than one non -
industry mental health/psychiatry professional to ensure consideration of long -term impacts of 
cannabis in p rogram design, especially where minor patients and/or high -potency products are 
concerned.  
 
Historically, industry -funded research for tobacco and alcohol has not been a trusted source of 
information by government al or health agencies  and has been heavily disregarded in the field . As 
documented by the Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids in 2017 , several agencies  across the world  
including the World Health Organization  and the American Cancer Society, rejected tobacco 
research backed by tobacco industry f unds due to conflicts of interest1. This again speaks to the 
need for robust and diverse membership of the health board.  
 
If the Committee moves forward with th e bill, Maine CDC also proposes that language be added 
around procedure for following, documenting, and reporting these long -term impacts in addition 
to short -term outcomes in studies. As with any medical treatment, these data are important to 
have to inform long -term applications for the study findings, and can be useful in helping to 
develop thresholds for the lowest effective dosage and pote ncy of recommended treatments for 
specific conditions.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
1 Public Health Groups and Leaders Worldwide Urge Rejection Of Philip Morris International’s New Foundation ; 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/what -we-do/industry -watch/pmi -foundation/compilation  

