Testimony of The Maine Real Estate Managers Association.  In Support of LD 347 An Act Regarding in Court Appearance Requirements for Persons Authorized to Serve Eviction Notices and the Process for Serving a Writ of Possession  February 13, 2023    Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, and all members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Alyssa Dean-Littlefield, and I am writing to you as Co-Chair of the Maine Real Estate Managers Association (MREMA) Legislative Committee.    Our organization is a nonprofit which represents over 80 professional property management companies providing 16,000 units of affordable and subsidized housing throughout the state.  It is our mission to promote the availability of safe, decent affordable housing in Maine.  Our management members are both for-profit and nonprofit landlords that believe in this mission.  MREMA supports and adheres to the existing eviction laws in Maine, with its members navigating their way through the court system as a last resort when a resident’s tenancy is no longer safe or successful.  The current process for serving an eviction notice requires that the person serving the notice make three good faith efforts to serve the notice in person and then allows the notice to be served by posting the notice at the residents address and sending it by first-class mail.  In instances where landlords feel unsafe serving the notices themselves, the local sheriffs departments are being asked to fill in.  They are held to the same standard of noticing. LD347 would allow for notices served by the Sheriff’s department to be done with a single good faith effort and then mailing and posting the notice at the residents home.  It also confirms that the Sheriff serving the notice does not have to be present during the court date. MREMA believes that this is a bill that will benefit both the Sheriff’s departments and landlords by simplifying the process while having minimal impact to the resident.  By posting the notices on the doors and sending them certified mail, this should ensure that the resident will receive the notice at the same level of confidence that knocking three times would. 
Alpha Management Corp Auburn Housing Authority Avesta Housing Bangor Housing Authority Barkan Management Co. Bath Housing Brewer Housing Authority C & C Realty Management C. M. Cimino Realty Inc. C. S. Management, Inc C.B. Mattson, Inc. Caleb Foundation, The CMHI Property Management Inc Community Housing of Maine DBH Management DC Management Deanna Morse Property Management Inc Deering Pavilion Dover-Foxcroft Housing Dev Corp Downeast Community Partners Eagle Point Management, LLC Ellen M Leach Memorial Home Evernorth Federal Management Co., Inc Foothills Management Foreside Real Estate Mgt Gary Buck Property Management Guilford Development Corp Hallkeen Management, Inc Harbor Management Harborview Management LLC Hillside Apts Housing Authority City of Old Town Housing Foundation, The Kathryn Hughes Associates, Inc. L & L Management LaBrecque Property Management Laplante Apartments Lewiston Housing Authority Madison Avenue Associates Maine Development Mary Young Matthew Sherman Mem Apts 
MEMBERS 

The bill will benefit the Sherriff’s department in the form of saved time.  Recently, defense attorneys have argued that a the Sherriff who served the eviction notice must be available to the court to attest that they served the notice.  The Sherriff’s offices do not have the resources to assign staff to every courthouse during forcible entry and detainer dates on the chance that they will be asked to testify.  Furthermore they could be focusing on other duties if they can reduce the time spent making three efforts to serve notices. Due to the reasons above, MREMA Supports LD 347.  Thank you for your consideration, and please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions.  Legislative Co-Chairs,  Alyssa Dean-Littlefield     Sherrin Vail adeanlittlefield@wishcamper.com   svail@evernorthus.org              
