M.LAW OFFICE OF
Aubrey Russell
RO. Box 194, Mechanic Falls, ME 04256 | (207) 241-0305
February 16,2023
RE: Support for LD 347 An Act Regarding In-court Appearance Requirements for Persons Authorized to
Serve Eviction Notices and the Process for Serving a Writ of Possession
Dear Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Aubrey Russell. I am an attorney practicing out of Mechanic Falls, Maine. I represent
primarily landlords, although I also represent tenants when hired to do so. I practice throughout our
state, routinely appearing in Springvale, Biddeford, West Bath, Portland, Lewiston, Rumford, Augusta,
Bangor and occasionally in almost every other District Court in our state. I have been doing this for over
15 years. I support LD 347.
Section 1. In the fifteen years that I have been practicing, I have sent out countless notices to
quit and notices of termination to be served by sheriff's deputies. We do this for many different reasons.
Sometimes it is because a landlord does not have someone close to the rental to serve the notice, or the
landlord is new and unaware of how to properly serve. However, the most important reasons we use the
sheriff's deputes for service of notices is safety. There are often times that we are serving notices on
tenants due to heated situations, mental health issues or after the tenant has made threats against
management. These types of evictions are on the rise with the current mental health crisis in Maine.
Deputies are better equipped to handle a situation where the tenant is upset or lashes out at the time of
service. It is important that this remains accessible for landlords to use.
For over fourteen years I have used the deputies without it ever being raised as a defense.
However, in the past year I have repeatedly experienced or observed Pine Tree raise this as a defense.
Their argument is that if the sheriff is not there to testify that the notice was properly served then the
landlord has not proven that the notice was properly served. While some Judges have not agreed, some
Judges have agreed with this argument and found in favor of the Defendant. This leaves landlords with
two choices: (1) use the sheriff and then have to request or subpoena the deputies to testify or (2) serve
all of their notices themselves. The former would put a huge burden on deputies and the latter puts
landlords and their employees in jeopardy.
Sheriff's deputies are required to serve the FED summons and complaint. Their signatures on the
service form are self-authenticating. It makes sense that their signatures on a certificate of service for a
notice of termination should also be self-authenticating, thus, not requiring the deputies to be present at
every FED hearing. I ask the Committee to support this legislation.
Section 2.1 also support the revision to allow a writ of possession to be posted after one good
faith attempt at service. At the point that the tenant is being served with a writ of possession, they have
been served a notice to quit or a notice of termination, served an FED complaint and summons, had an
33 Pleasant Street, Mechanic Falls, ME 04256 | aubreyslawoffice.com | arussell@aubreyslawoffice.com

