CrossWay LLC
  #1 Water Street, Newport, Maine 04953
 (207)368-6221 
emergencies (207)487-3680
crosswayrentals@gmail.com
February 1, 2023
To:  Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee
Re:  Support  of LD 347: An Act Regarding In-Court Appearance Requirements…
Dear Valuable Representatives of the People of Maine:
I am writing as a person with a small investment in rental property in support of LD 347.   I am a 
small landlord in Central Maine.  Unfortunately, there are rare times when we have had to ask 
people to move from our units, ALWAYS after numerous notices of infractions have been 
unheeded.  
By the time a writ is served by the Sheriff, the tenant has already had their numerous 
opportunities to seek legal representation, mediate, and present their case to the Judge, and have 
been given a firm move out or be considered trespassers date.  Most tenants move prior to the 
landlord even having to get a writ because they do not want to risk being arrested or any delays 
in retrieving their belongings.  This stage of the eviction is the “end of the line” when a civil 
matter has the potential to become a criminal matter.  Because most tenants are not even still at 
the unit on the day of the writ being issued, allowing the Sheriff to serve the writ by posting on 
the first trip helps to cut cost (that technically the landlord can sue the tenant to pay later but 
usually just causes higher rents due to the “cost of doing business”) and allows the tenant that 
final notice to vacate the premises and opportunity to remove their belongings peacefully over 
the next 3 days.  
The other factor of this bill is to allow the sheriff’s sworn statement on the date/time of service to 
stand on it’s own merits as a deputy of the law.  To require them to be in eviction court all day 
just to reaffirm what they have already sworn to seems to be a unnecessary stalling tactic that 
undermines the integrity of our legal system.   
Please vote in FAVOR of  LD 347 as it is written. Thank you for your consideration.
Donna E. Hodges
DONNA CROSSWAY HODGES
Newport
LD 347
Testimony in Support of LD 347.
