Pinette, Susan 
From: Lindsey Burrill <lindsey.burrill@gmail.com> 
Sent: Thursday, February 16, 2023 11:03 AM 
To: Carney, Anne; Bailey, Donna; Lyford, Peter; Moonen, Matt; Andrews, John; Dana, Aaron; 
Haggan, David; Henderson, Rachel; Kuhn, Amy; Lee, Adam; Moriarty, Steve; Poirier, 
Jennifer; GalgayReckitt, Lois; Sheehan, Erin; JUD 
Subject: Please SUPPORT LD 347! 
Attachments: LD 347- LTR TO JUDlClARY.docx 
This mcssac oriinatcs from outside the Maine Lcislature. * * *’ 
Brown House Properties 
71 Francis Street 
Waterville, Me, 04901 
February 16"‘ , 2023 
Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
l am writing today in SUPPORT of LD 347 ”An Act Regarding In-Court Appearance Requirements for Persons Authorized 
to Serve Eviction Notices and the Process for Serving a Writ of Possession" . 
This bill is mutually beneficial to both the Sheriff's Department and Landlords. To provide some context, the Writ of 
Possession is the final step in an eviction process when a tenant refuses to move, regardless of a court's Judgment. The 
process begins when the tenant is served a ‘Notice to Quit’ (or what some people refer to as an "Eviction Notice’). This 
notice states that rent is 7 or more days late and that the tenant has 7 days to vacate the property or cure the 
balance. This notice needs to be attempted to serve ‘in hand’ two times before it can be posted to the door on the 3"‘ 
attempt and mailed proof of mailing. if the Tenant is still within the unit after the 7‘“ day, the Tenant must be serveda 
Summons to Court. This notice must be served upon the tenant in the same fashion as described above with ‘three 
good faith attempts" . Once the Judge has ruled, the Judgment is mailed to the Tenant. If after the Court has ruled, the 
tenant still has not vacated the property, the Owner must apply for a Writ of Possession. Once this W.O.P. has been 
granted by the Court, a Sheriff must make an additional '3 good faith’ attempts to serve the notice. Once the notice is 
either served in hand or posted on the 3"’ attempt, the Tenant has 48 hours to vacate the Property. 
This current process is expensive (Sheriff's charge landlords for each attempt to serve, including mileage), redundant, 
wasteful of resources and delays the process beyond its intent. As you can see, by the end of the Writ of Possession, it's 
possible that the Sheriff was on the property attempting to serve eviction documents 10 times!! All associated 
documents served were also mailed to ensure the Tenant was informed. 
The goal of LD 347 is to streamline the Writ of Possession process by allowing Sheriff's to post a Writ of Possession on 
the first attempt, eliminating the need and unnecessary delay of a second and third attempt and subsequent 
posting. This bill would reduce the number of potential attempts to serve eviction related documents upon a Tenant 
from 10 services to 8 services. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
Sherwood Booker‘ 
Brown House Properties
1
Lindsey BurriII 
71 Francis Street 
Waterville, Me, 04901 
Lindsey.Burrill@gmail.com 
207.680.6630
