PINE TREE LEGAL ASSISTANCE, INC. 
Lynn M. Ward * Lewiston Office 
95 Park Street, Suite 3'01 
P. O. Box 398 
Lewiston, Maine 
(207) 400-3273 * V/TTY: 711 s (207) 783-8774 FAX 
www.ptIa.org ¢ lward@ptIa.org 
Written Testimony of Lynn Ward, Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
In Opposition to LD 347 
"An Act Regarding In-court Appearance Requirements for Persons Authorized to Serve Eviction 
Notices and the Process for Serving a Writ of Possession" 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary; 
My name is Lynn Ward. I am a staff attorney at Pine Tree Legal Assistance. lam a resident of Auburn, 
Maine. i have represented hundreds of Maine residents with low incomes over my five years serving 
Androscoggin County. This testimony is submitted in opposition to LD-347 and to urge that this 
committee vote ought not pass on LD 347. 
Since 1967 Pine Tree Legal Assistance has provided free legal services to low-income people 
throughout the State of Maine. In 2022, Pine Tree Legal Assistance provided legal services to Maine 
families and individuals in 7,582 cases, of which 4,738 (62%) involved representation of clients in 
housing cases, including preventing evictions and foreclosures, enforcing safe housing laws, and 
enforcing housing discrimination laws. In evictions, our representation ranges from advising clients on 
the phone, to negotiating for and defending tenants during eviction proceedings. In 2022, Pine Tree 
Legal provided representation in 2,702 eviction cases statewide. 
LD 347 proposes two substantial changes to Maine eviction law that would unfairly prejudice Maine 
tenants. 
LD 347 proposes a change to 14 MRS 6001 which would allow landlords to submit an affidavit froma 
sheriff or sheriff's deputy during an eviction hearing as prove that a tenant was served in accordance 
with Maine law. While it may, at first glance, seem that this change would do little to impact the legal 
process, that simply is not true. This change would create unfairness in our eviction process by allowing 
a landlord to submit evidence into the record that a tenant has no opportunity to test through cross- 
examination, a fundamental right in the American court system. It is important to note that most 
eviction cases do not go to a hearing. Instead, the vast majority of cases resolve through agreements 
made at or before court. On the occasions that an agreement cannot be reached, it is important thata 
landlord be required to prove each required element of their case by a preponderance ofthe evidence. 
Both the Maine and United States Constitutions require that due process be provided before a person 
is denied their right to property. It is well-settled that tenants have a ”possessory interests in property
1
[which] invoke procedural due process protection/'1 The United States Supreme Court has long held 
that "[a]t the core of procedural due process...is the right to advance notice ofa significant deprivation 
of liberty or property, and to a meaningful opportunity to be heard prior to that deprivation/'2 For that 
reason, ”due process requires that there be an opportunity to present every available defense"-3 and in 
order to evict a tenant, a landlord must show by a preponderance of the evidence that they have the 
right to evict. In every eviction case that goes to trial, a landlord must prove that the a tenancy was 
properly terminated. 
lt is important to note that under Maine law, there is no requirement that a landlord hire a ”person 
authorized to make service under section 702 or 703" to serve a notice to quit. The landlord can do it 
themselves, can send an employee or even a friend, or they can hire the county sheriff's office ora 
process server. The changes to 14 MRS 6001 proposed by LD 347 would allow landlords with the 
financial means to hire the sheriff or a process server to deliver notices to quit for their evictions to 
avoid proving a necessary element of their case if they were unable to reach an agreement with their 
tenant and were forced to go to trial. 
The goals of the proposed change to Section 6001 can be met in ways that do not involve preventing 
tenants from cross examining witnesses against them to test the sufficiency of the evidence. For 
instance, landlords can opt to serve notices themselves, or to have their property managers or other 
staff serve the notices to quit since they will already be required to submit testimony regarding 
ownership, the basis for the eviction, and/or conduct alleged to have occurred to prove their case. 
Doing so would require no involvement of the sheriff's department. Alternatively, if the landlord 
believes service by the sheriff is necessary, landlords can request that the deputy who served the 
notice to quit be on call, and only appear if negotiations fail. This would allow the deputy to handle 
other obligations, such as processing paperwork, or making phone calls during time they are not 
needed in court. lf the notice were served by a sheriff's deputy and the deputy was unavailable due to 
their other work obligations, a landlord could file a motion to request the hearing be continued toa 
date that the sheriff's deputy is available if negotiations fail. All of these solutions would meet the 
goals of LD 347 without impacting tenant's rights to due process. 
During the over 5 years that I have represented tenants in eviction court, I have had many clients who 
report that their mailing address is one thing, and the notice to quit states another, such as when the 
tenant reports living in Apartment 4 and the landlord calls it 2L. Some buildings have locks on exterior 
doors and those who are not either tenants or the landlord cannot access the property without a key. 
It is important that before depriving a tenant of their home, that evidence be submitted to prove that 
each and every required step of the eviction has occurred in accordance with Maine law. While I know 
that our sheriff's deputies work hard and are committed to following the law, the changes proposed by 
LD 347 presumes that they are infallible- and no one is free from mistakes. In circumstances wherea 
sheriff's deputy makes a mistake, it is important that a tenant be able to question them about how and 
when attempts to serve were made, whether the deputy went to the correct door, whether the first 
few attempts to service were thwarted because the deputy could not make it through the main 
entrance to their secure building. While it may seem trivial- proper notice is critical for a tenant for 
1 
Fuentes v. Shevin, 407 U.S. 67, 87 (1972). 
2 LaChance v. Erickson, 522 U.S. 262 (1998). 
3 
American Surezjy C0.v. Baldwin, 287 U.S. 156, 168 (1932).
2
several reasons. It allows tenants time to look for alternative housing, to try and fix issues between 
them and their landlord, to pay their rent if the notice was for non-payment, or to seek counsel. Proper 
notice can prevent evictions all together, as many tenants will move before a notice to quit expires, or 
will otherwise cure the notice. If the changes to 6001 are adopted and an affidavit alone is found to be 
enough to establish that notice was properly served, tenants will be unfairly evicted in cases where the 
sheriff's deputy made a mistake. LD 347's changes to 6001 would improperly shift the burden of proof 
on the issue of service to tenants by requiring them to submit evidence that the notice was not 
properly served instead of requiring landlords to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that it was. 
As set forth above, very few eviction cases go to trial. ln the cases that do, the fact finder, in most 
cases- a judge, must have an opportunity to evaluate the credibility of witnesses who have personal 
knowledge of the facts being submitted into evidence. The United States Supreme Court has stated 
that ”[a] landlord-tenant dispute, like any other lawsuit, cannot be resolved with due process of law 
unless both parties have had a fair opportunity to present their cases. Our courts were never intended 
to serve as rubber stamps for landlords seeking to evict their tenants, but rather to see thatjustice be 
done before a man is evicted from his home."" Sheriff's deputies must be held to the same standard as 
any other witness because like other witnesses who testify before the court, sheriff's deputies are 
humans who sometimes make mistakes. Requiring live testimony to prove proper service is the only 
backstop the justice system has to ensure that those mistakes do not result in a wrongful eviction. 
The second change proposed by LD 347 would permit the sheriff's office to post a writ of possession 
after one good faith effort has been made to serve a tenant. The current law requires three good faith 
efforts and increases the likelihood that tenants will be served with the writ of possession in hand. 
‘Many tenants live in multi-unit buildings where others have access to the locations where formal 
notices are often posted. Our clients, and landlords alike, frequently tell us that when notices are 
posted on doors for all sorts of things such as lead hazard postings, building inspections, pest 
treatments, repairs, evictions, and more that these notices are ripped down. In buildings where the1 
apartment doors are exposed to the elements, rain and wind can ruin or move notices. Often our 
clients do not receive noticed intended for them at all or receive them late. Once a writ of possession is 
served, through delivery in hand or by posting, a tenant has 48 hours to vacate their unit or they can 
be deemed a trespasser. For tenants who were not even aware that a court date had been set or 
missed or for tenants who complied with an agreement only to ﬁnd out their landlord had requested 
the writ of possession be served anyway, every one of those 48 hours can be critical to determining 
whether to ask the court for relief from a wrongfully entered eviction judgment. When a notice is 
posted, it is more likely that a tenant does not actually get the benefit of a full 48 hours to come up 
with a plan for alternative living arrangements or to seek legal help. Most landlords get to know their 
tenants’ typical routines. Rather than modifying Section 6005, in order to increase thelikelihood thata 
tenant will be served on the first attempt, landlords should communicate with the sheriff’s‘office 
regarding a tenant's schedule so that the sheriff can attempt to serve a tenant when they are likely to 
be home. 
The changes set forth in LD 347 will result in increased unjust evictions and will not provide sufficient 
notice to comport with Constitutional due process, and for that reason, we urge this committee to vote 
"Ought Not Pass" on LD 347 as drafted. 
4 Pernell v. Southall Realty- 416 US 363, 385 (1974)
3
