Antoinette Broadhead
Cumberland Foreside
LD 604
We are writing to SUPPORT of LD 814. Coyote hunting season should absolutely be 
limited, not expanded, especially during pup/denning season. Wildlife services in 
multiple states are opting to explore and expand sensible nonlethal approaches for 
predator control. Yet Maine consistently dips back into the dark ages, rejecting sound 
science.Coyotes lead complex social lives and are masters at adaption and 
self-regulating their populations. When food is scarce, they stop breeding or have 
smaller litters. Attempt to "control" or eliminate them by hunting year round, day and 
night, and they will breed to repopulate to a sustainable level. It would benefit 
lawmakers and the general public to learn the facts and truth behind policies that 
promote rampant unchecked predator killing as a means of population control or for 
the protection of game species like deer, livestock and in extremely rare cases, 
humans.The threat of coyotes is consistently overstated.Why is MIFAW still pitching 
nonsensical nonscientific narratives about coyote predation putting deer at risk of 
critical population declines? Despite the damage deer cause, they continue to be very 
carefully managed to INCREASE their numbers all for the benefit of hunters and 
licensing fees. I understand hunting is largely an emotional issue wrapped in tradition 
and very often not well grounded in science. It's management at it's worst disguised 
and promoted as conservation. Coyotes are a natural, vital essential part of the 
ecosystem we humans routinely destroy. Perhaps we should stop taking every last bit 
of open green space to develop for livestock expansion, recreation or housing and 
learn to co-exist with all nature including predators rather than always opting to get 
them out of the way. It's long past time to stop this irrational unscientific fear 
mongering. if we want to claim we are the most intelligent species on the planet, we 
should really start acting like it. Non lethal methods for coyote hazing and protecting 
livestock work. Keeping pets indoors or leashed works. Keeping food sources away 
works. Killing coyotes or causing unnecessary suffering by disrupting their natural 
reproductive cycles or social structures does not work. It just does not work. Never 
has. We need to support LD 814 not only because it's the civilized thing to do but 
because it makes sense. Thank you for introducing this bill. Sincerely Toni and 
Stephen Broadhead
