Claire Perry
Owls Head
LD 604
April 1, 2023
Claire Perry- Lifetime Maine Resident and Landowner
 Testifying as OPPOSED to 604
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and Honorable members of the IF&W 
Committee:
It is said that we do the best we can, until we know better; once we know better we 
can choose to do better.  
Nothing could be more relevant to this saying than considering the outdated 
management policies regarding our Eastern coyotes. 
Study after study is showing conclusive evidence that the indiscriminate killing of 
coyotes causes far more harm than good. In fact, with the exception of the occasional 
errant coyote, nothing helpful is accomplished at all. Only the debased entertainment 
of a human-being, using a living animal for target practice.  
It is well-known and not up for debate: Killing coyotes makes problems, both 
environmentally and human based. Ironically, those that do the killing think they are 
eliminating problems, when in fact, they are only making things much, much worse. 
I think it sobering for you, the committee members to know, that silencers are allowed
for use during night hunting!  When once gun-shots heard after deer-season closed, 
would be reason to call ALERT ME...they may mean nothing more than coyotes 
being killed. Silencers only aid the poachers...and yet, they are legal. How is all this 
bad “hunting” legislation happening? I know how.
 
No. We do not need to extend the night-killing of our coyotes...who are also being 
killed all day, every day but Sundays!  This is out of control “wildlife management” 
at its finest.   And as a former homeowner on a dirt road off a rural road in the heart of
the woods of Liberty Maine, I can tell you all about these night coyote “ hunts” and 
the high-intensity lights, lighting up people’s fields and property...even where the land
is posted; at all hours of the night. Using bait to lure  coyotes out of the woods and 
into a field or onto a lake where they are shot down like ducks in a penny arcade. And
now, rifles with infra-red scopes are the new thing. And as odious as lighting up a 
field on posted land is...sneaking around with an infra-red scoped rifle is worse.  This 
is not hunting. Don’t ever, EVER call this hunting. This is killing. And it is killing out
of ignorance and for the fun of killing. If you don’t believe me, watch the YouTube 
videos.  Whoops of glee and taking pot shots at coyotes who have come to a bait pile 
at night. Filming it all. Trying to hit each one before they can escape, no matter where
the bullet makes contact with the body; wounding is as good as a kill.
 
I’m not anti-hunting. Period. Never will be. But THIS?  This is beyond too much. 
This isn’t hunting. It’s just not.  And it’s time voices spoke out loud and clear against 
this mindset fostered by special interest groups that want to make coyote killing a 
good and needed practice. Shame on them is all I can say. They do not speak to the 
science of our coyotes, nor to the untold benefits they bring to us in Nature’s wisdom 
of their arrival. Nor of the zootonic diseases both known and unknown they will help 
to mitigate if they are allowed to do their jobs.
 
Our coyotes have a job to do. It’s why they are here. Please. Please listen to the 
scientists and the vast majority of wildlife biologists who are telling you what is now 
known. Let them do their jobs. We cannot afford to continue the favoring of people 
who turn a blind eye to best science in favor of unlimited killing interests. If we do, 
we will be paying the consequences down the road. Just like turning a blind eye to the
unlimited cutting of our forested deer yards. Let’s not make another mess to clean up.
I don’t know what else to say...other than ask: When is enough-ENOUGH?
Claire Perry
