Don Loprieno
Bristol
LD 604
Sen.  David LaFountain, Chair, Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee
Rep. Scott Landry, Chair, Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee   
 Other Members of the Committee:
I’m writing in strong opposition to LD 604.
Unlike other animals in Maine, coyotes currently have almost no protection under the 
law. There is no limit as to how many coyotes can be hunted including during spring 
and summer when killing them leaves their pups to starve to death in their den.
As part of an undeclared war, waged both day and night, coyotes are shot over bait, 
held fast in traps until they are executed, pursued and ripped apart alive by packs of 
GPS-equipped hounds, which often run uncontrolled against the wishes of landowners
who want to protect their domestic animals.    
You’d think that this relentless persecution would have some limits, but apparently 
it’s not enough for LD 604 which would expand the coyote season even more, 
extending even further the killing campaign that flies in the face of science and 
authoritative sources such as the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service which as recently as 
2014 had this to say:
 “Unseen effects occur when coyotes are killed. Left alone, coyotes will control their 
own numbers. When a pack is established and stable, only the dominant (parent) male
and female will reproduce. Extended family members only support them. If the 
dominant female is killed, other females in the pack will respond by breeding more 
coyotes, and the population increases instead of decreases! Thus, it is possible to kill 
one animal and end up with several more than you started with. Killing parent coyotes
leads to a breakdown of the social structure of packs, causing the average group size 
to decline, the age of individuals and reproduction to rise, and more pups to survive.”
Round the clock extermination not only hasn’t worked but has actually made the 
problem worse.   To keep on doing something that defeats its own purpose is not only 
futile but is also prevents us from seeking viable and humane solutions.  More killing 
is not one of them.
Don Loprieno

