Betsy Garrold
Knox
LD 1286
My name is Betsy Garrold,I am president of Food for Maine's Future.  I live in Knox 
and am represented in the Senate by Senator Curry.
Having listened to the hearing on LD1286 I am even more concerned about the 
structure of the proposed task force than I was when I originally read (very recently) 
the proposed resolution.  Here are my concerns:
*Maine has long been a resource colony for out of state investors.  With the heavy 
emphasis on venture capitalists and entrepeneurs on the task force this exploitation 
will only continue.
*When a question was asked about having participants on the task force that had an 
ecological and sustainable focus the answer was not reassuring.  Adding on more 
members with these expertises as an afterthought does nothing to quell my concerns 
about the true goals of such a task force.
*The fact that no tribal representation is present as the list stands right now is 
egregious.
*It was mentioned that we can use Europe as a model for future "blue" ventures.  
Only if we take the lessons of their mistakes to heart. This does not appear to be the 
current course of aquaculture developement in the state as typified by the Nordic 
Aquaculture's proposal in Belfast.  It is my  understanding that Norway would not 
give them a permit for their planned salmon CAFO so they came to a poor rural 
county in Maine to try to foist their questionalbe technology on us.
*The fact that there is a a group that has been studying this problem for years and is 
about to release it's report and the fact that this resolution is being heard as an 
"emergency" both point to the fact that this is duplicative effort and needs to be 
slowed until the SeaMaine Coalition can release their report.
*The testimony by one of the venture capitalists that they are only interested in "high 
risk" business models is deeply disturbing.  Do we want these moneyed interests to 
use our Maine waters for their risky experiments?  Surely not.
I am testifying neither for nor against because I share the speaker from the Bigelow 
Laboratory's concern that there is too much silo-ing of information in Maine and that 
collaboration and communication are both good things.  If the purpose of this task 
force is to build that network of those working in this sector of our economy then I am
all for it.  If the goal of this task force is hit and run exploitation of our natural 
resources than I am against it.  
Please amend this resolution to add more protection for the sustainability of our 
waters here in Maine and vote it out of committee "ought to pass".  Or barring this 
kind of shift in focus I ask the committee to vote "ought not to pass." 
Thank you for your time. 
