TESTIMONY OF BLAINE GRIMES 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1286 
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task Force to Support 
Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy Innovation and 
Opportunity in the 21st Century 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Blaine Grimes and l am 
from Cape Elizabeth. I am here today to speak in support of LD 1286. 
As the Chief Ventures Officer at the Gulf of Maine Research Institute, I lead a team that supports small 
entrepreneurial companies which are using science and emerging technologies to develop products and 
services that have the potential to reach large markets and support a more sustainable ocean economy. 
Over the past three years our team has engaged with over 45 start-up companies and has traveled 
throughout the US, Canada and Northern Europe in an effort to understand the extraordinary pace of 
innovation happening in the ocean sector. 
The term "Blue Economy" is defined as the sustainable use of the ocean's resources for economic 
health, improved livelihoods and jobs and ecosystem health. This bill is intended to make Maine a key 
player in this emerging global trend. Maine needs a Blue Economy strategic plan in order to attract the 
kind of investment and companies that will grow, innovate, enhance livelihoods statewide, support 
diverse community structures and create high paying, long term jobs. 
Given the excellent work recently done by several other industry-led and multi-stakeholder initiatives 
(and the important ongoing community work of many dedicated organizations such as the Maine 
Lobsterman's Association, Maine Coast Fisherman's Association, The lsland institute, Coastal 
Enterprises, Manomet, and others) Maine is poised to provide an integrated vision and aspiration 
around our ocean economy. New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode island, Alaska, Florida, California 
and Washington State are all forming powerful ocean industry clusters to make their states attractive to 
investors and entrepreneurs alike. Maine has a compelling geographic advantage, industry knowledge, 
institutional leadership, vested communities and ocean orientation to be a leader in the evolving global 
ocean economy. What Maine doesn't have yet is a clear strategy and coordinated message. 
We need a framework to attract innovation in this sector such as ocean-derived value—added products in 
consumer goods, biopharmaceutical applications, carbon sequestration and other climate solutions, 
software products to enhance supply-chain capacity, artificial intelligence applications across all ocean 
related industries and ocean data analytics for forecasting and modeling. There will be many 
opportunities over the coming decade for Maine to attract additional federal funding in the context of 
the “new blue economy” . We need to be prepared to compete effectively for those dollars in a way that 
is coordinated and in the best interest of all stakeholders. We believe that we are at risk of falling 
behind other states that have recognized this opportunity and that is part of the reason for our interest 
in supporting this bill. 
Over the past few weeks many leaders throughout the state have provided constructive suggestions for 
changes to the committee structure, timing, and overall objectives of this proposed Blue Economy Task 
Force to ensure better inclusion, representation of all vested interests and avoid duplication of effort.
We look forward to continuing those discussions with an eye toward offering a suggested amendment at 
this committee's work session. 
We have heard that our objectives are ambitious ~ yes they are. Maine has an opportunity to takea 
leadership role in the new blue economy, supporting Maine entrepreneurs, attracting companies to our 
shores and creating high paid jobs. This bill will put us on the path to accomplishing that goal. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
