UNIVERSITY 9F 1'Til§§°§§a§E'SZ§§ 
ENAND Biddeford, ME oﬁrgog 
lNNO\/ATION FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET l2O7l283 ‘O171 
Portland Campus 
716 Stevens Avenue 
Portland. ME 04103 
Testimony in Support of LD 1286 Resolve, to Establish the Blue (2O7)797_§;f1- 
Economy Task Force to Support Maine's Emergence as a Center ‘ 
for Blue Economy Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Rum, 
Centu |"y Tangier 90000 
Morocco 
+212 O5 38 80 24 00 
www.une.edu 
April 11,2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
My name is Dr. Charles Tilburg, and l am the Doherty Chair of Marine Sciences Research and 
the Academic Director of the School of Marine and Environmental Programs at the University 
of New England. UNE is submitting testimony in support of LD 1286. 
The Blue Economy is a potentially massive emerging field that can help Maine become relevant 
in a way that we have not seen in years. Maine has tremendous opportunities for development 
and growth regarding the Blue Economy; however, it is not clear how we should dedicate our 
resources and energy. This task force will help us determine how we should proceed ina 
strategic and forward-thinking way. 
Other states like New Hampshire and Massachusetts are already coalescing around the Blue 
Economy. Our coastline (and therefore potential) dwarfs theirs, and we should not allow 
ourselves to be left behind. 
Currently, we do not have a central place for academics, nonprofits, industry, and other 
stakeholders to come together and plan how to take Maine to the next level regarding this 
economy. We cannot rely on an ad hoc approach to take advantage of these opportunities. 
This task force would be the vehicle for formulating and advancing our plans. 
With the influx of new residents, we must be ready to support our sustainable, resilient coastal 
communities and protect the natural resources that make Maine the special place it is (our salt 
marshes, iconic coastal communities, lobsters, seafood, etc.). We cannot manage this change 
byjust saying ”No," we must work with other stakeholders to come up with strategic initiatives 
to help Maine thrive. 
BIDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, MAINE, U.S.A. | TANGlER,l\/IOROCCO l ONLINE
A 
NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITYQF 
ll\ll\lOVAT|ON FOR A HEALTHIER PLANET 
In the wake of Maine’s climate change initiatives and its goal to develop a sensible carbon 
budget, we cannot ignore the growing Blue Economy. This task force will provide the expertise 
to contribute to these discussions and will help ensure that our plans around the Blue Economy 
are aligned with other State initiatives. 
The University of New England has been training students in Marine Entrepreneurship, Marine 
Affairs, Aquaculture & Aquarium Science, and now Sustainable Ecological Aquaculture to take 
advantage of this new economic landscape. ln addition, we have a newly designed Professional 
Science Masters in Ocean Food Systems aimed at providing professionals in the ocean foods 
industry with additional education to further their careers. Our enrollments are exploding, 
bringing more and more students to Maine. However, we are seeing too many of these 
graduates then leave the state to pursue professional opportunities elsewhere. This task force 
can help us determine how to both grow our economy and keep our students in state. 
UNE is poised to provide more and more students to the economy, new research methods and 
techniques to blue industries, and business expertise to the economy. We can help in Maine's 
exploration of the Blue Economy, and we would be happy to take part in this task force. 
We would recommend, if the committee wishes to move forward with this legislation, that you 
amend the membership of the task force to include Community College and tribal 
representatives. 
This task force will provide a unified perspective, an avenue to plan and strategize, and the 
means for Maine to compete with other coastal states and take advantage of the abundant 
resources that this great state has to offer. For these reasons, we urge you to support LD 1286. 
BIDDEFORD AND PORTLAND, lviAli\lE,U.S.A. l TANGIERMOROCCO l ONLINE
