 
 
Testimony of Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences in Support of LD 1286  
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task Force to Support Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy 
Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Century  
 
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement, and Business , I am Dr. Deborah Bronk , and I am the president and CEO of 
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences.  I am here to advocate for t he vital importance of bringing 
people together – of connectivity – with the Blue Economy  Task Force.  
 
Bigelow was founded nearly 50 years ago in 1974.  We currently have 110 year -round staff, an annual 
budget of ~$20M, and a 64 -acre campus in East Boothbay , Maine. We study the foundation of global 
ocean health by focusing on the base of the ocean food web – the microscopic phytoplankton and 
associated bacteria and viruses as well as kelps and corals  – and we use those discoveries to improve 
life on this pla net through education and solutions -based research.  
 
I moved to the gorgeous state of Maine five years ago. When I arrived, I was amazed at the breadth 
and variety of work being done in the marine science space – in terms of research, education, and 
commer cial activity. The other surprise was the relative lack of connectivity and collaboration between 
the various marine science entities. This is a missed opportunity . 
 
The challenges we face in the ocean are truly dire , and yet the opportunities the ocean holds to 
address climate change, or to serve as a source of energy, food , and drugs is enormous. To truly take 
advantage of the opportunities, however, we need to leverage the many resources across the state 
and that re quires collaboration  and relationship building . It requires connectivity.  
 
I will give you a recent example. Bigelow houses the National Center of Marine Algae and Microbiota – 
you may have heard of seed banks – we are the seed bank for marine microbes for  the United States. 
There is no question in my mind that within our collection there are anti -microbial, anti -cancer, and 
anti-inflammatory compounds produced by marine microbes. The question is how do we identify and 
demonstrate the efficacy of individual  compounds out of the tens or even hundreds of thousands 
being produced?  
 
One possible  answer – Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory  (MDIBL) . Two weeks ago, Jim 
Strickland, the director of MDI Biosciences, an offshoot of MDIBL, came to give a talk at Bigelow where 
he described the state -of-the-art tools and expertise they have to do high -throughput screening of 
 
 
compounds for medical applications. Bigelow can identify and provide the compounds , and MDI 
Biosciences can screen them to find  the ones of val ue. I believe this is the start of an important 
connection between our two institutes with tremendous potential for the state.  
 
While I ask that amendments address more specifically what the group will be expected to accomplish,  
I am here today because the re is a real need within Maine for an entity that can catalyze these types of 
connections and to build the blue economy ecosystem needed to nurture those connections once they 
are made.  Thank you for your time and your service.  
 
Respectfully submitted by D eborah Bronk  on April 13, 202 3. 
 
 
