1 
  
LD 1286  
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task Force to Suppor t Maine's Emergence as a 
Center for Blue Economy Innovation an d Opportunity in the 21st Centur y 
Testimony Ne ither In Support Nor In Opposition  
Joint Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Public Hearing  
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Chair; Representative Roberts, Chair; and Honorable Committee 
Members:  
 
My name is Jacquelyn Ellio tt. Thank you for the opportunity to pres ent testimony 
for LD 1286 NEITHER IN SUPPORT OR AGAINST. For almost thirty years I have advocated 
for waste management  policy that protects the environment , public health , and the rights 
of impacted communities.  Waste is a verb and something we choose to do – whether it 
be what we throw away o r how we use our water resources . It can be agreed that c lean 
water resources are vital  for sustaining life.  Water resources are  not infinite and the 
supply is increasingly fragile due to  continued abuse .  
We can  allow  that here in Maine we are living the reality that our choices matter. 
Maine  citizens are  experiencing  the unfolding nightmare of water contaminated with 
PFAS forever toxic chemicals. There is a scramble  to discover  if there are effective ways 
to reclaim those poisoned waters . That remains an unanswered question.  What is evident 
is that  our precious water resources need our care.  Decision ma kers with the power and 
responsibility have not yet met the challenge of conserving and stewarding Maine’s 
valuable and irreplaceable water resources  increasingly  dominated by powerful vested 
interests . Recently, LD 1111  was before  the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology  with the intent  of shif ting the paradigm of how Maine ’s water resources are 
used and protected.  
Currently Maine does not have the legal infrastructure in place to protect our 
water resources  and communities  from extractive , exploitive, and polluting abuse s. The 
Legislature has not yet moved to replace "Absolute Dominion" or "Absolute  Capture" laws  
2 
 that prov ide the corporate  and investor sectors  signi ficant legal advantage over local 
communities'  and envi ronmental  inter ests.  It can be assumed;  venture capital is pushing 
us to grow fish on land instead of bringing our inland waterways and oceans back to good 
health . The model of aquaculture being promoted , like Nordic Aquafarms in Belfast ,1 
requires a tremendous amount of groundwater and creates a waste stream that would 
significantly add to th e existing stress es facing our warming ocean and surface waters . As 
previously  noted, the emerging PFAS issue ; bottled water extraction and exports ; metallic 
mining pressures ; and an increase in the privatization of municipal water systems all add 
threats to the  sustainability  of our finite and valuable water resources.  
Maine is attracting the interest of blue economy entrepreneurs and investor s 
due to the State's clean and cold waters . Maine needs economic development  that values 
what is irreplac eable and upholds the  rights of those who live here. This bill has potential 
to be precarious and should be put on pause  for many reasons . Not the least of which, 
this bill gives preeminence to the private sector over  water sources and the environment 
we depend upon for survival.  The composition of the pr opose d task fo rce raises concerns  
with appointed members weighted to promote  vested inter ests and lacking  meaningful 
participation  from potentially impacted citizens . The task force is  charged  to “overcome 
potential technical, economic , regulatory and other challenges to expand the blue 
econom y . . . [and make] recommendations to amend environmental  and investment 
rules an d regulation s.” As a citizen who has been involved in long -time advocacy , this is a 
familiar model  that raises flags . The outcome from end eavors so s tructured, has seldom 
resulted in sustainab ility and justice.  
Thank you for consi dering my comments and I would ask the Committee to 
carefully consider their dispens ation of LD 1286 . 
Jacquelyn Elliott  
148 W est Road  
Waterboro, ME 
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
 
 
1 Bever, Fred, February 12, 2020, Maine Public, Belfast Residents Express Concerns About Envi ronmental 
Impacts Of  Proposed Land -Based Sal mon Farm  
 https://www.mainepublic.org/business -and-economy/2020 -02-12/belfast -residents -express -concerns -
about -environmental -impacts -of-proposed -land -based -salmon -farm   
