Office  of Strategic 
Partnerships, Innovation,  
 5717 Corbett Hall, Room 430  
Orono, Maine  04469 -5717  
Resources and Engagement  Tel: 207 -581-2201  
Fax: 207 -581-1479  
www.umaine.edu /inspire  
 
Maine’s  Land Grant  and Sea Grant  University  
A Member of the University of Maine System  Testimony from the University of Maine  
Submitted  by Vice President of Strategic Partnerships and Innovation Jake Ward  Regarding LD 
1286, Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy  
Task Force to Support Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy  
Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Century , April 11 , 2023  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development , Economic Advancement and Business: My name is 
Jake Ward and I am  the Vice President of Strategic Partnerships and Innovation for the 
University of Maine, writing to inform your consideration of LD 1286, Resolve, to Establish the 
Blue Economy Task Force to Support Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy 
Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Century . 
 
Maine’s Blue Economy represents the sustainable use of the ocean's resources for economic 
vitality and growth, and it is a foundation of both the past and future for Maine’s many coastal 
and near -coastal communities, and our overall state economy. Nationally and internationally, 
there is increasing awareness of the Blue Economy and the growing opportuni ties it offers to 
support natural solutions to address many product, food, material and energy challenges; 
support employment and economic growth; and advance sustainability and resiliency.  
 
This bill is intended to further Maine as a key player in this e merging and expanding global 
trend. As Maine’s Blue Economy continues to evolve and establish its place in the broader Blue 
Economy, the state has, and will continue, to take a leadership role to manage a sustainable 
economic opportunity while protecting t he incredible natural Gulf of Maine resources.   
 
The R1 University of Maine — a land, sea and space grant institution — has been a strong 
supporter and accelerator of Maine’s Blue Economy for well over a century. Our talented faculty, 
staff and students — in collaboration with communities, state and federal agencies, non -profit 
organizations and companies — have participated in every aspect of the current Blue Economy. 
Our efforts include state and federally funded research and development (R&), product 
development, business incubation, entrepreneurial development, workforce development, 
stakeholder engagement, community support, and close partnership with every entity named in 
LD 1286. This marine work is supported in part by the State’s investment in univ ersity R&D 
through the Maine Economic Improvement Fund, which leverages additional resources from 
federal and private grants and contracts. A great example is Marine Skincare, a start -up 
launched by UMaine students with mentoring and support from our stude nt innovations center, 
that is making skin -care products from lobster processing wastes and marketing their products 
throughout the United States.  
 
In addition to supporting the R&D, product development and community support, UMaine 
faculty, staff and stu dents have led or participated in all of Maine’s marine -related economic 
development plans, roadmaps and strategies including SEA Maine, the Maine Aquaculture 
Roadmap 2022 -2023 and the Maine Climate Action Plan. We thank Sen. Duson and her 
bipartisan cospo nsors for bringing this bill forward. If the Blue Economy Task Force is 
established by LD 1286, UMaine welcomes participating as we continue to enhance Maine’s 
economy, global competitiveness, quality of life and resources, and community resilience 
through  leadership and innovation in the Blue Economy.  
