2» 
( l' 
_\ _' 
.- ." es’' 
/‘.6 
Jill C. Duson THE l\/IAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 27 l3 l St Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator .Iill' Duson introducing LD I286, “Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy 
Task Force to Support Maine ’s Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy Innovation and 
Opportunity in the 21st Century” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
April ll, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Distinguished Colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Jill 
Duson. I represent Senate District 27, which includes parts of Westbrook and Portland. I am here 
to present to LD 1286, “Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task Force to Support Maine's 
Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Century, ” for 
your consideration and speak in favor of its passage. 
The Blue Economy refers to the sustainable use of the oceans and coastal areas for economic 
growth, improved livelihoods, and jobs while preserving the health of our ocean ecosystem. 
This legislation would create a task force to explore and develop ways to support emerging 
opportunities and new blue economy initiatives in Maine. This task force would unify thinking 
across a variety of ocean and seafood economy sectors and a broad range of stakeholders who 
have been convening and have producedimportant reports and‘ 
recommendations aligned with 
our state’s ‘ten year economic plan over the ‘last few ye _ars‘.‘ Itwould be a mechanism to“ 
enable 
continued focus on this important Work and to convene relevant stakeholders to clarify our 
state’s blue economy vision for the future._ 
The ocean and coastal economies in Maine are vital for our state. Our wild ﬁsheries and’ 
aquaculture industries are part of the lifeblood of not just our economy, but of our coastal and 
island communities. For many of these‘ 
communities, their jobs aren’t simply a way to pay the 
bills, but are a way of life. As we all envision the future for these importantindustries, we must 
take into consideration the impacts of climate change as well as the global movement to look for 
emerging technology solutions to increase thelong term sustainability of our ocean economy. 
This task force would provide a lens to coordinate thinking ‘around our own blue economy and 
would ensure that we are supporting these critical communities through the volatility that comes 
with the climate crisis. ' '
~ 
. '' 
‘ 'l
*
_ 
Despite the challenges we are facing due to the impact of climate change on our ocean dependent 
communities, Maine is having its moment. We have the opportunity to establish our state as an 
international center for innovatIion,'investment and job growth in our ocean economy through 
blue economy initiatives and ideas. To achieve this, we must coordinate our efforts and identify 
shared priorities to attract the investment that will be vital for continued economic development
l 
/ippropriations and Fincmciczl/i_[ ’ai1's Committee 
_ Sta!eHoz1se: (207) 287~l5l5 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free: 1~8()0~423-6900 * TTI’? 711. 
- 
./ill.Duson@legz'slature. mainegov legislalzzre. mainegov ﬁsenate
:5? "2 
, . .. 11$ 
"'i 
> ‘=t 
V,
‘ 
°,\ , //\,,?\ 
Jill C. Duson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 27 I3 l st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
in this sector. This task force will identify barriers to attracting investment and help us jointly 
support pathways for equitable, responsible and efﬁcient growth for the beneﬁt of all. 
Maine occupies a unique position in the global ocean economy. Our state provides vital 
resources for the world and we represent an attractive entry point to US markets for a number of 
innovative international companies with ocean interests. We must ensure that we are fostering 
sustainable ways of nurturing and supporting our existing industries While we simultaneously 
develop a clear framework and pathway for innovators and companies interested in locating their 
businesses here. Proactively brainstorming and consciously considering blue economy 
opportunities for our state would directly address this need. At the same time, it’s critical that we 
approach this task force thoughtﬁilly and with sensitivity to the many individuals, institutions, 
communities and businesses which have a vested interest and are deeply rooted in our ocean 
economy. 
After discussions with a number of key stakeholders and leaders within the administration, we 
expect to modify the language of this bill and submit an amendment for your consideration 
during the work session. However, the goal of this legislation remains the same. With support 
from the University of New England, the Roux Institute, Maine Maritime Academy, the Maine 
Aquaculture Association, the University of Maine, Maine Venture Fund, Bold Ocean Ventures, 
Maine & Col, Downeast Institute, and the Gulf of MaineResearch institute, -an of who will be 
speaking toda' y,I see this bill as a platform to continue the great work of a variety of stakeholder 
initiatives and a pathway‘ to transform our ocean economies and communities for the better. 
Thank you for your timeand consideration. “ Ijwould be happy to answer any questions.A
' 
Appr0pr1'atf0n.s' and F incmcial /iﬂrli/is‘ C ommirfeel 
State House: (207) 287-1515 Fax: (207)287-1585 * To/lFree:1-800 —423—6900 * TTY: 711 
Jill.Dzzs011@!egis/amre. marine. gov * iegis/alme. mains. gov/senate
