TESTIMONY OF KEITH M. WILLIAMSON 
lN SUPPORT OF l.D 1286 
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task Force to Support 
Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy Innovation and 
Opportunity in the 21st Century 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Keith Williamson 
Provost at Maine Maritime Academy in Castine. I am here today to speak in support of LD 
1286. 
We at Maine Maritime support the Blue Economy Task Force as a strategic approach to 
leverage the collective wisdom of experts from the major areas that will create jobs and ensure 
the safe and sustainable use of our ocean resources. 
At Maine Maritime Academy (MMA), we pride ourselves on creating economic value for our 
students. We do this with a curriculum focused on learning outcomes that tie directly to 
practical demonstration of the skills that employers need to grow their businesses and maintain 
their competitive advantages. Every shipping company, every shipbuilder, and every business 
who hire our graduates look to us to provide graduate who are lifelong learners, are agile, and 
adapt to rapid changes in technology including ship's operational technologies and cyber 
related skills. 
We look forward to contributing our unique perspectives to the Task Force, and we look 
forward to benefiting from the perspectives of others on the Task Force. As an example of what 
we anticipate, I look at our recent experience with Floating Wind Technology. This technology 
from UMaine’s R&D efforts has opened the door for us at MMA to partner with Northern 
Maine Community College to create a vision for wind techs to work at sea. We've called this 
effort "marinizing ” the wind tech workforce. We've also broadened the concept to other areas, 
as we know the concept will apply to electricians, welders, plumbers, and others seeking to 
work offshore in Maine's floating wind industry. 
We anticipate similar opportunities from sensor technologies and cyber tools that are 
advancing smart ship technology and creating opportunities for cyber-mariners. We see these 
cyber tools trickling down from our 500 foot training ship to 50 foot vessels. In summary, the 
Blue Economy will be a landscape for new opportunities, and we know there will be challenges 
to unlocking those opportunities. Again, as I mentioned earlier, I believe the Task Force isa 
phenomenal way for us to bring our collective expertise together to identify the emerging 
technologies and workforce opportunities that will put Maine at the forefront of one of the 
fastest growing global economic sectors. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
