 Morgan Rielly 
 16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
 Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Phone: (207) 228-5767 
 Morgan.Rielly@legislature.maine.gov  H  OUSE OF   R  EPRESENT ATIVES  
 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
 AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
 (207) 287-1400 
 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 April 1 1, 2023  
 Testimony of Repr esentative Mor gan Rielly in support of  
 LD 1286,  Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy T ask  Force to Support Maine's  
 Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy Innovation and Opportunity in the  
 21st Century  
 Befor e the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and  
 Business  
 Good   afternoon   Senator   Curry ,  Representative   Roberts   and  distinguished   members   of  the 
 Committee   on  Innovation,   Development,   Economic   Advancement   and  Business.   My  name   is 
 Morgan  Rielly ,  and  I  represent   House   District   127,  which   includes   part  of  Westbrook.   I  am  here 
 to  testify   in  support   of  LD  1286,   Resolve,   to  Establish   the  Blue   Economy   Task  Force  to 
 Support   Maine's   Emergence   as  a  Center   for  Blue   Economy   Innovation   and  Opportunity   in 
 the 21st Century  
 Outside   of  the  legislature,   I  work   as  a  farmhand   on  oyster   farms.   And  when   the  session   ends,   I 
 will  be  back   out  on  the  water   working   for  a  farm   in  Brunswick.   I  got  my  first  experience   in 
 aquaculture   with  two  hard-working   farmers   in  Harpswell,   who  opened   my  eyes  to  Maine’ s  Blue  
 Economy ,  with  its  incredible   opportunities   for  meaningful   work   that  is  connected   to  Maine’ s 
 natural   beauty   and  beneficial   for  our  environment.   There   is  no  better   feeling,   and  no  better   way 
 to  know   you’ve   had  a  good   day,  than  the  smell   of  the  ocean   as  you  traverse   across   Casco   Bay 
 and some mud on your sleeves from lifting bags of oysters out of cages.  
 LD  1286   establishes   the  Blue   Economy   Task  Force   to  Support   Maine’ s  Emer gence   as  a  Center  
 for Blue Economy Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Century . 
 The  Blue   Economy   encompasses   the  practice   of  the  sustainable   use  of  ocean   resources   for 
 economic   growth,   improved   livelihoods   and  jobs,   while   preserving   the  health   of  community  
 members   and  our  environment.   A  Blue   Economy   Task  Force   should   also  examine   how  Maine  
 can  ensure   that  our  working   waterfront   is  equitable   and  encourages   the  inclusion   of  women,  
 District 127: Part of Westbrook 

 indigenous   peoples,   historically   marginalized   or  underrepresented   groups,   veterans,   young  
 people, and local communities to participate in.  
 A  core  part  of  our  Blue   Economy   is  Maine's   aquaculture   industry ,  which   is  a  cornerstone   of  our 
 state’ s  identity .  Further ,  our  economy   relies   upon   this  industry .  In  Maine,   there   is  growing  
 interest   in  better   understanding   how  we  can  grow   and  harvest   our  seafood   in  more   sustainable  
 ways,   while   increasing   job  production   in  the  industry .  Now   is  the  time  for  us  to  further   support  
 this industry for the betterment of all Maine people.  
 Beyond   being   a  growing   export,   Maine’ s  aquaculture   industry   has  the  potential   to  be  restorative  
 to  our  coastline   as  many   of  the  shellfish   grown   help  filter   our  water ,  to  have   a  positive   impact   on 
 the  environment,   to  mitigate   the  effects   of  climate   change   and  to  contribute   to  sustainable   food 
 production.   There   is  a  bright   future   in  our  Blue   Economy ,  and  we  must   take  the  necessary   steps  
 to examine how Maine can be a leader in this space.  
 Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions.  
