C1T-ITOG GREATER PORTLAND 
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 
Testimony of the Greater Portland Council of Governments 
In Support of 
LD 1286, Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task Force to Support Maine's Emergence asa 
Center for Blue Economy Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st Century 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Members of the_Joint Standing Committee on innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Paul Johnson. 
I am Economic Development Director for the Greater Portland Council of Governments (GPCOG), and I am 
here today to speak on behalf of GPCOG in support of LD 1286, Resolve, to Establish the Blue Economy Task 
Force to Support Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy Innovation and Opportunity in the 21st 
Century. 
GPCOG serves 25 municipal members in Cumberland County, from Sebago Lake to Casco Bay, as well as Saco, 
Biddeford, Arundel, and Old Orchard Beach through the Portland Area Comprehensive Transportation System 
(PACTS). We deliver transportation, land use, sustainability, and economic development services to our 
members and their communities. 
For over a decade GPCOG has served as the Economic Development District (EDD) for our region, designated 
by the U.S. Economic Development Administration. As EDD, GPCOG acts as a catalyst and convenor for the 
region's economy, and as a conduit of federal funding for qualified development projects. 
My work involves helping small employers find resources and support to sustain and expand employment in 
our region, and I work closely with economic development professionals at the local, regional, and state levels. 
GPCOG is a proud partner of the Blue Economy. As EDD, we have written several letters in support of grants 
that are being used today to grow sustainable jobs and investments by Blue Economy employers. And we see 
great potential in the future of the Blue Economy, connecting a traditional resource-based sector with 
emerging science, technology, and innovation and supporting new sustainable ventures far into the next 
century. 
LD 1286 seeks to ”engage stakeholders, identify barriers and propose policies to attract and support the 
responsible and efficient growth of the blue economy in Maine," and to ”develop a strategy and recommend a 
specific action plan to accelerate the State's emergence as an important contributor to the sustainable use of 
the ocean's resources for economic health, improved livelihoods and jobs and ecosystem health." 
We believe this is important work. When completed, we look forward to being one of many implementing 
partners assisting the future growth and development of the Blue Economy in our region, and across the state 
As we prepare a 5-year strategic plan for our region's economy, we intend to include the Blue Economy asa 
specific opportunity of highest value. We hope you will agree and will pass LD 1286 unanimously so it can go 
into effect as soon as possible in order to advance this economic sector with great potential for all of Maine. 
For all these reasons we urge you to support the passage of LD 1286. Thank you for the opportunity to share 
our support, and please let me know if I can do anything to advance your work on this legislation. 
Helping communities thrive and prosper in the Greater Portland and Lakes Region 
970 Baxter B|vd., Suite 201 O Portland, Maine, 04103 O Tel. (207) 774-9891 O www.gpcog.org
