 
 
131st MAINE LEGISLATURE 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, 
ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT and BUSINESS 
   
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1286 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Peter 
DelGreco, President & CEO of Maine & Co.  My organization exists to find growing 
companies and show them how they can be successful in establishing an operation in 
Maine.  Created during the administration of Governor Angus King, we are a privately 
funded 501(c)6.  We compete with states from the entire country and countries around 
the world to attract new jobs and investment to Maine.  We also work with existing 
Maine companies, helping them implement their growth plans.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share why I support LD 1286.   
 
LD 1286 rightfully recognizes the importance of the blue economy and the potential of 
new innovations coming from our oceans.  With our state’s over 3,000 miles of 
coastline, the opportunities for new technologies are seemingly limitless. 
 
This bill seeks to “expand the blue economy and attract blue economy investment to the 
State…”.  Given that much of Maine’s working waterfront is under pressure from 
residential and vacation home developers, attracting new investment to the working 
waterfront can help ensure that the next generation of Maine’s workforce will have the 
opportunity to make a living along Maine’s coast.  I would also suggest that the 
committee considering adding some expertise from the world of investment attraction. 
 
Looking back through Maine’s history, our citizens have been tremendous stewards of 
our ocean resources.  Looking forward to Maine’s future, the next period of innovation is 
going to come from our oceans. Companies come to us about new technologies related 
to the blue economy frequently.  Venture capitalists are putting resources behind 
entrepreneurs looking for new advancements and innovations derived from the ocean.  
Developing a plan of action to attract new investment and entrepreneurs to this exciting 
new frontier is the right idea. 
 
For these reasons, I support LD 1286 and ask for you to support it. 
 
 

Peter DelGreco
Maine & Co.
LD 1286
Please see my attached testimony in support of LD 1286.  Thank you for the 
opportunity to offer this testimony.
