, ° MAINE 
AQUACULTURE 
9/ ASSOCIATION 
April 11,2023 
The Honorable Chip Curry, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Tiffany Roberts, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
State House, Room 206 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture Association 
(MAA) and the current president of the National Aquaculture Association (NAA). The MAA is the 
oldest state aquaculture association in the country. We represent Maine's aquatic farmers that raise 
finfish, shellfish and sea vegetables. Our farmers annually produce over 100 million dollars in farm 
gate revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens year-round. We purchase goods and 
services from over 400 Maine businesses and our total economic impact is roughly 150 million 
dollars annually. 
l stand before you today to testify in support of LD 1286 "A Resolve to Establish the Blue Economy 
Task Force to Support Maine's Emergence as a Center for Blue Economy innovation and Opportunity 
in the 21st Century." 
The blue economy concept seeks to promote economic growth, social inclusion, and preservation or 
improvement of livelihoods, while at the same time ensuring environmental sustainability. It allows 
for the commercial development of ocean resources while ensuring that those activities are 
sustainable and adaptive to changing ecosystems and human population demographics. The 
emergence of blue economy initiatives is happening rapidly internationally and the United States is, 
frankly, behind many other countries that we compete with both economically and geopolitically. 
Maine is uniquely positioned to become a national leader in the development of a dynamic blue 
economy. We are already a leader in marine resource management and aquaculture. Maine has the 
best cold water marine aquaculture research infrastructure in North America. We lead in marine 
renewable energy R&D and have some of the best marine transportation training facilities in the 
United States. The development of a Blue Economy Task Force would facilitate a systematic 
appraisal of how Maine can capitalize on these strengths and position ourselves to take advantage of 
rapidly emerging market opportunities. 
339 Water Street | Gardiner, ME 04345 | (207)622-0136 I www.maineaqua.org
While we support LD1286, the MAA has a number of suggestions to improve the proposal: 
Two critical institutions have been left out in the proposed task force membership. ln addition to 
the proposed aquaculture representatives, the Maine Aquaculture Innovation Center (MAIC) and 
the University of Maine Aquaculture Research Institute (ARI) should be added as members. Both 
of these institutions form the core of the state's world class aquaculture research community. 
Add a representative from Focus Maine, which has led and helped fund critical economic 
development work in Maine's marine economy over the last 7 years. 
Given the proposed scope of work for the task force and the fact that SEAMaine will not complete 
its work until this fall, the time frame within which the task force conducts its work should be 
lengthened by one year. 
The task force should be given a directive to not only "consider" the recommendations of the 
Aquaculture and Offshore Wind Roadmaps and SEAMaine Reports, but to include their 
recommendations and identify what resources are necessary to implement said 
recommendations. The task force should also identify the potential sources of those resources 
and be empowered to recommend draft legislation to dispense those resources and implement 
any other recommendations it develops in order to facilitate Maine's emergence as a Center of 
Excellence for a Blue Economy. 
Please vote "OUGHT TO PASS as amended with the above recommendations" on LD 1286.I 
thank you for your attention and patience and would be glad to answer any questions you may 
have. 
Sincerely, 
,~+" 
iv 1’ ;._ i./“w 
Sebastian Belle 
Executive Director 
339 WaterStreet | Gardiner, l\/IE 04345 I (207)622-0136 | www.maineaqua.org
