 
 
MNPA.org 
PO BOX 135 Woolwich, ME 04579
207-621-0313
mainenpassociation@gmail.com
mnpa.org
       25+ Years of Independent Practice as Healthcare Providers for the People of Maine 
 
May 2, 2023 
Members of the Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
I am a citizen from South Portland and work as a nurse practitioner in primary care in the greater 
Portland area.  I am writing to you on behalf of the Maine Nurse Practitioner Association in support of 
LD 1639 ‘An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care.’  
We support LD 1639 which will improve patient safety and health outcomes, and appreciate Senator 
Brenner and the co-sponsors for presenting this bill. An increasing body of evidence shows appropriate 
nurse staffing contributes to improved patient outcomes and greater satisfaction for both patients and 
staff.  
Unsafe staffing ratios put patients and staff at risk. Advanced Practice Registered Nurses order high risk 
medications and orders for many complex hospital patients. We are concerned that the current nurse-
patient ratios leave these patients at risk because the nurse is taking care of too many patients unable 
to monitor the patient closely, and this can lead to complications and death. Nurse burn-out rates are 
increasing and if our healthcare system continues to force our nurses to practice in this way, we will 
continue to lose skilled nurses.    
Safe nurse staffing is essential to both the nursing profession and to the overall healthcare system. 
Studies have shown that appropriate nurse staffing helps achieve clinical and economic improvements 
in patient care, including: reduction in medication errors, patient mortality, hospital readmissions, and 
length of stay; improved safety outcomes by reducing incidents of falls, pressure ulcers, and healthcare-
associated infections; reduced patient care costs through avoidance of unplanned readmissions; 
enhancement of patient satisfaction and HCAHPS scores; and prevention of nurse fatigue. 
Thank you for your consideration of this bill as we urge you to vote in favor of LD 1639. Please feel free 
to contact me at the number below for more information and references or if you wish to discuss 
further. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Amy Brown, FNP-C 
Tel # 207-621-0313 
mainenpassociation@gmail.com  
Legislative Committee Member 
Maine Nurse Practitioner Association 
