 
 
 
Testimony of A ngela Cole Westhoff , President and CEO  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
 
May 4, 2023 at 1:00 PM  
 
Neither for Nor Against  
LD 1639, An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care  
 
Good  afternoon  Senator Tipping,  Representative Roeder , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Labor and House. M y name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the  President  & 
CEO of the Maine Health Care Association . We represent approximately 200 nursing homes , 
assisted living , and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical Institutions or 
PNMIs) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the integrity, quality, 
and sustainability of long term care in Maine.   
 
I am here today to present testimony neither for nor against LD 1639, An Act to Address 
Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care.  This bill establishes minimum direct -care 
registered nurse staffing requirements for hospitals , free standing emergency departments  and 
ambulatory care settings based on patient care unit and patient needs  and specifies the 
method to calculate a health car e facility's compliance with the staffing requirements .  
 
Maine’s long term care facilities already have minimum staffing requirements.i While I am not 
here to judge the adequacy of what the Maine Quality Care Act proposes, I am here today to 
share with y ou the reality of Maine’s current staffing crisis. The COVID -19 pandemic disrupted 
our industry, resulting in a nationwide thirteen -year low of long term care workers in the 
United States. 85% of Maine’s recently surveyed long term care facilities are faci ng a staffing 
 
 
2 
 shortage. Even before 2020, recruiting and retaining employees at long -term care facilities had 
been incredibly difficult when employers from other industries offer more pay and benefits.  
 
The workforce shortage has major implications for ou r health care system. We estimate that we 
lost between 10 and 15% of the direct care workforce, including CNAs, RNs and LPNs  in our 
sector . Every part of the health care continuum is struggling to find workers . When we are not 
able to fully staff our buildings , we end up having to clos e to new ad missions or take beds 
offline. This means  access to long term care is reduced at t ime when demand continues to 
grow . In addition, long  term care facilities are then forced to rely upon extremely cost ly 
temporary nurse agencies to fill our staffing needs and comply with our minimum staffing 
ratios.  This is exponentially driving up the cost of care.  
 
In Maine, it is estimated there will be a shortage of 2,700 nurses by 2025 — a slight decrease 
from the previous projection of 3,200 based on a 2017 analysis by the Center for Health Affairs. 
However 2,700 nurses is far from breaking even. Nurses are retir ing and leaving the field at an 
alarming rate. In a rural and aging state like Maine, nurs es are in great demand.  
 
Sadly, t here just aren’t nurses  to fill all the positions across the health care continuum , and the 
education and training pipeline takes ti me. If this bill passes , hospitals will have no choice but to 
recruit away our nurses  thereby further destabilizing access to long term care in Maine. Since 
the beginning of the pandemic , we have had 15  long term care  facilities close and a recent 
announce ment that additional closures are coming. Long term care is funded 70% by 
MaineCare so we can’t afford to absorb additional  wage increase s to compete or cost  shift to 
other payors.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today , and I would be h appy to answer any 
questions.  
 
i Maine’s Nursing Facility Minimum Staffing Requirements are viewable at: 
https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/rules/10/144/ch110/14411009.doc  
