 
 
Hello my name is Angela Charland and I am a Registered Nurse at Maine Medical Center. I manage the 
transfer center for MMC, SMHC, and MCH. I am aware of staffing issues and how they affect patient’s 
access to care. I have a vast knowledge of the nursing profession and I am concerned for the LD 1639 
bill. 
Patients wait at critical access facilities for beds at tertiary care centers every day. These prolonged wait 
times are detrimental to patients because they are in a place where they are unable to receive the care 
they require. If we pass LD 1639 we will ultimately need to close beds due to staffing which will increase 
the wait times for these patients and further delay care. There is no data or evidence to support this bill 
and there is only one state that has processed staffing ratios. This states quality and safety scores have 
had negative influence, and Maine is already ranked much higher for patient safety and satisfaction.  
I am concerned for the repercussions of patient care if this bill is passed. We have a nursing shortage for 
the profession mandating patient ratios will not change that. We already have a deficit in Maine of 
1500-2000 nurses.  If we pass this bill we will be forcing hospitals to close beds due to the lack of staff 
much like we have experienced with our nursing homes in Maine. We will be taking away nursing 
autonomy to make the decisions regarding staffing to accommodate acuity and provide exceptional 
patient care. As nurses we are patient advocates and it is my duty to this profession to voice these issues 
that surround this bill. Please consider your family members and their access to care if this bill passes we 
will be increasing wait times for transfers, and in our ED’s. Patients will experience increased boarding 
times which has been studies across the nation to increase mortality and morbidity. I urge you to 
consider patient safety and advocate for the nursing profession by not supporting this bill.  
Thank You 
 
 
