Ashley Schumacher
Freeport
LD 1639
Ashley Schumacher, RN, BSN
Regarding LD 1639 “An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve 
Patient Care” or “The Maine Quality Care Act”
April 28, 2023
Thank you Senator Tipping and the members of the Committee on Labor and Housing
for your time and consideration today. My name is Ashley Schumacher. I live in 
Freeport and have worked as a registered nurse in Maine since 2009. In 2022, like 
many of my peers, I made the difficult decision to leave my bedside nursing career 
after 13 years at what is now Northern Light Mercy Hospital in Portland. I worked at 
the Birthplace, a labor, delivery, recovery and postpartum unit performing all the 
aforementioned descriptors of the unit in addition to circulating in the unit’s operating
room, caring for newborns in the Level 2 nursery, triaging patients and acting as 
resource (or charge) nurse over the years. It was an honor and a privilege to serve in 
these roles. 
The patients I cared for are decidedly not on the list of reasons I left the hospital 
bedside. Instead, I found myself exhausted and over-stressed by higher patient acuity, 
“acceptable” ratios of one nurse to three parent-and-baby couplets, performing 
multiple roles in a single shift, and seemingly endless required menial tasks that 
pulled me away from direct patient care. I was also required to be frequently 
available, or “on call,” to the hospital on my days off. 
Passing LD 1639 will not only help improve patient care by giving nurses more time 
at the bedside, it will also ensure nurses are more likely to work on the days they are 
scheduled, thereby being able to use their paid time off for actual vacation/personal 
days rather than making up for days they have been called off work for “low census.” 
These safer staffing ratios will allow for bedside nurses to complete their annual 
mandatory corporate compliance training and insurance-mandated education in 
addition to continuing education units, specialty-based certifications and unit-based 
education/drills within their scheduled working hours, creating a better work-life 
balance. All of these factors will serve to establish Maine not only as a place to 
receive excellent medical care, but also as an attractive place to work for new nurses 
and prevent burn-out in experienced nurses like me who are considering leaving the 
profession altogether. This bill recognizes the unique role, education and expertise of 
the registered nurse and sets realistic expectations for each individual nurse to provide
safe, excellent care to patients in a hospital setting.  
Thank you for your work on this committee and for the time and consideration you 
have granted me today. 

