Senator Tipping, Representative Daughtry, and Members of the Labor and Housing Committee,  
 
My name is Brandie Rubin. I am from Scarborough, and I am a Registered Nurse with over 13 
years of nursing experience. I am writing to oppose LD 1639. 
 
This Bill claims that it will improve patient care by addressing staffing of Nurses.  On the surface 
this seems like an easy decision. The data clearly shows that safe Nurse/Patient ratios result in 
safer care and better patient outcomes. The evidence tells us, based on specialty, how many 
patients our Nurses should be charged with on our shifts.  Professional Nursing organizations, 
including the American Nurses Association, make recommendations to healthcare facilities 
based upon that evidence.  Healthcare agencies already monitor staffing ratios.  CMS, JCAHO, 
and DHHS Licensing Division, all have staffing requirements that must be adhered to inorder to 
maintain licensure. 
 
It has been found that Nurse driven staffing committees, which encourage flexible staffing levels 
based on individual patient care needs and experience of the Nurses, provide the best patient 
outcomes.  Rigid staffing models that do not consider the dynamic nature of the healthcare 
needs of the current patient population, and can result in unnecessary restriction on the ability of 
a healthcare center to care for its patients. This is the Number 1 reason why staffing is best 
managed by committees in real time, based on evidence based standards of care.  
 
While mandated staffing ratios may seem to make sense, it does nothing to address the fact 
that we have a nationwide shortage of licensed Registered Nurses, and Maine is no 
exception.  Our largest Healthcare organizations in the state are reporting unprecedented 
nursing vacancies. The number of vacant nursing positions have grown since the beginning of 
the pandemic.  I have heard from a couple of groups who claim they know the reasons for 
this.  A very small group wants you to believe that it is vaccine mandates.  The Maine State 
Nurses Association, part of National Nurses United, who are organizing public rallies in support 
of this legislation, want you to believe that there isn’t a nursing shortage at all.  Both of these 
groups couldn’t be more wrong. The largest Nurses Union in the state continues to ignore the 
evidence and continues to throw Nurses under the bus by pushing their false narrative. Nurses 
endured months of abuse by this union during the Covid-19 pandemic, while they made false 
promises to fix these issues for us, but they have been failing Nurses in this state for decades. 
This is not an organization that speaks for Nurses working hard each and every day.    
 
Nurses across the country have been sounding the alarm for decades that we do not have 
enough Nurses to care for our aging population, especially when our own are aging out and 
retiring as well.  The shortage is continuing to grow. Moral injury is widespread. What was once 
considered the most trusted profession, are now subjected to abusive patients, sicker patients 
due to failures in our healthcare system, dismal healthcare reimbursement rates from 
Medicare/Medicaid and private health insurers, and the burden of over regulation. We can’t 
bring in more Nurses because we have too few seats available in Nursing schools.  We have a 
bottleneck at clinical sites, partially due to the lack of Nurses available to teach future nurses. 
Before we can even begin to think about mandating ratios, we need to ensure we have enough 
nurses to meet that need without compromising access to care. I implore you to look at ways to 
increase the number of Nurses such as providing for student loan reimbursement, build more 
relationships between nursing schools and hospitals, and increase their pay by increasing 
reimbursement for services.  Then, we can look at nurse ratio mandates. For these reasons, I 
hope you will vote Ought Not To Pass. Thank you. 
 
