www.maineacep .org Maine Chapte r, American College of Emergency Physicians   
 
April 26, 0223 ~  DRAFT  
 
Testimony  of the  
Maine Chapter – American College of Emergency Physicians  
 
 in Opposition  to 
LD 1639 / SP 656  
An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care  
Legislative D ocument Link  
 
Labor and Housing Committee  
Cross Building, Rm 202, Augusta, Maine  
Amy J. Roeder, Chair  
May 4, 2023 at 1:00 pm  
 
Senator  Roeder , Representative  Bradstreet  and members of the Labor and Housing Commitee , we are 
providing written testimony on behalf of Maine Chapter, American College of Emergency  Physicians  (MEACEP)  
speaking in opposition to this bill.  Maine Chapter - ACEP  has a network of over 200 emergency -trained 
physician  members  practicing in each major hospital in Maine  who are dedicated to provid ing the very best 
patient care .  
 
There are a number of issues and challenges impacting patient experiences and patient care in Maine’s 
emergency departments that hospitals, physician leaders and clinical providers  are working in collaboration to 
resolve. This bill aims to improve nursing ratios, working conditions for nurses, and clearly intended  to 
improve patient care. While staffing ratios are important and can be advantageous,  if we focus strictly on 
nursing ratios , this bill will likely have the opposite effect.  
 
• Do the fo rmulas and ratios take into account other clinicians  on duty ? This bill’s staffing limits 
would effectively limit the number of patients who can be treated in a hospital’s Emergency 
Department based  purely on the number of RNs on duty. In order to maintain compliance with the 
proposed R egistered Nurse (RN)  ratio mandates, hospitals would need to assess and reassign RNs 
based on these  mandates, regardless of whether there are other members of the ED t eam (including 
but not limited to: physicians, licensed practical nurses, licensed vocational nurses, certified nursing 
assistants, healthcare techs, patient observers, nurse educators, registration clerks, security, and 
others) who are capable and availab le to help.  
 
Instead of looking at the experience and expertise of the entire clinical team, this bill proposes that 
care would be determined by ratios and numbers of a single part of the team.  
 
• Is this model effective in other states?   In California, the only state with a nurse staffing mandate, 
studies show that ED wait times increased following the implementation of mandated ratios, despite 
fewer people seeking care.1 They state, “… enforcement of this fixed ratio has been harmful rather 
than helpful to ED patients.  In the past, during periods of extreme crowding, ED patients might have 
been ‘doubled up’ in some treatment areas to provide the safest environment for monitoring. Now, 
with a rigid 3:1 patient: RN ratio, patients are placed in  hallways with no direct nursing observation 
during periods of crowding. Indeed, some patients who are very ill must remain in the waiting room.”2 
www.maineacep.org   
Maine Chapter, American College of Emergency Physicians   
• Does decreas ing the  nursing ratio improve patient care ? There is, in fact, data/studies showing 
that decreased nursing ratios improve patient outcomes.  However, it is important to recognize that 
this result may not be attainable in Maine.  It is important to recognize that outcomes in these results 
may not be feasible in Maine. These studies addressed this  issue from a different perspective  than this 
bill proposes. Instead of limiting or reducing patient s, they improved nurse ratios by increasing nurses , 
something that may not be possible or feasible given the critical nursing shortage. We cannot control 
the number of patients being treated in the emergency department so we  expect  the effect of this 
bill would be to limit and delay care  causing increased counts of harm  and diminished patient 
experience . 
 
• Are there nurses to hire to fulfill these new requirements?  The answer is no.  On November 7, 
2022 the American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), co -signed by 34 other national groups, 
including the American Medical Association and American Nurses Association, sent a 9 page letter to 
President Bi den, Xavier Becerra (Secretary of DHHS), and Alejandro Mayorkas (Secretary of Homeland 
Security).   This letter’s purpose was to bring attention to the dire situations that Emergency 
Departments across the country are facing.   The reason  for the critical si tuation is multifactorial, in 
large part because of a  national nursing shortage. The following is a direct quote from this letter:    
 
“Prior to the pandemic, the American Association of Colleges of Nursing already projected a 
nursing shortage. That trend has accelerated due to COVID -19, confirmed by a recent 
American Nurses Foundation survey 9 which found that 21 percent of nurses surveyed 
intended to leave their position, with another 29 percent considering leaving. Almost half of 
all respondents cited insufficient staffing as a factor in their resignation, and their 
departures will only increase the insufficiency, forcing their fellow nurses to an even more 
severe condition and impeding the ability to provide high -quality patient care. ” 
• If passed,  how would these nursing ratios impact patients seeking emergency care in 
Maine ? We expect that patients in the emergency department would likely experience one or more 
of these issues - 
o Increased wait times  before a patient can be seen by a cl inician. This delay in accessing 
emergency care could potentially worsen patients’ critical illnesses;  
o Prolonged wait times for inpatient beds  when patients require admission from the ED since 
floor staffing ratios will dictate the number of beds available  for new admissions. This will 
further delay care for admitted patients and delay care for new ED patients who require 
evaluation;  
o Exacerbated Emergency Department boarding of admitted patients , already a crisis issue for 
patients waiting on inpatient bed s; and  
o Extended EMS holding while they wait for nurse ratios to decrease enough for emergency 
departments to accept new patients. Not only would this delay patient care, but it would also 
limit EMS availability to respond to emergencies in the field.  
 
• Wou ld the proposed rules conflict with any Federal laws and mandates?  EMTALA in its 
current form and this bill cannot safely co -exist.  Under these proposed rules, ED’s would be forced to 
violate federal laws to provide the care they feel is best for the patient, resulting in possible loss of 
license or ability to care for patients with Medicare coverage. The federal Emergency Medical 
Trea tment and Active Labor Act (referred to as “EMTALA”) requires Medicare -participating hospitals 
www.maineacep.org   
Maine Chapter, American College of Emergency Physicians  with dedicated EDs to screen, treat, and stabilize patients with emergency medical conditions coming 
to a hospital in a non -discriminatory manner regardless of t heir ability to pay, insurance status, 
national origin, race, creed or color. The federal government implemented EMTALA to ensure that 
emergency care is provided to any patient who believes that they have an emergency medical 
condition, so they are not pre vented from accessing care. Non -compliance with EMTALA can result in 
steep penalties, including hospital fines up to $50,000 per violation and/or physician fines up to 
$50,000 per violation, including on -call physicians.3 
 
We support our nurse colleagues at American Nurses’ Association -Maine (ANA -Maine ), Maine Emergency 
Nurses Association (Maine ENA ), and the Maine Hospital Association  who are also speaking  against LD 1639 
and ask that you do not support  this bill. 
 
Thank you  for your time and consideration of this testimony . 
 
Maine Chapter - ACEP  
Andrew Ehrhard, M D, FACEP , President   
Cathr yn Stratton,  CAE, Executive Directo r 
PO Box 190, Manchester, Maine 04351  
(207) 592 -5725   |  acepmaine@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
Footnotes:  
1. Chapman, S. A., Spetz, J., Seago, J. A., Kaiser, J., Dower, C., & Herrera, C. (2009). How have mandated nurse staffing 
ratios affected hospitals? Perspectives from California hospital leaders. Journal of Healthcare Management, 54(5), 321 -
335.; Weichenthal, L., & Hendey, G. W. (2011). The effect of mandatory nurse ratios on patient care in an emergency 
department. The Journal of emergency medicine, 40(1), 76 -81. READ ARTICLE  
2. Derlet, R. W., & Richards, J. R. (2008). Ten solutions for emergency department crowding. National Library of Medicin e. 
V9(1);  2008 January . READ ARTICLE  
3. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2012). Emergency Medical Treatment & Labor Act (EMTALA). Accessed 
from  https://www.cms.gov/Regulations -and-Guidance/Legislation/EMTALA/ . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
