Remarks of Cokie Giles, RN 
President, Maine State Nurses Association/NNOC/NNU 
LD 1639 Maine Quality Care Act 
May 4, 2023 
Augusta, Maine 
Hello Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing. 
My name is Cokie Giles. I am the President of the Maine State Nurses Association, which is 
affiliated with National Nurses United, the largest and fastest-growing union for Registered 
Nurses in the United States. 
ln addition to being the President of MSNA, I am also a Vice President of National Nurses 
United. l live in Brewer, Maine. 
And, l have been a registered nurse at Eastern Maine Medical Center in Bangor for 34 years. In 
my time as a nurse, l have witnessed first—hand the disintegration of working conditions for 
nurses within our healthcare system, where patients are monetized and profits are maximized. 
Given that the conditions in which nurses work are the exact conditions in which patients receive 
care, nurses are the natural allies of, and advocates for, the patients to whom they give care. 
Our mandate to give patients the best possible care is what drove so many registered nurses to 
be here today. We have all seen the effect that short staffing has, not only on our patients, but 
also on us as caregivers. We all know nurses who have left the bedside because they were not 
allowed to give the care that their patients deserved. 
But we also know that nurses will come back to the bedside if working conditions (and patient 
care conditions) improve. That is the point of LD 1639, The Maine Quality Care Act. 
It is important for you all to know that we aren't hoping and wishing for better working 
conditions and lower patient ratios to bring nurses back to the bedside. We have data to show 
that this will happen. As you may know, the State of California passed a safe staffing law, much 
like what we're proposing here, back in 1999. After that law was implemented in California, 
nurse applications to hospitals shot up by 60%. 
It's common sense that the more patients a nurse has to care for the less time she has for each 
them. And we also have authoritative data to show that assigning fewer patient per nurse 
reduces injury to nurses, workplace violence, patient falls and other negative outcomes, and 
improves the overall quality of care that patients receive. Not to mention that sensible, safe 
nurse-to-patient ratios improve the retention rate of Registered Nurses, doing the work they 
love and that they were trained to do. 
Nurses know there is not a shortage of nurses, but rather a shortage of nurses who are willing to 
work in these current conditions, where they are regularly short—staffed. Help us bring nurses
back to the bedside. Help us solve this nurse staffing crisis. Help us give patients the care they 
need and deserve. Please support LD 1639, the Maine Quality Care Act. 
Thank you.
