Remarks of Emma Cooper, BSN, RN 
LD 1639 Maine Quality Care Act 
May 4, 2023 
Augusta, Maine 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Emma Cooper. I have been a registered nurse 
for almost five years. Currently I work on the postpartum unit at Maine Medical Center and 
am a proud member ofour union. 
Caring for birthing folks, postpartum parents and their new babies is something I have 
always held in high regard. My mother is a registered nurse and certified nurse midwife and 
I am honored to have followed her into the revered profession of nursing. The care that my 
mother talked about being able to provide feels very different from the realities of my 
current role. Truth be told, in my almost five years of being a nurse, I have rarely felt proud 
of the care I was able to give. 
The acuity of patients is increasing across all hospital areas and I have observed this 
directly in the postpartum space. More patients have conditions like pre-eclampsia and 
gestational hypertension, both are serious, and if not treated and managed are potentially 
fatal. I also have the honor to care for new Mainers, many of whom do not speak English 
and require interpreters. I am taking care of infants that require more advanced nursing 
care initiatives like blood sugar checks every three hours or frequent vitals for the duration 
of their stay. All of this takes more time. 
We are already failing parents in this country on so many levels and I often feel that I am 
failing them personally. On any given shift a postpartum nurse will likely have three 
parent-to-child couplets to take care of, so six patients in all. Everyone's baby feeds at least 
every two to three hours and more often than not feeding is not the easy image we all want 
to see. Many of my patients [both parent and baby) need help with several feeding sessions 
in a row until things click, Irarely have time to provide this due to the number of patients I 
am being assigned. 
You will hear the opposition state that mandated ratios reduce nurse autonomy over 
patient assignments and care. As a floor nurse I have never once been asked if I thought my 
assignment was appropriate and I know that my charge nurses do not control this either. 
This is dictated by administrators not staff nurses. This bill would only serve to increase 
nurse autonomy over patient care.
The continuous moral injury to nurses as a result of these conditions is devastating. Nurses 
are leaving inpatient care settings in droves because we no longer want to be subjected to 
the gruesome moral injury being inﬂicted upon us by our employers. Hospitals like to say 
that this is because there is a nursing shortage. This is categorically false. There is no 
nursing shortage, just a shortage of jobs that we nurses feel safe working in. 
I am so tired of hospitals and big health corporations dominating the conversation on what 
nurses need. Especially when the people who run them have never worked a day at the 
bedside or have not worked there in years. If hospitals are truly concerned with "helping to 
create the healthiest communities in America, ” they would support patients over profit and 
staff over technology. 
We need legislatively mandated nurse-to-patient ratios. We are the most trusted profession 
in America and we are asking you to trust us now, nurses know best what we need. Please 
support nurses and help us help our patients. Please vote in support of LD 1639 The Maine 
Quality Care Act. Thank you for your time. 
Emma Cooper, BSN,RN
