/A\ Maine Medical Center 
l\/lainel-'Iealth 
Testimony of Faye Weir, Maine Medical Center 
In Strong Opposition to LD 1639, “An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of 
Nurses and Improve Patient Care” 
Thursday, May 4, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, distinguished members of the joint Standing Comrnittee 
on Labor and Housing, my name is Faye Weir and I am the Vice President of Patient Care Services 
for the Women’s Service Line at Maine Medical Center and The Barbara Bush Children ’s Hospital. 
I have been a nurse for over 40 years and have cared for mothers, infants and children during my 
entire career. 
My long career as a nurse includes working in several hospitals in a variety of states as a bedside 
nurse, a nurse educator and as a leader and this has provided me a vantage point on how we care for 
mothers and their infants through a variety of lenses. Throughout my career, I have found that our 
success hinges on the collaboration between the nurse at the bedside, physicians, nurse leaders, 
respiratory therapists, pharmacists, midwives, nurse practitioners and so many others who all have 
the goal of providing the best possible care to our patients. Reﬂecting on the legislation before you 
today, I am very concerned about the unintended consequences of such a law. 
First, I want to acknowledge that we are all tired. The pandernic impacted all health care workers as 
never experienced before. I also understand that while mandated ratios might look like a great idea 
on the surface, it is not the answer to the fatigue and burnout nurses, physicians, respiratory 
therapist and, I would argue, every health care worker has experienced. I oppose this legislation for 
several reasons, but I’d like to focus on one particular reason: Ratios will take away the ﬂexibility 
that nurses need to treat each patient as an individual. 
The implementation of mandated staffing ratios is contradictory to everything that a nurse is 
educated and trained for. The ratios do not take into account the variability in a patient’s condition 
throughout a shift nor does it take into account that all nurses may not have the same level of 
competency and skills. 
As an example, a new graduate may not be able to manage 4- patients during a shift because they 
might have one patient needing extra focus due to a change in blood pressure. However, an 
experienced RN would be able to quickly reprioritize their patient assignment and work with the 
team to help with some of the routine care so they can focus on the patient with blood pressure 
concerns. Wiﬂi mandated ratios, this ﬂexibility is taken away and all nurses will be at the counted at 
the same level, as well as all patients. If you asked an expert nurse how many patients they can care 
for, they would respond... “it depends” because they are constantly reassessing their patients and 
recognize that all patients are not the same. Many nurses I’ve spoken with this week have asked why 
Z2 Bramhall Street ' Portland, ME 04102 ' Phone: (Z07) 662-Qlll 
w\vw.mn1c.org
their “judgment ” is going to be taken away. Wlnle mandated staffing ratios may make sense on the 
surface, we are not a one-size ﬁts all. 
I lived in Massachusetts during the tiine that they enacted mandatory nurse staffing ratios for 
intensive care units in 2015 so I also speak from my personal experience of what this law actually 
did. I oversaw a Neonatal intensive care unit and this law was applied to both adult and neonatal 
intensive care units. During the time after the law went into effect, one particular situation occurred 
where we were not able to accept an admission of a premature infant from our region and this 
critical infant needed to be transferred to Worchester, close to 2 hours away from where the mother 
delivered distancing the family and delaying care in an intensive care setting. We also experienced 
situations where twins had to be separated because of the mandate; one infant required critical care 
while the other required a less intensity of care. These levels were provided in different locations so 
they could not be together. This unintended consequence for the family and also for having tirnely 
care at an intensive care unit is why I am concerned about this legislation. 
I recently looked to see what has happened in Massachusetts since the legislation was enacted. In 
2018, a study published in Ciitical Care Medicine journal showed that the iisk of patient mortality 
and the risk of complications in Massachusetts ’ ICUs remained unchanged. The authors stated: “In 
conclusion, the staffing assignrnents of nurses to patients in the ICU based upon acuity tools failed 
to demonstrate improvements in patient mortality or complication rates among critically ill patients, 
potentially due to small effects on nurse staffing ”. 
Mandated ratios may have an unintended impact on patients having to either wait longer in 
the Emergency room for care or to be transferred out of their region for care. This is nota 
hypothetical — I saw this happen in Massachusetts. The unintended consequences of this legislation 
is one of the reasons why California is the only state that has legislated rigid ratios over the past 25 
years. Other states have just said no. 
Instead of ratios, we need to focus on those things that will increase the nuinber of nurses in the 
state such as ﬁnding ways to have more faculty to teach new nurses, address issues with child care 
for families so they can be fully employed and so many others. Ratios will not make nurses 
magically appear and is not the answer to the needs in Maine. 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
