LD 1639 An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and 
Improve Patient Care 
 
Good Morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and 
members of the Labor and Housing Committee.  My name is 
Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent for Ironworkers Local 7 
and a member of the AFL- CIO Executive Board.  I rise in favor 
of LD 1639 An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and 
Improve Patient Care.  
      I am a proud spouse of a Maine State Nurses Association 
Member, we are a union family.  The hard work my wife put in 
over the years and sacrifices she made to become a registered 
nurse are not only inspiring but have left me with a deep level 
of respect for her commitment to the care of others.  My wife, 
like many other nurses, benched her life for years in the pursuit 
of her  dreams.  Dreams of being able to help people when they 
need it the most.  Becoming a nurse requires grueling college 
schedules which lead to careers where entry points are usually 
12-hour overnights that run down the mind and body.  The 
pressures of nursing, the overnights, the long shifts and hours 
upon hours between meals (that’s if you even get a chance to 
eat during a shift) bleed into one’s family life and mental 
health.   The journey is something indescribable to anyone who 
doesn’t endure the same path.   
      This bill is our chance to tell the many women and men who 
chose this profession, we have your backs.  We recognize the 
years of hard work, the daily sacrifices you have made to 
protect our families and we appreciate it.   Maine has no law 
limiting the number of patients a registered nurse can care for 
at one time.  All stop right there, how is that not dangerous?  
Although nurses are modern day superheroes, there is a limit to 
not only what one person can do but what one person should 
be expected to do.   
       Speaking from firsthand experience I have not only 
supported my wife leaving a position due to unsafe staffing, I 
have encouraged it.  Working as the sole floor nurse in a multi-
level rehabilitation facility.  Her only support nurses were on 
other floors with a few nurse assistants floating between 
nurses.  It was hard on her mentally, the stress of worrying she 
wouldn’t be prepared for multiple issues happening at the 
same time or that help would come slowly because the other 
nurses also were working well past capacity.  Just having a 
patient  wonder out of a room and take a fall while you were 
busy with another is stressful.  This situation is just an example 
of how poor staffing endangers patients and drives nurses from 
the profession.  My wife has a ton of grit and determination, 
she found another job in a community health center and stayed 
with it.  We should all be thankful for nurses like her, who rise 
above to stay the course. 
      With this bill we can safeguard nurses’ right to advocate in 
the exclusive interests of the patients under their care.  
Alongside protecting nurse whistleblowers who speak out 
about assignments that are unsafe for the patient or nurse.  
Those patients’ whom nurses are advocating for are us on our 
worst days.  By undercutting this bill and a nurses’ chance to 
advocate for their patients, you undercut yourself.   
       I look forward to seeing your unwavering support for our 
Maine Nurses when you vote this bill ought to pass!! 
 
Appreciate your time, 
Grant Provost 
207-314-3530 
gprovost@iwlocal7.org 
Grant Provost
Brunswick
LD 1639
LD 1639 An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care
Good Morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee.  My name is Grant Provost, I am the Business Agent for 
Ironworkers Local 7 and a member of the AFL- CIO Executive Board.  I rise in favor 
of LD 1639 An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care. 
      I am a proud spouse of a Maine State Nurses Association Member, we are a union
family.  The hard work my wife put in over the years and sacrifices she made to 
become a registered nurse are not only inspiring but have left me with a deep level of 
respect for her commitment to the care of others.  My wife, like many other nurses, 
benched her life for years in the pursuit of her  dreams.  Dreams of being able to help 
people when they need it the most.  Becoming a nurse requires grueling college 
schedules which lead to careers where entry points are usually 12-hour overnights that
run down the mind and body.  The pressures of nursing, the overnights, the long shifts
and hours upon hours between meals (that’s if you even get a chance to eat during a 
shift) bleed into one’s family life and mental health.   The journey is something 
indescribable to anyone who doesn’t endure the same path.  
      This bill is our chance to tell the many women and men who chose this 
profession, we have your backs.  We recognize the years of hard work, the daily 
sacrifices you have made to protect our families and we appreciate it.   Maine has no 
law limiting the number of patients a registered nurse can care for at one time.  All 
stop right there, how is that not dangerous?  Although nurses are modern day 
superheroes, there is a limit to not only what one person can do but what one person 
should be expected to do.  
       Speaking from firsthand experience I have not only supported my wife leaving a 
position due to unsafe staffing, I have encouraged it.  Working as the sole floor nurse 
in a multi-level rehabilitation facility.  Her only support nurses were on other floors 
with a few nurse assistants floating between nurses.  It was hard on her mentally, the 
stress of worrying she wouldn’t be prepared for multiple issues happening at the same
time or that help would come slowly because the other nurses also were working well 
past capacity.  Just having a patient  wonder out of a room and take a fall while you 
were busy with another is stressful.  This situation is just an example of how poor 
staffing endangers patients and drives nurses from the profession.  My wife has a ton 
of grit and determination, she found another job in a community health center and 
stayed with it.  We should all be thankful for nurses like her, who rise above to stay 
the course.
      With this bill we can safeguard nurses’ right to advocate in the exclusive interests 
of the patients under their care.  Alongside protecting nurse whistleblowers who speak
out about assignments that are unsafe for the patient or nurse.  Those patients’ whom 
nurses are advocating for are us on our worst days.  By undercutting this bill and a 
nurses’ chance to advocate for their patients, you undercut yourself.  
       I look forward to seeing your unwavering support for our Maine Nurses when 
you vote this bill ought to pass!!
Appreciate your time,
Grant Provost
207-314-3530
gprovost@iwlocal7.org

