Hearing Remarks for LD1639, by Jackie Fournier, RN 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. 
My name islackie Fournier, and I am a registered nurse on the Mother Baby unit at l\/laine 
Medical Center, where I have spent 25 years caring for countless new Maine families. 
lam proud and honored to be standing before you and alongside so many of my amazing 
nursing colleagues as well as families that l have personally cared for while they welcomed our 
next generation of tiny Mainers into the world. 
l am here today, despite my INTENSE aversion to public speaking, to share with you how critical 
it is for Maine nurses to earn your support for LDl639, The l\/laine Quality Care Act. 
I'd like to keep it simple and personal: As nurses, we know that safe stafﬁng saves lives! 
”Safe stafﬁng" is not a ”cookie cutter, one-size- ﬁts-all" approach and nobody knows what ”safe" 
and "unsafe" look like better than the RN at your bedside trying to provide the best possible 
care to you and your loved ones. Unfortunately, and shockingly, there is N0 CAP on how many 
patients we can care for at one timel This NEEDS to change! 
A great deal of our nursing care involves providing emotional support and guidance to struggling 
patients and families. That care takes TlME.... time that we don't have when we are caring for 
too many patients than we can safely and adequately care for. 
While childbirth is often one of the most joyous and special times in peoples’ lives, it can also be 
one of the most heartbreaking and devastating.... 
We care for families who have experienced severe and unexpected complications during 
childbirth whose visions of ”the perfect birth" morph into more of a "horriﬁc nightmare" when
their precious newborns must be urgently admitted to the NICU instead of delicately handed 
into the loving arms of their awaiting parents. 
What does safe stafﬁng mean to me? 
It means that I don't have to rush away from a sobbing Mom who just watched her perfect baby 
take its last breath in the NICU. It means that I will have enough time to help a patient learn to 
breastfeed her newborn who is struggling to feed. It means that I can help a 16-year-old learn to 
shift gears to learn to be a mom at a time when she thought she'd be hanging out with her 
friends and going to school. 
We care for your families- your mothers, fathers, daughters & sons, husbands & wives, your 
grandparents, grandchildren and your closest friends. We do what we love, and we love what 
we do, but we simply MUST have enough nurses to do our jobs safely and well! Countless 
nurses have left hospital nursing or nursing altogether due to "burnout." When you leave shift 
after shift with the feeling that you just couldn't do ENOUGH because you were too over- 
extended, it takes a toll on even the strongest of nurses. What is being proposed here will 
ATTRACT nurses to acute care settings and RETAIN them. 
So today, I stand before you urging you to PLEASE help us take the next step. This bill acts as the 
ﬂoor, not the ceiling, to developing safe stafﬁng ratios across the state. 
What we truly need from you is your vote of support for LD1639. 
Please support US so that we can safely support YOU and your loved ones in their times of 
greatest need! Thank you!
