Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and Housing Committee, my name 
is Jana Drake, I am a Nurse Director at Maine Medical Center for two busy med-surg units and our 
Dialysis unit. I have been a nurse for 19 years, the first 11 of that as a bedside nurse in a general med- 
surg setting. During my time as a bedside nurse and now as a nurse leader, I have personally cared for 
and witnessed our nurses caring for hundreds of patient through the most vulnerable moments. I have 
been here for busy days and slow days. And through all of that, I can tell you numbers (ratios) did not 
matter- nurses and their patients ’ needs mattered! 
Help Nurses Get Back to Nursing 
The reason we are here today, is because being a nurse is hard! And one could easily say that controlling 
ratios should make nurses work easier. I am here today to tell you it's not about the numbers or the 
ratio. lt's about the patients, what they need and how the nurse can meet those needs. We are caring 
for patients that are sicker than they ever have been. They need resources we do not have. Our patients 
need more outpatient providers and services, they more rehab/SNF/LTC facilities, they need more 
mental health resources, they need more physical and occupational therapists, and, specific to one of 
my units, they need more outpatient Dialysis beds and facilities that can accept Dialysis patients. When 
these services aren't available, more fall on to the nurse to care for these patients. Nurse ratios will not 
change the work that the healthcare system is asking nurses to do right now. We do not need nurse- 
patient ratios. We need to help our nurses get back to being nurses! 
Workplace Violence 
One of the biggest stressors l see impacting nurses every day is the way they are treated by patients and 
their families and the situations they encounter that are outside of a traditional nursing education. 
Workplace violence is a growing phenomenon across all healthcare settings and one that is contributing 
significant stress onto our nurses each and every day. Nurse patient ratios will not eliminate this factor 
nor will it help this situation. Our nurses need patients, families, and communities that are kind, 
compassionate, and respectful. Our patient's need more substance use disorder treatment options so 
when they come into the hospital, they are already in treatment. Our nurses need their patients to have 
increased mental health support so they are mentally health when they come into the hospital and can 
withstand the stress associated with being admitted. Our nurses and hospitals need help in preventing 
Workplace Violence to help create a healthy work environment once again. Mandated nursing ratios 
cannot help any of this. 
Flexibility 
And the final point I would make today, is that mandated nursing ratios are black and white- there is no 
gray. Today in healthcare, we constantly live in gray. When the ED is surging and patients ’ needs to be 
moved to inpatient units- we have discussions about where and how. When the ORs and recovery 
rooms are at full capacity and need to move patients- we have discussions about where and how. When 
there are 100 patients waiting for rehab or long term care facilities- we have the discussions about 
where and how. Leaders and charge nurses come together to figure out how to flex our units to care for 
all patients. At our huddles, a nurse may speak up and say ’my assignment in ok, I can take that patient 
from the ED’ while another RN may be in with a sick patient and we all recognize that patient needs that 
nurse's full attention and care. During COVID, we lessened ratios on COVID units sometimes by pulling 
resources from units that could flex up in ratios. Today, one of my unit cares for kidney transplant
patients that require lower ratios- some days we do this by flexing up one other nurse if possible. Nurse 
leaders strive to staff every unit with the proper amount of nurses to hit our target ratios. Ratios are our 
starting point, but never our ending point. Ratios do not consider the human factors that so greatly 
impacts the flow of healthcare and the care patients need to receive. 
In closing, I want to thank you for your time. l hope you consider the vital points I have made in voting 
against any mandated nursing ratios. l also hope that I may spur your thoughts about what role you can 
play in helping our nurses and our patients get the resources that they so desperately need. Thank you.
