  
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 4, 2023  
 
Senator Mike Tipping , Chair  
Representative Amy Roeder , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1639, An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient  Care  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on  Labor and 
Housing : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the Committee with our input and concerns about LD 1 639, 
An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient  Care . The Department deeply 
appreciates the role of nurses in Maine’s health care system . It also recognizes the importance of 
sufficient staffing levels to the safety of patients and the wellbeing of staff . This is part of the reason 
why the Department has advanced MaineCare payment reform to help facilities improve support for 
staff and the qual ity of care. That said , the Administration opposes this bill at this time because of the 
ongoing , significant  workforce challenges  that have persisted from the COVID -19 pandemic through 
this period of recovery. Additional concerns relate to the legislation’s impact on the state psychiatric 
hospitals and the Division of Licensing and Certification  (DLC) . We are also working to understand 
potential impact on the MaineCare program  which could be significant since, until hospital rate reform 
is implemented,  certain  payments are cost settled .   
 
This bill establishes minimum direct -care registered nurse staffing requirements  based on patient car e 
levels in health care facilities, including hospitals,  ambulatory sur gical facilities , and freestanding 
emergency departments  (note: there are no free -standing emergency departments currently in Maine) . 
The bill  specifies the method to  be used to  calculate a health care facility’s staffing requirement , 
protects direct -care registered nurses from retaliation , and includes notice, record -keeping , and 
enforcement requirements . 
 
While the goal of this bill is to improve patient care, the current healthcare workforce challenges may 
result in  in difficult y in compliance at best and a reduction in access at worst. S ome facilities under 
these requir ement s could cut back or dis continue services due to the inability of securing the proposed 
minimum staffing resources  under L D 1639 . In a rural state like Maine, t he unintended negative impact 
of service or facilit y closures  due to an inability to meet these new proposed requirements cannot be 
understated.  
 
Additionally, p assage of this bill would result in Maine having staffing requirements that exceed 
current fed eral requirements . As such, it would require significant changes to the licensing and 
certification process because  a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS )-approved 
accreditation survey would no longer  be sufficient to establish compliance  with State of Maine 
 
 licensing requirements.  This would increase staffing and other costs for health care providers and on 
the Departmen t. It would also require major amendments to state licensing rules .   
 
Further, we interpret this bill  to extend these requirements to the two state psychiatric hospitals : 
Riverview Psychiatric Center (RPC) and Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center  (DDPC) . Not only would 
this require additional headcount to accommodate these ratios, the requirement to increase registered 
nurse staffing is not necessarily conducive to an optimal  therapeutic environment. RPC and DDPC are 
staffed with a diverse and wide -ranging set of professionals, and these ratios are not necessarily 
appropriate for the ir patient population s or goals.  
 
For these reasons, the Administration is opposed to LD 1639 . I want to thank you for your 
consideration of th ese concerns, and the Department would be glad to respond to questions or be of 
assistance should the Committee request.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  

