Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee, thank you for your 
time today.  My name is Jennifer Low, I  have been an intensive care nurse for 10 years and am 
currently the Nurse Manager at Maine Medical Center, supporting the Cardiac Surgery 
Intensive Care Unit, which cares for all open heart surgery patients.    
I am here to day in opposition of LD 1639 and the inflexible mandates it proposed on nurses 
and the patients they care for.  
• I would like to ask the committee where the proposed patient populations and 
minimum staffing requirements were derived and is there evidence to support better 
patient safety and quality of care with these mandated ratios.  When reading the 
proposed minimum staffing requirements in section 1794, I found many of the patient 
populations to be ambiguous and questioned what they mean.  An example is line 4 on 
page 3 “U” – what defines a “patient receiving coronary care services”, or line 12 of 
page 4 “W” “patient receiving acute respiratory care services”?    
 
• Maine hospitals currently use ratios that are regulated and reviewed by CMS, The Joint 
Commission, as well as Maine DHHS to ensure adequate staffing.  With our current ratio 
guidelines, the nurse to patient ratio in for patient in the intensive care unit are in no 
more than a 1 nurse to 2 patient ratio, this legislation takes away the autonomy and 
trust that we have trained nurses and charge nurses to determine appropriate staffing 
for patients, based on the clinical needs and requirements of patients.   
 
• To a uniformed public, this bill looks to support nurses. What I have come to realize, is 
that this is not legislation that support nurses, as our job as nurses it to support the care 
and wellbeing of the healthcare needs of our communities.  With the proposed ratios 
along with the current and ongoing nursing shortage, healthcare facilities in Maine will 
not be able to meet the demand for beds and care, but will require facilities to close 
beds, delay care, or even turn patients away in order to avoid significant financial 
penalty.  My fear is that this will have the most significant impact on critical access 
hospitals that support communities all over the state of Maine, as they do not and 
would not have the resources to care for all of the patients coming in to their facilities to 
provide the ratios as proposed.  These patients would then possible be transferred to a 
larger facility that may put a strain on the large facilities, as well as financial strains on 
the families of these patients that could be transferred many miles from their 
community hospital that in current state would be able care for a treat the patient. Our 
communities may no longer have the appropriate access to care that they rely on.   
 
• I do not see the benefit to nurses, when what we need is more funding for nursing 
programs to allow for more nurses to join the workforce, as they are the largest pool of 
nurses being hired.  Given the ongoing nursing shortage, critical care units in the past 
have had a practice of hiring large cohorts of new graduate nurses, hiring 1-2 at a time, 
due to the longer orientation time to become competent and practicing at a level to 
care for critically ill patients.  Over the past year, we have hired 13 new grads in the CS 
ICU, compared to the 4 experienced nurses who applied and were hired during the 
same time period.  
 
As a nurses and providers, we take an oath to “do no harm” and, it is my opinion that these 
mandated ratios, if put into practice,  would put that oath into question, as we may be forced 
to close beds and turn patients away in order to meet the unreasonable ratios.   Thank you so 
much for your time and I ask that you think about the communities you represent and how this 
proposed legislation will impact them in their time of need for healthcare, whether it be 
emergency care or even planned care needs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
