My name is Jillian Sternberg and I have been a nurse for almost 10 years. I have been employed 
at Maine Medical Center for the past 3.5 years on R5, a 38-bed med-surg tele floor specializing in 
Urology and Nephrology patients. We also hold the distinction of being part of the only transplant 
program in Maine. In my position as a Clinical Nurse Coordinator, I work both as a bedside RN with a 
direct patient-care assignment as well as a charge RN. I know and understand the complex challenges 
both nurses and hospitals are facing regarding safe staffing ratios and appreciate the support from our 
representatives in government as they attempt to remedy the situation. However, I do feel the 
proposed ratios will have a negative impact on the health of my community, and for this reason, I have 
chosen to speak out against this proposal. 
I am concerned with the impact staffing ratios being proposed in this bill will have on Maine 
residents and visitors seeking care for acute health care needs. At Maine Medical Center, on any given 
day, the Emergency Department can have over 100 patients, often with boarders awaiting placement on 
inpatient units. With the mandated staffing ratios and the current shortage of nurses in our state, the 
facility may be forced to close beds, which will decrease access to care and increase patient waiting 
times. Patients requiring a higher level of care at a smaller hospital may be forced to wait days for bed 
availability. Delaying care for those acutely ill will have a drastic impact on those most vulnerable in the 
community.  
 If the proposed mandate passes, it will take away the flexibility currently afforded to units when 
determining patient assignments. The ability to flex nurse ratios based on acuity and experience to best 
meet individual patient needs is essential to providing safe, quality care. The proposed mandate also 
approaches staffing ratios as a “one size fits all” solution, not considering the differences in the level of 
acuity and care provided at a smaller hospital versus a level 1 trauma center.  
 I implore you to rethink the mandated ratios in this proposal and the impact it will have on our 
community. Let us focus instead on the current issues weighing down hospitals and nurses, such as the 
nursing shortage and lack of degree programs within the state, shortfalls in long-term care and mental 
health care, and workplace violence. This mandate is not a solution but a catalyst for challenges to 
providing care in an already fractured system.  
 
