nasa- 
‘W 
May 4, 2023 P.O. Box 647 Kennebunk, Maine 04043 
To: Committee on Labor and Housing 
v Senator Michael Tipping- Chair 
0 Senator Matihea Daughiry 
v Senator Matthew Pouliot 
~ Representative Amy Roeder- Chair 
Q Representative Dick Bradstreet 
Q Representative Gary Drinkwater 
0 Representative Joe Galletta 
Q Representative Vali Geiger 
0 Representative Traci Gear 
Q Representative Marc Malon 
Q Representative Ronald Russell 
1 Representative Charles Skold 
I Representative Mike Soboleski 
From: Juliana L’Heurem:, B.S., M.H.S.A. R.N., ANA-Maine Pﬁident 
lheureux.juliana@anam.aine.o1g 
Ref: Oppose An Act to Address Unsafe Staﬂing of Nurses and Improve Patient (hm 
Thank you Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing for providing this opportunity to offer testimony in opposition to LD= I63 9-= 
, An 
Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care. My name is Juliana 
L’Heureux and I am currently the president of AN A-Maine, a non-proﬁt organization in Maine, 
with 702 members from throughout the state. AN A—Maine has participated in the coalition to 
oppose staffing ratios during previous attempts to pass this legislation and we stand with our 
colleagues in the Organization of Maine Nursing Leaders, the Maine Nursing Action Coalition 
and the Maine Emergency Nurses Association to explain to legislators why staffing ratios are not
serving the purpose of (1) creating a safer work environment for nurses (2) not providing support 
for the training and hiring of more nurses who will work in Maine or (3) improve Maine’s 
already high standard of nursing care as determined in quality performance evaluations. 
ANA-‘Maine appreciates the dedication and high quality nursing care provided to our citizens, in 
all kinds of heath care settings. This quality care was acutely evident during the past several 
years when many nurses were the only conduit between families and patients who were isolated 
due to COVID. Understandably, many nurse experienced exhaustion as a result of the intensity 
of the pandemic. Therefore, consistent with the ANA-Maine ’s non-proﬁt mission to improve 
health, and availability of healthcare to Maine people, and stimulate and promote the 
professional development of the nurse, we advocate for safe Working environments based on 
inclusivity and collaboration. LD 1639 does not support including more nurses in health care but, 
rather, risks the consequences of creating a highly monitored, strictly regulated and inﬂexible 
work environment. Rather than adding 13 pages of enforcement to the nursing process and give 
directives to professional nurses about how to provide patient care, We advocate for the 
legislature fund opportunities to train young nurses who Will ﬁll the nursing shortages caused by 
more nurses retiring than those that are available to ﬁll their positions. 
In response to the reality of nurse “burnout” , I have attached to this testimony articles about how 
nurses are supporting programs within their work places to help address nurse fatigue and 
burnout. Every nursing journal l open includes similar articles. Nurses will continue to provide 
safe and quality patient care in spite of challenges. Health care facilities are aheady adopting 
wellness and health programs in free on-line seminars and in the workplace. 
ANA-Maine supports all of Maine’s nurses and we hope public policy initiatives will provide for 
training and licensing more nurses for the state’s health care facilities. Thank you.
* " is 
Normalizing the language of stress, burnout,and 
nurses’ well-being 
By Allison Nordberg _ 
nowhere more than in healthcare and nursing. 
In a recent Pulse on the Nationfs Nurses Survey, 
56% of respondents indicated they were experiencing 
somelevel of burnout, including 7% who reported be- 
ing "completely burned out, and may be in need of 
help” (bit.ly/3GEU3EQ). This only adds to ongoing 
feelings of stress, frustration, and exhaustion that 
have remained unsustainably high for nearly 3 years. 
Although the frequency of burnout is acknowledged, 
a gap exists in implementing solutions. This inspired 
the American Nurses Foundation ’s (the Foundation) 
newest initiative, which launched in the fall of 2022. 
The Foundation Stress and Burnout Prevention Pilot, 
made possible by generous support from the United 
Health Foundation, a leader in healthcare philanthro- 
py, involves a 3-year, $3.1 million grant to address 
well—being and burnout among nurses. The pilot aims 
to enhance nurses’ ability, individually and in teams, 
to deal with the reality of sustained and excessive 
stress in the work environment. B urnout is a buzzword used nationwide, perhaps 
The initiative is based on the Stress First Aid Model, 
originally developed for the military and since deployed 
in other high-stress professions (bit.ly/3VOSsOb). At 
its core, Stress First Aid represents a framework of 
peer support and self-care designed to improve 
recovery from stress and avoid future harm. This 
novel approach builds awareness in recognizing 
stress injury and provides tools for individual and 
peer support at the organizational level. Additionally,F 
a color—coded stress continuum chart gives nurses 
a common language to describe stress reactions, 
which in turn reduces stigma.» 
The Foundation pilot will expand beyond Stress First 
Aid and focus on implementing three key compo-V 
nents with the goal of reaching thousands of nurses - 
nationwide. Woven across these components will be] 
a focus on‘Millennial" 
and Gen Z nurses and nursesof-
~ 
color who, according to multiple studies, havepbeen __ 
the most negatively impacted by stress and b' urno'ut.- T 
The first component entails infusing "a nursing lens 
into Stress First Aid content. A healthcare Stress First" 
Aid exists, but building a nurse-focused intervention 
ensures nurses can see themselves in the content, 
imagery, and examples, which is essential for increas- 
ing credibility and adoption. Additionally, content will 
be adapted to include the broader nursing workforce 
and the diverse range of environments where nurses 
practice.7 
The second component involves engaging three 
diverse organizations across the country. These sites 
include BayCare Health System in Tampa, Florida, an 
38 American Nurse Journal Volume 18, Number 1 ANCC Pathway to Excellence@-designated organiza- 
tion; Indiana University Healthin lndianapolis, Indiana, 
an ANCC Magnet Recognition Programf;-designatedg 
organization; and University of South Alabama in 
Mobile, Alabama. Nurse champions at each organiza- 
tion will spearhead unit-level introduction and adop- 
tion of the initiative, promoting engagement in the 
concepts and real-time solutions, ,
_ A 
Even as wegain g valuable insightsafrom deep engage- 
ment with the pilot sites, we recognize that nurses 
nationwide are grappling with extraordinary stress, 
leading to burnout and staffingsishortages. These 
crucial needs can't go unaddressed, so the initiative ’s 
third component will build national awareness within 
nursing. This will leverage and~make5widely available 
the knowledgeacquired from the pilot sites, thereby 
empowering nurses to speak aboutftheir stress and 
burnout, support their colleagues- , and actively'
_ 
engage in interventions that reduce stress and 
burnout. 
The health of thenursing workforce depends on' 
addressing burnout. Doing so has implications on 
broader issues impacting the profession. Recommen- 
dations made by the Nurse Staffing Think Tank 
include using the stress injury continuum to address 
burnout, moral distress, and compassion fatigue as 
barriers to nurse retention (bit.ly/3gtlQea). The Foun- 
dation Stress and Burnout Prevention Pilot is one. 
solution that acts not only on these recommenda- 
tions, but also on the calls from the nation's nurses to 
develop a healthier work environment for all nurses. 
— Allison Nordberg is a program director with 
American Nurses Foundation. 
ANA“'““E FR€)NTl..ii*~§E
Lisa DiBla.ri ll-Inoreixead 
Recent data 
show that 
healthcare 
workers are 
io u r ti rnes 
more likely to 
experience 
v»./orl<place 
violence t'n<:-in 
non-healthcare 
workers. 
/lmeritan Nurse Journal. 2022; W12). 
Doi: l0.51256IAllJl22Z55-1 
(G Z022 lieal|hCom Media. 
All righls reserved. PRACTICE CMHATTERSC '" 
it" 
,v 
Viewpoint 
Preventing workplace 
violence 
Arialyze, report, arid eeiucate to ens- e"
- 
gsatient saiety                     
By Lisa DiBlasi Moorehead, EdD, MSN, RN, CENP, CPPS, CJCP 
THE STRESS and isolation caused by the 
COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated vio- 
lence in our society. In January 2022, Thejoint 
Commission published new requirements that 
support workplace violence prevention. Our 
previous survey process evaluated workplace vio- 
lence primarily through existing environmen- 
tal safety standards, but with an increase in 
workplace violence incidents, The Joint Com- 
mission felt that procedure was insufficient. 
Recent data show that healthcare workers are 
four times more likely to experience workplace 
violence than non-healthcare workers. Work- 
place violence also has been identified as a con- 
tributing factor to staff burnout and nurses 
leaving the profession, and it' s always presented 
a patient safety issue. These ﬁndings and the 
recent tragic events in Texas and North Caroli- 
na further illustrate the point. 
The Joint Commissions new workplace vi- 
olence prevention requirements include three 
new and two revised elements of performance. 
The R3 Report Issue 30: Workplace Violence 
Prevention Standards (bit.ly/3hyEiBG) thor- 
oughly explains new and revised elements, which 
provide healthcare organizations with a struc- 
ture for accountability, evaluation, and response 
to workplace violence events. Highlights in- 
clude the following: 
0 Conduct annual worksite analyses that help 
identify vulnerabilities within the hospital 
campus (dead-end corridors, inadequate 
lighting, multiple or uncontrolled building 
access points). 
¢ Take action to mitigate or abate issues iden- 
tified in the analysis. 
0 Collect and analyze information about work- 
place violence obtained through incident 
reporting. 
54 American Nurse Journal Volume l7, Number 12 0 Act on trends and opportunities for im- 
provement as identified via reporting and 
information analyses. 
0 Provide staff with training and education on 
the organization' s workplace violence pre- 
vention program (when hired, annually, and 
when significant program changes occur). 
0 Include prevention, recognition, response, 
and reporting of workplace violence during 
training. 
0 Create programs developed by a multidiscipli- 
nary team and led by one designated expert. 
0 Report incidents of workplace violence to 
the organizations governing body. 
W/orkplace violence standards have success- 
fully provided healthcare organizations witha 
starting point to evaluate their vulnerabilities 
and subsequently take action to create safer 
environments for patients, visitors, and staff. 
In fact, most healthcare organizations current- 
ly meet the new workplace violence standards. 
However, some organizations struggle with 
the worksite analysis requirement. They fre- 
quently fall short by failing to conduct a com- 
plete analysis or neglecting to implement needed 
improvements. The joint Commission offers 
valuable workplace violence prevention resources 
(bit.ly/3EcFfdu) to help healthcare organiza- 
tions successfully complete a worksite analysis 
and other workplace violence requirements. 
I hope that by evaluating our worksites, ana- 
lyzing data on reported incidents and risks, and 
providing education and other needed resourc- 
es, we can decrease workplace violence within 
healthcare —-a safety risk for all of us. AN 
Lisa DiBIasi Moorehead is the leader of the Psyrhiatrit Hospital Ac- 
creditation Program at The Joint Commission in Oakbrook Terrace, 
Illinois. She previously served as the associate nurse executive. 
MyAmericanNurse.com
