     
     
  
         
 
                
           
May  4, 2023  
 
Dear Members of the Labor Committee,  
 
For businesses in Maine a key factor in attracting and retaining employees is ensuring our state is a desirable place 
to live. An essential part of a high quality of life is access to quality health and hospital care. That ’s why we oppose 
LD 1639, which wo uld impose strict nurse staffing ratios through statute  in all hospitals in the state.  
 
The mandated staffing ratios will require hospitals to hire an additional 1 ,000 nurses, in addition to the 1 ,500 
nurses  that hospitals are working to hire today.  Maine ’s nursing workforce shortage is well documented.  A report 
released in 2021 projects that Maine has a current shortage of 2 ,250 RNs and this shortage will remain constant 
through 2025.  The Maine Hospital Association estimates that the bill will cost Main e hospitals $105 million dollars 
to hire additional nurses to meet the staffing ratio standard.  
 
We do not see how hospitals can possibly hire this many new nurses.  LD 1639 will make permanent the care 
delays and long emergency department waits we are cur rently experiencing. It will severely impact the health 
care options available to residents, have an adverse effect on hospital quality and harm all businesses ’ ability to 

attract and retain talented staff to Maine.  California passed a nurse staffing rati o law 20 years ago; no other state 
has passed this harmful legislation.  National reports on health care quality data consistently rank California as a 
state with the lowest quality scores in the country.  Maine consistently ranks among the states with the  best 
quality scores.   
 
Business, nursing and health care organizations across the state, including the Maine Hospital Association, 
Organization of Maine Nursing Leadership, American Nurses Association of Maine, Maine Medical Association,  
Maine Osteopath ic Association, Maine Ambulance Association, Home Care and Hospice Alliance of Maine, 
National Federation of Independent Business , Emergency Nurses Association , the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services , Emergency Room Physicians, several regio nal chambers of commerce  and the Maine State 
Chamber are opposed to the bill. If this bill becomes law, it will permanently damage a statewide health care 
system that has provided best in class care for decades.  
 
One of the most important considerations that we hear from prospective employees are quality of life and access 
to quality health care. We urge you to protect the state ’s health care system and its patients from the 
consequences of this rigid, costly manda te.  
 
Please oppose LD 1639 . 
 
 
Maine Medical Association      NFIB  - Maine  
 
 
 
Maine Ambulance Association     Maine State Chamber of Co mmerce  
 
 
 
Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Maine    Maine Osteopathic Association  
 
 
 
American Nurses Association (Maine)    Organization of Maine Nursing Leadership  
 
 
 
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services   Biddeford -Saco Chamber of Commerce  
 
 
 
Bath -Brunswick  Maine Chamber of Commerce   Maine Emergency Nurses Association    
 
 
 
Maine College of Emergency Physicians   Lewiston -Auburn Metropolitan Chamber of 
Commerce  
 
 
Greater Bridgton Chamber of Commerce  
