 
 
 
123 Medical Center Drive • Brunswick, ME 04011 • Phone: 207 -373-6000  
midcoasthealth.com  
May 3, 2023  
 
I am Kristin Anthony, Chief Nursing Officer at Mid Coast Parkview Health in Brunswick.  I am writing you to share that as a 
registered nurse I strongly oppose LD 1639, which mandates rigid nurse to patient ratios.  
If you take a look at the title of this bill “An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care" you may 
think this is a “good thing” for nursing and the constituents of the state of Maine.  Nothing could be further from the truth . 
This bill strips nurses of autonomy and flexibility. Mandated ratios reduce nurses to a number, and strip them of the ability to 
exercise their professional judgement and the flexibility they need to meet the individual needs of their patients.  
An excellent ex ample of the necessity of staffing ratios flexibility can be illustrated by the extreme overcrowding we 
experienced last Friday. The day started with 16 patients who were acutely ill waiting in our Emergency Department. Two of 
these patients required inten sive care level of care.  The nursing team rose to the occasion by temporarily modifying our 
staffing ratios in the ICU to send an experienced intensive care nurse to the emergency department to care for these two 
critical patients.  Staffing ratios would prevent this from happening as we would have been outside of our ratios and incurring 
a $10,000 fine in order to provide the best care to patients.  The staffing ratio scenario may have prevented those two patie nts 
from coming into the department as we wer e extremely overcrowded and with staffing ratios would have either had to divert 
them to a hospital with capacity or had the ambulance line up and wait with the patients until the staffing allowed entry.   
Our current staffing plan is flexible and is devel oped to meet the needs of the patients the majority of the time.  Some days we 
have more staff than necessary and low census staff, other days when there is a higher demand we call in additional staff to 
assist and pull our management team into staffing te mporarily.  We currently have a system that is not perfect but does not 
require us to turn patients away.  
This law does not create any new nurses.  At this time I have 50 open RN positions at Mid Coast.  We have engaged in all 
kinds of creative solutions in order to meet our current staffing needs.  These includes the development of a Nursing Extern 
program to provide nurses in their final year of college an opportunity to expand their skills and prepare for future 
employment.  We have a developed and expa nded our nursing residency program. A nursing residency program is a program 
that combines classroom instruction specific to a nursing specialty with clinical experience under the supervision and guidan ce 
of preceptors, coaches, and the program director.  We estimate that we would need to hire a minimum of 100 additional RN’s 
beyond our current 50 openings to continue services as they currently stand. We currently have 36 contracted travel nurses. 
This is not sustainable financially. Due to current cost ass ociated with these travel nurses we are in the process of eliminating 
many contracts. Currently, MaineHealth has over 1,000 traveling nurses.  We lost $45 million last year and are on track to do  
the same this year. We’re having to make very difficult deci sions right now, and this bill could push us over the edge.  
 This legislation if enacted will decrease access to care. Without an increased supply of nurses, we will be forced to close b eds 
and our Emergency Department may go on diversion, which means we ask ambulances not to bring their patients to our 
hospital. For these reason and so many more I strongly urge you to oppose LD 1639. Thank you for your attention to this 
critical issue.   
Respectfully,  
 
Kristin Anthony RNC, MSN, NEA -BC 
Chief Nursing Officer  
