  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine 04351-0227  
Ph: 207-213-6125  |  Fax: 207-213-6127 
www.HomeCareAlliance.org 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Laurie Belden, a resident of 
Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Maine 
(Alliance).  The Alliance is a network of home health care, hospice, home care and 
personal care providers across our State delivering in-home care to older adults 
and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to stay in their home and 
community.  
I’m here today to testify in opposition to LD 1639, An Act to Address Unsafe 
Staffing of Nurses and Improve Patient Care. 
Hospitals, nursing homes, and home-based care are like a 3-legged stool in the 
state's healthcare landscape. Caring for Mainers in the home is essential to 
relieving the stress on facilities by keeping patients out of acute and long-term 
care settings.  
The bill before you would require hospitals to comply with mandatory staffing 
requirements for nurses. While we believe the intent of this bill in honorable, the 
ripple effect would devastate the home care industry, which is already struggling 
to recruit and retain nurses. 
 
The workforce shortage in nursing is chronic across the entire healthcare 
continuum; however, the primary reason that home care providers are unable to 
hire and retain enough nurses is not due to a lack of applicants – it is directly due 
to the low reimbursement rate from MaineCare.  Hospitals, nursing homes, etc. 
already offer higher rates of pay and incentive bonuses for several reasons 
including receiving higher State reimbursement, more private pay patients, other 
streams of profitable services, etc. The average hospital RN rate of pay in Maine is 
approximately $36/hour. Up until the recent COLA adjustment, the MaineCare 
reimbursement rate for RN labor for home care services was $29/hour. Seven 
dollars an hour is a stark difference, one that means home care providers are 
unable to compete for talent. And while the recent COLA adjustment was 
desperately needed and greatly appreciated, it is not enough to make up this 
structural gap between outdated State reimbursement and market rates. 
If this legislation passes, hospitals will have no choice but to increase their 
recruitment efforts by offering even higher wages, bonuses, and benefits – 
compensation packages that home care providers won’t be able to match. The 
home care nursing shortage will become even more severe, and patients who 
need care in the home won’t be able to access it. Board of Directors 
 
President 
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President 
Daryl Cady 
Hospice of Southern Maine 
 
Treasurer 
RJ Gagnon 
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice 
 
Secretary 
Laurie Bourgoin 
Home Hope & Healing 
 
 
Members 
Ken Albert 
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice 
 
Patricia Aprile 
MaineHealth Care at Home 
 
Kyra Chamberlain 
Hospice of Southern Maine 
 
Elaine Collins 
MaineHealth Care at Home 
 
Chris Costello 
CHANS Home Health& Hospice 
 
Zetta Fogg 
McKesson Medical-Surgical 
 
Lisa Harvey-McPherson 
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice 
 
Adam LaMonica 
Maxim Healthcare Services 
 
Amy McVety 
Mount Desert Nursing Association 
 
Greg Pizzo 
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice 
 
Amy Shawley 
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice 
 
Testimony in Opposition to 
LD 1639, An Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses and Improve 
Patient Care 
 
May 4, 2023  
 
  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester, Maine 04351-0227  
Ph: 207-213-6125  |  Fax: 207-213-6127 
www.HomeCareAlliance.org 
 Without adequate nurses in home care, children and adults with complex medical needs must be taken care of 
by family members or friends (who would perhaps be forced to leave their jobs to be a full-time caretakers). If 
no one is able to step in and care for the patient, they must be transferred to facility care (including hospitals). 
Therefore, the cycle of stress on our hospital system continues. 
 
Instead of implementing staffing mandates for hospital nurses, let’s even the playing field to help keep 
patients out of hospitals and in their homes and communities. Support expediting RN and LPN rate increases 
in home care instead of pulling the lifeline for the many older Mainers and people of all ages with disabilities 
who choose to receive their care in the safety of their home and community. 
 
The loss of any nurses to other healthcare sectors will cause more home care agencies to scale back or cease 
the provision of nursing services, and patients in need of care in their homes will suffer. 
 
Please vote “ought not to pass” to ensure that home care remains a viable care option for Mainers.   
 
Laurie Belden, Executive Director 
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
