My Name is Lori Beucler of Windham Maine and the Executive Director of the Scarborough 
Surgery Center.  
I am Voicing concern over this bill and the impact on surgical services .  
Surgery is dependent upon post operative  beds for patients to heal and recover. With 
proposed  mandates before us I am deeply concerned about the potential inability to continue 
meeting the surgical demands that are currently backlogged  mostly as a result of the pandemic 
as well as the growing numbers of urgent traumatic injuries.  
My fear is based on the impact of closing unstaffed beds on the access to surgical care. Currently 
there are patients waiting months to surgically address cancer diagnoses ( not in all cases, but in 
many) . 
The result of this bill may create the closure of beds resulting in reduction of scheduled surgical 
cases per day .  
In the ambulatory setting the call for staffing ratios in the immediate post operative area will 
create unreasonable and unnecessary staffing demands at a cost that is not necessary.  
Immediate post op patients already have 1:1 or 2:1 care , then 3:1 as patients recover quickly and 
are generally discharged home . The same nurse renders care establishing an important 
relationship and seeing them safely off to home from ambulatory surgical string under a hospital 
license.  
The inability to move from phase 1 recovery , phase 2 to discharge with in the same area will 
hamper flow and slow surgery, again reducing the number of cases we can do in any given day.  
We all strive for safe patient care, not all areas have staffing challenges . This bill is so specific 
in it demands that it leave no room for adaptation to specialty areas.  
My key concerns are loss of creative patient care process, escalation of the cost of care in an 
already inflated economy, but mist of all the impact on access to surgical care. I fear this will 
crush health care in Maine and cause people to migrate to neighboring states for care - 
yielding  economic impact.  
While nurse patient assignment need to be improved in certain areas, this Bill is not the answer.  
In a point of interest neither CMS nor The Joint Commission have created National nurse patient 
ratios , one would think that these experts would do so if so simple.  
This act is simply not sustainable in its current form and a bargaining unit shouldn’t be leading 
health care policy in the State of Maine.  
Best Wishes in making your decision. Your work is deeply appreciated.  
 
