Margaret McRae
Lewiston
LD 1639
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee, my name is Margaret McRae. I have been a registered nurse for over 40 
years with the past 20 years working in Maine.  I have had the opportunity to work as 
an Emergency Nurse, a Critical Care Nurse and currently in nursing leadership. While
working clinically, I held certifications in both specialties and now have a Doctorate 
Degree in Nursing Practice and certified in executive nursing practice.  I am a resident
of Lewiston and work for MaineHealth Medical Group. I am submitting testimony in 
opposition of LD 1639. 
This bill removes the autonomy as a nurse that I am most proud of including the 
ability to use the foundation of nursing in the Nursing Process.  Core to the delivery 
of care is the ability to Assess, Plan, Implement, and Evaluate the conditions and 
needs of our patients, which would include determining the best nursing assignment 
to meet patient needs. The nursing process allows us as professionals to make 
decisions about staffing that take in account the unique needs and acuity of each 
patient. I find this bill in conflict with the fundamental premise that all nurses are 
leaders and we are part of the decision making process.  I have been fortunate in my 
career to work collaboratively will all members of the healthcare team and provide 
input to ensure the delivery of safe patient care. Mandated staffing ratios with 
eliminate that ability and reduce our patients and the nurses that care for them to just a
number. 
Additionally, there is no evidence to support mandated ratios particularly around 
quality or safety. What is known is that the healthcare provided in Maine is 
recognized as being in the top quartile in the country for quality and safety. In 
comparison, we know that California (the only state with a mandated ratio,) sits in the
bottom quartile for quality and care outcomes. 
Mandated ratios will not create more nurses, our efforts need to be focused on 
workforce development, and addressing the capacity at our educational institutions.  If
this bill is passed, it will however have a negative impact to the health of our 
communities. Healthcare institutions will have to reduce bed capacity and access to 
care in order to maintain the recommended ratios. There is currently challenges with 
bed capacity at both acute and post-acute care beds and mandated ratios will further 
impact this capacity.  
I am requesting that the members of this committee vote ought not to pass on LD 
1639.  Thank you.

