Senator Tipping and Representative Roeder, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, 
My name is Mariah Pfeiffer and I am a Registered Nurse working primarily in labor and delivery 
for the past 12 years, the last 5 of those here in Maine. In that time, I have worked at the bedside, 
taught dozens of new nurses both on the unit and in academic settings, and recently earned a public 
health masters degree. In each setting, I've worked to find solutions for the moral distress that comes 
from the impossible expectations of our jobs given that our patients are getting sicker and our systems 
increasingly focus on efficiency, administrative tasks, and documentation instead of patient care. We are 
working harder and harder and health outcomes are growing worse every year. The status quo is 
unsustainable for nurses and dangerous for patients. 
We need safe staffing ratios so that we can walk into our jobs knowing that we will be able to 
focus on our patients ’ needs and not have to compromise our own. While working on the unit, I've had 
to leave in the middle of assisting families struggling with breastfeeding to help with an emergency 
happening elsewhere. I've often had to rush through the two-hour recovery period immediately aftera 
birth, the most important time for bonding between a newborn and their parents, so I could run to take 
care of another patient who just arrived. And I've felt thankful that an emergency happened at change 
of shift when there were two shifts of nurses available to respond, knowing that a patient’s life may 
have been at risk if it had happened without those extra hands. These are not isolated experiences ~ we 
are spread too thin too often, making patients feel alone in some of their most vulnerable moments. 
This wears on us and it definitely wears on patients. 
While not every shift is like this, they happen regularly and unpredictably and the stress from 
them adds up over the course of a career. We are exhausted. The culture of efficiency and money-saving 
in healthcare is hurting us all. Hospitals may save money, but patients pay more and receive less care, 
and nurses continue to suffer. 
Educating more nurses can't be the only answer to this problem, nurses are leaving at 
increasingly alarming rates. I've precepted too many new nurses who have had to take on the care of 
too many or too acute patients before they're ready, often as a result of short staffing. Increasingly, 
these new nurses have left the job or the field entirely as a result of this stress and lack of support. This 
bill helps address one of the root causes of the nursing shortage - the culture of hospitals is inhumane - 
it is losing us nurses and it is harming patients.
Nurses are the eyes and ears of the healthcare system, but when our attention is too divided 
and frenzied with taking care of too many patients, it's impossible to notice the subtle changes and early 
warning signs that matter to the health of each patient. Having safe staffing ratios will let us focus on 
healing and recovery for our patients while allowing space for our own well-being. It will allow us to 
work on creating better systems for patient safety and for true holistic care. I want to live and work ina 
world where this is possible, and l hope you will support safe staffing so we can all work towards a more 
just and humane culture of healthcare. 
Thank you for your work on this committee and for your time and consideration hearing 
testimony today. 
Mariah Pfeiffer, BSN, MPH,RN
