Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee, my name is Megan Flynn, I am 
a masters prepared RN and a NICU graduate. I am a CNL at Maine Medical Center, faculty in a BSN 
program and serve as a board member for the Neonatal Nurses Association of New England. I am here 
today as a neonatal intensive care unit RN who has serious concerns about LD1639 and the impact it will 
have on some of the most vulnerable patients in our community. 
My biggest concern regarding this bill is that it is not evidence-based, everything we do in healthcare 
should be evidence based. Why? Aligning our practice with the best evidence available results in better 
patient outcomes and ultimately healthier communities. I can't speak for the entire bill but the NICU 
ratios in this bill are not in alignment with current evidence or congruent with the standards set by our 
professional nursing associations. The increased nursing staff needed to meet these arbitrary 
requirements will likely result in closures of critical access hospitals and beds in our larger facilities due 
to lack of staffing. 
As a CNL I examine and predict both upstream and downstream impacts of changes that are made in the 
clinical setting and I would like to share the impact this will have for neonates born in the state of 
Maine. 
This bill will results in limited access to care 
Our NICU currently abides by evidence based ratios set by our professional organization. The ratios in 
this bill would force us to close beds in the NICU that provides the highest level of care in the state. 
Poorer patient outcomes 
Did you know that the brain of an infant born between 32 is relatively smooth? This is because the brain 
is in a phase of rapid development. Nurses who care for these infants receive hours of specialized 
training to learn how to provide care that most resembles the womb and decreases negative 
developmental impacts. Infants who do not receive the brain protective care have poorer outcomes 
including decreased cognitive scores, autism and sensory processing disorders. 
This specialized care is even more important Maine where the majority of NICU patients will qualify for 
post- discharge therapies, with only a small percentage actually receiving these services due toa 
shortage of therapists in the state. These infants who do not receive brain protective care and are 
unable to access service will eventually enter our school systems needed intensive services. 
Decreased Quality 
RNs who support and advance nursing practice would no longer be able to be fully function in their roles 
as they would be required to shift to the bedside. These are the RNs who help to manage supply 
shortages, maintain quality metrics and maintain research and quality project. These changes would 
eventually be reflected in a decreased quality of care. 
Increased Cost of Care 
The ratios in this bill would require an unnecessary increase in cost associated with nursing care. This 
cost would be passed on to all members of our community. We know increased spending does not 
equate to better care, the United States consistently ranks the lowest in outcomes when compared to
similar countries with the gap continuing to grow despite spending the most per capita on healthcare. 
To put this in perspective we spend nearly 25% more than Luxembourg the second largest spender. 
The nursing shortage is not unique to Maine and there is no quick fix, to put it into perspective training a 
bedside nurse in the NICU post licensure requires 6 month of training. I appreciate the desire to help 
nurses I believe there is a way to do this without punishing our communities by limiting access to care.A 
2020 paper noted that nurses are the largest group of healthcare workers in the US and utilizing the 
knowledge of these professionals is essential to healthcare reformation. I urge you to invite frontline 
nurses like myself to the table to help understand their needs and the impact changes have on our 
communities. 
Thank you, 
Megan
