My name is Megan Lowell, I am a resident of the Town of Windham as well as a Nurse Manager at 
Maine Medical Center in Portland. I have worked as a nurse at MMC for the past 11 years in various care 
settings, the latest as the Nurse Manager of the Cardiac Catherization Laboratory (a procedure area that 
cares for heart attack patients). I have also served our country as a 1LT in the US Army Nurse Corps 
Reserves out of Auburn.  
I am writing to you today in regard to my concern over a bill that will be presented to the Labor and 
Housing committee (LD1639) next Thursday. This bill has been brought forth in response to the labor 
shortage that nursing is facing in state, and is very prescriptive of mandatory nurse to patient ratios. 
Should this bill come to a vote, I urge you to vote no in opposition to this bill. Plainly, this bill strips 
nurses of autonomy and flexibility, does NOT create new nurses, does not improve quality of care and 
most importantly reduces access to care in our very rural state where access to care is already challenging. 
In short, this would create a great risk to patient safety by exacerbating the already prevalent problem of 
bed closures and delays in patient care.  
As a nurse leader in a high stress, high volume procedural area, we already adhere to the ratio that would 
be required in my area due to the nature of the care we provide. I do not disagree that nurse to patient 
ratios need to be managed; however this bill does not take into account the acuity (severity of a 
hospitalized patient’s illness) of each patient, it simply looks at the ratio. In nursing, we use our clinical 
expertise and assessment to determine the level of care needed for each patient which allows us to 
fluctuate our level of care throughout each shift. This bill attempts to give a one size fits all approach to 
nursing care which is neither a realistic nor an achievable goal.   
Maine was just voted by The Leapfrog Group (a national quality and safety organization) the first ever 
state of the decade for patient safety. This is due to our consistently high scores in patient safety and 
quality across the entire state’s health care systems. California is the only state in the country who has 
legislated mandated nurse to patient ratios. This same group ranked California hospitals 25th in patient 
safety and quality. This is just one example that negates the argument that mandated ratios provide greater 
quality of care.  
Nursing resources are scarce as it is and the projections for 2025 show a shortage of 2,250 nurses in our 
state alone (per the Cypress Research Group). As a rural state, we already have challenges with access to 
health care. These ratios, coupled with our workforce shortage, will force bed closures or a $10,000 fine 
per shift when the ratios are not met. I am concerned that with bed closures, delays in patient care will 
occur as well as the potential to close smaller critical access hospitals who cannot pay the fines or find 
nurses to staff the beds. The access to health care in our state is already reaching a critical point and this 
bill perpetuates and will potentially accelerate this problem. 
In closing, it is not out of concern for my specific area that I write, it is the concern I have for our 
patients’ access to care. I urge you to vote no.     
Respectfully, 
Megan Lowell, RN, BSN 
 
