Remarks of Sadie Tirrell, RN 
LD 1639 Maine Quality Care Act 
May 4, 2023 
Augusta, Maine 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Sadie Tirrell. I'm a Registered Nurse anda 
member of the Maine State Nurses Association. I work in the Float Pool at Maine Medical 
Center, where we are proud to have just organized our union and won our first union contract. 
I'm also a nursing educator. _ 
Nurses are the conduit through which the entire patient experience flows. We are capable of this 
responsbility, and what an honor to get to do it, but we are constantly set up to fail without safe 
nurse-to-patient ratios. When nurses delegate tasks to ancillary staff, we are still legally 
responsible for them being done correctly and on time. We monitor for changes in condition and 
alert the providers to those changes. We coordinate the care team - the case manager, social 
work, the lab, the pharmacy, interpreter sen/ices, and the various teams of physicians that 
consult on one patient. We all know we can’t be in two places at once, and I'm being asked to 
be in five. 
I am here to say unequivocally that without legislation for patient ratios, patient care is not safe, 
and nurses will not keep participating in it. I'm constantly agonizing over being a part ofa 
system inflicting harm by design, and l feel a moral obligation as a nurse to speak out on behalf 
of my community. 
When I care for a septic patient on antibiotics with dressing changes, a patient witha 
gastrointestinal bleed, a patient who can’t move and has diarrhea and complex buttocks 
wounds, a patient in a psychiatric crisis, and a patient with dementia who is jumping out of bed 
and falling if left alone, excellent care that day looks like keeping them all alive. Those patients 
will not get their medications on time, they will not get turned properly, I will not chart on them 
thoroughly, and I will not able able to round on them every hour. Imagine the patient you want so 
badly to hold and keep safe, being so disappointed with the care you can give them that they 
raise their voice at you and then cry. 
After a wretched shift, I go home and sit in silence for hours, my mind racing and feeling likea 
failure. I cancel my plans with loved ones for the next couple of days because it would hurt them 
so see me so different than my typical self and I need total rest. I return to work to try again- 
determined to provide care l’m proud of, but that quality of care is unachievable. I'm not able to 
provide care I would deem acceptable for a loved one of mine, and I do not feel comfortable 
with a loved one of mine being admitted to a hospital while this is the standard of care in our 
state. 
I love my work, and I want to be able to reccomend nursing as a career. I am facing an ethical 
dilemma as a clinical instructor because there is no quality of education that could prepare a
nurse for life at the bedside without ratios. New nurses are making plans to leave the bedside, 
and l have promised myself l won’t stay in my job the way it is for more than a few years. 
Nurses are the experts in this conversation and we are here together today empowered by 
protection from our union. Right now, unsafe inpatient care is the standard in our state. l am 
here to say loudly that I will not be complicit in that. Please help us provide safe care and please 
help us make the beside a sustainable career. Please pass LD 1639, The Maine Quality Care 
Act.
