 
 
Testimony of Sharon Baughman, MaineHealth 
In Strong Opposition to LD 1639, “Act to Address Unsafe Staffing of Nurses 
and Improve Patient Care” 
Thursday, May 4, 2023 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, I am Sharon Baughman, Chief Nursing Officer for 
MaineHealth, and I am here today to strongly oppose LD 1639, “Act to Address Unsafe Staffing 
of Nurses and Improve Patient Care.”  
 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides the full continuum of 
health care services to the residents of eleven counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire. 
MaineHealth is also the state’s largest private employer with over 22,000 care team members, 
but, we are facing a workforce crisis that is significantly impacting access to care. We are 
currently recruiting for over 2,900 positions, in addition to over 55 physicians and 70 advanced 
practice providers. Of those 2,900 openings, over 800 are nursing positions.  
 
In an effort to address the crisis, we have invested heavily in retaining our current workforce – as 
a system we have invested over $75 million in nurse pay increases in the last two years. Our 
nursing positions are open on average for 71 days despite offering sign-on bonuses, competitive 
pay, generous relocation benefits, generous employee referral bonuses, and increasing our 
clinical education support to enable us to provide preceptorships to an increased number of new 
graduate nurses.  
 
We have also invested heavily in creative and innovative solutions to develop entry-level 
employees in front line positions from Environmental Services and Certified Nursing Assistant 
programs to creating pathways into nursing, to training tomorrow’s physicians. As one example, 
MaineHealth is working with our universities and community colleges to expand their programs 
and student placements by providing Clinical Nurse Education Faculty to assist in student 
training. The program started in 2022 and has provided education to 32 separate cohorts, or over 
200 nursing students, in all specialty areas, including mental health, obstetrics, geriatrics, and 
medical practices. 
 
There is no doubt that more needs to be done - the magnitude of the crisis is too big for one 
organization to solve - but I want to be very clear that the solution to addressing staffing 
concerns is not a government mandated staffing ratio. There is a nationwide shortage of nurses 
and it is a false claim that we have nurses sitting on the sidelines in Maine. With only 2% of 
nurses in Maine unemployed, we need the support of the Legislature to focus on those bills that 
will develop new nurses as well as supporting our current nurses.  
 
You have heard today that nursing is hard. That cannot be understated. And it has only gotten 
more difficult during the pandemic – and in its aftermath – with record levels of violence, a 
behavioral health crisis that is felt acutely in our Emergency Departments, and increased patient 
volume and acuity. That is why listening to our nurses is so critical to supporting our nursing 
team. We have professional practice councils, town halls, nursing forums and unit huddles that 
are held at the various sites in our system to hear the important voices and concerns of our 
nurses. Nurses are the backbone of our hospital care teams, and they are part of the solutions we 
develop to better meet the needs of our patients. As one example, an issue that may affect patient 
care will be discussed at the daily huddle and rapidly addressed and resolved by the team in the 
moment versus waiting for management to identify a resolution.  
 
We have also hired travelers to fill our current gaps and ensure patient safety and access. We 
currently have over 800 travel nurses across the MaineHealth system at an estimated annual cost 
of approximately $180 million. That is not a long-term sustainable solution. As a system, we lost 
$45 million last year and are on track to lose another the same this year. If this bill were to pass, 
we would be forced to either hire nearly 400 new nurses – at an estimated financial impact of 
nearly $40 million per year at a time when we are experiencing unprecedented losses. Should we 
have to fill those positions with travel nurses, it will more than double that cost. These mandated 
additions are neither necessary nor feasible. Should this bill pass, mandated staffing ratios will 
not support patients – instead, they will ultimately lead to reductions in services and force us to 
reduce access to care.  
 
Staffing is not always perfect, and the nursing profession is hard. But mandated ratios are not the 
solution to this issue. Training more nurses and building cultures of inclusion and feedback are. I 
urge you – don’t strip nurses of their autonomy, don’t reduce nurses to a number, don’t further 
reduce access to care in our rural areas. Vote no on LD 1639. Thank you and I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have.  
