Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee, my name is Victoria 
Quinlan. I am a Nurse Administrator at Maine Medical Center. A key aspect of my work, and the 
work of my team, is to manage nurse staffing for every shift, 24 / 7. Managing stafﬁng is 
something that our team is expert at. We make staffing decisions based on our global view of 
needs and acuity and always consider nurse to patient ratios. Every decision is a thoughtful one 
made at the intersection of needs and staffing resources. 
Hospitals all over the country are experiencing record high volumes, and here in Maine, we are 
no exception. Our hospitals are consistently at or over capacity. To keep our beds open to 
support the healthcare needs of our community, our families, and your constituents, we need to 
have ﬂexibility and trust in the way we manage stafﬁng. 
At the same time that we are challenged with consistently high numbers of members of our 
families and communities needing our care, we are also working with the reality of a nationwide 
nursing shortage. We need more Well trained professional nurses. We need greater capacity in 
our nursing schools and greater compensation for those who teach and prepare those new nurses. 
Mandating ratios does not address the core problem. In fact, inﬂexible ratios will have negative 
consequences for those who need care. Our capacity will be limited forcing lengthy and 
ultimately dangerous lengthly wait times. Our support and resource positions will likely be lost 
in order to maintain inﬂexible ratios. 
Consider a patient who may have been appropriate for a 4 patient assignment at the start of the 
shift and then becomes more ill. With mandated ratios, we will not be able to have another 
RN take one patient from that assignment to allow the bedside nurse to care for the patient with 
increased clinical needs. Patient care and safety will suffer if we lack resilience and ﬂexibility. 
Our unit that cares for burn patients will typically schedule one nurse to support burn dressing 
changes. These complex dressing changes take signiﬁcant time as well as skill and experience. If 
that unit has an unexpected call—out, with mandated ratios, that support will be sacriﬁced to take 
that 4 patient assigmnent. Patient care and safety will suffer. 
The same will be true of our chemo nurses, who are highly skilled professionals there to support 
safe chemo administration. Most chemotherapy is delivered outpatient. If you or a loved one are 
receiving chemotherapy inpatient, increased risk already exists. With mandated ratios, the 
support of that specialty trained nurse, and the additional safety that nurse brings to a potentially 
high-risk treatment will be sacriﬁced with just one unanticipated call out. 
How will hospitals be able to respond when there simply are not enough nurses for the patients 
already in our care if we are bound by madated ratios? Will we be forced to turn people away 
who seek emergency treatment? Will we be forced to lose every resource we have put inplace in 
order to support our nursing teams and patient safety? 
Most nights, when many of the traditional supports aren’t available, we have a New Grad 
Resource Nurse. This position was developed in order to support our newest team members, their 
professional growth, and the development of their nursing practice. These nurses, each with the
heart of a teacher, meets with every new grad working that night to provide support and 
guidance. Ultimately, they support best nursing practice and patient safety by ensuring that these 
new nurses are supported through the crucial ﬁrst year of practice. With inﬂexible nursing ratios, 
that resource will no longer be available. 
Without the ability to ﬂex ratios when appropriate or when absolutely necessary, we will be 
forced to limit capacity. Where will our community, our loved ones, and your constituents get 
the care they need? As nurses, we are trained in evidence based practice. I have seen no evidence 
that patient care and safety are increased due to mandated ratios. Research in the literature does 
not support mandated nursing ratios. Certainly, the experience in California does not demonstrate 
improved quality of care or patient outcomes. 
Without our nursing resources, what will be the experience of our newer nurses? Will they not be 
more likely to stay in a ﬁeld and at a facility where they have resources to support their practice? 
Nursing is hard, and the ﬁrst few years are especially challenging. The loss of ﬂexibility in 
staffing and the resulting loss of professional resources will most certainly contribute to the 
nursing shortage. That shortage is the real problem. 
If our goal is to improve the experience of nurses and patients alike, we need more nurses. Your 
support of the work to increase the capacity and throughput of the high-quality nursing programs 
in Maine is imperative, as is supporting the work of healthcare organizations to bring more 
experienced nurses to Maine. 
In closing, please know that our team diligently works to ensure the best possible stafﬁng for 
every unit at Maine Medical Center every shift with the resources we have. Support our work to 
bring more nurses to Maine. Strongly support our nursing schools. With more nurses, we will be 
able to continue to provide excellent nursing care and operate at full capacity ensuring that our 
community has access to the best healthcare available. 
Respectﬁilly, 
Victoria Quinlan 
Alfred, ME
