  
53 Baxter  Boulevard,  Suite  202 | Portland,  ME 04101  
Phone:  866-554-5380  | Fax: 207-775-5727  | TTY:  877-434-7598  
aarp.org/me  | me@aarp.org  | twitter:  @aarpmaine 
facebook.com/aarpmaine  | instagram.com/aarpme  
 
 
 
April 1 8, 2023  
 
AARP MAINE TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
LD 1531, Resolve, Implement A 4 -Year Moratorium on Solar Energy Subsidies And Direct Department Of 
Environmental Protection To Study Economic Impact Of Industrial Solar Energy Projects.  
 
Good afternoon,  Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler  and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities and Technology. I am Alf Anderson , Advocacy and Outreach Director for AARP 
Maine.  
 
AARP is a non -profit, non -partisan social mission organization with more than 200,000 members acr oss 
the state. We work on a range of energy issues at the state level. The core principles we approach this 
work with include:  
 
• Ensuring service affordability for all —utility rates should be based on prudent use of 
ratepayer money. Costs and savings should  be distributed fairly among consumers. 
Households with lower incomes must be taken into account.  
• Securing and expanding service access for all —all consumers should have access to utility 
services regardless of factors such as geography, race, ethnicity, a nd income.  
• Improving quality —consumers should be able to rely on high -quality utility services.  
• Enhancing accountability —any changes in utility service, policy, or rates should be open and 
transparent. The process should provide a wide range of opportuniti es for input from the 
public and independent groups.  
AARP Maine has appeared on many occasions in the last several years to raise our concern about the 
excessive subsidies associated with Maine’s Net Energy Billing (NEB) Program , particularly with respect 
to the expansion of this program in the statutory man date adopted in 2019.  In 2021 we supported 
reforms to that program that we re not adopted.  The predictions concerning the cost and bill impacts of 
the 2019 changes to the NEB program are now even more dire than previously thought.  This program  as 
current ly mandated by statute threatens the affordability of essential electricity service for Maine’s 
ratepayers.   
Both the Public Utilities Commission and the Office of Public Advocate have documented that CMP and 
Versant Power’s distribution customers will in cur rate increases of $ 200 million  or more by 2025 if this 
program is allowed to continue in its current form.  Chairman Bartlett of the PUC estimated in his 
presentation  to this Committee  last week that customers will pay approximately $10 per month start ing 
later this year and even higher monthly rate increases next year  for stranded costs that are being driven 
primarily by the 2019 NEB statutory mandate .   

 While the program was designed to ensure that Maine will reach its climate goals and to incent the 
development of solar energy to replace natural gas and other carbon emitting fuels, the actual result 
will threaten Maine’s move to electrification for home heating and transportation.  High electricity 
prices from the Standard Offer (a program that also r equires reform as we have proposed in an 
amendment to the pending LD 987) and the costs associated with the NEB mandate included in 
distribution rates will dampen customer interest in or their economic ability to switch to heat pumps 
and EVs.   
And, most i mportantly, we can achieve our climate goals with less expensive solar by relying on 
competitive bids for power purchase contracts  for solar resources  at 2-4 cents per kWh compared to 
the over 20 cents per kWh being paid by ratepayers for this NEB program.  
As we know, Maine can only regulate our distribution services  and rates  provided by our public utilities.  
Any subsidy mandated by the Legislature or Commission regulation is paid for in the distribution portion 
of our electric bill.  We are now faced w ith NEB mandates that will exceed even the proposed base rate 
increa ses in proceedings pending before the PUC  to maintain our customer service and reliability of 
service, key requirements for essential electric service.  Maine ratepayers cannot afford the current 
version of the NEB program and we do not need this program to achieve our climate change goals.  
 
In 2020 the Public Utilities Commission told this Committee that the NEB program  as expanded in 2019  would 
threaten affordability of service and our ability to promote electrification:  
 
In this Report, the Commission concludes that energy goals of increasing r esource 
diversity through renewable resource generation, the promotion of solar generation 
and addressing climate change are promoted to a significant degree by the NEB 
program. The Commission also concludes that the current NEB program will result in 
subs tantial increases in electric rates. Such rate increase would have a negative 
impact on the State policies of promoting beneficial electrification and reducing oil 
dependence .1 
 
****  
Based on the most recent monthly NEB reports provided by the Central Mai ne Power 
Company and Versant Power, if the NEB projects with current NEB Agreements 
become operational, the cumulative total revenue/rate impact on transmission and 
distribution (T&D) rates would be approximately $161 million annually. For Central 
Maine Po wer Company, the revenue impact of the currently pending NEB projects 
represents  an overall T&D rate increase of approximately 21% and for Versant Power, 
an overall T&D rate increase of approximately 23%. Not all of these projects will 
necessarily be devel oped.   However, there is another roughly equivalent amount of 
projects in the utilities’ interconnection queues .2 
 
AARP Maine supports cost effective and lowest cost renewable energy .  However, the current statutory 
mandate for the NEB program should be r eformed to focus on a realistic price for rooftop and 
 
1 Maine PUC, Report on Effectiveness of Net Energy Billing in Achieving State Policy Goals and Providing B enefits to 
Ratepayers, Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology (November 10, 2020), 
Page 2  
2 Ibid.,  Page  3. 
 community solar energy based on its value in the wholesale market.  We urge this Committee to halt 
the current NEB program and ask that  you delegate to the Commission the task to develop a cost 
effectiv e and affordable NEB regulation to govern rooftop and community solar programs.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our views.  
 
Sincerely,  
Alf Anderson  
Associate State Director, Advocacy & Outreach  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
