 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Opposition to LD 1531  (“Resolve, to Implement a 4 -year 
Moratorium on Solar Energy Subsidies and Direct the Department of 
Environmental Protection to Study the Economic Impact of Industrial Solar 
Energy Projects ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 18, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler  and members of the Joint Standing  Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of 
Resolve Government Relatio ns. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a 
professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. 
REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent 
buyers and sellers involved in bo th residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our 
membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, 
appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the 
National Ass ociation of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes  LD 1531 . The bill establishes a four-year 
moratorium on state subsidies or assistance of solar energy projects.   
 
MAR does not support moratoriums that restrict economic investment opportunities and  
impose unreasonable restrictions on the use of privately -owned property. Moratoriums and 
no growth  policies have adverse economic effects on employment,  housing and the tax base.  
Limiting development of solar  projects is overly broad and restrictive and counteracts 
statewide measures to encourage the voluntary use of solar energy.  Property owners should 
have access to  alternative  power and benefits produced by these projects and  they should 
have the ability to take an ownership interest in them . Policies should be created that meet 
the needs for both today and tomorrow, and property owners s hould be encouraged to 
develop their private property with these projects to support clean, renewable, and affordable 
energy.  
 
For these reasons, we oppose  LD 1531  and respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and considerati on. 
 
