1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Hearing Date: April 18, 2023 
  
LD 1531 – Resolve, to Implement a 4-year Moratorium on Solar Energy Subsidies 
and Direct the Department of Environmental Protection to Study the Economic 
Impact of Industrial Solar Energy Projects 
 
 
 Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, 
Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services.  I am testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 
1531, Resolve, to Implement a 4-year Moratorium on Solar Energy Subsidies and 
Direct the Department of Environmental Protection to Study the Economic Impact 
of Industrial Solar Energy Projects. 
My testimony addresses the resolve only with respect to its impact on taxation, 
most clearly with respect to property taxation.  The resolve would prevent the State 
from providing a subsidy or assistance to a private person with respect to solar 
projects.  There are several issues with the resolve that I would like to highlight for 
the Committee’s consideration.  First, the scope of the moratorium is unclear.  
Specifically, the terms “independent governmental unit of the State” and “any 
subsidy or assistance” should be defined or clarified.  Second, the term 
“independent government unit of the State”  would appear to prevent the State 
from providing solar energy equipment tax exemptions to taxpayers in the 
unorganized territory but would allow taxpayers in other parts of the state to 
continue receiving solar energy equipment exemptions provided by the 
2 
 municipalities.  That difference in treatment – exempting solar energy equipment 
from property tax in one area of the state and denying an exemption for similar 
property in another area of the state likely conflicts with the Maine Constitution, 
article IX, section 8, regarding equal assessment. 
Finally, it should be noted that some taxpayers may have made a purchase decision 
for solar energy equipment based on the current State property tax exemption and 
may be adversely impacted by this resolve. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
