Testimony in Support of LD 1531 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 17, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 1531
Resolve, to Implement a 4-year Moratorium on Solar Energy Subsidies and Direct the Department of
Environmental Protection to Study the Economic Impact of Industrial Solar Energy Projects 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am writing this testimony in support of LD 1531, “Resolve, to 
Implement a 4-year Moratorium on Solar Energy Subsidies and Direct the Department of 
Environmental Protection to Study the Economic Impact of Industrial Solar Energy Projects.”
I and many other have numerous concerns over the rapid expansion of solar projects in our 
towns. It is alarming how much we depend on photovoltaic systems with components sourced from 
the People’s Republic of China, a nation highly antagonistic toward our own and one that faces severe 
allegations of human rights violations and forced labor. It behooves our lawmakers to avoid any 
dependency on our foreign foes.
I believe the Committee has been informed of the toxic chemicals used in solar panels: lead, 
cadmium, gallium, and others. We must learn the lessons from the PFAS contamination that now 
plagues regions of our State before we face long-term consequences and otherwise preventable 
damage.
Obsolescence is another issue, along with end-of-life management. Solar panels will eventually
meet the end of their lifespan and, with subsidies feeding solar project growth today, extensive 
dismantling and disposal will be required in the future. Acres of solar farms promise tons of future 
waste; there ought to be a plan to account for this.
Mainers do not need to foot the bill for an unreliable source of energy generation. Even with 
subsidies, I do not see solar panels going up on many of the roofs of my working-class relatives and 
neighbors. I see no reason why taxpayers, already struggling financially, have to pay for those with the 
means to set up a solar power system for their homes, whether the money comes from our wallets 
Testimony in Support of LD 1531 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
through their tax credits and rebates or paying for the energy they don’t use yet is still provided by 
power companies.
If someone wants to pursue solar power, then more power to them, but it is not appropriate to
expect their neighbors who are struggling in this economy to shoulder part of their burden. Solar 
projects must stand on their own two feet, and if they cannot survive without subsidies, if they are not
responsibly profitable and reliable, why are we paying to deploy this infant technology across our 
State? If we want the technology to advance it must be allowed to develop in the free market, not be 
propped up by the State. Let those interested parties fund the experiment, not the People of Maine.
I would be pleased to see, one day, solar technology maturing to a point where it is reliable, 
cost-effective, competitive, and efficiently utilized. But right now I would be more pleased to see acres 
of fields and farmland preserved and left unspoiled by contamination, tax and electricity rates 
decreased, and our companies and governments disentangled from hostile countries.
Please allow for more research to be done and for a thorough evaluation of the costs and 
benefits, rather than subsidizing the hasty expansion of today’s industrial solar energy projects. I ask 
the Committee to vote Ought to Pass, and I thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
