 
 
Support of LD 343: An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician Training Program to Address 
Shortages in Public Schools  
 
50 Industrial Drive, Augusta, ME  04330  •  (207) 626 -3380  •  FAX (207) 626 -3347  
Web: www.madsec.org  •  E -Mail: info@madsec.org  •  gmcdonald@madsec.org  
 
2022 -2023 Officers : President Susan Fossett; President -Elect Kathleen Hamblen; Vice President, Lesley Snyer; Secretary Sandy Flacke; Treasurer Cheryl Mercier; 
Past-President Timothy O’Connor   Staff:  Execu tive Director Gay Anne McDonald; Administrative Assistant Pamela W. Ouellette  
                                           
                McDonald_G._MADSEC testimony_LD 343                
           April 20,  2023  
 
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Gay Anne McDonald and I am the Executive Director for 
the Maine Administrators of Services for Children with D isabilities. On behalf of the MADSEC Legislative 
Committee, I am providing testimony in support of LD 343: An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician 
Training Program to Address Shortages in Public Schools.  
 
As Maine faces a critical shortage of educati onal technicians across the state, MADSEC supports ongoing 
funding to assist the Learning Facilitator Credential Program at Eastern Maine Community College for 
the fiscal years 2023 -2024 and 2024 -2025. Such a program allows individuals to work in Maine pub lic 
schools while obtaining intensive, targeted instruction and training through a multi -phase approach. 
Phases include intensive classroom instruction and coursework, bi -weekly class meetings and 
assignments throughout an academic year, apprenticeship of over 300 hours in a public school, 
implementation of Community of Practice assignments, mentorship, completion of a personalized 
learning plan and the opportunity for micro -credentialing with demonstration of competency in content 
areas.  
 
Not only does th e EMCC Learning Facilitator Program address the current paraeducator shortage 
through its fast -tracked program for Maine’s Educational Technician III certification, more importantly, 
it provides targeted instruction, training, and field experience specific  to the education of children, 
resulting in highly qualified paraeducators to work with Maine students who require additional supports 
and services.  
 
We highly encourage Maine’s Community College System to work collaboratively in an effort to provide 
such  programs throughout the state to best support all Maine schools, regardless of geographic location.  
 
MADSEC encourages the Committee to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 343.  
 
Thank you for your time, consideration, and service to our state.  
