mfostern Maine Community College 
I-1-( 1“ I> 
TO: Senator Rafferty, Representative Breman 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: Megan London, Education Department Chair, EMCC 
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 343, An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician 
Training Program to Address Shortages in Public Schools 
DATE: April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, please accept this testimony in support of LD 343 on behalf of 
the Eastem Maine Community College Education Department. 
One of the essential components of a quality experience-based education technician training 
program is the ability to honor teachers for their mentorship. The additional time and energy they 
put forth to support the development of a leamer in an experience-based program is precious 
time for educators who already perform a myriad of functions throughout their regular school 
day and are often stretched in many ways. Providing a stipend for mentor teachers is one 
important way to recognize their essential role in the learning process. Without the ability to pay 
mentor teachers for their work, we are asking them to provide an essential service for free. 
The continuation of funding of the Learning Facilitator program proposed in LD 343 would not 
only allow for the Learning Facilitator program to remain free of cost to leamers who enroll in 
the program, it would allow the for the continuation of teacher stipends to honor their mentorship 
of leamers. The goal of the Learning Facilitator program is to lessen the stress on teachers by 
providing them a qualiﬁed support person who can help them to manage their classrooms with 
careful guidance. However, to reach that goal, we must ﬁrst train the leamers in the best possible 
way. 
For those leamers who are part of MDOE-funded cohorts, we can provide stipends to mentor 
teachers because the cost is built into our current budget. As we have diversiﬁed our funding 
sources to meet the growing waiting list demands and the needs of our school partners, we ﬁnd 
that many of those funding sources do not consider mentor teacher stipends an allowable 
expense. The funding proposed in LD 343 would allow us to allocate additional funds for mentor 
teacher stipends even when the learner funding source may not allow for those stipends. This 
allows us to maintain equity of opportunity, to honor all mentor teachers for their signiﬁcant 
contribution to the program and maintain the consistency and quality of the training experience 
for our leamers. 
For these reasons, I urge you to support this bill. 
Bc|ngor- E. Millinocket - 
Dover-Foxcroft 
354 Hogon Rood - 
Bangor, Maine 04401 
www.emcc.eclu ~ 
1.800.286.9357
