I 
_ HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brennan@legislature.mainegov 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Michael Brennan introducing 
LD 343, An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician Training Program to 
Address Shortages in Public Schools 
LD 1366, An Act to Address Educational Technician Shortages in Public 
Schools by Establishing an Alternative Certiﬁcation Pathway 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good aftemoon, Senator Rafferty and fellow members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. I am Michael Brennan, and I represent House District 115, which 
includes a portion of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 343, An Act to Invest in an 
Educational Technician Training Program to Address Shortages in Public Schools and@ E, An Act to Address Educational Technician Shortages in Public Schools by 
Establishing an Alternative Certiﬁcation Pathway. 
As we have repeatedly heard this session, our public schools are facing signiﬁcant workforce 
shortages. These two bills address this issue. 
Fortunately, we have developed a unique approach to help more individuals receive the training 
they need to be Ed Tech IIIs. Ed Tech Ills are critical to the functioning of our schools. Yet many 
schools are struggling to ﬁll these positions. 
The Learning Facilitator Program at Eastern Maine Community College is helping to address the 
shortages our schools face by providing job-site training, reﬂection and mentorship for an entire 
school year for those enrolled. By nearly all accounts, the program has been a success. In fact, as 
others that speak after me can talk about in more detail, the program currently has a waiting list. 
With the reported shortages, I hope we can all prioritize the funding to make sure the program is 
open to all qualiﬁed applicants. Supporting and expanding this program can directly respond to 
the workforce shortages facing our public schools. 
LD 1366 provides that the Commissioner of Education may approve training programs for 
certiﬁcation as an Ed Tech III offered by accredited postsecondary institutions in Maine, 
including learning facilitator programs offered by the Maine Community College System. An 
District 115: Part of Portland
applicant who successfully completes an approved program and meets all certiﬁcation 
requirements may be certiﬁed as an Ed Tech III. 
However, the Learning Facilitator Program is only budgeted for the current ﬁscal year. No 
commitments have been made to continue funding this program. While there may be other 
avenues to pursue for funding in support of this program, I hope we can all agree to at least 
continue the state support to make sure this program continues. LD 343 is a simple appropriation 
of $200,000 for each of the next two years to make sure this program can continue to operate. I 
believe this matches current funding for the program. I am interested in whether there is an 
opportunity to scale this program up and provide this opportunity to more interested applicants. 
But at least securing this appropriation will make sure the program will continue for two more 
years. 
Last session, there was a robust discussion about this program in this Committee. At the time, the 
Committee wanted to prevent Ed Techs who complete the program from then applying for 
emergency teacher certiﬁcates. l believe the language of LD 1366 maintains that prohibition. 
Others who come after me today can talk more in detail about the program. I suggest you hold 
any speciﬁc questions for those who follow me today. Thank you for your attention to this 
important legislation. 
District ll5: Part of Portland
