State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Michael Peny, Acting Director of the Higher Education & Educator Support 
Services 
In Support of: L.D. 343 
An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician Training Program to Address Shortages in Public 
Schools 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Brennan 
Date: April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Joint Standing Cormnittee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Michael Perry, and I am testifying on behalf of the Department of Education in 
support of LD 343, An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician Training Program to Address 
Shortages in Public Schools, which proposes to provide ongoing funds to support the Learning 
Facilitator Credential Program at Eastem Maine Community College (EMCC). 
The Learning Facilitator Program began in 2020 after Governor Mills issued Executive Order No 
7 FY 20/21, An Order Regarding Pre K-12 Education, which in addition to other measures 
allowed for emergency support staff credentialing. Later, a specific pathway for Emergency 
Education Technician III credentialing was included in the updated language for State Board of 
Education Rule Chapter 115: The Credentialing of Education Personnel. 
An Emergency Ed Tech III certification differs from the traditional Ed Tech III certification in 
that instead of a mandatory 90 credit hours of instruction, applicants complete a program which 
focuses on competency in the targeted skills required of an Ed Tech III in the classroom. In the 
case of the EMCC Learning Facilitator program, participants complete an intensive three-credit 
course of instruction and then launch into an immersive teaching apprenticeship at a Maine 
school, participating in the classroom under the guidance of EMCC faculty and, crucially, a local 
peer mentor. Each participant is formally evaluated twice by their mentor teachers. 
To support this program, the Department of Education allocated money from the Govemor’s 
Emergency Education Relief Fund (GEER) to support SAUs employing Leaming Facilitator 
program participants. Qualifying SAUs could invoice the DOE for up to 315 hours of actual pay 
at a maximum of $14.00/hour, or up to $4,410 per participant. These DOE reimbursements to 
SAUs occurred in the 2020-21 and 2021-22 school years. The salary of individuals paid with 
federal funds — under Title I, for example — were not reimbursed.
1
Under LD 343, funding for the Department of Education ’s support of the Learning Facilitator 
Program will continue through the General Fund. 
The Maine education community continues to struggle with an educator workforce shortage. 
Our ed techs are a valuable resource to our schools, and increasing training pathways for these 
positions is an important aspect of growing and strengthening the Maine educator workforce. 
For this reason, the Department is in support of LD 343. I am happy to answer any questions the 
Committee may have and will be available for work sessions on this bill.
2
