      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
March 29, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1106, An Act to Improve the Transition to Adult Services for Children with Intellectual 
Disabilities   
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and Human Services  
Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM .  I am also the parent of a 2 6-year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I ser ve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair the Maine Developmental Servic es Oversight 
and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 I am testifying in strong support of LD 1106, An Act to Improve the Transition to Adult Services for Children with Intellectual Disabilities .  This bill requires the DHHS  to establish a liaison team 
within the d epartment to provide education and outreach to children with intellectual disabilities 
receiving services at school and those children's families on transitional services and services available to adults with intellectual disabilities. This team must provide educational and outreach 
services, including assistance with applications for services with waiting lists, at schools and other 
appropriate locations. School administrative units are required to assist the liaison team with 
providing transitional servic es. Education and outreach services must be provided on a regular 
basis, at least annually, beginning when the child receiving services at school is 15 years of age.  
 
Passing LD 1106 would help actualize the Developmental Services Lifelong Continuum of Care
 
and the Blueprint for Effective Transition  (both of which were created by the Maine Coalition for 
Housing and Quality Services in partnership with DHHS  and a broad array of stakeholders ).  This 
would ensure the ID/DD continuum of care  truly address people’s changing needs and desires 
throughout the entire lifespan, specifically ensuring smooth transition from children to adult 
services, so th at each person is met where they are at, providing the amount and type of services 
needed.   The Blueprint for Effective Transition was used as a roadmap for the Office of Child and 
Family Services (OCFS) and the Office of Aging and Disability Services (OAD S) in their 
transition planning work.  I would like to thank OCFS and OADS for their thoughtful work on 
improving the transition process for people with ID/DD in Maine.  Passing LD 1003 will build upon this transition work.  
 
Blueprint for Effective Transit ion 
In October of 2013 the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services initiated a subcommittee 
to create a White P aper on the topic of transition within the system of care for persons with 
developmental or intellectual disabilities.  This began with a visual and conceptual diagram, 
evolved to a narrative, a structural design for implementation, and goals and action steps to achieve 
them.  The Coalition completed the White Paper in February of 2015.  In late 2019 and early 2020 
the Blueprint for Effective Transition diagram and narrative were revised and adopted by the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services on 1/13/20. Some excerpts:  
 
The Blueprint for Effective Transition is founded in the belief that human beings have value, 
natural abilitie s, dignity, and potential.  By dignity, we mean:  Self -respect, nobility, worthiness, 
and honoring choice.  Through this, we set the tone for all achievement and personal growth.  
Transition is the movement that incorporates these inherent characteristics, creating opportunities 
for a meaningful and fulfilling life.   
  
Transition is a process, not a destination or event, and leads to quality outcomes for each 
individual.  Transition is lifelong, with milestones along the way.  It is both a foundation and a 
springboard to a fulfilling and meaningful life that must be facilitated by the individual, family, 
supports, and services across all environments.  Transition involves collaboration, creativity, and  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
community, and envisions a path through which an indivi dual figures out what he or she wants to do and how to live their 
life.   
  
Successful transition is a journey.  This journey takes the individual through many transition planning areas and promotes 
development of the essential elements of a fulfilling life.      
 Successful transition from children to adult services is critical to  accomplishing the goals set forth in the Developmental 
Services Lifelong Continuum of Care and the Blueprint for Effective Transition.  It would ensure that people do not have a 
gap in services upon graduating and that the full spectrum of needs of people  with ID/DD in Maine are met effectively .   
 
Transition is an important tipping point – things can go very well, or they can fail miserably.  Special Education and school -
based services do a great job with setting youth up for success with employment skill  development and independent living 
skills training.  They plan for a transition to employment.  My son was able to get out into the community, volunteer in work 
settings, and learn a lot of skills.  What I’ve witnessed, through my son’s experience and oth ers, is that when people move 
into adult services this ball tends to get dropped – there’s a marked difference when school ends and those employment 
skills fade, and connections and relationships formed dissolve.  
 
LD 1106 also importantly supports the work of the LD 924 Task Force.  This Task Force examined the ID/DD system  of 
care, including data, and the cliff of no services when they age out of school.  The Task Force’s membership was  broad and 
inclusive, and its goal was to create concrete recommendatio ns to improve transition in Maine , with which LD 1003 would 
greatly assist.  
 
Please support LD 1106, so that transition from children to adult services is a seamless process through which youth with 
ID/DD in Maine have access to and receive the services they need.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.  
