 
March 28, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Support of LD # 1106 An Act to Improve the Transition to Adult Services for 
Children with Intellectual Disabilities  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, 
My name is Daniel Francis and I live in Beals. I am a self-advocate meaning I am a person who lives 
with a disability. I am part of Speaking Up For Us, Maine’s Self-Advocacy Network.    
 
I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 1106 because of my personal experience.   
 
One reason is that when I was just out of high school, I joined a program that was sort of like job 
coaching and it was only a 4-week paid position and I ended up losing part of my income for a period 
of time and my Mother needed to spend 4 months advocating that it wasn’t a permanent position that 
it was only a 4 week temporary.   
 
It is important to be educating families about how much they can work and receive benefits.  Neither 
of us knew about the income limit.  I think it's important to educate kids about receiving a disability 
income.  It is important to be educating about money and what the system is before it happens so the 
kid and their family are prepared.   
 
We need to be providing opportunities for income without having it hurt more than helping to earn a 
sustainable income.  I was offered job training but at the end of training if they don’t have an opening, 
they don’t hire you, that was not clear when I started that program.  
 
This bill is important because it will help people prepare to understand the risks and benefits of 
getting a job.  Some people may have to be paid under the table to not get in trouble with losing out 
on their income.  It doesn’t make being honest easy.   
 
I think it is important to give more education and opportunities for kids transitioning to adulthood. I ask 
you to vote in favor of LD 1106. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Daniel Francis 
Beals, ME 
DanielFrancis5890@gmail.com  
 
