Testimony of Steven Shaver 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Testifying In Support Of 
L.D. 1106, An Act to improve the Transition to Adult Services for Children with Intellectual 
Disabilities 
March 29, 2023 
Representative Poirier, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Steven Shaver. I am a resident of Lewiston, and the father of an 
18-year-old young man, with Level 3 (profound) autism. l am testifying in support of L.D. 1106, 
An Act to improve the Transition to Adult Services for Children with Intellectual Disabilities. 
My family has been involved with special needs services for over sixteen years, _ 
beginning with Child Development Services (CDS), DHHS, the Department of Education, outside 
agencies, and special purpose private schools, along with a myriad of doctors and therapists, all 
in an effort to give our son the best possible support. 
During this past year, we have been working to navigate the many facets of his 
transition from children's services to adult services. At times, it honestly felt as though we 
were walking through a cornfield maze, uncertain which way to turn. My wife has spent 
countless hours doing on-line research and making phone calls, all in an effort to discover what 
services are available to our son, and how to go about accessing them. The challenges of caring 
for a special needs child are magnified by the complexity of the different regulations and 
agencies with which parents must contend. ls that service covered by section 21, or 28, or 29? 
Accordingly, l believe that a dedicated liaison team to help inform and support parents 
and schools with child to adult transition services is greatly needed, and I am very pleased to 
see bipartisan support for this effort. 
Thank you for your attention to this critical matter that affects so many l\/laine children 
and families. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Steven Shaver 
sashaver63@gmail.com; 
P. O. Box 2553, Lewiston, lVlE 04241 (207) 751-5333
