1 
 
 
Testimony IN SUPPORT  
 
LD 1171  
An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and 
Composting in Maine  
 
And 
 
LD 1172  
An Act to Reestablish Annual Reporting on Solid Waste in Maine  
 
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
Public Hearing  
 
April 5, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Chair; Representative Gramlich, Chair; and Honorable Committee 
Members:  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony IN SUPPORT OF LD 1171 and 
LD 1172 . We would like to submit our testimony on both pieces of legislation together as 
they are linked in overall intent to move  Maine forward in more effective ways to manage  
solid waste.  DWME (Don’t Waste Maine) is a citizens’ group working for waste policy 
that gives communities local  control, incorporates Zero Waste goals, and protects the 
health and environment of communities most impacted by waste facilities . Many of our 
members live in communities that host waste processing and disposal operations . Their 
quality of life and personal rights are  heavily impacted by those facili ties. They  have a 
particular vested interest in how waste management policy is constructed and 
implemented. Waste is a verb and is a choice we make. We can make better choices.  
LD 1171  An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, Reuse, Recycling 
and Composting in Maine  adjusts the fee structure for disposal of certain waste streams. 
Incentives and rewards are necessary  to prompt  the necessary system changes to protect 
public health and the environment; and preserve valuable resources . The changes offered 
2 
 
in LD 1171  recogni ze that disposal of waste has costs  and help identify that  the goal must 
be to reduce the amount of waste produced that requires  disposal. Current approaches 
are not sustainable economically or environmentally . Importantly, LD 1171  makes a 
portion of the fees collected available to municipalities to support reduction, diversion, 
recycling and composting efforts to better achieve the goals of the State waste hierarchy. 
As recently reported1, Maine is failing to meet  waste management goals and there are 
115 MRC (Municipal Review Com mittee) communities facing uncertainty2 as to what 
opportunities  will be available for them to manage their wast e as legally required under 
State statute. LD 1171  is timely  and not insignificant because it  supports investing 
resources locally to develop  better management approaches  that produce local benefit s. 
Maine has a real challenge because waste operations are dominated by the for -profit 
sector at near monopolistic levels. The outcomes from that structure have established 
Maine as a destination for waste produced outside of our borders  and has endangered  
public health ; exploited and polluted the e nvironment ; and neglected the rights of 
citizens . Returning some benefit to communities from the cost of landfilling wastes to 
develop infrastructure and support hierarchy goals, is a positive step. A value -added 
outcome would be that the flow of imported trash eating Maine’s disposal capacity will 
be staunched.  Such an effort does not interfere with the Interstate Commerce Clause  3of 
the Constitution, because regardless of origin, all waste is being treated equally as to 
landfilling costs.  
 
1 January, 2023 , Maine Solid Waste Generation and Capacity Report for Calendar Years 2020 & 2021 , 
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/23565994 -maine -solid -waste -generation -and-disposal -
capacity -report -for-calendar -years -2020 -2021   
2 Loftus, Sawyer, March 1, 2023, Bangor Daily News, How trash plans fell apart for 115 
Maine communities  
 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/03/01/mainefocus/hampden -trash -plant -fallout -
joam40zk0w/   
3 Reid, Jerry, AAG,  Chief, Natural Resources Division, May 13, 2010, Memorandum, Commerce Clause 
Limitations on State Regulation of Solid Waste; Legal Restrictions on Unlined Landfills , 
https://img1.wsimg.com/blobby/go/3a99e672 -2796 -498c -8250 -
9aae47365deb/downloads/Commerce%20Clause%20Limitations%20on%20State%20Regulatio.pdf?ver=1
679745383737   
 
3 
 
LD 1172  An Act to Reestablish Annual Reporting on Solid Waste in Maine directs 
the DEP (Department of Environmental Protection) to gather vital data from 
municipalities  that identify options and businesses that provide opportunities to separate 
recyclable material s; divert organic waste ; and manage and dispose other solid waste , 
including demolition debris.  This information is to be reported annually  and DEP is to 
assist with developing a model and the forms to gather this information . Effective waste 
management re lies on data. Maine’s communities look to the DEP to help them achieve 
success.  The assumption is  these d ata points will assist to determine  how well the State 
is meeting established goals  for reduction , diversion, and recycling as well as establish  the 
effectiveness  to preserve  disposal capacity for Maine citizens.  This information will 
provide guidance for adjusting policy and actions going forward that conserve valuable 
resources, reduce harmful impacts to public  health and the environment, and honor the 
rights of all Maine’s citizens. These objectives are important to DWME and we ask that 
the Committee vote OUGHT TO PASS ON LD 1171 AND LD 1172.  DWME supports the 
Zero Waste framework for managing resources. Thank you for considering our comments.  
 
"Zero waste is a philosophy and a design principle for the 21st Century; it is not simply 
about putting an end to landfilling. Aiming for zero waste is not an end -of-pipe solution. 
That is why it heralds fundamental chang e. Aiming for zero waste means designing 
products and packaging with reuse and recycling in mind. It means ending subsidies for 
wasting. It means closing the gap between landfill prices and their true costs. It means 
making manufacturers take responsibilit y for the entire lifecycle of their products and 
packaging. Zero waste efforts, just like recycling efforts before, will change the face of 
solid waste management in the future. Instead of managing wastes, we will manage 
resources and strive to eliminate w aste." Institute for Local Self Reliance (Washington, DC)  
 
Jacquelyn Elliott, Member DWME  
148 West Road  
Waterboro, ME 04087 -3210  
(207) 247 -0103  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
 
