* 
STATE OF MAINE 
Depaitment of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Trafﬁc Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cans? 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
AGAINST LD 62.3 
An Act to Modify Maine Motor Vehicle Inspection Standards to 
Permit Nonstructural Corrosion That Does Not Directly Affect 
the Passenger Compartment 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the 
Ioint Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Lt. Bruce 
Scott, and I am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Traffic 
Safety Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of 
Public Safety and the Maine State Police in Opposition of LD 623. 
The Maine State Police already have rules in place to address the 
concerns put forth in this bill. This bill would codify some of our 
current rules but would be more liberal by not allowing a rejection for 
certain components, regardless of the degree of rust. Even if the 
required component was so severely rusted that it was no longer 
securely attached to the vehicle or causes a safety concern. There 
would be no consideration given to the sharp edges that are produced 
by heavy corrosion and rust, which can be a hazard for both the 
occupants of the vehicles as they get in and out of the vehicle and 
others walking or riding by the vehicle. This bill does not consider the 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
differences between a full framed vehicle and one made of unit body 
construction. This bill speciﬁcally deﬁnes a rocker panel as a non- 
structural component, yet in a unit body construction the rocker panel 
is indeed a vital part of the structural integrity and crash worthiness of 
the entire vehicle. This bill also assumes that doors, hoods, fenders, 
trunks and hatches are non—structural, yet all of those components are 
vital to maintain the integrity of the vehicle and improve crash 
worthiness. Current rules allow for considerable rust on a vehicle 
provided the answer to the following three questions is, “no;” 
0 Does the rust compromise the integrity of the vehicle or 
component? 
0 Can €Xl'lElllSt fumes permeate into the passenger 
compartment of the vehicle? 
0 Does the rust create sharp edges that can cause a safety 
hazard for vehicle occupants or a passerby? 
If the answer is yes to any or all those questions, the vehicle does not 
currently pass inspection, yet if this bill were to pass, the vehicle would 
pass a safety inspection, even though it may be dangerous to the 
occupants and others nearby. 
In closing, minor amounts rust or perforation that do not affect the 
structural integrity of the vehicle or component, that doesn’t create 
dangerous sharp edges and that doesn't allow for the passage of fumes 
into the passenger compartment, on the vehicle is permissible. With 
that being said, if there are citizen complaints regarding licensed 
stations being too strict with regard to rust or any other standards set 
forth by rule, we will happily investigate any and all claims of causing 
unnecessary repairs. Any station found to be overselling or attempting 
to oversell will be strictly dealt with, with penalties up to and 
including, at times, a full revocation of their inspection license. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote “Ought Not To Pass” on LD 623 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State 
Police, I thank you for your time and would be happy to try and 
answer any questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
