April 4, 2023 
TESTIMONY OF Charlene Donahue 
Representing the MAINE ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY 
BEFORE THE MAINE COMMlTTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
ln FAVOR of LD 239 Amended to ”An Act to Establish the Pink-edged Sulphur (Colias interior) as 
the Maine State Butterfly ”. 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members ofthe committee. Representative 
Gramlich, Senator Bailey and members of the public. 
l am here to testify in favor of the amended bill LD 239 ”An Act to Establish the Pink-edged 
Sulphur (Colias interior) as the Maine State Butterfly" on behalf of the Maine Entomological 
Society. 
I am a retired entomologist with a master's degree in entomology, and have worked for both 
the Maine Forest Service and the University of Maine. lam a past president and founding 
member of the Maine Entomological Society and currently volunteer as an adjunct curator of 
the insect collection at the Maine State Museum. 
I have consulted with other members of the Maine Entomological Society about this bill and we 
are pleased that the sponsors and students who brought this idea to the Maine Legislature have 
amended the bill with a butterfly that represents the State of Maine as a whole. The Pink~ 
edged sulfur can be found across the State, it can be seen, and identified with relative accuracy, 
by anyone living, working or visiting here. This lovely butterfly can be found in wild blueberry 
fields, in openings in the woods and in boggy areas — all of which are extensive habitats across 
the State. Although a primary food source for the caterpillars is blueberry leaves, it is never so 
abundant as to cause a problem for blueberry growers. As a boreal species of northern North 
America, the Pink-edged Sulfur represents what people often think of when they think of Maine 
- cool weather, forests and wild blueberries. 
Having a State Butterfly, insect or other specific insect brings to the fore the fact we share the 
environment with other creatures and that no matter how small, they too are important to the 
health and welfare of our State. Benefits we derive from the Pink-edged Sulfur are: a sign ofa 
rich, healthy environment where all can thrive, joy at its beauty, and curiosity about its tiny, 
green, striped caterpillar. lf they do well, we do well. 
The Maine Entomological Society and l hope you will vote in favor of this bill. 
Thank you for the opportunity for me to speak and for your time.
