I 3 I st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Se 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ll/[E 04333-0003 
0fMaing ()_,7¢¥@ (207) 287-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey supporting 
LD 239, An Act to Establish the Hessel’s Hairstreak as the Maine State 
Butterﬂy 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Govermnent, my name is Domra Bailey, and I proudly represent Senate 
District 31, which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today I am pleased to offer 
my testimony in strong support of LD 23 9, “An Act to Establish the Hessel’s Hairstreak as the 
Maine State Butterﬂy.” 
Before I begin, it’s my understanding that the sponsor has an amendment to change the title of 
the bill and the species of butterﬂy that the bill would name as the state butterﬂy. The Pink- 
edged Sulphur (Colias interior) is a medium-sized butterﬂy, from 1 1/2 to 2 5/8 inches long. The 
males are yellow, and the females are yellow or very rarely white. They have conspicuous pink 
wing edges. The upper side of the male has a black border, and the border on the female may be 
incomplete or only seen at the tip of the wing. The underside of the hindwing is clear yellow 
with a single silver cell spot circled in pink. The Pink-edged Sulphur is active from June through 
August, and the caterpillars feed on blueberry plants. 
LD 239 would make this lovely yellow butterﬂy that makes its home in Maine the ofﬁcial state 
butterﬂy. Why should We name the Pink-edged Sulphur the state butterﬂy? For one thing, Maine 
does not yet have a state butterﬂy, despite our state being home to more than 120 native species 
of butterﬂies. Following that, Maine has a state animal, the moose; a state bird, the Black-capped 
chickadee; a state ﬁsh, the Atlantic salmon; a state ﬂower, the White pine cone; and a state 
insect, the honeybee. There could be more that I’ve missed. It only seems right that Maine 
should designate a state butterﬂy. (N o offense to the moose or the chickadee.) 
Perhaps the most important reason to name the Pink-edged Sulphur the state butterﬂy is to raise 
awareness for butterﬂies, in general. According to the Maine Butterﬂy Survey, nearly 20 percent 
of Maine butterﬂies are considered to be extinct, endangered, or of special concern. The decline 
of the butterﬂy is a sad story, but it’s also a call to action. It’s critical that We help preserve and 
protect the butterﬂies in our state. Butterﬂies play an important ecological role: They serve as 
pollinators for many wildﬂowers and as prey for migrant birds. Without butterﬂies, we would
hear less birdsong in our Maine springs and summers; and, self-seeding grasses and weeds might 
replace our ﬁelds and meadows that were abundant with colorful wildﬂowers. By promoting the 
Pink-edged Sulphur as the state butterﬂy, we can raise awareness for and generate public interest 
in protecting and celebrating these critters. 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions. 
019-e\ Donna Bailey 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
2
