MAINE 
AU1) ON 
Committee on State and Local Government 
% Legislative Information Ofﬁce 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
April 4, 2023 
RE: LD 23 9, A n Act to Establish the Hesse! 's Hairstrea/e as the M aine State Butterﬂy 
Dear Chair Nangle, Chair Stover, and Members of the State and Local Government Committee: 
My name is Francesca Gundrum and I am Maine Audubon’s Policy Advocate. Maine 
Audubon is a wildlife conservation non—proﬁt — We fulﬁll our mission to “conserve Maine’s Wildlife 
and wildlife habitat” by engaging people of all ages in nature through a science-based approach to 
education, conservation, and advocacy. On behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members and 
supporters, thank you For the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 239, An Act to 
Esta hlish the Hessel 3 Hairstrea/e as the M a inc State B a ttcrﬂy. 
Our organization is eager to support Representative Gramlich ’s amendment to designate the 
Pink—edged Sulphur as the Maine State Butterﬂy. Found statewide, this butterﬂy spends the spring and 
summer months in nearly every corner of the Pine Tree State. The Pink-edged Sulfur has a roughly 
2-inch wingspan, yellow wings and legs, a single eyespot on its hindwings, and bright pink antennae 
and outline along its wings. The species is found in shrubby openings in woods or bogs and, best of all, 
they prefer to lay their eggs on the leaves of Maine’s Famous state Fruit: blueberry plants!h 
Maine Audubon thanks the students of Old Orchard Beach’s Loranger Middle School for 
their critical role in the process to select our state’s butterfly. Their dedication and enthusiasm are 
admirable. Thank you to Representative Gramlich and to the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife for facilitating this important initiative. We are pleased to support this bill and the positive 
endeavors it could spark for the conservation of Maine’s butterflies and insects. Thank you For your 
consideration. 
Sincerely, 
%a-»£I&~l» 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrum 
Policy Advocate 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' (207) 781~2330 ' maineaudubonorg
