it 
6, I. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
L AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
tn’: (207) 287-1400 
Lori K_ Gramlich TTYI Maine R6l8.y 71l 
154 Temple Ave. 
Old Orchard Beach, ME 04064 
Phone: (207) 232-1067 
1011 2ramlich@legislature.maine.gov 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Lori K. Gramlich presenting 
LD 239, An Act to Establish the Hessel's Hairstreak as the Maine 
State Butterﬂy 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Good afternoon, Senator Nagel, Representative Stover and my esteemed colleagues on the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. My name is Lori Gramlich, and I represent 
House District 131, the lovely seaside community of Old Orchard Beach. I am here today to 
present LD 239, An Act to Establish the Hessel's Hairstreak as the Maine State Butterﬂy. 
While this is a very straightforward bill, there are some details I want to draw your attention to. 
Before I get into these details, I wanted to alert you all to an amendment, which changes the title 
of this bill to An Act to Establish the Pink-edged Sulphur as the Maine State Butterﬂy. 
Now the details: Last November, I received a letter in the mail from two ﬁfth-grade students at 
Loranger Middle School in Old Orchard Beach. Having been a guest at Loranger in previous 
years, I was excited to hear from these students. Their letter read as follows: 
“Dear Representative Lori Gramlich, 
We are writing to you today because other states have state butterﬂies, why not us? 
We ’re proposing the Hessel ’s Hairstreak because it ’s native to Maine and over alla 
beautiful butterﬂy. It ’s also an endangered species. The butterﬂy is mostly found in York 
County, Maine. H this butterﬂy became our state butterﬂy, it would raise awareness for 
the Hessel's Hairstreak and maybe in the future it won ’t be endangered Also, we started 
to like this butterﬂy when we visited the Saco Heath, which is one place it can be found, 
that’s why we think this butterﬂy will be perfect for our state. 
Sincerely, 
Oscar Stanton and Tate Graham” 
District 131: Old Orchard Beach
As you know, we receive all kinds of correspondence from folks back home, but this letter really 
stood out to me. I was so pleased to hear from these young people, who had taken the time to not 
only research this issue, but to also reach out to their representative to share their thoughts. 
Well, I immediately did a little research of my own, as I had never heard of the Hessel’s 
Hairstreak, and indeed, it is quite a rare and endangered species. And the timing could not be 
more perfect, as I was scheduled to once again visit Mrs. Seavers’ and Ms. Nye’s ﬁfth-grade 
class in early December, where I met Oscar and Tate and their classmates. To see such an 
engaged group of students was really something. These kids had an idea that we were able to 
bring to the Legislature with the notion that this could actually become a law. 
Once I submitted this bill, I received correspondence from the Department of Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife, where I met the Maine State Lepidopterist, Phillip deMaynadier, who informed me 
of the Department's concerns with using the Hessel’s Hairstreak for the Maine State Butterﬂy 
due to its endangered species status and limited geographical distribution. While I was grateful to 
hear from the Department in advance of this bill moving forward, I was slightly apprehensive to 
tell the kids at Loranger about this. They had all worked so hard and were so excited about this 
project. In fact, I think I might have said: YOU tell the ﬁfth-graders this. 
Well, that is exactly what happened. Phillip reached out to the students, suggested a number of 
worthy alternatives to the Hessel’s Hairstreak, and offered to review this with them at Loranger, 
and I agreed to meet them there. Imagine my surprise when not only was Philip at Loranger but 
also Commissioner Camuso! 
The students were able to discuss the alternatives and voted on their choice, the Pink-edged 
Sulphur, for the Maine State Butterﬂy, hence the amendment. 
This story is a perfect example of how young people can learn about civics, be engaged and 
included in» the process, and now, today, see their dedication, their commitment and their hard 
work come to fruition. These students .are here today, along with their incredible teachers, Laura 
Seaver, and Cynthia Nye, who really set the groundwork for these kids to undertake this amazing 
work. You will be hearing from Oscar and Tate, as they too will be presenting testimony for LD 
239.. And I believe that Oscar’s and Tate’s parents are also here - so a huge shout out to not only 
the dedicated teachers at Loranger Middle School but also to the parents of these incredible kids. 
I am sure they are all very proud, as am I. And I would venture to say that the initial intent of this 
bill, which was to draw attention to the endangered Hessel’s Hairstreak, has most certainly been 
achieved. 
I urge you to unanimously vote to pass LD 23 9, and I would be happy to try to answer questions, 
although I know that we have some experts here with us today who might be able to answer any 
questions you may have. Thank you for your consideration. 
District I31: Old Orchard Beach
