TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 239 
"An Act to Establish the Hessel's Hairstreak as the Maine State Butterfly" 
Presented by Representative GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach. 
Cosponsored by Senator BAILEY of York and Representatives: COPELAND of Saco, 
HEPLER of Woolwich, LANDRY of Farmington, O'NElL of Saco, PAULHUS of Bath, 
SHEEHAN of Biddeford, STOVER of Boothbay, Senator: NANGLE of Cumberland. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 4, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the Committee 
on State and Local Government. lam Phillip del\/laynadier, a wildlife biologist and Group 
Leader speaking on behalf of the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, in support 
of L.D. 239 as amended by Rep. Gramlich in the proposed amendment circulated prior 
to the public hearing. The bill, as amended, would designate the Pink-edged Sulphur 
(Co/ias interior) as the official state butterfly. 
The Department defines wildlife as all species in the animal kingdom, including insects, 
and has recently completed a comprehensive study of lVlaine's butterfly fauna. With 
approximately 120 species statewide, butterflies are a colorful and conspicuous 
component of Maine's wildlife diversity. They also play important ecological roles, both 
as pollinators and as prey to larger species, from dragonflies to birds. There is increasing 
scientific concern about the status of butterflies, bumble bees, and other pollinating 
insects. As such, the designation of a state butterfly could help increase public 
awareness of the value and need for conserving butterflies and other pollinating insects. 
The Department is also pleased with the specific selection of the Pink-edged Sulphur as 
the state's butterfly ambassador. This attractive, nativeinsect is widespread in Maine, 
with a range in the United States that is limited mostly to northern New England and the 
Great Lakes, giving it some geographic exclusivity to our region. The butterfly also hasa 
biological and cultural connection to Maine since its caterpillar is nourished by native 
blueberry heaths, including lowbush blueberry (Vc/ccinium angustifolium), which also 
produces Maine's official state fruit. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
Pink—edged Sulphur (Co/ias interior) nectaring on Birds—foot Trefoil flowers ih Maine
