 
 April 19, 2023 
 
Greetings Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the 
Judiciary Committee 
 
My name is Jan Collins, I am assistant director of Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition. I 
am here in support of  LD 609  An Act to Ensure an Incarcerated Individuals Right to 
Make Free Phone Calls Protected by Attorney Client Privilege”. 
 
I am adding the information below, excerpted from an article in The Maine Monitor and 
discussing both prison calls and the inmate benefit fund as a resource in your work 
session discussions. 
 
Thanks so much,  
Jan  
 
 
CRIME & JUSTICE  
As families struggle to afford 15-minute phone calls from 
jail, Maine counties rake in millions 
Private phone contracts at Maine jails and prisons are adding 
millions of dollars to state and local coffers while financially 
straining families. 
BY SAMANTHA HOGAN  | MAY 23, 2021 
 
The cost of connection 
 
 Cumberland County has reaped the most money of the 13 county jails contracted 
with Securus Technologies for phone services. In the past five years, the company 
paid at least $1.2 million to Cumberland County for telephone costs incurred by 
jailed people and their families, a review of payments by The Maine Monitor 
shows.  
 
Securus Technologies pays an average of $21,600 a month to Cumberland County, 
payment records show. 
Jacorey Monterio has been in and out of county jail and state prison for the past 
decade. His latest stint at Cumberland County Jail lasted almost two years because 
of the pandemic. In the Maine prison system, where calls cost $0.09 a minute, it ’s 
difficult to rack up a large phone bill, he said. But it takes only a few telephone 
calls at a county jail to do the same. 
Monterio had a job at the Cumberland County Jail and earned $12 a week. It was 
barely enough to make a few phone calls. 
“For the most part here it ’s just really expensive. If I didn ’t have people taking care 
of me I wouldn ’t be able to talk to my immediate family as often, because they 

 
 don’t have the financial capabilities to really pay. You know, $20 a week you can 
probably call someone five or six times for 15 minutes apiece,” Monterio said. 
An extended family member adds money into an account for him to be able to stay 
in contact. But there are surcharges every time money is deposited. To make the 
maximum deposit of $300 online there is a $11.95 fee, he wrote in a letter and 
confirmed by The Maine Monitor. The fees lower incrementally but people are 
charged $4.95 to add less than $20 to a person ’s account. 
The fees are even higher to send money over the phone, and the kiosk in the jail ’s 
lobby charges $3 for deposits, according to a fee chart provided by the Cumberland 
County Sheriff ’s Office. The only method to add money without a fee is through a 
money order. 
The money doesn ’t go far. At the time, Monterio was working with a recovery 
coach, Sarah Siegel, on a substance use disorder. The first minute of their phone 
call cost him more than a dollar to connect and 14 cents a minute, he said, before 
the call automatically cuts off at 15 minutes. Their session lasts an hour, which 
means Monterio calls four times and pays a connection fee on each call.  
Cumberland County Sheriff Kevin Joyce said the jail recently eliminated its 
connection fee and changed the cost of in-state calls to 26 cents a minute. 
 
 An excerpt of a letter sent by Jacorey Monterio from Cumberland County Jail 
describing the costs of making phone calls from the facility. Obtained by The 
Maine Monitor. 
Siegel said the time restraints and costs are stressful for her, too. She uses an 
interviewing technique that helps get people to the action phase of their recovery. 
It requires a lot of listening. There have been times when Monterio is beginning to 

 
 open up and a warning interrupts their conversation to announce there ’s a minute 
left on the call.  
“The amount that he actually wants to get better is really astounding and beautiful. 
And so it ’s equally as frustrating when there ’s these just totally unnecessary 
hurdles,” Siegel said. 
Even for families that have money, the cost to stay in contact adds up fast. 
It cost $4,000 for Uria Pelletier to speak to his brother-in-law while he was being 
held at the Cumberland County Jail for eight months, he said. Pelletier owns 
multiple businesses in Waterville and is a member of the city ’s Planning Board. He 
can afford the calls, but many people he has met don ’t have the money. The 
counties ’phone contracts punish families financially, he said. 
“Everything is expensive when it comes to jail. I just don ’t think you should 
incentivize prisons and caging humans as a means of income — for profit — 
especially, when the facilities themselves are paid for by taxpayers,” Pelletier said. 
Counties cash in on communication 
County sheriffs and the Department of Corrections have little motivation to end 
their contracts with private telecommunication companies despite the costs to 
families.  
Instead of calls getting cheaper, companies have added services and technology 
that have further driven up the costs for people in jail. One service Securus 
Technologies provides to county jails is video visitation terminals. A video visit 
costs $20 for 20 minutes or $40 for 40 minutes plus fees.  
The counties with video visits agree to push jail residents to make video calls, 
including a contract stipulation that says jails, “will endeavor to reach at least one 
remote paid Video Visitation session per inmate per month,” according to contracts 
reviewed by The Maine Monitor. This ensures the jails “maximize full utilization” 
of the video visit platforms so Securus Technologies can recover its upfront costs 
of installing the equipment.  
But the platform offered by Securus Technologies has low quality video and high 
prices, The Marshall Project  reported in 2019. The Prison Policy Initiative, a 
nonprofit that researches mass incarceration, questioned in a 2015 report why 
expensive video visits were being offered to historically poor families, and 
potentially replacing in-person visiting hours at jails and prisons. 
The commissions (from Securus Technologies) are deposited into the Inmate 
Benefit Fund and must be used for the benefit of the inmates. I don ’t want that 
getting lost in this whole equation.” 
 
 — Gregory Zinser, York County manager 
Securus Technologies said it spent around $500,000 on its hardware, infrastructure 
and network in Maine in the past three years, according to information provided to 
the sheriffs ’association and lawmakers. The company did not return a request for 
comment. 
The jails and prisons receive direct payments for offering telephones and video 
visits to people. The money earned is required to be deposited in an “Inmate 
Benefit Fund” and spent to better inmates ’lives, according to state detention 
standards . But some county jails and state prisons have substantial balances of 
unspent funds. Take York County for example. 
Over $558,000 was paid to York County in the past five years, and more than 
$465,000 was unspent as of May.  
York County receives 95 percent of the revenue from collect calls and debit calls 
completed from the jail, according to an agreement with Securus Technologies. 
County Manager Gregory Zinser said York County spends the money it earns from 
phone calls on cable and newspaper subscriptions, chaplain services, commissary 
bags around Christmas and during the pandemic, seasonally appropriate clothing 
for people to wear when they are released, haircut tools, law library access, and 
other educational supplies and programs. 
“The commissions (from Securus Technologies) are deposited into the Inmate 
Benefit Fund and must be used for the benefit of the inmates. I don ’t want that 
getting lost in this whole equation,” Zinser wrote. “The commissions received 
cannot be used as any type of revenue offset.” 
Zinser stopped responding to questions from The Maine Monitor about why York 
County had a balance of $465,664 in its benefit account or why the county had not 
spent more money on the needs of inmates. 
A costly cycle 
Families asked the Maine Public Utilities Commission, or PUC, back in 2007 to 
investigate whether the telephone rates offered at the state prisons by the 
Department of Corrections were reasonable. At the time, the prisons were charging 
30 cents a minute, while the average Maine resident was paying 3 cents. 
The PUC tried to regulate the cost of phone calls from the state prison, but the 
Maine Supreme Court ruled that the PUC could not regulate  a state agency like a 
public utility. The court decided the Department of Corrections had exclusive 
authority to set telephone rates at the state prisons, said PUC spokeswoman Susan 
Faloon. 
T-Netix, the phone provider for Maine State Prison at the time, wrote in response 
to the families ’complaint, “if a consumer feels the rate is too high they may 
decline the call because there is no obligation to accept and no charges will be 
 
 incurred.” T-Netix and Evercom Systems merged in 2004 and launched Securus 
Technologies.  
Legacy Inmate Communications now provides phone services at the five adult 
prisons and Long Creek Youth Development Center for $0.09 a minute, which the 
state earns $0.05 back. There is a balance of $1.2 million in the inmate benefit 
accounts at five of the state ’s prisons, said Commissioner of Corrections Randall 
Liberty.  
The department would not say why each prison had a significant balance or why 
the money had not been spent on the betterment of inmates ’lives.  
 
The Department of Corrections refused to make Liberty available to The Maine 
Monitor for an interview. In response to written questions, an agency 
spokeswoman, Anna Black, said the cost of phone calls were aligned with industry 
standards and not set by the department. Factors, including the size of the prisoner 
population, affected the balance of the prison ’s inmate benefit fund, she said.  
The Department of Corrections does not see its above-market rates for phone calls 
as a “tax,” Black said. 

 
 The agency spent $908,000 it earned from its phone contract on “quality of life” 
expenses last year, including cable, gym and sporting equipment, haircuts and food 
items for the residents of state prisons, Liberty told lawmakers.  
Half of one percent of the money spent went to phone calls for inmates who were 
unable to afford them, department records show. To qualify for free calls, the 
person must have no money in their facility account and no personal savings or 
investments, according to the state ’s detention standards.  
Rep. Danny Costain (R-Plymouth) said the state budget, not families, should fund 
expenses currently covered by earnings from the phone systems. 
“If you feel those things are that important, then we need to look elsewhere for it 
and not put it on the taxpayers that are already paying taxes to run the facility as it 
is,” Costain said. 
Lawmakers tabled Kinney ’s bill until at least 2022 so the sheriffs ’association, 
Department of Corrections, families and lawmakers can make amendments.  
For a person in one of Maine ’s county jails or state prisons there is no easy way to 
call home. Fees, surcharges and taxes all add up before their first word and the 
clock pushes the cost higher. The price is stressful to them and their families. 
To make sure her sons stayed connected with their father, Courtney Allen carved 
out time for a 15-minute phone call multiple times a week. 
Her son Wyatt is now 13 and his dad is out of jail. Still, Allen remembers the 
nights when he couldn ’t get to a phone until 8 or 9:30 p.m. Wyatt and his brother 
were tired and should have been in bed, but they wanted to talk to their dad. 
“But when we finally did get on the phone and the kids had the time to talk to their 
dad, they ’d talk about soccer or what they ’re learning at school,” Allen said. “And 
it’d feel really normal for those 15 minutes.” 
Maine Monitor researcher Caleb Horton contributed to this report. 
 
