Maine {if \- 
PRISON .lAD\/Q CACY 
Coalition 
April 19, 2023 
Greetings Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of 
the Judiciary Committee 
My name is Jan Collins, l am assistant director of Maine Prisoner Advocacy 
Coalition. I am here in support of LD 609 An Act to Ensure an Incarcerated 
Individuals Right to Make Free Phone Calls Protected by Attorney Client 
Privilege" . 
MPAC's mission is to support Maine's incarcerated citizens, their families, and 
friends, in their struggle with Maine's criminal justice system. Our purpose is to 
reduce Maine's use of incarceration by creating a criminal justice system that is 
ethical, humane, and restorative in nature. 
Justice delayed is justice denied. 
We have heard from the courts and attorneys, both prosecuting and defense, 
that court dockets are backed up for years into the future. Sheriffs report that the 
percentage of residents in their jails who are pretrial is often greater than 80%. It 
is not unusual for individuals to sen/e a longer term pre-trial than their sentence 
would be for the crime. All of this at great expense to the community, to children 
and families, and to individuals. 
You have heard me argue that since the 70's we have set a distressing 
precedent ofjailing people who would be better served in a medical setting 
especially people with mental health and substance use disorder diagnosis.
These two things alone would empty our jails and lighten the loads of our courts. 
Until that happens we must make do with baby steps. 
This bill makes a simple request, allow residents of Maine jails and prisons to call 
their attorney ’s for free. Currently, Maine jails and prisons charge fees for phone 
calls that are considerably higher than the cost of calls made by you and l to 
each other. It is families and loved ones who pay these costs despite the financial 
hardships of expensive calls. The profit is held by the prison orjail in an account 
called the inmate beneﬁt fund(lBF). Some jails and prisons are holding hundreds 
of thousands of dollars in these lBFs. 
Phone calls to attorneys should be a priority use of these funds. There can be no 
higher use for this money than justice. 
Allowing for free phone calls will help save time for attorneys who may be far 
away from their clients. Consulting by phone will allow them to save time on 
travel. Allowing attorneys to spend more time on defense and less on travel will 
speed up the resolution of cases. 
Phone calls will make it easier for clients to participate in their defense in 
meaningful ways. 
Most important, this simple change will make the criminal legal system more just 
for all those involved. 
I urge you to support passage of LD 609. 
Thank-you for your consideration. 
Jan M. Collins 
Assistant Director 
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition 
PO Box 360, E. Wilton, ME 04234 
207.578.8419
