  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthe w D. Morgan  
 
Treasurer  
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secretary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andr ew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Ma ttson 
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam  Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
April 19, 202 3 
  
Sena tor Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Committee on Judiciary   
5 State H ouse Station , Room 438 
Augus ta, ME 04333  
   
RE: LD 609  “An Act to Ensure an Incarce rated Indi vidual ’s Right to Mak e Fre e 
Telephone Calls Protected by A ttorney -Client Privilege .”  
Dear Senator Carney , Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary : 
MACDL supports  LD 609. 
LD 609 guarantees two essential and seemingly simple pa rts of any person ’s criminal  
defense when he/sh e is incarcerated : the ability to speak with an attorney  over a (1) 
confi dential phone l ine (2) without  expense to the ac cused .  
The only thing  more daun ting to a person than defending him/herself from criminal 
charges brought by the government  is to do so from  jail or prison.  A person is literally 
“cut of f” from the outside world when t hey are arrested . Visiting times are limited and 
many families canno t afford to travel to visit in the  first place.    
The initial p oint of someone ’s arrest is a cri tical point in  any criminal  case. The sooner 
someone can be  released  from custody the more like ly they can find support  in the 
community fo r any  unde rlying mental health or drug conditions and the better they can  
keep their professional  and personal  lives intact.  Time is of the essen ce and there is no 
more important time  for someone to be able to speak  to an attorn ey confidential ly and 
without  having to wait for family members to add money to an account, which  is often a 
difficult and time-consuming  process (for those families  that can afford to do so).  
Finally , many people who are unable to make bail an d defend themselves  from outside of 
jail are unable to do so because  they la ck the f unds to post bail or are facing truly  serious 
and potentially life -chan ging c harges. A person ’s defense should not be limit ed based on 
his/her financial means or the severity of the allegations against him/her.  
LD 609 recognizes these i mportan t difficulties facing incarcerated  Mainers and seeks to 
level  the playin g field  for everyone  accused of crimes in Maine . 
For these reasons, MACDL support s LD 609. 
 
                 
Sincerely ,     
 
/s/ Matthew Morgan  
 
Matthew D. M organ , Esq.  
MACDL Vice Pre sident  
 
