PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.acIumaine org 
AMERICAN IIIIIII LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 609 — Ought to Pass 
An Act to Ensure an Incarcerated Individual's Right to Make Free 
Telephone Calls Protected by Attorney-Client Privilege 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
JUDICIARY 
April 19, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am Policy Director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I submit this 
testimony in favor of LD 609. 
This bill would require jails and prisons to provide people in their custody 
with access to free phone calls to their lawyers during business hours. Doing so 
would support the constitutional right to an attorney protected by the Sixth 
Amendment. Attorney-client confidentiality is a crucial part of the right to counsel. 
Unfortunately, several jails throughout Maine have violated this right over the past 
few years. The Maine Monitor discovered that “[f] our jails recorded nearly 1,000 
attorney-client calls in a single year and shared recordings with police and 
prosecutors before trial.”1 Defense lawyers were often “not told when their calls are 
recorded and agencies lack rules about what to do once law enforcement and 
prosecutors eavesdrop on jailed suspects ’ calls to their attorneys ”? 
While this bill does not address systems or procedures to ensure 
confidentiality, it does address the ability of incarcerated individuals to access their 
attorneys, regardless of how much money they make. No one should be denied 
contact to their attorneys because their attorney does not or cannot accept a collect 
call.3 
1 Samantha Hogan, Eavesdropping in Maine Jails, Maine Monitor, available at 
https://www.themainemonitor.org/eavesdropping-in-maine-jails/ 
2 Id.
Although this bill is specifically aimed at providing free calls to attorneys, we would 
be remiss if we did not recommend to the committee that it also consider making 
phone calls between incarcerated defendants and their families available without 
cost. Connecticut did this in 2021, connecting families with their loved ones and 
making it more likely that people have successful reentries into their communities 
when they finish their sentences. Maine should follow this path. 
Experts estimate that nationwide, the families of incarcerated people pay 
nearly $3 billion every single year on the hidden costs of incarceration.4 There are 
commissary costs, costs associated with visitation, legal costs, sometimes the cost of 
housing a person, and of course, costs for phone calls and text messages. A short 
prison phone call in Maine costs an average $5 for 15 minutes. The minimum wage 
in Maine is $12.15, so that a person working minimum wage must work for almost 
twice as long as the phone call itself to pay for it. 
The people who bear these costs are often the ones least likely able to do so. 
People from poorer backgrounds are more likely to be imprisoned.5 A recent study 
from the Muskie School found that between 2015 and 2020, there were 2,134 
parents incarcerated in Maine’s prisons, and 3,403 children with parents in prison.6 
These children bear the cost of prison phone calls. And, because Black people are 
disproportionately likely to be incarcerated, it is their children who beara 
disproportionate burden. There is an enormous gender disparity as well: of people 
who pay to stay in touch with family members, 87% are women.7 The cost of calls 
and visitation are the top barriers for families trying to stay in touch during 
incarceration.8 
We urge you to vote ought to pass. 
4 See Nicole Lewis & Beatrix Lockwood, The hidden cost of incarceration, The 
Marshall Project, Dec. 17, 2019, available at 
https://www.themarshallproject.org/20 1 9/ 12/ 1 7/the-hidden-cost-of-incarceration. 
5 See Adam Looney & Nicholas Turner, Work and opportunity before and after 
incarceration, Brookings Institution, Mar. 14, 2018, available at 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/work-and-opportunity-before-and-after- 
incarceration/. 
6 Jillian Foley, Erica King & Case Benner, Breaking the Cycle Interrupting 
Generational Incarceration in Maine, Cutler Institute Muskie School of Public 
Service, Nov. 2020, available at https://placemattersmaine.org/wp; 
content/uploads/2021/01/BreakingtheCvcle.pdf. 
7 Saneta DeVuono-Powell, et al., Who Pays? The True Cost of Incarceration on 
Families, Ella Baker Center 2015, available at http://whopavsreport.0rg/who-pays- 
fu1l-report/ . 
8 Id.
