 1  
Charles Skold 
59 State Street, Apt. 67  
Portland, ME 04101 
 Phone: (207) 329-3838 
Charles.Skold@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 
 
April 12, 2023  
 
Testimony of Rep. Charles Skold presenting  
LD 605 - An Act to Enhance Commuter-oriented Rail Service 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, I am Charles Skold, representing part of Portland in House 
District 119. I am honored to be here to present LD 605, An Act to Enhance Commuter-oriented 
Rail Service. 
 
Passenger rail has a long history in our state. From 1842 to the late 1960’s, the people and 
commerce of our state benefited from 125 years of regular services connecting Portland to places 
like Boston and New York, to Lewiston and Montreal, to Waterville and Bangor, and more. And 
for the last twenty years, our state has benefited tremendously by the revival of daily service to 
Boston and back on the Downeaster.  
 
Even though passenger rail service doesn’t currently operate in most of the places it once did in 
Maine, our history of passenger rail is evident because the tracks are still there. We drive over 
these tracks in our cars, or see them alongside a walking path, or hear the freight trains at night 
that still use some of these tracks to ship Maine’s great products all over the country. Some of 
these tracks are owned by private companies, and some have been wisely purchased over the 
years by the State. The tracks are still there, and this great history of passenger rail can still 
become our great future. 
 
My hope, and the hope of many advocates here today and people all around the State, is that we 
can put ourselves back on track for passenger rail in Maine. Yes, for inter-state travel, but also 
for travel within the state, and also for commuter-oriented service in our metro areas.  
 
This bill aims to evaluate one of the many puzzle pieces that will in the hopefully near future all 
fit together for a full revival of passenger rail in Maine: liability insurance. Maine’s current 
statue requires passenger rail operators to hold liability insurance policies of no less than $75 
million annually. The question, is does that still make sense in today’s insurance markets? Would 
a $75 million policy be cost-prohibitive to a small operator looking to establish passenger service 
on a section of Maine-owned railroad? Is a $75 million policy the right level of insurance for the 

 2 extremely rare instances of personal injury and property damage that might result from smaller 
and slower passenger rail services? If subsidized by the State, is a $75 million policy a wise 
stewarding of taxpayer money? 
 
This bill, as amended, directs the Department of Transportation to investigate passenger rail 
liability insurance, report findings, and propose legislation regarding the following:  
 
1. Whether Maine’s liability insurance requirement presents a barrier-to-entry for passenger 
rail operators 
2. Whether Maine’s liability insurance requirement is an outlier compared to other states 
3. What liability insurance is required for other common carriers like bus and ferry  
4. Alternative methos for passenger rail liability insurance that Maine can consider 
5. Whether those alternative methods could lead to an expansion of passenger rail in Maine. 
 
As I was working with colleagues on various excellent and necessary proposals to support and 
expand passenger rail in our state, I learned of a passenger rail operator who is currently 
attempting to revive passenger service between Brunswick and Rockland, but has identified this 
issue of liability insurance as a costly barrier. I want their efforts to be successful, and I also want 
that success to inspire other passenger rail operators to establish service between Portland and 
Westbrook, or Lewiston, or Bangor. I don’t want any of these potential operators to decline to 
establish service based on a mandated liability insurance level, if we are not absolutely sure as a 
State that it’s the right level or that there are no other ways of providing it. 
 
Although passenger rail is proven to be much safer than cars and other modes of transportation, 
liability insurance in the case of accident is nonetheless an important piece of the puzzle. The 
question we need to ask, is does a blanket requirement at a cost-prohibitive level regardless of 
factors like size, speed, and density make sense? It would benefit the people of this State and all 
these potential passenger rail developments for the Department of Transportation to study this 
issue and propose a way forward so that the high costs of liability insurance don’t prevent us 
from getting back on track towards a future of passenger rail service in Maine. 
 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
  
 3 LD 605 
Proposed Amendment by Charles Skold 
 
LD 605, An Act to Enhance Commuter-oriented Rail Service  
 
Amend the bill by striking out everything after the title and before the summary and replacing 
with the following: 
 
Sec. 1. Department of Transportation to convene study group to examine passenger rail 
liability insurance.  Resolved: That the Department of Transportation shall convene a study 
group including members representing the department and other interested parties to examine the 
following: 
 
1. The degree to which current statute requiring liability insurance policy of not less than 
$75,000,000 per occurrence annually and $75,000,000 in the aggregate annually (Title 
23, Chapter 621, §8012) presents a barrier for Class III short-line railroads and other passenger 
rail operators from operating passenger rail in the State of Maine; 
 
2. The degree to which Maine is an outlier regarding passenger rail liability limitation in 
comparison to other States, and alternative methods of requiring and providing for 
liability insurance for passenger rail in other States; 
 
3. The requirements and methods of providing for liability insurance in the State of Maine for 
other common carriers including bus and ferry; and 
 
4. The feasibility of alternative methods of requiring and providing for liability insurance for 
passenger rail in the State of Maine including lowering the passenger rail liability 
limitation in all or some cases, adopting and regulating an Owner Controlled Insurance 
Program, establishing a Passenger Rail Insurance Program at the Department of 
Transportation to provide insurance to passenger rail operators in the State of Maine, and 
any other alternative method the Department of Transportation wishes to include; 
 
5. The potential for the above alternative methods to increase the number of passenger rail 
operators in the State, expand passenger rail service in the State, and increase passenger 
rail ridership in the State. 
 
Sec. 2. Report.  Resolved: No later than February 1, 2024, the department shall submit a report 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation that includes its findings and any 
recommendations, including suggested legislation, regarding passenger rail liability insurance 
and related matters. 
 
