Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/11/2023  
               1 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
To:   Maine Legislature Transportation Committee  
From:   Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
Tony Donovan, Director  
Date:    April 11, 2023  
Re: In support of Bills to Expand Passenger Train services in Maine  
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and members of the Transportation Committee,  
 
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the Maine Rail 
Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) lobbies for f ederal, state 
and local policies that promote equitable funding of transit services for all. MRTC’s vision is a 
comprehensive transit design connecting passenger rail service with local transit systems to 
promote economic and environmental sustainability.    
 
The MRTC is here in to spea k in support of and to assist  the Committee, others  in the 
Maine State legislature , and those in the Department  of Transportation in 
understanding passenger train transportation and how all the following bills are 
valuable  to the residents , economy and environment of the State of Maine  
 
As follows : 
 
---- LD 860 An Act to Identify the Railroad Lines from Portland to Bangor as a Major Corrido r 
and to Fund a Feasibility Study  & LD 880/ Directing the Department of Transportation to Initiate 
a Service Development Plan for Commuter and Passenger Train Service Between Portland and 
the Lewiston and Auburn Area   
Recent  past legislatures have regularly  supported passenger train and rail bills.  Back in 2005 the 
legislature  passed a bill to fund passenger rail.  That direct ly led to the bill to shift the tax on 
rental cars from the general fund to fund pas senger train expansion.  In fact,  that now  funds more 
than 50% of the entire multi -modal fund. In 2014 the legislature  created the Passenger rail 
advisory council and In  2015 you passed the Transit Corridor District bill a method for towns along 
the rail corridor  to establish d istricts to take advantage of passenger rail benefits to their towns.  
In 2017, 2019 and 2021 we passed bills to evaluate  passenger service plans to Lewiston, Aubu rn, 
Bangor and Montreal.   
LD 860 recognizes this demand for expansion of passenger rail.  Based on the success of the 
Downeaster  service for towns from Wells to Brunswick, the towns of western, central,  and 
eastern  Maine want rail.   LD 860 goes beyond general analysis  reports of ridership and potential 
economic impacts .  LD 860 recognizes the demand and will provide  the details for a Service 
Development Plan to these inland cities.  The state rail authority  recently applied for f ederal 
funding for a new program , part of the  Bipartisan Infrastructure  Law, to identify the rail service 
to beyond Brunswick to Rockland as a priority corridor.  No ridership or economic impact was 
required.  
Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/11/2023  
               2 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
LD 860 directs the state rail authority  to do the same  for the inland cities of the state.  The bill is 
specific to where the tarin station towns will be,  what the operation could be and brings the new 
owner of the Mainline railroad to the table, just as the State has done with the previous owner.  
With federal  funding in reach.  With the demand higher than ever.  With a new owner to partner 
with in extending this service.  Now is the time to support passenger train service to Bangor.   
---------  LD 1170  Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters  
That there are as many as a dozen bills this session is a message in itself.  Maine residents  like 
passenger trains  and they want more.  LD 1170 is the residents south  of Portland benefiting from 
the Amtrack service and now looking for it to grow  and better serve the commuting needs of 
towns along that corridor.  This is not a bill for ne w service.  It is a bill to determine if we can, in 
a public manner, make the service better.  Support LD 1170 as it is one more example of the value 
of railroad transportation to those wanting equitable  and good access.  
--------  LD 862 to Move Jurisdiction over Railroad Lines from the Department of Transportation 
to an Independent Rail Authority  
A similar  bill was introduced  last year.  Maine residents , business  and decision -makers want a 
better stewardship of the more than 400 miles of state -owned railroads.  I will admit to my 
concerns that the current MeDOT State Rail Plan references  rails to trails more than using the 
rails for trains.  Maybe it is not a new agency we need so much as a new resource in MeDOT to 
oversee the railroads.  The DOT just hired a young staffer to oversee the State  Active 
Transpor tation Plan  who knows Smart Growth alternative  transportation.   Maine could do well 
in hiring a nother person versed in Smart  Growth alternative  transportation, with expertise in 
multi -modal transportation, including  how a passenger train services works for sustainability .  I 
support funding resource for new position in MeDOT rather than a new state agency .   
---- LD 861  An Act to Identi fy the Canadian Pacific Railway Railroad Lines from Hermon Station 
Through Brownville and Jackman to Quebec and Montreal as a Major Corridor and to Fund a 
Feasibility Study  
The Transportation Committee is considering a bill LD  754 to directing the Maine -Canadian 
Legislative Advisory Commission and the New England an d Eastern Canada Legislative 
Commission to Examine Restoring Passenger Rail from Boston to Montreal. " 
Again,  we see the demand for passenger train serv ice to M ontreal – something that has been in 
demand by 80% of  Maine  residents  for decades.  Lets be certain that LD 754 is passed and that 
this route to Canada  is included  in the discussions with our Canadian  neighbors to the north  
Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/11/2023  
               3 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
----- LD 8 42. to Strengthen the Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority by Inviting 
Participation on the Board of Directors by and Negotiating for Funding from the State of New 
Hampshire and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts  
The Maine State Rail Plan advisory committee, along with almost anyone who cares about the 
Amtrak Downeaster  operation is aware that, although  we serve 3 train station communities  in 
NH, including  their own state  university, and 2 more in Mass achusetts, Maine funds the service 
ourselves , along with federal  funding.  Although it might challenge jurisdictions , this bill has the 
right idea in that if Maine wants NH and Mass to contribute to these operations, then they  should 
be invited to sit on the Board of Directors .  They need not have a vote.  But they will have a voice, 
and they will hear what Maine passenger rail authority that makes  train service so beneficial  to 
their residents .  That should  position  the State  of Maine to ask that those states contribute in 
some manner to the public  costs of this service .   I SUPPORT LD  842 AND FOR THE RAIL authority 
may invite the State of New  Hampshire and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to appoint a 
person each to serve as NON -VOTING MEMBERS  on the board.  
-----LD  605 An Act to Enhance Commuter -Oriented Rail Service  
One of the most important  aspects in the success of expanding passenger train  service will be 
the involvement  of the private sector .  Maine should be doing our best to remove or reduce 
barriers to entry into this marke t.  One thing we could do is invest in Maine railroads assets.  
Another  way is to help the private business  overco me hurtles.  The State  of Maine is current ly 
cooperating in a pilot project with the Fingerlakes RR for a passenger train service on the State 
Rockland Branch .  Last week we learned that the rail operator has overcome many federal , state 
and lo cal hurdles  except one. Maine Law Title 23 sec  §8012. Passenger rail liability limitation requires  
policy limits of not less than $75,000,000 .  In other states and other operations  make access for a private 
passenger train operator to afford insurance  easier.  Maine should investigate  this.  MRTC is aware of at 
least two other  private with interests in operating on railroads in Maine .  
 
I’d be happy to answer any questions.  
-- 
Anthony J. Donovan,  Director  
Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
84 Middle St.   Portland, Me. 04101  
(207) 329 -6732 Mobile  
Mailto:  MElikesRail@Gmail.com  
  
Train Time  
 
Tony Donovan 
Maine Rail Transit Coalition 
LD 605
The attached is testimony on multiple bills heard today
