Written Testimony on 
L.D. 962, “An Act to Lower the Amount of Seized Cur rency in a Criminal Asset 
Forfeiture over Which the Currency May Be Transferr ed to the Federal 
Government” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Judiciary Committee 
Tuesday, March 21, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distingu ished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
 
I am submitting testimony in support of the passage  of LD 962, “An Act to Lower 
the Amount of Seized Currency in a Criminal Asset F orfeiture over Which the 
Currency May Be Transferred to the Federal Governme nt”.   
The current law that established a $100,000 thresho ld effectively thwarted 
participation in the Federal Asset Sharing Program,  and severely impacted 
partnerships between federal and local law enforcem ent partners when it 
came to coordination of efforts to tackle drug dist ribution. 
Unlike southern Maine, my area and north are not co nsidered a High Intensity 
Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA).  With a HIDTA design ation comes federal 
resources to include paid task federal task force p ositions.  To place an officer 
on a federal task force here we have to foot the bi ll and vacate the position at 
the police department.  We had an officer assigned to the DEA task force out of 
Bangor for close to 10 years, and he worked many su ccessful cases that were 
far reaching.  Cases that started in Maine and led to Florida, Alaska, and Costa 
Rica.  We relied on the Federal Asset Forfeiture pr ogram to backfill his position, 
which took about 3 years before being able to do so .  We have first hand 
experience with the program, how difficult it is to  get a forfeiture, how stringent 
the rules are, and the oversight of the Asset Forfe iture Management Staff with 
annual reports and audits.   
We must recognize the illicit drug consumption is a  money-making venture, one 
that organized crime is the profiteer.  The Mexican  Cartels control every major 
distribution hub in the United States with no other  criminal organization posed to 
challenge their dominance.  All of the fentanyl, me thamphetamine, and 
cocaine that we have here in our state came from th e distribution of the 
Mexican Cartels, which has an identified presence i n New England states.  From 
there it goes to other levels of organized crime, g angs, and is further distributed 
at the street level.   
We are seeing wholesale quantity seizures of fentan yl and methamphetamine 
by patrol officers in my area.  Pounds and kilogram s are readily available, this is 
a significant change from years past. 
Our demand is at an all time high, as illustrated b y record numbers of overdoses 
and overdose deaths.   
Supply sources, gangs, are now coming to my area to  distribute drugs to meet 
the demand.  A stark contrast from years past when our consumers travelled to 
Massachusetts to procure drugs for use and sale.  T hese gang members come 
from New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.  Gun  involvements and 
violence are becoming more common place.  The under lying reason is because 
its about money, making money.  Criminal organizati ons profit while our citizenry 
suffers. 
The resources available to local law enforcement al low us to disrupt drug 
trafficking rings, at best.  It is the federal role  to work beyond jurisdictional 
boundaries and have the resources to work cases tha t sometimes take years to 
effectively dismantle a criminal enterprise.  It is  imperative that all levels have 
some interoperability.  The Federal Asset Forfeitur e Program is the incentive to do 
just that, and is a much-needed tool, especially no w.  Its mission is to use asset 
forfeiture as a tool in order to deter, disrupt, an d dismantle criminal enterprises 
by depriving criminals of the instruments of illici t activity. 
The current federal threshold for seizure is $10,00 0.  It requires a nexus to criminal 
activity, an adoption by a federal law enforcement partner, review by a US 
Attorney, and court proceedings in Federal Court.  Once assets are forfeited to 
an agency, the agency must file a detailed annual r eport and are routinely 
audited.  If you would like to see the extensive ma nual on this program and its 
oversight I can provide it to you. 
I respectfully ask for your support on this bill to  give law enforcement a much-
needed tool to combat organized crime here in Maine . 
