 
   
May 9 , 2023  
Testimony in Support of LD 1776:   
An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection (MDEP) 
and Department of Marine Resources (MDMR) Actions and Rulemaking 
Comments Submitted by Albert M. Manville, Ph.D., C.W.B. 
 
Dear Sen. Reny, Rep. Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine Resources,  
 
My name is Dr. Albert M. Manville.  I am a Ph.D. Certified Wildlife Biologist/CWB by The 
Wildlife Society; a Senior Lecturer and Adjunct Wildlife Professor for the Advanced Academic 
Programs, Johns Hopkins Univ. (23 yrs), a retired Supervisory and Senior Wildlife Biologist for 
the Division of Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (17 yrs); and a retired 
seasonal Park Ranger Naturalist for the National Park Service (~2 yrs).  Additionally, I’ve 
worked for NGOs including Defenders of Wildlife, the Adirondack Mountain Club, the 
Endangered Species Coalition, and the Boone and Crockett Club, among others, for more than 
19 years. I’ve published nearly 190 popular and technical, peer-reviewed scientific publications, 
book reviews, and chapters on wildlife conservation.  I am a full-time Maine resident.    
For the following reasons, I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1776, An Act to Allow 
Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and Department of Marine 
Resources Actions and Rulemaking. 
 
1) In my roles as a wildlife NGO and a Federal wildlife biologist, I have been involved in 
numerous aspects of citizen oversight (both as an NGO representative and as a Fed), and 
I have been involved in rulemaking, including drafting and seeking public input/comment 
on proposed Federal rules.  Citizen involvement, participation, testimony and comments 
are critical to the process. The same certainly holds true for laws, rules and regulations 
approved by Maine’s State Legislature, signed by the Governor, and interpreted and 
implemented by MDEP and MDMR. 
2) Citizen involvement — including by expert witnesses — can be critical to the evaluation 
of scientifically valid information designed to form the basis for laws designed to protect 
human health and the environment.  Such involvement also allows citizens to present 
evidence to administrative agency examiners and to courts where the Administrative 
Procedures Act is being applied. 
3) Another problem LD 1776 would help to solve is the lack of agency resources, delays, 
and under some administrations, the lack of political will to enforce the laws written by 
the State Legislature. 
4) To make this bill effective there is one essential amendment. That amendment would 
avoid the possibility that a response denying the request would preempt or prevent citizen 
action or participation, thus defeating the purpose of the bill.  In the last sentence of 
paragraph 2 of LD 1776, insert after “not responded to the petition” the phrase “so as to 
grant the petitioner’s request or to begin a proceeding that may do so.” 
 
  
Respectfully submitted. 
 
Dr. Albert M. Manville 
Greenville Junction 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Albert Manville
Greenville Junction, ME
LD 1776
May 9, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1776:  
An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection 
(MDEP) and Department of Marine Resources (MDMR) Actions and Rulemaking
Comments Submitted by Albert M. Manville, Ph.D., C.W.B.
Dear Sen. Reny, Rep. Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine Resources, 
My name is Dr. Albert M. Manville.  I am a Ph.D. Certified Wildlife Biologist/CWB 
by The Wildlife Society; a Senior Lecturer and Adjunct Wildlife Professor for the 
Advanced Academic Programs, Johns Hopkins Univ. (23 yrs), a retired Supervisory 
and Senior Wildlife Biologist for the Division of Migratory Bird Management, U.S. 
Fish & Wildlife Service (17 yrs); and a retired seasonal Park Ranger Naturalist for the
National Park Service (~2 yrs).  Additionally, I’ve worked for NGOs including 
Defenders of Wildlife, the Adirondack Mountain Club, the Endangered Species 
Coalition, and the Boone and Crockett Club, among others, for more than 19 years. 
I’ve published nearly 190 popular and technical, peer-reviewed scientific 
publications, book reviews, and chapters on wildlife conservation.  I am a full-time 
Maine resident.   
For the following reasons, I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 1776, An Act to 
Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and Department 
of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking.
In my roles as a wildlife NGO and a Federal wildlife biologist, I have been involved 
in numerous aspects of citizen oversight (both as an NGO representative and as a 
Fed), and I have been involved in rulemaking, including drafting and seeking public 
input/comment on proposed Federal rules.  Citizen involvement, participation, 
testimony and comments are critical to the process. The same certainly holds true for 
laws, rules and regulations approved by Maine’s State Legislature, signed by the 
Governor, and interpreted and implemented by MDEP and MDMR.
Citizen involvement — including by expert witnesses — can be critical to the 
evaluation of scientifically valid information designed to form the basis for laws 
designed to protect human health and the environment.  Such involvement also allows
citizens to present evidence to administrative agency examiners and to courts where 
the Administrative Procedures Act is being applied.
Another problem LD 1776 would help to solve is the lack of agency resources, 
delays, and under some administrations, the lack of political will to enforce the laws 
written by the State Legislature.
To make this bill effective there is one essential amendment. That amendment would 
avoid the possibility that a response denying the request would preempt or prevent 
citizen action or participation, thus defeating the purpose of the bill.  In the last 
sentence of paragraph 2 of LD 1776, insert after “not responded to the petition” the 
phrase “so as to grant the petitioner’s request or to begin a proceeding that may do 
so.”
Respectfully submitted.
Dr. Albert M. Manville
Greenville Junction
