 
 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources  
in opposition   
LD 1776 , An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and Department 
of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking  
 
May 11, 2023 
Nicholas Branchina, Director, Fisheries & Aquaculture  Program  
Nick.Branchina@ceimaine.org  
 
Senator Reny , Representat ive Hepler, and Distinguished Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Nick Branchina,  and I reside in  Kennebunk . I am Director of the Fisheries & Aquaculture 
Program at Coastal Enterprises , Inc. (CEI), a private, non -profit Community Development Corporation 
(CDC) and Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick . I am submitting 
testimony  in opposition  to LD 1776 , An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental 
Protection and Department of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking, on behalf of CEI . 
 
Founded in 1977 to develop job -creating natur al resource -based  business es, CEI  work s to build a just, 
vibrant, and climate -resilient future for people and communities in Maine and other rural regions. We 
do this by integrating finance, business expertise and policy solutions to  make the economy work more 
equitably  for everyone. CEI  has a 46-year track record of supporting Maine’s commercial fishing and 
aquaculture  businesses . We do  this by providing business services including free business counseling 
and technical assistance, and by making loans and investments in those marine businesses wishing to 
start or expand . Since the 19 70s our total portfolio of loans to this sector has grown to over $18 million . 
These loans have sustain ed or created over 2,200 jobs  in Maine.   
 
CEI strongly supports  Maine fisheries – wild -catch and aquaculture . As written , LD 1776 presents an 
unnecessary  and counterprodu ctive threat, that is a disservice to the controlled development of  
responsible aquaculture  in Maine  waters  that is a key state economic  development strateg y/object ive. 
We support  the concerted effort that the Maine  aquaculture industry  has undertaken to find 
constructive , evidence -based  solutions  for address ing public concerns while fostering  the growth and 
inno vation of Maine aquaculture businesses .  
 
For this reason, and  concerns that are highlighted below , we are opposing this bill . In addition to being 
an inefficient us e of time and resources, there is great potential for unintended consequences , which 
could have very negative effects on Maine ’s aquaculture an d seafood industry , as well as other  
sustaina ble businesses.  Our concer ns mirror  those of the Maine Aquacul ture A ssociation , wh ose mission 
is to  support  Maine’s aquatic growers to develop  economically and environmentally sustainable 
business practices, preserv e Maine’s heritage of a vibrant working waterfront , and promot e healthful, 
locally grown  food . 
 
Concerns about the bill’s approach  are as follows : 
• LD 1776  is dangerously  broad in scope  and circumvents existing legislative oversi ght. While public 
oversight is the essence of democratic governance,  this bill provides standing to any one to exercise  
unrestricted oversight  of agency actions and rulemaking  as well as the state attorney general ’s office ’s 
jurisdiction  over natural resource management , prote ction, and conservation ; the environment ; 
public health; and information access . By creating a direct mechanism for citizen oversight and  
 
creating a parallel process  that is subsidized to duplicate  the authority  already delegated  to state 
government , LD 1776  interfere s with  agencies ’ ability to  apply  their  scientific expertise in  service to 
the cultural and nat ural resources they manage that are held in common  protect  the public trust, 
public health, and the environment  sharing . It could allow the subsidized appeal of a residential 
development, the construction of a research laboratory or the issuance of a lobster or commercial 
fishing license , and  effectively paralyze the state government by a series of endless petitions and 
appeals . 
• LD 1776 is not a  cost -efficient  or pragmatic solution to resource management . It assumes that the 
legislature is not doing its job in overseeing the executive branch and that Maine ’s state agencies are 
not fulfilling their responsibility  to the public or to the resources they have been  entrusted to protect.  
There is currently  nothing in statute or rule that prevent s a plaintiff from filing a complaint or a lawsuit 
against a state agency . Permit ting and  rulemaking procedures already  contain very clear protocols for  
appeal . These are the c hecks and balances that are n ecessary  to ensure th at any state agencies are 
carrying out official responsibilit ies. If enacted, the pro posed process for public oversight of these 
public agencies will undermine and in effect  privatize existing governmental  process .   
• Small business owners can least afford to defen d their livelihoods from potentially  frivolous 
lawsuits  or absorb  the added expense or dela y of a lawsuit , lease or permit  they desperately need  
to operate  sustainably . LD 1776 create s a publicly subsidized financial incentive for plaintiffs  to 
contest agency permit ting and rulemaking . This could  lead to  protracted litigation , resulting in 
unnecessary costs to  taxpayers and. Many interest  groups create fu nds to support their advocacy , 
including lawsuits . Creating such a fund as proposed in section 8 of the bill with public resources  is 
unnecessary an d will, in essence, force permit applicants  to fund pro ceedings against them and the 
state overseers by compet itors and industry  opponents . This is  likely to give rise t o a legal appeal s 
industry , which will damag e the business community’s ability to raise financing because of  regulatory 
uncertainty . 
 CEI is invest ing in aquaculture for  economic and cultural reasons . Aquaculture  is a pro mising sector  that 
provides  a significant source  for diversification of the economic base of Maine’s marine economy . It has 
co-existed successfully  with other marine activities for decades . If implemented , LD 1776 could result in 
costly , unnecessary hurdles for an industry that already operat es in a well- regulated environment  and is 
intentionally  managed  to minimize ecosystem  impact s, protect natural habitat s and the interests of 
other harvesters who are  sharing Maine  waters.  This is a fragile time for Maine ’s natural fisheries 
resources . The State should  support  the growth of a sector that provides  alternati ve or additional 
needed income  for Mainers who make their living on the water.  We respectfully urge you to vote  
Ought -not-to-Pass  on LD 1776 .Thank you for considering this  testimon y.  
