Antonio Blasi
Hancock
LD 1776
LD 1776 Ought to Pass.  The provisions in this bill are needed to turn the tide of lax 
or neglected regulation enforcement that  Maine has seen over the years.  I will 
attempt to summarize those I have collected. 
Not one AG in 20 years did their legal job in studying the monopolization of our 
water.  Upon enactment, the AG would be notified of any suit against an agency and 
s/he could intervene or would probably automatically be the attorney for the 
defendant agency. 
The DEP denied a public hearing on the wastewater discharge permit application on 
Frenchman Bay by American Aquafarms in 2021.
The Quietside Journal reported on the Cooke Aquafarm fish die off and Cutler permit 
oversight on December 18, 2021:  Except this is Maine where enforcement is, well, 
not the highest priority.
It was a sketchy plan from the start where the state played the role of licensor and 
licensee. It called for the DMR to lease the acres of water needed and then give itself 
a permit. Cooke would have managed the herding of the salmon up the river. With the
Cutler project canceled, Cooke is now out of the penalty box.
QSJ has reported other soft stances on enforcement by the DMR.
On Nov. 27 QSJ unveiled emails of a high ranking DMR official who decided not to 
pursue underwater videos of the die-off of 116,000 salmon at Cooke’s Black Island 
fish farm last summer so that DMR wouldn’t have to investigate it further.
Marcy Nelson, chief of aquaculture at DMR, wrote, “Cooke is not collecting videos 
for us at this time. Although we have the authority to ask for videos, there was 
concern in the past about it being contrary to the MEPDES permit should we start 
collecting that information and potentially having to then take action.”
In other words, DMR would rather not know about potential violations because it 
might have to do its job.
QSJ recently obtained another email showing the DMR commissioner out of the loop 
for almost 10 days after the massive die-off. It wasn’t until the manager of the boat 
assigned to clean up the dead fish alerted Patrick Keliher on Aug. 23 did he learn of 
the news. The following is a scan of the actual email exchange.
“DMR has a huge void in its leadership,” said Crystal Canney, executive director of 
Protect Maine's Fishing Heritage Foundation. “DMR was about to approve its own 
lease for salmon net pen aquaculture. Thankfully, the town of Cutler stopped it. This 
is a significant problem for the state. It's time for the Governor to take a hard look at 
industrial scale aquaculture leases like the one proposed for Frenchman Bay. How 
could a project of that scale possibly be handled by DMR leadership if the 
commissioner couldn’t even handle a 4-acre salmon aquaculture restoration project?”
The state certainly postured as a tough hombre when it announced in 2019 that staff 
inspections at multiple Cooke facilities found Cooke violated the terms of its permit. 
It then imposed the stocking of wild salmon at Cutler by Cooke as a disciplinary 
action.
Except that DMR did virtually no advance work at this fishing village (population 
505) at the head of the Machias River to make sure things were copacetic.
Indeed they were not. Cutler residents had concerns about the impact on its incumbent
fisheries, navigation, aesthetics and jurisdictional authority. Cutler administrator 
Teresa Bragg said despite multiple overtures, the DMR was not responsive.
The Jan. 22, 2009 Sears Island conservation easement names the Maine Department 
of Environmental Protection as the "third party enforcer" for the terms and conditions 
of the easement. This is an unlawful conflict of interest. The Maine DEP and the 
easement Grantor, the Maine DOT, are both
executive branch agencies whose Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the 
Governor. The Third Party Enforcer, by definition, must be a party that is completely 
independent from the Executive Branch of the State of Maine - not an integral part of 
it. 
More of the same case: Grounds For Relief being Sought 
23. Mr. Huber seeks relief for the failure of the Maine DOT to "evaluate the full range
of reasonable 
transportation strategies to address the transportation need"; to "identify and develop 
strategies that are 
context sensitive and minimize adverse effects to environmental quality"; to conduct a
"strategy 
evaluation process" and to fulfill other requirements of the Sensible Transportation 
Policy Act and its 
rules prior to executing the conservation easement on January 22, 2009. 
24. Mr Huber seeks relief from the un-Constitutional exercise of PL 277 which gives 
the Joint
Committee on Transportation executive powers to approve or disapprove Sears 
Island-related land use, 
ownership or jurisdiction decisions, in violation of the separation of powers outlined 
in Sections 1 and 
2 of the Maine Constitution's Article III: Distribution of Powers. PL 277 is also 
inconsistent with 
statutory authority given legislative joint committees in MRSA 3 §165. Joint 
committees, authority. 
25. Mr. Huber seeks relief for the failure of MDEP to require MDOT to apply for a 
Maine Site 
Location of Development permit for its planned marine transportation 
parcel/cargo/container port prior 
to executing the Jan. 22, 2009 conservation easement that is a necessary precondition 
for this port. 
26. MDEP's signing of the conservation easement and assumption of third party 
enforcer status is itself 
a final agency action pursuant to 5 MRSA §8002 ¶4. The agency decision itself fails 
to meet MDEP's own standards of the Site Location of Development Act which call 
for a "" in large development planning. 
Maine's site law clearly states that MDOT must have this permit prior to making an 
"offer for sale or lease or cause to be sold or leased any development of state or 
regional significance that may 
substantially affect the environment without first having obtained approval for this 
construction, operation, lease or sale from the department." Governor Baldacci's 
executive order of Jan. 22, 2009 
states that upon execution of this conservation easement the MDOT is required to 
"actively and aggressively work with the Maine Port Authority and other interested 
parties to initiate the process of 
marketing and development of a cargo/container port on Mack Point and Sears Island 
in accordance with the Agreement including initiating a request for proposals for a 
cargo/container port facility." This 
language clearly shows that, upon execution of the easement, the MDOT is to initiate 
efforts to offer for sale or lease or development the 300 acre "transportation parcel" at 
Sears Island for a major cargo/container port and facility. This marketing activity by 
MDOT requires a permit under the Site 
Law, due to the size, scope and statewide and regional significance of the planned 
port facility. 
27. Mr. Huber seeks relief for the failure of MDOT to appoint an Third Party Enforcer
for the easement that is actually independent. 
Demand for Relief 
 28. Mr. Huber asks this Court to find Public Law Chapter 277 An Act Regarding the 
Management and Use of Sears Island to be an unconstitutional delegation of 
Executive Branch land use decisionmaking power to the Maine Legislature's Joint 
Committee on Transportation, in violation of Sections 1 
and 2 of the Maine Constitution's Article III Distribution of Powers, and of MRSA 3 
§165 Joint Committees, Authority, and declare all decisions made pursuant to its 
exercise by the Joint Committee 
on Transportation and Maine DOT invalid. 
29. Mr. Huber asks this Court to rescind the Jan. 22, 2009 conservation easement until
the MDOT has fully complied with the requirements of the Maine Sensible 
Transportation Policy Act and the Maine Site Location of Development Law. 
The following LNG in Maine-related documents were obtained from Governor 
Baldacci and his agency heads via the Maine Freedom of Access Law. They illustrate 
the behind-the-scenes maneuvering as the energy industry tries to push LNG 
terminals onto the Maine Coast,to try to bring liquid natural gas to the Maine coast). 
* FOA documents requested from Governor Baldacci June 25, 2004 to September 29, 
2004. Click Here
* FOA documents from Governor Baldacci April - June 2004. Click Here
* FOA documents from Jack Cashman Commissioner, DECD, January 1st to March 
2004 Click Here
* FOA documents from Governor Baldacci, Oct 3 '03 to March 3 2004 Click Here
Commentary: Maine should demand accountability from
its solid waste monopolistd--Senator Rick Bennet
pressherald.com/2023/03/09/commentary-maine-should-demand-accountability-from-
its-solid-waste-monopolist/
There have been several alarming stories in recent days about how Juniper Ridge 
Landfill, owned by the state and managed by Casella Waste Systems, is refusing to 
accept sludge from several wastewater treatment facilities, putting our municipalities 
in an untenable
situation. The cause, according to Casella, is that the company is no longer allowed to
use bulky waste from out of state to stabilize the landfill. Instead of coming up with 
solutions, Casella has decided to hold our communities hostage in the name of profit.
Maine’s government acted responsibly by enacting L.D. 1911 to stop future
contamination of farmland and drinking water by banning the land application of 
PFAS-laden sludge. We also enacted L.D. 1639 to save limited state-owned landfill 
space for Mainers by halting the disposal of construction debris
from out of state. During the committee hearings on these bills last session – bills that 
Casella claims are responsible for the lack of stability at Juniper Ridge Landfill – I 
repeatedly asked for information from Casella about their
business practices and financials. This is information Maine taxpayers have a right to 
know about the landfill they own. [It was not provided.]
In 2004, Casella entered into a 30-year contract with the state’s General Services 
Administration to operate this landfill. Our right to know did not end with the signing 
of this contract. Policymakers can’t make good decisions if relevant information is 
kept from them. As the consequences of widespread
PFAS contamination have become clearer, the financial underpinnings of our solid 
waste policies have become murkier. Casella refused to provide critical information to
the committee then; the company is no more forthcoming
today.
Are the dramatic rate increases Casella is imposing on municipalities justified? What 
is the actual cost of using alternative bulking materials to ensure landfill stability 
compared to what Casella is paid to take construction and demolition debris from out 
of state? What is a fair rate for Casella to charge municipalities to manage sludge? 
Right now, communities are in a take-it-or-leave-it situation. Casella’s business is 
essentially a public utility, but the Public Utilities Commission does not regulate it 
and it has not volunteered to share financial information the PUC would routinely 
require. Landfill management is complex and important. Casella services around three
dozen sewer
treatment facilities in the state out of the roughly 41 that are licensed to manage 
biosolids.
That puts Casella in a huge position of power over the majority of our wastewater 
treatment facilities here in Maine and across New England. There are no other storage
options for those facilities.
What is happening with our wastewater treatment districts right now shows the 
danger of one company having a monopoly over goods and services. It leaves no 
room for price competition and limits options for customers, in this case Maine 
taxpayers. Without competition, a company has no reason to innovate and look for 
different solutions. 
But there are different solutions. Casella has claimed that the increase in sludge and 
decrease in out-of-state bulky waste has caused instability in the landfill. Yet there are
other readily available options to ensure landfill stability. Still, Casella has no reason 
to look for alternatives when they know that Maine’s wastewater treatment facilities 
have little choice but to kowtow to their demands and increased fees. 
Casella is a billion-dollar corporation. In addition to being paid to manage the 
state-owned Juniper Ridge Landfill, it makes money from multiple landfills it owns 
across the region. It is long past time for the state of Maine to take a good, hard look 
at the iron grip Casella has on our waste options. So far, Casella appears unwilling to 
work together with municipalities and 
the Department of Environmental Protection to find solutions other than increasing 
fees and trying to overturn legislation that protects Mainers’ health and safety. 
Without competition or effective financial oversight, the market doesn’t function as 
intended. 
Mainers deserve better. 
Yes, Senator, we deserve to be able to have standing to protect our environment and 
be reimbursed for legal action when Maine government won't enforce its own rules. 
https://dontwasteme.wordpress.com/juniper-ridge-state-landfill-poisoning-our-land-o
ur-river-and-our-bay/
