 
 
 
May 11th, 2023  
 
Senator Cameron Reny, Senate Chair  
Representativ e Alison He pler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee o n Marine Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in opposition to L .D. 1776 : “An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of 
Environmental Protection and Department of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking”  
 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler and members of the Committee on Marine Resources : 
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce . The 
Chamber is the voice of Maine business, speaking for approximately 5,000 Maine businesses of all sizes 
throughout the State. The Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting written t estimony in opposition  to 
L.D. 1776.  
 
The Chamber is in  strong opposition to L .D.1776 because it would allow any person to anonymously petition 
either department (DMR or DEP) to investigate a violation of the law , or for a rule to be changed. If either 
department, or the Attorney General, does not respond to this anonymous petition, that person may file an 
action in court and be entitled to reimbursement for legal costs. If that isn’t concerning enough, the bill takes a 
step further to establish a fund to pay the legal exp enses, expert witness fees and other costs associated for 
people seeking to enforce a law or enforce or amend a department rule in adjudicatory and legal proceedings 
regarding agency rulemaking and the issuance of licenses and permits.   
 
Legislation to further complicate th e regulatory process in Maine has always been of  concern to the  business 
community  and L.D . 1776  proposes to dramatically change the regulatory structure . The Chamber has 
incredible confidence and trust within  various Department s, and we believe these critical decisions should 
remain in the control of the DEP.  The business co mmunity welcomes a robust regulatory environment that 
provides clear, predictable, consistent decisions from state agencies and the Chamber always advocates for that. 
We already have a rigorous and thorough permitting process in Maine, and anything that ad ds more challenges 
for critical projects to come online is of concern to the business community. Maine is urgently responding to the 
environmental and economic challenges that climate change imposes on all of us . It is important that we have a 
streamlined process so various projects can get permitted and come online as soon as possible.  Additionally, we 
fear the changes proposed in L.D. 1776 would inject more  legal proceedings into the regulatory process – and 
that is  another thing we are strongly  opposed to.   
 
 
 Additionally, more of our concerns stem from the fact t here is an existing process to petition the department for 
a rule making. This new anonymous petition process would duplicate that process.  The anonymous petition er 
does not need to be a resident of Maine, which makes this provision ripe for abuse from out -of-state special 
interest groups and competitors who are seeking to  oppose a permitted activity. L.D. 1776 will have a chilling 
and far -reaching impact on all of Maine’s  important economic sectors . Under this bill, no license or permit 
issued by the State is safe from litigation. We should be  creating legislation to make Maine a state that i s more 
open a nd welcome to investment , as a state that is open for business, and a state that wants businesses to locate 
here and create  jobs here – unfortunately this legislation does not do that.  
 
In closing, L.D. 1776 would be bad for Maine business and for o ur economy . It would create co nfusion and 
more difficulties for t he business  comm unity . We encourage the committee to vote ought not to pass. Tha nk 
you for the opportunity to submit written testimony, and I am happy to bring back any additional information in 
advance of the work session and I will be sure to be available for the work session .  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
