Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1776 
 
“An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of 
Environmental Protection and Department of Marine 
Resources Actions and Rulemaking ” 
 
May 11, 2023 
 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler  and members of the Committee on Marine 
Resources , I am Patrick Strauch of Exeter, Maine, and the Executive Director of the 
Maine Forest Products Council (MFPC). I am submitting testimony today  on behalf of 
the Council in strong opposition to LD 1776, “ An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of 
Department of Environmental Protec tion and Department of Marine Resources Actions 
and Rulemaking.”  
 We aren’t before this committee often, so before I discuss the bill, here’s a little bit of background about the Council. We  are an organization representing more than 300 
member  companies  from all facets of the forest products industry from the stump to the 
mill. Members include paper mills, sawmills, loggers, truckers, foresters, panel manufacturers, biomass and pellet facilities  and secondary wood manufacturers.  We 
also have more than 8 million acres of land owned by dues paying members.    We are in strong opposition to LD 1776 because  it would allow any person to 
anonymously petition either department (DMR or DEP) to investigate a violation of law, or for a rule  to be changed. If either department, or the Attorney General, does not 
respond to this anonymous petition , that person may file an action in court and be 
entitled to reimbursement for legal costs. If that isn’t concerning enough, the bill takes a step fur ther to establish a fund to pay the legal expenses, expert witness fees and other 
costs associated for people seeking to enforce a law or enforce or amend a department rule in adjudicatory and legal proceedings  regarding agency rulemaking and the 
issuance of licenses and permits.  
 We have many concerns with the implications of this legislation, but here are a few issues to consider:  
 1. There is an existing process to petition the department for a rule making. This 
new anonymous petition process would duplicate that process.  
 
2. The anonymous petition er does not need to be a resident of Maine, which makes 
this provision ripe for abuse from out -of-state special interest groups and competitors  who are seeking to 
2 
 oppose a permitted activity . 
 
3. The petitioner may bring an action in court and be granted standing when they would not be qualified to 
do so under current law. This allows any out -of-state entity or person to file court actions when they do 
not have a particularized interest in the matter, or the case is without merit.  
 
4. If the case survives a motion to dismiss, the petitioner would be entitled to legal and witness cos ts, even 
if the case is later found to be without merit.  
 
5. The fund established to cover the legal fees of these anonymous complaints w ould be  funded by entities 
holding discharge licenses  or “engaging in consumptive commercial use of natural resources ”, forcing 
license holders t o fund both the appeal  and defense of valid licenses issued by the State in accordance 
with the law. This provision will have a chilling  and far -reaching  impact  on all of Maine’s heritage 
industries.  
6. Under this bill, no license or permit issued by the State is safe from litigation. Any neighbor, competitor or special interest group would have the ability to block projects and investments in our state.  
Finally, it is unclear what problem this bill is trying to address. The Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection already provides a form on their website to file a complaint if someone believes that a  possible 
violation has occurred, or if they’d like to make a n environmental complaint about direct impacts to protected 
natural resources. The form can be found at www.maine.gov/dep/contact/complaint.html . It is easily found 
through a quick Google search.  
 The Department of Marine Resources has the Maine Marine Patrol, our  oldest law enforcement organization, to 
conduct investigations and enforcement of Maine’s marine resource laws and regulations.   Maine is blessed with plentiful natural resources, and with strong laws and agencies that provide oversight and protections to these resources. There are many ways for Maine citizens to engage in both the lawmaking and rulemaking processes, and avenues for citizens to raise concerns with how these laws and rules are 
implemented. LD 1776 would create significant chaos for both the regulated and regulatory communities .  
 For these reasons, please vote ‘Ought Not to Pass’ on LD 1776. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
