TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Opposition to 
LD 1776 An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and 
Department of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking _ 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Representative Worth 
Date of Hearing: May 11, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner ofthe Department of Marine Resources, andl 
am testifying on behalf of the Department in opposition to LD 1776. 
LD 1776 allows a person to anonymously petition the Department of Envirnomental Protection (DEP), 
the Department of Marine Resources (DMR), or the Attorney General (AG) to enforce a law or rule that 
protects or conserves a natural resource, the environment, public health, or freedom of information, 
including the common law. If either department or the AG does not respond within 60 days, the 
person may bring an action in court, and receive attorney's fees, expert witness fees, and other 
reasonable costs. 
With these changes, LD 1776 removes prosecutorial discretion of these agencies in enforcing their laws 
and rules. Prosecutorial discretion allows agencies with finite resources to make decisions on how to 
proceed in individual cases in light of the facts of the specific case, as well as applicable law. 
While proponents of this legislation may have specific enforcement actions in mind, it is important to 
understand that as drafted, it encompasses all of DMR and DEP's laws and regulations, such thata 
private citizen could require charges to be brought against an individual for any offense. 
ln order to provide the revenue necessary to cover the costs described above, the bill creates a Fund 
for Oversight. An administrator is designated, who has the authority to assess fees (with no upper limit 
identified) on persons licensed or holding a permit from DMR or DEP sufficient to fulfill the purposes of 
the Fund. This is potentially unconstitutional, as it would allow public funds to be directed to private 
legal actions. 
This proposal is unnecessary and unworkable. If any citizen suspects a violation of marine resources 
law or regulation, they can contact their local marine patrol officer with that information. Officers live 
within their patrol area, and are accustomed to receiving confidential information and investigating 
complaints. Similarly, DEP also has an existing process through which complaints may be submitted. 
In addition to the opportunity to bring enforcement action, LD 1776 also provides for a citizen to 
petition the agencies for an amendment of a rule. Again, there are existing processes in place through
the Administrative Procedures Act (APA) where citizens can pursue changes to regulations. This bill 
also provides funding for citizens to participate in rule-making and adjudicatory proceedings. All of 
DMR's lease hearings are adjudictory proceedings, so this represents a limitless opportunity for any 
citizen to obtain free legal counsel and expert witnesses to participate in lease hearings. 
The Department of Environmental Protection has also provided a letter offering additional detail 
regarding the numerous opportunities for public process in the current enforcement and rule-making 
procedurse, and the agency accountability already present in the Maine Administrative Procedures Act 
and the rule-making process. 
LD 1776 is fundamentally unworkable and potentially unconstitutional. For these reasons, we urge 
you to vote ought not to pass. Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you might have.
