Testimony in Support of LD 1776 – 
An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and 
Department of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking 
Dear Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine 
Resources, 
I am a full time Maine resident and registered voter.  I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 
1776, “An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and 
Department of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking” with the amendment specified 
below. 
This bill will help to make the right to a healthy environment a reality by providing the tools to 
enable citizens to help enforce the laws that our state legislature has passed to conserve and 
protect the natural resources and wildlife of Maine.  Specifically, this law will help citizens 1) 
access scientifically valid information by obtaining the assistance of expert witnesses to develop 
and present that information and 2) obtain the help of an attorney to present that scientifically 
valid information to the administrative agency or a court as required by the Administrative 
Procedures Act. 
The bill will not only help citizens realize their right to a healthy environment.  It will also help 
the agencies whose job it is to promulgate scientifically valid rules and regulations implementing 
our laws to conserve and protect our state’s natural resources by enabling citizens to help provide 
the agencies with the best scientific evidence and a well-developed, cohesive, and coherent 
administrative record on which the agency may base its decision.   
To make this bill effective there is one essential amendment. That amendment would avoid the 
possibility that a response denying the request would preempt or prevent citizen action or 
participation, which would defeat the purpose of the bill.  In the last sentence of paragraph 2 of 
LD 1776, insert after “not responded to the petition” the phrase “so as to grant the petitioner’s 
request or to begin a proceeding that may do so.” 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Sandra Scholar 
Greenville Junction 04442 
Sandra Scholar
Greenville Junction 04442
LD 1776
Testimony in Support of LD 1776 –
An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of Environmental Protection and 
Department of Marine Resources Actions and Rulemaking
Dear Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine
Resources,
I am a full time Maine resident and registered voter.  I urge you to vote ‘ought to 
pass’ on LD 1776, “An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of Department of 
Environmental Protection and Department of Marine Resources Actions and 
Rulemaking” with the amendment specified below.
This bill will help to make the right to a healthy environment a reality by providing 
the tools to enable citizens to help enforce the laws that our state legislature has 
passed to conserve and protect the natural resources and wildlife of Maine.  
Specifically, this law will help citizens 1) access scientifically valid information by 
obtaining the assistance of expert witnesses to develop and present that information 
and 2) obtain the help of an attorney to present that scientifically valid information to 
the administrative agency or a court as required by the Administrative Procedures 
Act.
The bill will not only help citizens realize their right to a healthy environment.  It will 
also help the agencies whose job it is to promulgate scientifically valid rules and 
regulations implementing our laws to conserve and protect our state’s natural 
resources by enabling citizens to help provide the agencies with the best scientific 
evidence and a well-developed, cohesive, and coherent administrative record on 
which the agency may base its decision.  
To make this bill effective there is one essential amendment. That amendment would 
avoid the possibility that a response denying the request would preempt or prevent 
citizen action or participation, which would defeat the purpose of the bill.  In the last 
sentence of paragraph 2 of LD 1776, insert after “not responded to the petition” the 
phrase “so as to grant the petitioner’s request or to begin a proceeding that may do 
so.”
Respectfully submitted, 

