: 
7O 
, MAINE 
AQUACULTURE 
ASSOCIATION 
May 11, 2023 
The Honorabie Cameron Reny, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Allison Hepler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
State House, Room 206 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Marine 
Resources: 
My name is Sebastian Belle and l am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture Association 
(MAA) and the current president of the National Aquaculture Association (NAA). The MAA is the oldest 
state aquaculture association in the country. We represent Maine's aquatic farmers that raise finfish, 
shellfish and sea vegetables. Our farmers annually produce over 100 million dollars in farm gate 
revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens year-round. We purchase goods and services 
from over 400 Maine businesses and our total economic impact is roughly 150 million dollars annually. 
l stand before you today to testify in strong opposition to LD 1776 "An Act to Allow Citizen Oversight of 
Department of Environmental Protection and Department of Marine Resources Actions and 
Rulemaking." Our opposition is based on several factors: 
1. LD 1776 is incredibly broad and applies to ANY and ALL DEP and DMR permits and rules or any 
action by the Attorney General. For example, it would equally allow the subsidized appeal ofa 
residential development, the construction of a research laboratory or the issuance of a lobster 
or commercial fishing license. lt will effectively paralyze state government by a series of 
endless petitions and appeals. 
2. By creating a direct mechanism of citizen oversight LD 1776 will circumvent the existing 
legislative and rulemaking processes, and usurp legislative and agency authority. State 
agencies will spend more time practicing litigative risk management than actually protecting the 
public trust, public health and the environment. 
3. LD 1776 will force state agencies to charge additional fees to permit applicants. Those fees will 
then be used to fund attorneys or activist groups who want to appeal that very permit. ln 
essence permit applicants will be forced to fund their own opponents. That is unfair and 
probably unconstitutional. 
4. LD 1776 will result in project permits and agency rule making being tied up in endless and 
publicly subsidized litigation. it will create a strong financial incentive to contest permits and 
agency rules, cost the state and permit holders millions of dollars and clog the court system 
with frivolous lawsuits. The bill is literally a blank check for any attorney or activist group 
wishing to recover the cost of opposing an agency decision or regulation. 
339 Water Street I Gardiner, ME 04345 I (207)622-0136 | www.maineaqua.org
, Q MAINE 
AQUACULTURE 
ASSOCIATION 
The Maine legislature has a long tradition of developing practical solutions to Maine's many 
challenges. LD 1776 is not one of those solutions. On the contrary, it will upend the normal course of 
government, create a legal appeal industry and by creating significant regulatory uncertainty, critically 
damage the business community's ability to raise financing. Please help us continue to build the Maine 
brand and defend Maines working waterfronts. Vote “OUGHT NOT TO PASS" on LD 1776. I thank you 
for your attention and patience and would be glad to answer any questions you may have. 
Sincerely,‘ 
,, xi1 
iv 
i"':€“""¢4% 
_- 
"4; 
,5 
Sebastian M. Belle 
Executive Director 
339 Water Street I Gardiner, ME 04345 ] (207)622-0136 | www.maineaqua.org
