Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Committee on Marine Resources, 
thank you for the opportunity to speak today.  
 
I’m Tom Sorby, Operations Manager for Kingfish Maine and I am writing in opposition to LD 
1776.  
 
The current permitting process in Maine is extremely robust and stringent and it can take 
multiple years for a project to be fully permitted. The process is transparent and unbiased. 
During the permitting process there is ample opportunity for public participation and all permit 
details are available to the public. Once permits have been granted there is an additional 
opportunity for the public to appeal the decision of any permit. This process is clearly detailed 
in the existing rules and is easily accessible to any member of the public. 
 
LD 1776 is incredibly broad and applies to any and all DEP and DMR permits and rules or any 
action by the Attorney General. For example, it would equally allow the subsidized appeal of a 
residential development, the construction of a research laboratory or the issuance of a lobster 
or commercial fishing license. It will effectively paralyze the state government by a series of 
endless petitions and appeals.  
 
By creating a direct mechanism of citizen oversight, LD 1776 will circumvent the existing 
legislative and rulemaking processes and usurp legislative and agency authority. State agencies 
will spend more time practicing litigative risk management than protecting public trust, public 
health, and the environment. 
 
LD 1776 would lead to an increase in frivolous appeals and cost the state and permit holders 
millions of dollars. The added anonymity would encourage abuse of the appeals process, a 
process which is already frequently abused. It would greatly inhibit any kind of economic 
development in the state and severely hamper new and existing businesses. New businesses 
would look to establish in other states and existing businesses would look to move, should they 
wish to expand. The bill would be a blank cheque for any attorney or activist group wishing to 
recover the cost of opposing an agency decision or regulation. 
 
I implore the committee to trust the existing system and not waste time and money on the 
implementation of LD 1776. I urge the committee to defend Maine's working waterfronts and 
vote “OUGHT NOT TO PASS” on LD 1776. 
