 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                   700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
May 15 , 2023  
Electronic Delivery  
Honorable Stacy Brenner and Lori Gramlich , Chair s 
Members, Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
State Legislature , 
State of Maine  
ENR@legislature.maine.gov   
 
In re: Public Comments: Opposing  LD 1645 ( HP 1055) , relating to: prohibiting 
certain plastic packaging .  
Dear Chair s and Members , 
On behalf of the members of the American Chemistry Council ’s (ACC)  Plastics Division , thank 
you for this opportunity to provide comments on LD 1645 (HP 1055) , relating to:  prohibiting 
certain plastic foodservice  products . 
ACC and our members are working hard to creat e a more circular economy for 
plastics.  That is why ACC  and its Plastic s Division members were among the first to establish  
ambitious, forward -thinking goals that all plastic packaging in the United States is reused, 
recycled,  or recovered by 2040 and that all U.S. plastic packaging is recyclable or recoverable by 
2030 .1 Achieving these goals will require industry, manufacturers, brands and retailers, 
recyclers,  and waste haulers, as well as citizens, communities, non -profits, academics, and 
federal, state and local governments to come together to support policies and programs to 
increase the supply of and demand for recycled materials  and create the circular economy we all 
want . 
Under LD 1645 , plastic packaging containing polystyrene  (PS), polyvinyl chloride (PVC) , among 
others would be prohibited.  Unfortunately, this proposal will likely lead to (1) greater 
environmental impact , (2) increase costs  to the State and its residents , and ( 3) little, if any, 
contribution litter reduction.  
Maine already created a framework to consider packaging ’s environmental 
performance  that this bill also seeks to address. Under 2021 HP 1146 ( the packaging 
stewardship program ), the State will contract with a stewardship organization to operate a 
packaging stewardship program.2 That program includes creating a payment schedule  
“…incentivizing improvements to the design of packaging material as enco uraged through the 
allowance of payment…”3  
 
1 “U.S. Plastics Resin Producers Set Circular Economy Goals to Recycle or Recover 100% of Plastic Packaging by 
2040,” Med ia release (American Chemistry Council, May 9, 2018), 
https://www.americanchemistry.com/chemistry -in-america/news -trends/press -release/2018/us -plastics -resin -
producers -set-circular -economy -goals -to-recycle -or-recover -100-of-plastic -packaging -by-2040.  
2 “An Act To Support and Improve Municipal Recycling Programs and Save Taxpayer Money,” Pub. L. No. Me. 
Ch. 455, HP 1146 (2021).  
3 An Act To Support and Improve Municipal Recycling Programs and Save Taxpayer Money, tit. 38 M.R.S. 2146 
(5)(J).  
Given the law was recently enacted and the development of implementing 
regulations has only just begun, creating new packaging mandates is unnecessary 
and counterproductive. This new law will require significant resources to implement, both 
from the regulated community and the State. Outright bans on certain materials do not 
consider potential important tradeoffs, including how certain packaging materials promote food 
safety o r prevent food waste.  
The legislature should allow for the new law to be fully implemented before considering whether 
new packaging requirements or restrictions on producers  are needed . 
The proposal  seems to mistakenly assume that plastic alternatives are always 
environmentally preferable.  Although PS and PVC  have carbon footprint, it is mistaken to 
assume that alternative materials would always be more effective.4 It is important to consider 
the carbon benefits of using these materials .5 ACC is concerned by any blanket approach that 
merely substitutes certain plastics with alternatives, without considering  the overall 
environmental footprint and total lifecycle impact of the alternative materials  will result in 
unanticipated consequences not only  to consumers  and businesses,  but also to the environment . 
Taking this approach in the absence of science -based analysis will in turn lead to increased 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and increased landfill.  
Many applications, particularly in food packagin g, do not have a viable alternative in 
terms of performance.  Moreover, plastics adoption in additional areas could contribute to 
decarbonization by reducing food spoilage and energy use, resulting in net lower ing of  GHG 
emissions.  In an analysis of 20 comm on food categories, including fresh and frozen meat, more 
than 90 percent of the products use plastic packaging.6 Over 50 percent of products in another 
eight categories are packaged with plastic.7 Plastics have a significant impact on GHG gas 
emission avoidance.8 
Again, we urge the Committee not to proceed with this proposal . Thank you for this 
opportunity to prov ide information to the committee. If you have any questions or if we may be 
of further service, please feel free to contact Margaret M. Gorman, ACC’s Senior Director, 
Northeast Region at Margaret_Gorman@AmericanChemistry.com . 
 
Sincerely,  
{  
Adam  S. Peer  
Senior Director, Plastics Division  
American Chemistry Council  
  
Margaret M. Gorman  
Senior Director, Northeast Region  
American Chemistry Council  
 
 
4 N. Voulvoulis et al., “Examining Material Evidence: The Carbon Footprint” (Imperial College London, 2020), 
https://perma.cc/3ZV4 -DNST, https://www.americanchemistry.com/better -policy -
regulation/plastics/resources/examining -material -evidence -the-carbon -fingerprint.  
5 Voulvoulis et al.  
6 David Feber et al., “Climate Impact of Plastics,” Industry report (McKinsey & Company, July 2022), 
https://perma.cc/XBG6 -A8LD, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/chemicals/our -insights/Climate -impact -of-
plastics. 
7 Feber et al.  
8 Feber et al.  

