 
 
May 15, 2023  
 
Sen. Stacy Brenner, Chair  
Rep. Lori Gramlich, Chair  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Consumer Technology Association testi mony in opposition for LD 1645 – An Act to Reduce 
Plastic Packaging Waste.  
 
Dear Chair Brenner, Chair Gramlich, and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources:  
 
On behalf of the Consumer T echnology Association (CTA), we respectfully submit these comments  
opposing LD  1645 an Act to Reduce  Plastic Packaging W aste . 
 
CTA is North America’s largest technology trade association. Our members are the world’s leading 
innova tors – from startups to global brands – helping support more than 18 million American jobs. 
Our member companies have long been recognized for their commitment and leadership in 
innovation and sustainability, often taking measures to exceed regulatory requ irements on 
environmental design and product stewardship.  
 
EPR for Packa ging in Maine  
Maine recently passed and is in the process of imp lementing LD 1541 an Act to Support and 
Improve Municipal Recycling  Programs and Save Taxpayer  Money. LD 1541 establishes an extended 
producer responsibility (EPR) program for packa ging in Maine , which  according to the Mai ne DEP ’s 
website will “reduce  the volume and toxicity and increase  the recycling of packaging materia l.” 
Since th is program is currently in the implementation process, with stakeholder  meetings ongoing 
to address topics including recyclable materials , program  goals, infrastructure investments,  and a 
needs asse ssment, CTA believes that LD 1645 is unn ecessary  and would interfere wit h program ’s 
development.  
 
Prohibited Packaging Materials  
According  to LD 1645, certain types of plastic packaging will be prohibited from use beginning 
January  1, 202 5. Prohibited plastic p ackaging includes packaging that is compose d wholly or partially 
of polystyrene, including  expanded polystyrene ( EPS). CTA is in strong opposition to this p rovision. 
While we appreciate the intent of the bill, we believe that if it were to take effect, it would have the 
unintended consequence  of increasing electronic waste.  EPS can be a necessary packaging material 
to the durables goods sector including some electronic devices like televisions and camera 
equipment. Due to the size, weight, and structure of some electronic devices, EPS is often the 
preferred packaging material due to its durability  and versatility . 
 
2 
  
When transporting heavy, complex electronics, it is important that the packaging material is able to 
protect goods from breakage. EPS has outstanding shock absorbing and compression resistance  
abilities that perform well in protecting electronics. Additionally, EPS can be molded into any shape 
or form to meet a product’s protection needs. Some electronic devices, like camer a equipment have 
odd shapes  that can be difficult to protect. In these circumstances, EPS can be made to fit the exact 
specifications needed to perfectly fit  the product, making it an ideal packaging material. Finally, EPS 
is valued for its lightweight pro perties. B ecause EPS is made up of 98 percent air, it does not 
significantly add to the weight of a packaged product. This is especially import ant when transporting  
heavy equipment.  EPS is a valued material type that the electronics industry still relies o n with n o 
viable economic alternatives  that do  not significantly drive -up damage rates of electronic devices. 
The result of inadequate alternatives wil l be damaged electronics entering landfills or the recycling 
system along with the loss of critical resources such as rare earth elements found in these products.  
 
Furthe rmore, the state of O regon  analy zed information regarding EPS during their implementation 
process of their Recycling Mo dernization Act , including a life cycle assessment analysis . The 
Technical Wor kgroup convened by Oregon Department of Environmental  Protection  acknowledges 
the benefits and recycling po tential of EPS and  proposed to add it to th eir Recycled Materials  
Acceptance List . In their proposal, they plan to  invest in EP S recycling infrastructu re by creating 
depot s across the state for consumers  to re cycle their EPS.  
 
Additionally, CTA believes that the defin ition of “nondet ectable pigments ” is too vague and will be 
confusing for manufacturers to implement. CTA requ ests that t his definition be further explained to 
provide  further cl arity o n what packaging materials will be allowed . 
 
CTA’s also has concerns with  “prohibited plasti c packaging ” including polyethylene terephthalate  
that is manufactured using antimony or cobalt  as a processing a id or additive . The electronics supply  
chain  is incredibly comple x and there may be limited transparency  from supplie rs on the use o f 
“additives  and processing aids ” as opposed to the base materials that are used.  We believe this 
provision may be  overly burdensome and  difficult  for manufacturers to comply with.  
 
Timeframe  
The implementation timeframe of January  1, 202 5, is too aggressive  for industry to achieve . Given 
existing  contractual  obligations and the pr ogre ss of this legislation,  it’s unreali stic to r equire 
manufacturers  to switch their packa ging wi th little more than a year’s  notice. Instead, any 
mandated r equirement shoul d be a “years following ” date, instead of  a specified year , with at least 
a four -year  lead ti me. In general, c hanging packaging materials requires special an alysis in order to 
ident ify viable alternatives . There are a variety  of factors that manufacturers must consider when 
identify ing packaging materials, including costs, scalabili ty, packaging integrity, retai ler 
requirements, allocation of resources, and other design criteria.  The insufficient lead time prov ided 
by LD 1645, is another reason CTA strongly opposes this legi slation.  
 
Conclusion  
In conclusion, CTA  opposes  LD 1645  since it puts  overly bur densom e requirements on industry , 
creates vague definitions, and will  potentially lead to an increase in electronic waste . Protective 
packaging is not your typical foam litter . Complex ar ticles, like electronics, require high performance  
packaging  materials for them to be delivered safely and intact. Finally , sufficient lead times are 
necessary for industry to transition their packaging materials, which LD 1645 does not provide.  
 
3 
  
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide th ese comments for LD 1645 , an act to reduce 
plastic packaging waste. We welcome further engagement with the Committee on this topic . If you 
have any questions about our above comments,  please do not hesitate t o contact me at  
apeck@cta.tech .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Ally Peck  
Senior Manager, Environmental and Sustainability Policy  
apeck@cta.tech   
(703) 395 -4177  
 
 
 

