 
 
 
May 15th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSC C testimony in opposition to L.D. 1645: An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce . The 
Chamber is the voice of Maine business, speaking f or approximately 5,000 Maine businesses of all sizes 
throughout the State. The Maine State Chamber of Commerce is testifying in opposition to L.D. 1645.  
 
Packaging is an important issue for Maine ’s business community.  Our members work hard to ensure  the quality 
of consumer goods as they are manufactured, shipped, stored,  and consumed  are done so in a way that protects 
our environment, but also to ensure that the product is protected. The Chamber supports  policies that improve 
recycling, and our members work hard to try and innovate how they can do this. We believe  L.D. 1645 does not 
do that and will threaten the safe delivery of consumer goods to consumers in Maine.  
Our main concerns stem from the broadne ss of the proposed ban in L.D. 1645 and the far -reaching impacts it 
could have on all sectors of our economy . General bans are always of concern to the Chamber, and we believe 
they are bad for Maine business. The bans put in place under the “Prohibited Pla stic Packaging” designation are 
extremely broad and would essentially ban critical packaging types from food, to electronics, to flammable and 
hazardous materials, just to name a few.  The Chamber is also concerned about the broad authority  given  to the 
Department of Environmental Protection to ban packaging simply based upon the presence of over 1400 
chemicals – from a law related to children’s products that is unrelated to recycling . 
 
Additionally, anytime we see an out right ban on something it causes concern to the business community, 
because if we are going to ban something – it is critical to make sure that there is an alternative to make sure our 
companies can continue to manufacture products to compete in a global economy. In our view, there  is not an 
alternative for what is proposed to be eliminated in L.D. 1645 and that would leave our members in a difficult 
position. Furthermore, a few years ago, Maine enacted a new EPR law that would significantly change how 
packaging and recycling  are done in Maine. While the Chamber expressed concerns at the time  the new EPR 
 
 
 law was being debated in the legislative process, we believe  we should stand by the rulemaking process at the 
DEP . We believe L.D. 1645 is unnecessary and could cause confusion with the new EPR law.  
 
The reasons listed above are what give the Chamber concerns about passing L.D. 1645. It would be another law 
that would make Maine an outlier with most of our region and the country, and that could have a negative 
impact on both our comp anies located here,  companies looking to invest here. L.D. 1645 could have a negative 
impact on jobs in Maine if companies must  look elsewhere – for example a member company such as Sazerac – 
who employes 260 people in Lewiston – they care very deeply abou t this legislation and the future impact it 
could have on their operations in Maine.  
 
We would respectfully ask the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 1645. We believe it is bad for 
Maine’s business community and our economy. Thank you for the  opportunity to testify today. I am happy to 
try and answer any questions and if I cannot answer them, I am happy to bring back additional information in 
advance of the work session.  
  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
