 
  
 
 
 
Monday, May  15, 2023 
Senator Stacy Brenner, Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich, House Chair  
Joint S tanding Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 
 Re: Letter from the American Cleaning Institute on LD 1645 – Opposed 
 Thank you for the opportunity to share  our position on LD  1645 which is being heard befor e the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources . The American Cleaning Institute (ACI) – the 
association for detergent and cleaning product manufacturers – has a vested interest in ensuring packaging such as that which is encompassed by this legislative proposal does not become waste. That is why we ha ve a goal to eliminate all cleaning product packaging waste by 2040 and are 
already making great strides in creating more recyclable packaging, reducing our packaging usage, and incorporating more recycled content into the packaging we do introduce to the market.   
 
Our industry is already taking several  actions to address packaging types that are not widely 
recyclable, which alongside existing Maine policy, leads us to oppose this legislation at this time. We are hopeful t hat the Legislature will understand that this legislation is not necessary, and that  
change is already underway to address problems this bill seeks to address.  
 
The Stewardshi p Program for Packaging ( PL 2021, c. 455, §2) is one of the most comprehensive 
modern recycling program s to be established in the United States. Within this law are 
requirements that a program be assessed based on its ability to meet recycling rate goals. It also 
requires  the Department of Envi ronmental Protection to adopt rules for producer payments 
designed to incentivize the use by producers of packaging material that is readily recyclable and disincentivize the use by producers of packa ging material that is not readily recyclable . 
 ACI members are also voluntarily moving away from some of the packagi ng types that are 
mentioned through efforts organized by the U .S. Plastics Pact. Thes e public -facing commitments 
exhibit  how important it is that we move toward a more circular economy. Our members are well 
underway in transitioning products into new packa ging formats that are more widely accepted  
for recycling and less problematic.  Other partnerships include the Plastic Bank, Loop and 
How2Recycle . 
 Our industry has also developed a Design Guide to help our members design 100% of cleaning product packaging to be recyclable or reusable by 2025. This Guide includes a checklist encompassing base materials, additives, labels, adhesives, attachments, closures, size, and shape 
that should be considered to ensure that packa ging can ultimately be recycled.  
 
  
 We would like to reiterate that our industry supports the use of recyclable packaging , and we 
believe that Maine is well on its way to establishing a more circular economy. As these 
initiatives just begin to develo p, we hope the Legislature will pause before introducing additional 
policies. ACI looks forward to providing the necessary  input regarding our industry’s 
compliance wi th existing federal and state laws pertaining to packaging.  
 Sincerely,  
Brennan Georgianni  
Director, State Government Affairs  
BGeorgianni@cleaninginstitute.org  

