 
 
 
Testimony of William “Buck” O’Herin, former environmental educator and current Midcoast 
Conservancy board member who lives in Montville, Maine.  
In SUPPORT of LD 1645,  
"An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste” 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
May 15th, 2023 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee.  My name is Buck O’Herin. I have more than forty years of experience as an 
environmental educator, high school teacher, college teacher, wilderness guide and conservationist. I 
have lived in Waldo County since 1986 and would not live anywhere but Maine. Please accept this 
testimony in support of LD 1645, which would help reduce the growing problems association plastic 
packaging waste in Maine. 
 
It is well documented that plastic pollution threatens our oceans, human health and even the food we 
eat. We know that microplastics (larger plastic objects that break down into smaller plastic particles) get 
into the food chain and this is one of the ways we end up consuming them. The long-term health effects 
are not well understood yet but researchers believe that these plastic particles pose grave threats to 
human and environmental health. 
 
I have personally witnessed the immense amount of plastic waste washed up on the shoreline of Horn 
Island, a barrier island ten miles of the coast of Mississippi in the Gulf of Mexico. The trash stretched as 
far as I could see and was in various states of degradation.  Here in Maine, I have collected plastic 
bottles on the roadsides near my home in the Sheepscot River headwaters in Montville. Without 
intervention the destination of that plastic trash is Penobscot Bay and eventually the food chain. 
 
By passing LD 1645 we have the opportunity to make an important difference for the lives of our 
children and grandchildren, and for many species of wildlife that are negatively impacted. There are 
other materials options that can replace single-use plastics, that don’t pose threats to our health and 
won’t detract from our standard of living. We all benefit by reducing plastic waste in our environment. 
 
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass’ on LD 1645. I greatly appreciate your consideration of my thoughts. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Buck O’Herin 
Montville, Maine 
 
 
 
