 
May  15, 2023  
 
The Honorable Stacy  Brenner  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, Chair  
Maine Senate  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
The Honorable Lori Gramlich  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, Chair  
Maine House of Representatives  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re:  LD 1645  – An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste  (OPPOSE)  
 
Dear Chair s Brenner and Gramlich , 
 
On behalf of the Consumer Healthcare Products Association (CHPA), the Washington, D.C. 
based national trade organization representing the leading manufacturers of over -the-
counter (OTC) medicines, dietary supplements, and consumer medical devices, I’m writ ing to 
express opposition to LD 1645  as it is currently drafted . This bill restricts  packaging materials  
such as polyvin yl chloride and p olyvinylidene chloride  which are critical to the packaging of 
some over -the-counter (OTC) drugs and dietary supplements  in ensuring product quality and 
safety to the consumer.    
 
What I s Polyvinyl Chloride and Polyvinylidene Chloride ? 
 
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)  is a high -strength synthetic plastic polymer and the world’s third -
largest thermoplastic by volume. Its lightweight, durable, and low -cost properties have 
allowed for universal uses including the production of blister packs for pharmaceuticals and 
dietary  supplements . 
 
Polyvinylidene Chloride (PVDC)  is a synthetic polymer that is used primarily in the production 
of barrier films and coatings. PVDC is known for its exceptional barrier properties, particularly 
against oxygen, water vapor, and other gases. It  is commonly used in pharmaceutical 
packaging to extend the shelf life of the product. It is also resistant to chemicals and solvents 
and has good heat -sealing properties.  
 
Blister Packs Are a Critical Form of Drug and Dietary Supplement Packaging  
 
Pharmac eutical blister packaging is a type of packaging that consists of a plastic (PVC or 
PVDC) or aluminum pre -formed cavity or pocket, known as a blister, that holds individual 
doses of medication. The blister is usually sealed with a backing made of paperboar d, 
aluminum foil, or plastic film, which protects the medication from moisture, light, oxygen, and 
other environmental factors.  
 
2 
 Blister packaging is commonly used for over -the-counter (OTC) drugs and dietary 
supplements due to its many benefits including:  
 
Protection:  Blister packaging protects the medication from environmental factors that can 
degrade or compromise its quality and effectiveness.  
 
Convenience:  Blister packaging provides individual doses and medication that are easy to 
carry and use, making  it a convenient option for consumers.  
 
Safety:  Blister packaging helps to prevent contamination and tempering of the medication, 
ensuring its safety and efficacy.  
 
Compliance:  Blister packaging can help to improve medication adherence by providing a 
clear  and easy -to-follow dosing regimen.  
 
Identification:  Blister packaging allows for easy identification of medication by displaying the 
name, dosage, and other important information on the packaging.  
 
 
OTC  Product Packaging is Regulated by the Federal Govern ment  
 
Consumer healthcare product (OTC medications, dietary supplements, and consumer 
medical devices) packaging is regulated by the FDA under Good Manufacturing Practices 
regulations (GMPs) (21 C.F.R. Part 211, Subpart G), including material examination a nd usage 
criteria (§211.122), packaging and labeling operations (§ 211.130), tamper -evident packaging (§ 
211.132), and expiration dating (§ 211.137).  
 
Certain consumer healthcare products are also regulated by the Consumer Product Safety 
Commission (CPSC) under the Poison Prevention Packaging Act (PPPA), which requires child -
resistant packaging. Manufacturers are required to test and certify compliance. In fact, drug 
products for which packaging does not comply with PPPA packaging and labeling 
regulations a re deemed  misbranded under the FDCA (21 U.S.C. § 352(p)).  
In summary, federal OTC packaging requirements include:  
Child -resistant packaging : Certain OTC products, such as medications that contain aspirin, 
must be packaged in child -resistant containers to prevent accidental ingestion by children.  
Tamper -evident packaging : OTC products must be packaged in tamper -evident packaging to 
ensure that the product has not been opened or tampered with.  
Labeling : OTC product packaging must include labeli ng that provides important information 
about the product, such as its active ingredients, uses, warnings, and directions for use.  
Good manufacturing practices : OTC product packaging must be manufactured in accordance 
with good manufacturing practices (GMPs ) to ensure that the packaging is of high quality and 
does not contaminate or degrade the product.  
3 
 Adverse event reporting : Manufacturers of OTC products must report any adverse events 
associated with their products to the FDA, and the packaging must inclu de information on 
how to report adverse events to the manufacturer or FDA.  
CHPA Seeks Exemption for FDA Regulated Products  
 
Several states have passed and/or considered packaging reform laws in the United States. In 
nearly all cases, consumer healthcare products were deemed to be exempt from these 
requirements.  In fact, Maine  itself recognizes the uniqueness of consumer healthcare product 
packaging and included exemption  consideration s for these products in  the EPR for 
packaging law adopted in 2021  (LD 1541) . This same recognition should be extended to this bill  
(LD 1645)  as well .  
 
CHPA respectfully requests the following language in red be added to LD 1645:  
 
G.    "Plastic packaging" means packaging that is composed wholly or in 
large part of plastic but does not include:  
              (1)  disposable food service container as defined in section 1571, 
subsection 3 or 3 -A; 
              (2) polystyrene foam cooler or ice chest used for the processing or 
shipping of seafood; or  
              (3) packaging used for  medical products and products defined 
as devices or drugs, or dietary supplements as specified in the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. Secs.   321(g), 321(h), 321 (ff)  
 
                 
Conclusion    
  
CHPA and its members are committed to the h ealth and welfare of consumers and the global 
environment.   We applaud the Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  for 
taking on this important issue, but unfortunately, we cannot support the legislation in its 
current form.  We look forward t o continued dialogue with t he hope we can come to an 
equitable resolution.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
 
Carlos I. Gutiérrez  
Vice President, State & Local Government Affairs  
Consumer Healthcare Products Association  
Washington, D.C.  
cgutierrez@chpa.org | 202 -429-3521  
 

4 
 cc:  Members of the Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
