May 12, 2023 
 
Re: LD-1645 AN ACT TO REDUCE PLASTIC PACKAGING WASTE 
 
Maine Legislation:  
 
Dart Container Corporation would like to express their opposition to Legislative Document No. 1645 an 
act to reduce plastic packaging waste throughout the state of Maine.   
 
Dart Container Corporation is a global manufacturer of foodservice packaging material including 
polystyrene, paper, plastic and compostable products.  We take pride in minimizing our company’s 
environmental impact by innovating new or improved processes, programs and products with 
thoughtful design for sustainability.  Our approach to product development is to design for first use to 
next recycled life.   
 
As we all want to reduce the amount of plastic packaging waste that goes to landfill, more recycling and 
composting options for these packages throughout Maine should be a focus to the issue.  With a 
passage of LD-1645, this will just eliminate certain packages on the market without addressing the need 
to increase recycling options for all materials.  
 
In July 2021, Maine passed the Stewardship Program for Packaging with the purpose to increase 
recycling of packaging material.  Producers of products will pay into a fund in which will be used to make 
investments in recycling infrastructures to increase the packaging that LD-1645 sets to eliminate.  Dart 
believes that enacting the stewardship program prior to making changes to the availability of packages 
will seek to reduce the amount of plastic waste in the environment.  A clear focus on infrastructure 
grants to material recovery facilities will able them to increase the amount of material they take on, 
improve end markets for the materials and create a circular economy.  Why take this opportunity away 
before it begins? That is exactly what LD-1645 will do.  Working on real solutions for plastic waste in the 
environment is something that should be a focus in the next few years, and we believe the Stewardship 
Program will do this.  
 
For that reason, I encourage you to take a pause on passing any legislation that would eliminate the use 
of certain plastic packaging to the consumers and look at a more robust recycling system throughout 
Maine.  Give consumers the right to choose which packaging material suits their operations best while 
providing them with the necessary outlets to recycle these packages.  With that an increase in recycling 
and a reduction in waste will be achieved throughout Maine.  Consider voting no on LD-1646. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Christine Cassidy 
Dart Container 
Government Affairs Manager 
 

