Testimony in support of bill LD 1645 
 
Good afternoon Representative Gramlich and members of the Environmental and Natural Resources 
Committee. 
 
My name is Debra Cole and I live in West Greenwich, Rhode Island. 
 
I support bill LD1645 because I believe we should ban all plastics that are known carcinogens and 
environmental toxins. 
Cancer has played a large role in my life. I lost my dad to cancer when I was in my mid-twenties and 20 
years later, I was diagnosed with breast cancer.  I don’t know what caused my dads’ cancer or my own, 
but I do know that only a very small percentage of cancers are genetic.  We all must ask ourselves, what 
is causing so much cancer?  According to the National Cancer Institute, one out of every two men and 
one out of every three women will have some form of cancer in their lives. That’s a very scary statistic. 
We must do something. 
Cancer doesn’t just affect the individual, it affects everyone in their life – family, friends, co-workers. We 
all know someone who has had or has passed away from cancer.  It’s a horrible disease, filled with pain 
and sadness.  My personal experience consisted of a bi-lateral mastectomy and reconstructive surgery 
at 49 years old. I will never forget the fear in my daughters’ eyes when I told them what I was going to 
go through.  My youngest was just 9 years old at the time, and she asked me if I was going to die.  I 
didn’t know how to answer that… all these years later, I still don’t. 
Here is what I want you to consider today; if there was a way to prevent cancer by eliminating 
environmental toxins – like plastics – why wouldn’t you want to do that?  It’s a move that would help 
each one of you, your family, and your friends. It would help us all. 
If we all joined together to ban plastics and other environmental toxins we would be working towards 
prevention, and I believe that is the goal. 
I am urging you today to support LD1645 for my loved ones and yours. 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak and I welcome any questions you may have. 
 
Debra Cole 
87 Bates Trail 
West Greenwich, RI 02817 
