 Testimony of Emily W ong, Colby College student, W aterville, ME  
 In Support of LD 1645, "An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging W aste"  
 Before the Committee on Environment and Natural Resource  
 Maine Legislature, Augusta, ME  
 May 15, 2023  
 Dear Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee. My name is  
 Emily W ong, and I am a student at Colby College in W aterville studying Environmental Policy  
 and Economics. I am particularly interested in public health and environmental justice. I am  
 testifying in support of LD 1645 to protect workers, consumers, and community members from  
 the health issues associated with plastic packaging waste.  
 We have toxic plastics in our bodies. For example, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) additives leach out  
 of plastic packaging and persist in our air , water , and food, ultimately accumulating in our  
 bodies. Products containing chlorine, a building block in PVC, produce dioxins during its  
 lifecycle. This poses risks of cancer , damage to the immune system, and developmental problems  
 among other issues. In fact, the The Environmental Protection Agency (EP A) set the   maximum  
 contaminant level goal of dioxins   to 0. As an economics   major , PVC is understandably used due  
 to its convenience and low cost. On the other hand, as an environmental policy major , I 
 understand that the health and environmental risks associated with PVC are detrimental and that  
 safer plastic alternatives exist, such as bio-based plastics.  
 I interned for the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protections’ Bureau of Air and  
 Waste for six months. I was able to visit a transfer station, where I witnessed truckloads of waste  
 dumped into the facility for hours. However , these truckloads partially contained plastic waste,  
 whose generation and disposal have been increasing exponentially since the 1950s. PVC  
 plastics’ lack of recyclability due to its high levels of chlorine may contribute to our plastic waste  
 issue. Where does this plastic end up? Landfills and incinerators – including those in Maine  
 where Massachusetts ships their waste to. Historically , Maine’ s waste sites have previously been  
 or are currently located in low-income communities. Since the plastic waste at these sites  
 releases toxic chemicals into the soil and air , these communities are disproportionately struck  
 with health issues.  
 PVC is only one example: the other ingredients in plastic packaging listed in LD 1645 follow a  
 similar story . LD 1645 can prevent the health and environmental risks of PVC and of other toxic  
 ingredients in plastic packaging as well as improve equity . Please vote “Ought to Pass" on LD  
 1645. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 Emily W ong 
