Gregory DAugustine
Greene
LD 1645
Testimony of Gregory D’Augustine MD of Greene, Maine
In SUPPORT of LD 1645, 
"An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste”
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee
May 15th, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee.  My name is Greg D’Augustine, and I appreciate your 
taking the time to review my comments.
Please accept this testimony in support of LD 1645, which would help reduce the 
growing problems associated with plastic packaging waste in Maine.
 I feel fortunate to own some property on the eastern bank of the Androscoggin River 
in Greene.   I have, on virtually a daily basis, walked the country road near the river, 
or paddled on it. Over the years I have continued to be surprised and disturbed by the 
amount of plastic trash I see in these locations. On today’s walk I noted a large plastic
trash bag that had apparently been thrown from a passing vehicle onto the shoulder of 
the road, spilling its contents near a stream running toward the river. The contents of 
that bag include a number of plastic products that might be eliminated by LD 1645. 
These include rigid plastic packaging as well as soda straws, and plastic utensils. Why
folks would toss materials like this from their cars is something I just can’t fathom, 
but it’s reality. It’s also somewhat alarming to note that it’s common for me to see 
alcoholic beverage containers along the roadside as well. So my exercise routine is 
less than desirable from both an esthetic and presumably a safety perspective as well.
The result of all the roadside plastic pollution I see is clearly a major load of plastic 
detritus in the Androscoggin River, and ultimately Casco Bay and the Atlantic Ocean.
If one multiplies the plastic trash seen on my short stretch of country road by the 
many miles of similar highways in the state it becomes apparent that we’re inundated 
in plastic! So any measure such as LD 1645 must be a positive step. Our wildlife as 
well as our children deserve an environment free of such plastic contaminants. 
Conclude:
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass’ on LD 1645.
Thank you for your time,
Gregory D’Augustine MD 
Greene, Maine

