 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY  
 
 
 
Jacob Cassady  
Director, Government Relations  
 
 
 
On Behalf of  
The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers  
 
 
 
Before the Maine  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
 
 
HEARING  
 
 
LD 1645 :  
An Act to  Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste  
 
 
 
May 15 , 2023  
  
  
 p 2 
Chair  Brenn er, Chair Gramlich and  members of the Environment  and Natural Resources 
Committee , the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers (AHAM) is opposed to LD 
1645, which  would prohibit the use of expanded polystyrene  (EPS) for packaging.  The 
legislation does not take into accou nt the practicality and impact this prohibition would have on 
the distribution of appliances.  
 
AHAM represents more than 150 member companies that manufacture 90% of the major, 
portable and floor care appliances shipped for sale in the U.S. Home appliances are the heart of 
the home, and AHAM members provide safe, innovative, sustainable and efficient products  that 
enhance consumers’ lives.  
 
The home appliance industry is a significant segment of the economy, measured by the 
contributions of home appliance manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers to the U.S. economy. 
In all, t he industry drives nearly $200 billion in economic output throughout the U.S. and 
manufactures products with a factory shipment value of more  than $50 billion.  
 
In Maine, the home appliance industry is a significant and critical segment of the econo my. The 
total economic impact of the home appliance industry to Maine is $437.4  million, more than 
3,100 direct and indirect jobs, $ 66.5 million in state tax revenue, and more than $ 138.3  million in 
wages. The home appliance industry, through its product s and innovation, is essential to 
consumer lifestyle, health, safety and convenience. Home appliances also are a success story in 
terms of energy efficiency and environmental protection.  
 
LD 1645 would prohibi t the use of plastic packaging  that is essential an essential component for 
the safe storage an d distribution of appliances.   There is no current ly viable  alternative to the use 
of EPS for large appliances/white goods. T his proposal would immediately limit the sale and 
distrib ution of major appliances in Maine .  No jurisdiction, to date, has enacted a similar , blanket 
ban on EPS packaging.  
 
Appliance Packaging Has Unique Needs and Requir ements  
Appliance packaging is used to protect the appliance and factory 
personnel during storage, transport and delivery.  The safest and 
most effective materials for this use are lightweight, can 
withstand multiple impacts, and maintain their integrity in  
humid conditions.  Unlike smaller, fast -moving consumer 
goods, packaging for heavy durable goods have different 
requirements and must be able to ensure the protection of 
workers during transportation and at distribution centers. Large 
appliances such as r efrigerators, freezers, dishwashers, cooking 
ranges, washers and dryers are stacked as high as 30 feet so 
packaging cannot fail while products are stored in warehouse in 
all environmental climates.   
 
EPS is used around the edge of large appliances to protect it and workers during storage, 
transport and delivery.  EPS is the preferred materi al for this use since it is lightweight, 
withstands multiple impacts and maintains its integrity in humid conditions.   

  
 p 3 
Worker safety during transportation and at distribution centers 
must be considered especially when dealing with large 
appliances such as  refrigerators, freezers, dishwashers, cooking 
ranges, washers and dryers.  Once assembled, major appliances 
are often packaged, stored and moved in very large warehouses 
or distribution centers. These facilities often have limited 
climate control and can experience extreme temperature and 
humidity changes.  Low temperatures can cause packaging 
materials to become brittle while humidity and heat can affect 
the packaging’s structural integrity and limit the effectiveness of 
adhesives or the strength of produ cts that are made from fiber.  
 
For safety purposes, it is vital to maintain the structural strength of packaging materials, 
particularly with respect to major appliances that are housed in stacks that are three or four 
appliances high.  Furthermore, these  appliances are often moved around by clamp truck and the 
packaging must withstand the force of the clamps in order to be moved efficiently. Other paper 
alternatives such as cardboard, molded pulp or honeycomb can only handle a single impact and 
loses its integrity in hot and humid environments.  
 
A fiber-based alternative  would  be larger and heavier, which leads to more truck loads and more 
warehouse space.  It is estimat ed that there would be an increase of 5-10% in all directions of the 
packaging, which equates to an increase of about 20 -30% more trucks needed to deliver large 
appliances.  
 
Additionally, thin plastic film is use d to protect the finish of appliances as well as the display 
screen.  Fiber alternatives, such as paper, are like sandpaper and would scratch the product and 
would lead to consumers either accepting a damaged product or refusing delivery and the 
distributor returning the product to the warehouse .  There is no alternative to the use of plastic 
film to protect  the finish of appliances or the display screen .   
 
Conclusion  
AHAM appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on LD 1645 .  Manufacturers of 
consumer products need flexibility in choosing appropria te materials for packaging their 
products to avoid situations that cause product breaka ge and damage during transport, which 
ultimately increases the lifecycle impact of the product.   The current system for appliances and 
appliance packaging works, and it should be allowed to continue on its successful path.   For 
future reference, my contact information is (202) 202.872.5955 x327 or via electronic mail at 
jcassady@aham.org . 

