1 
  
Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 1645 – An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste  
Public Hearing  
Jacquelyn Elliott ǀ May 15, 2023  
 
Honorable Senator Brenner, Chair; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and Honorable 
Committee Members:  
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony IN S UPPORT  of LD 1645 . My name is 
Jacquelyn Elliott  and I live in Waterboro . I have actively participated as an environmental health and 
justice advocate for three decades to promote  waste policy that is sustainable; protects  public health 
and preserves  the environment; empowers communities in decision making and upholds  justice for 
those who bear the greatest impacts of t he policy choices that are employed . Policy is about people 
and how they get to live their lives.  
LD 1645  is an attempt to install some parameters around one of the major issues confronting 
management of the  overall  waste stream. Plastic packaging is a problematic  component of what 
constitutes discards requiring disposal. The plastics utilized for this purpose can contain some of the 
most toxic elements used to manufacture plastic. Plastics used in packaging  are often  incompatible 
with recycling equipment  operation; frequently end up imp roperly handled littering and fouli ng the 
environment ; are incinerated creating toxic smoke and ash; consum e preciou s landfill resources  and 
contribut e to the toxic danger from leachate. We are coming to the realiza tion that plastics are not  a 
readily recyclable1 commodity. Th e idea that plastics are desirable and recyclable has bee n primarily 
promoted as a marketing strategy by the fossil fuel and chemical industries to facilitate continued 
extraction of finite resources and produc tion of more plastic. Plastic s are toxic2 throughout their entire 
life cycle – from removal  of the raw materials; the production, transportation, and storage of 
feedstocks; actual manufacturing of products; use of those products; and disposal of those products. 
Efforts to “recycle” in most instances result in  some variation of refuse derived fuel  that is then  
incinerated producing more toxic pollution.  
Changing out unnecessary  plastic packaging is a doable  goal . Many companies are already 
incorporating other materials such as formed recycled cardboard replacing rigid polystyrene ; or 
perforated, recycled and unbleached paper to replace inflated PVC pouches and polystyrene  peanut  
 
1 July 29, 2021,  Brock, Joe, Geddie, John, Volcovici, Valerie, The  recycling myth: A plastic waste solution littered with 
failure : 
 https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special -report/environment -plastic -oil-recycling/   
2 December 2020, Flaws, Jodi Dr., Damdimopoulou, Pauliina, Dr., Patisaaul, Heather, B. Dr., Gore, Andrea Dr., 
Raetzman, Lori Dr., Van denberg, Laura Dr., Plastics, EDCs & Health: A guide for public interest organizations and 
policy -makers on endocrine disrupting chemicals and plastics : 
https://www.endocrine.org/t opics/edc/plastics -edcs -and-health   
2 
 packaging. Toothpaste is being sold without the tube . You can buy bar soap in a paper wrapper  and 
laundry soap in a bag.  
Plastics production proliferated post WWII along with petrochemicals, the building blocks for 
such products. My father was one of the first people identified as petrochemically injured. As a still 
young man, he was near death with failing kidneys and an  overwhelmed liver. A res earch doctor 
working for then Standard Oil (now ExxonMobil Corp. ) risked his position  and informed my father 
what was happening to his body . His only advice for my father was to avoid exposure  to 
petrochemicals. Not easily accomplished  considering what was  occurring in our world at that time. 
Fortunately, these toxics were not yet ubiquitous in our environment and my father would escape 
from our native New Hampshire to the lakes and mountains of the Rangely Region where he would 
settle for weeks at a time i n a rustic hunting camp to allow his body to detoxify sufficiently so he could 
return to civilization and his family.  There are no longer places to where we can escape this toxic 
mugging . 
 There are warnings that the toxic exposures assaulting us all are having deleterious effects on 
our children before they are even born. The science of epigenetics3 is beginning to understand the 
mechanism s involved contributing to the genetic harm that is being passed on. These exposures are 
cumulative and synergistic and are not required to be in mega amounts  to result in damage . 
Soberingly, we are accumulating evidence that miniscule exposures4 during critical windows of 
development can result in profound changes. These injuries  are shaving points off the upper end of 
the arc of intelligence and adding to points on the lower end. Fertility and the ability to reproduce5 
are affecting both males and females.  
Reducing toxic  and needless plastic packaging would contribute positively to the larger 
challenge of protecting human health and the health of the environment. G etting to where we need 
to go will be  a considerable journey . We must  identify the steps we can take now and begin.  
Thank you for considering my comments. I ask the Committee VOTE OUGHT TO PASS . 
Jacquelyn Elliott  
Waterboro ME  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com   
 
3 November 2017,  Food and Chemical Toxicology, Vol. 109, Part 1, pages 812 -816, Ideta -Otsuka, Maky, Igarashi, 
Katsuhide, Hirabayashi, Yoko, Epigenetic toxicity upon exposure during dev elopment – Bisphenol A and valproic acid 
may have epigenetic effects: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278691517305240?link_id=6&can_id=41932730a7f2a6695f9
cc57f9e44755f&source=email -toxic -tuesday -hydrofracking&email_referrer=email_1869898&emai l_subject=toxic -
tuesday -epigenetic -toxicity   
4 Little Things Matter: Protecting Children from Toxic Chemicals, Microplastics:   
 https://littlethingsmatter. ca/toxic/microplastics/   
5 Schettler, Ted M.D., Solomon , Gina M.D., Valenti, Maria, Huddle, Annette Generations At Risk: Reproductive 
Health and the Environment.  
