Kaethe Rice
Waterville 
LD 1645
Testimony of Kaethe Rice, Student Rep. for Defend Our Health’s C4 Board, 
Waterville ME
In SUPPORT of LD 1645,
&quot; An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste”
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee
May 15th, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee. My name is Kaethe Rice. I am a Sophomore at 
Waterville Senior High School in Waterville. Please accept this testimony on behalf 
of the Waterville Senior High School Green Team and the young people in my 
community and across the state, in support of LD 1645, which would help reduce the 
growing problems associated with plastic packaging waste in Maine. 
I am privileged to have grown up in Maine. As I start my college search and see my 
friends go off to college I notice the longing to get out of Maine and explore the world
but the fact of the matter is, as the climate crisis becomes increasingly daunting, 
Maine and New England will become some of the most liveable places in the country.
I love Maine and no matter where life takes me I always see myself coming back to 
this place. As a young person who will inherit this state, and this world, and will be 
tasked with continuing to protect its forests, its lakes, and its coastlines, making it 
liveable and protecting its biodiversity from the harm of climate change, I want to see 
action now towards breaking down the hold that consumerism has on our state, our 
country, and our society as a whole. 
This consensus stays the same among young people everywhere; we want government
action now against the systems that perpetuate climate change. It is no secret that the 
production and consumption of plastic is detrimental to the environment, and the 
health of citizens, disproportionately BIPOC, queer, poor, unhoused, and young. We 
are all affected by these unnecessary plastics in our daily lives. I speak with kids from
my school every day. Their parents are firefighters, farmers, hunters. A few months 
ago I organized a guest to come in and speak about PFAS contamination in Maine and
the work of Defend Our Health. I observed the faces and demeanors of my peers 
change as they started to make personal connections with the stories and information 
they were hearing about the very real and immediate threat of not only PFAS but of 
other types of plastic that we encounter daily. 
 As a young queer advocate, I want a better future with less plastic. Before I ever 
learned about the climate crisis I was told to “reduce, reuse, and recycle.” As I have 
grown as an advocate I have come to understand how flawed this statement and the 
system it represents is. LD 1645 would by 2050 work to phase out 11 harmful plastics
that poison us every day. This legislation gives me hope that we can protect the world 
that we live in. We can protect this beautiful place while making steps toward climate 
justice. With this legislation, we set the tone for other states to follow. I urge you to 
vote “Ought to Pass’ on LD 1645.
Thank you for your time,
Kaethe Rice, Waterville ME
