Kate Manahan
Kennebunk
LD 1645
Testimony of Kate Manahan, Producer and Host of What Mama Wants, a radio show 
about the role of toxics in our daily lives.  Kennebunk, ME.
In support of LD 1645, “An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste”
Before the ENR Committee, May 15, 2023
Senator Brenner, Rep. Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee. My name is Kate Manahan. Please accept this somewhat 
unconventional testimony, in a poem format, in support of LD 1645, which would 
help reduce the growing problems associated with plastic packaging waste in Maine.  
Rachel Carson’s Got her Fingers Crossed!
Rachel Carson is watching, 
She has placed her bets on Maine.
Proven odds on favorite, when looking out for the environment.
For a very long time, 
she’s known all about the ugly toxic reality of plastic’s life cycle: 
Train cars of vinyl chloride, burning toward plastic production plants.
Pipes leaking greenhouse gas emissions, from every crack,
Into the lungs of black and brown children, who live next door.
Plastic bottles bleeding antimony and cobalt into the orange juice.
Infrequently recycled, due to dyes, 
invisible to the eye.
The vast remainder, vaporizing from an inferno, 
spreading cancer, infertility, and misery down wind.
National regulators struggle, things move slowly.
Rachel cheers us on, “Let’s go, Maine!  Dirigo!”
But it is not just for us Mainers.
Plastic particulates don’t discriminate; 
humans, 
beasts, 
soil, 
water.
Fossil fuel particulates force their way into 
our bloodstreams, 
our airways, 
our lives.
Abusing the bodies of people who didn’t have the means to fight to keep them out.
New plastic plants creeping up, next-door to current offenders.
Rachel Carson asked “Who among us is not diminished” by this suffering?
Suffering for what? 
Packing peanuts 
Coffee stirrers 
Plastic straws
Canada politely passed a ban on the production, import and sale 
of single-use squaderances.  
Taiwan, New Zealand and South Korea have seen the light,
They now withhold the toxic chemicals from the plastic bottle recipe.
The EU is strict: No plastic with food!
We can do it, too.
When we phase out The Polys, we’ll join forces with dozens of other states, 
Forcing the hand of the manufacturers.
The Plastics Pact shows, 
That many already know, 
It is time to step away from contamination and destruction. 
Stop with the toxics and the crazy, frivolous waste. 
Make way for 
pink lungs, 
clean water, 
pure blood… 
and ducklings.
Less toxics, less waste, more health.
“Nothing exists alone”—Rachel Carson
Let’s turn off the toxic tap, together. 
 
Please vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1645
 
