 
  
May 15, 2023  
RE: Comments in opposition to LD1645: An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste  
Dear Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources : 
 
On behalf of the Association of Plastics Recyclers , I am submitting testimony in opposition to 
LD1645: An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste. While APR  support s the intent to limit 
chemica ls of concern in plastic packaging, APR  does not believe this bill is the right instrument 
to accomplish this goal and  specifically  does not represent the current sc ience on PET 
packaging.  
 
The Association of P lastic Recyclers (APR)  is a U.S. -based trade organization and the only 
organization focused exclusively on growing and sustaining the plastics recycling industry. 
APR's membership includes independent recycling companies of all sizes that process 
numerous resins, as well as con sumer product companies, plastic resin producers, packaging 
producers, equipment manufacturers, testing laboratories, organizations, and others committed 
to the success of plastics recycling. In short, APR members are the entirety of the plastics 
recycling  industry from design to collection to recovery to remanufacturing . Plastics recycling 
is what we do each and every day. We know the challenges facing the industry and the solutions 
needed to scale recycling effectively as a key solution to reduce plastic waste and move toward 
a more sustainable, circular economy.  
 
APR opposes this bill for  primary reasons:  
1. This bill inappropriately targets antimony in PET packaging and would essentially ban 
one of the most widely used and most recyclable plastic packa ging without due cause.  
Antimony oxide, or compounds derived from antimony oxide, is the most widely used 
catalyst for making PET around the world. Its impact on consumer safety when used in 
PET packaging has been extensively studied for over 60 years in t he context of PET 
packaging.  Further, APR would like to clarify that antimony is not added during the 
recycling  process; it is only used as a catalyst in virgin PET production. There is no 
justification to ban the use of PET packaging based on the current use of antimony in 
the production process.  
2. This bill creates an uneven playing field by targeting only chemicals in plastic packaging 
without simultaneously addressing the use of chemicals of concern in other materials 
including paper and metal packaging.  
 
APR is widely recognized as the leading technical standard in determining plastics recyclability 
and has an extensive team of technical experts who can provide additional i nformation about 
plastics recycling upon request. We welcome any questions you may have and an open 
dialogue on current efforts to improve the design of plastics for recyclability.  
 
  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kate Bailey  
Chief Policy Officer, Association of Plastics Recyclers  
 

