 
 
 
1425 K Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005  
P 202.974.5200 | plasticsindustry.org  
May 13, 2023  
 
 
Joint  Environment and Natural Resources Committee  
State House, Room 216 
Augusta ME, 04333  
 
RE: LD 1645 – An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste - OPPOSED   
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing  Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources , 
On behalf of the members of the Plastics Industry Association (PLASTICS), I appreciate the opportunity to 
share our perspective on LD 1645 . Plasti cs is the 6th largest manufacturing industry  in the United State s, 
and as the  only association that represent s the entire plastics manufacturing supply chain, with nearly 1 
million jobs across the country, PLASTICS has a vested interest in this issue. Since 19 37, PLASTICS and 
our members have  been working to make  the industry more globally competitive while advocating for an 
increase in recycling and sustainability.  As this bill is currently written, it s ramifications  would  unfortunately  
be catastro phic to the state and its residents , as the list of items banned would cause complete upheaval 
in both the plastics industry  and consumer goods sector s. Please allow me to expand on our thoughts:  
Extended Producer Responsibility  (EPR) has no t yet even been implemented in Ma ine. 
We fully support the fact that all players within the plastics supply cha in perform  important role s in being 
good steward s of the environment, which is why  PLASTICS  contends that imp lementing this new law before 
EPR has even begun it s regulatory pr ocess  is both counter -intuitive to the passage of the 2021  law, as well 
as unnecessary. The EPR law  passed aims to make recycling more effective. It set  out clear goals for 
recycling rates , outlined how to  assess if a recycling program is doing its job well , and most importantly, 
tasked the Department of Environmental  Protection (DEP)  to deve lop a fee system  for companies that make 
packaging for products  to fund the program . Make no mist ake, m any of the products by which EPR would 
be funded in the state would no w be banned under LD 1645 . Maine was the first state to pass EPR. We 
hope the state will not be pre-emptively turning its back on the program before it has even had  a chance to 
be fully realized . The  bans instituted  under LD 1645 would  unequivocally  up-end the success of EPR in 
Maine.  
The bill has broad -reaching impacts  and bans many types of packaging  and materials  that are 
necessary  for health and safety  purposes . LD 1645 prohibits materials that are essential for maintaining 
food safety and minimizing food waste. This issue is particularly significant given that food waste is a 
growing problem  across the United States and the world.  A 2021 report  by the U .S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EP A) on the environmental effects of food waste show ed that each year,  food loss and 
waste in the United States  represents  170 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent GHG emissions 
(excluding landfill emissions) , which is  equal to the annual CO2 emissions of 42 coal -fired power plants.1 
 
1 https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021 -11/from -farm-to-kitchen -the-environmental -impacts -of-u.s.-food-waste_508 -
tagged.pdf  
 
 
 
1425 K Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005  
P 202.974.5200 | F 202.296.7005 | www.plasticsindustry.org  
Further, it would eliminate blister packaging that often helps ensure  proper dosage for over the counter 
medications  for countless  consumers,  and would eliminate pigmented bottles that protect vitamins and 
medications from UV light which  can often diminish a medication  or vitamin ’s efficiency  and/or nutritional 
value . Polymers  bann ed under this measure  are imperative  for maintaining freshness and safety of food 
quality. For example, the inclu sion of polyvinylidene chloride ( PVdC) in packaging  can increase the shelf -
life of food s like fresh me at from three w eeks to three months.  Lastly , this bill would ban one of the most 
highly recycled plastic materials in the world - PET packaging , including bottles  and pos t-consumer recycled 
plastic PET packaging , due to the use of cobalt and antimony in processing . Banning cobalt  would be an 
issue for any oxygen scavenging material , as today only cobalt salts allow for oxygen scavenging at room 
temperature.  The antimony chemical form found in PET, has been in use an d researched extensively for 
decades. It is not the same as metallic an timony, which is the form often considered a health ris k, and   any 
antimony  used in  the making of PET bottle s is already regulated and  must  be in compliance with EP A 
drinking water standards . 
Maine’s focus should be on increasing recycling rates and recycling infrastructure , not bans . 
Section  1(I)(7) and Section  2 of this bill, granting blanket authority  to DEP to continue  prohibiting plastic  
packaging material s as it sees fit is both dangerous and overreaching. There is no scientific  criteria outlined 
by which a  material is to be rightly evaluated by DEP  to result in such a distinction.  As pre viously stated, 
bans on plastic pack aging with EPR already having been passed in the State is excessive  and 
unreasonable . The State should be seeking out ways to comple ment EPR and add further value to these 
already valuable and re cyclable materials.  
PLASTICS strive s to help our industry reach a fully cir cular economy  every day , which is why our members 
and industry colleagues  implement  sustainable materials management strategies and promote  concepts 
that consider the entire lifecycle of a product. Through our own commitment to sustainability, we work with 
our members to  help them achieve their sustainability goals . PLASTI CS advocates for the responsible 
recycling, reuse, and recovery  of all plastics products and materials . Thank you again for the opportunity t o 
comment on this very important proposal.  While we  respectfully urge the committee to oppose this 
measure , we would  welcome  any opportunity to work with policymake rs and stakeholders  to advance 
reforms that can bring lasting solutions to our shared goals  of sustainability  to Maine . 
 
If I can answer any questions or provide the committee with further information , please do not hesitate to 
contact me at kquigley @plasticsindustry.org .  
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kris Quigley  
Regional Directo r, State Government Affa irs 
Plastics Industry Association  
 
 
 
 
