i 
Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
In Support of LD 1645 
An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste 
Sponsored by Representative Lori Gramlich 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, May 15, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the 
Committee, my name is Lani Graham I am a physician and former Chief 
Public health Officer for Maine. I live in Freeport I am here in 
support of Ll) 1645, which offers this Committee another opportunity to 
show your excellent environmental leadership that IS becoming a Maine 
trademark With this bill you can reduce greenhouse gases and reduce 
the environmental and health effects of plastic waste without harming 
businesses. s 
First, from a public health point of view, it is well recognized thati 
climate change is considered one of the leading public health problems 
of our time. This bill offers the opportunity to reduce greenhouse 
gasses by limiting the amount of plastic that is burned in Maine 
incinerators. We can also enhance recycling by eliminating the use of 
unnecessary plastics not eligible for recycling. Unfortunately, at the 
present time, plastic production is increasing. We need to decrease 
plastic use now. Getting rid of plastic packaging that most experts, 
including businesses, agree is not needed is an easy way to do that. 
Second, we all know that significant amounts of this unwanted and 
unneeded plastic winds up on Maine land and in Maine waters Last 
year I was driving on 295 following a truck that had plastic peanuts 
blowing out of its truck bed like a mini snowstorm. We have all seen 
plastic trash washing up on our coastline. Every year at least 14 million 
tons of plastic enter the ocean and plastic makes up 80% of all marine 
debris found from surface water to deep-sea sediments} All this is 
very expensive to clean up and very important to consider for a state 
that depends on fishing and tourism. Maine already took a big step to 
1 
https //www iucn org/resources/issues-brief/manne-plastic-pollution
reduce plastlc waste and 1ts attendant costs by makmg manufacturers 
pay fees to contmue usmg materlals that would requlre clean up. LD 
1645 bullds on that approach and 1s 1n hne w1th what the manufacturers 
themselves have comrmtted to do w1th respect to plastlc packagmg 
Flnally, we should conslder the potentlal lmpacts of plastlcs on human< 
health. Humans are exposed to many toxlc chemlcals and 
mlcroplastlcs through lnhalatlon, 1ngest1on, and dlrect skln contact all 
along the plastlc hfecycle. Accordmg to the worldwlde fund for Nature, 
an average person could be lngestlng about 5 grams of plastlc every 
week? Whlle research 1nto health lmpacts of plastlcs on human health 
1s st1ll 1n 1ts early stages, there are certamly anxlety-provoklng slgns 
suggestlng that 1t may not be healthy to contmue down thls path. 
Studles on ﬁsh and blrds have shown clear health lmpacts and a study 
done last year of the breast mllk of healthy mothers found that 
mlcroplastlcs were present 1n 75% of the samples. 3 Ultlmately health 
lII‘lp21CtS could be the costhest of all the lmpacts of plastlc waste. Isn't 1t 
better not to rlsk those costs and begm now to reduce plastlcs? 
Let's pass LD 1625 unanlmously and contmue our efforts to reduce 
plastlc by ehmmatmg plastlc packagmg waste.‘ 
Thank you so much for your attentlon. I would be pleased to answer 
any questlons you mlgh have°
/ 
2 https //WWW genevaenwronmentnetwork org/resources/updates/plastlcs-and-health/# 
3 
https //www nyumes com/2023/O4/20/oplmon/Imcroplastlcs-health-envlronment html
