1 
 Testimony of Pat Ianni, Falmouth, Maine,  
In Support of LD 1645 (H.P. 1055), An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
May 15, 2023 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1645. In my 38 year career as an 
environmental scientist and regulatory specialist, here in Maine and across the country, I have had the 
opportunity to investigate hazardous waste sites all across the country and to work with numerous clients to 
mitigate their environmental risks in many ways, including helping those clients reduce their waste generation 
impacts. As an aside, I have also been a long-distance runner for more than four decades and have grown 
frustratingly accustomed to seeing the amount of litter along our roadsides in Maine increase exponentially 
over the years. As we all know, it is a trait of human nature that most people will not discard items of value 
whether through littering or proper trash disposal. Coincidentally, this human behavior seems to support my 
observation that most roadside litter is comprised of “plastic packaging waste”, much of which might be 
characterized as non-essential, single-use – most notably – plastic packaging – bottles, cups, straws, wrap, 
food containers, bags, etc. Even those materials covered under our “bottle bill” are frequently found because 
the redemption amount is ineffective at reducing the litter of those materials. 
 
What Can We Do to Address the Increasing Amount of Plastic used in Packaging and the Wastes Generated 
by this massive amount of Single Use Non-Essential Plastic Waste?  
 
While the forthcoming EPR program will address some of this plastic packaging waste, it will not turn off the 
plastic packaging waste “at the tap”.   
 
In the January 2019 “Annual Product Stewardship Report”, the MEDEP acknowledged the following: 
• A large portion of the current municipal waste stream is composed of consumer packaging, much of 
which is plastic and is not recyclable. 
• Consequently, the diversion of packaging wastes from profitable recycling markets to more costly 
disposal/incineration options in recent years as the value of recyclable packaging has dropped, has 
resulted in the high costs of disposal which have been passed along municipalities and consumers. 
 
Companies are free to continuing producing this non-essential petroleum-based, “greenhouse gas”-
generating, single use plastic which quickly becomes a waste and either litters our roadways, pollutes our air 
via incinerator emissions, contaminates our groundwater, surface water and soil via landfilling, and/or possibly 
is recycled to become more plastic products which quickly become wastes.  While this bill does not do enough 
to eliminate all single-use, non-essential plastics – that is, both plastic packaging and many plastic products, it 
is a start.  And unlike the EPR program, this bill will stop the production of these materials at the start of the 
life cycle and begin to stop the flow of these hazardous materials into our environment and our bodies.  
 
Is it possible to live in a world without Non-Essential Single-Use plastic packaging? 
 
Of course it is!  As someone who remembers the consumer/retail world of the 1960s and 1970s, I can clearly 
remember an economy where food, clothing, appliances, and many other goods were sold and packaged 
safely and securely without the multiple layers of plastic packaging we see needlessly used in today’s 
packaged products.  This SINGLE-USE plastic packaging is NOT ESSENTIAL!  And the costs associated with it are 
extreme – it is the consumer, not the producer, who ends up bearing the brunt of these costs – in terms of 
litter, waste, unnecessary need for recycling or incineration or landfilling, and ultimately, the adverse impacts 
2 
 to human health and the health of the environmental receptors that we all depend upon including – clean 
surface water, groundwater, soil, and air; and healthy plants and animals.  These resources make up the world 
we all share on this planet.  The adverse impacts of plastics – caused both during the extraction and refining of 
the petroleum used to manufacture the plastics, as well as the impacts resulting from the use and disposal of 
this unlimited constant generation of wastes caused by these single use materials – are unnecessary because 
these are NON-ESSENTIAL materials.  While the manufacturers and sellers of plastic packaging would like you 
to believe that this demand is driven by the consumer, they are wrong. I am a consumer and I can attest to the 
fact that I would much prefer to live in a world without these SINGLE USE NON-ESSENTIAL plastic materials. 
They serve no purpose which can’t be easily and aptly replaced by other materials if necessary at all; however, 
in most cases they are not essential. 
 
Why Reducing Packaging Waste is Long Overdue in Maine! 
 
While running many miles along Maine’s roadways, I have observed not just the increase of roadside litter 
over the years, but also the enormous increase in the amount plastic trash placed for pick-up at the ends of 
driveways on garbage collection days; these observations clearly reflect the increase over the years of our 
society’s consumption level, and the corresponding waste generation. The overuse of non-essential single-use 
plastic packaging has developed in just the last half century. It is not a coincidence that grocery stores in the 
1950’s and 1960’s did not wrap every single product sold in multiple layers of plastic packaging and certainly 
did not wrap fresh produce in non-essential single-use plastic film which serves no purpose except to cause 
the produce to ripen too quickly. Much of the litter observed along our roadways, on city sidewalks, and in 
retail and commercial parking lots is non-essential single-use plastic packaging material – such as, the 
multiple layers of packaging used to wrap non-fragile retail products, the plastic packaging used on cereals, 
crackers, pasta, snacks, coffee, bread, etc., and the endless supply of non-essential single-use plastic to-go 
coffee and soda cups, lids, straws, and stirrers, all of which are handed out freely by restaurants and 
convenience stores. Our consumer demand for convenience appears to have fed our need for more disposable 
goods and disposable packaging and, consequently, has led to an attitude that this waste is a necessary evil. It 
is not.  However, is it consumer demand or is this needless over packaging a marketing surface relied upon by 
the product producers?  I would suggest it is the latter. 
 
In 1989, our Maine Legislature enacted a recycling law which currently states that the State-wide goal is to 
“recycle or compost, on an annual basis, 50% of the municipal solid waste tonnage generated statewide, by 
January 1, 2021.” 38 MRSA§2131. According to figures cited by the NRCM, we have yet to meet this goal. This 
non-essential single-use plastic packaging wastes, for which recycling and reuse is often not feasible, must be 
landfilled or incinerated at a significant cost to taxpayers, our health, and the environment. The third 
alternative, and a goal for which we should strive, is to reduce the practice of using non-essential single-use 
packaging. 
 
Therefore, this bill which aims to reduce and eliminate a large portion of non-essential single-use plastic 
packaging wastes is long overdue in our state. Besides relieving our towns and taxpayers of some of the 
financial burden currently placed on them to handle the ever increasing volume of packaging wastes that can 
no longer be recycled, LD 1645 will prevent those packaging producers from using non-essential single-use 
packaging, and potentially will also encourage the development of new design technologies for packaging 
materials that are less harmful to the environment and human health during production, use and disposal. 
 
For these reasons (and many more too numerous to iterate here), I sincerely hope this Committee will support 
this long-overdue bill, and vote Ought to Pass. 
