 
 
 
 
 
 
May 15th 2023  
RE: Oppose- LD 1645/HP 1055 An Act to Reduce Plastic Packaging Waste 
Chair Brenner, Rep Gramlich and Members of the Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources,  
The undersigned organizations representing industries and workers across Maine respectfully 
request your opposition to LD 1645/HP 1055 that would ban any product in packaging that 
contains polystyrene, expanded polystyrene, polyvinyl chloride, polyvinylidene chloride, 
polystyrene terephthalate and is manufactured using antimony or cobalt as a processing aid or 
additive.  
We are deeply committed to creating a more circular economy for plastics. That is the 
reason our industry were among the first to establish ambitious, forward-thinking goals that all 
plastic packaging in the United States is reused and recycled. Achieving these goals will require 
industry, manufacturers, brands and retailers, recyclers and waste haulers, as well as citizens, 
communities, non-profits, academics and federal, state and local goverments to come together 
to support policies and programs to increase the supply of and demand for recycled materials 
and create the circular economy we all want.  
Maine is currently in the stakeholder input stage of pre-rulemaking to implement an 
Extended Producer Responsibility program for paper and packaging. New mandates are 
unnecessary and counterproductive.  
As you know, Maine enacted LD 1541 in July 2021, making it the first state in the nation to 
enact a paper and packaging EPR program. The implementation of this EPR program is 
intended to reduce single use packaging and plastics waste. Producers will be required to pay 
into this fund based on the amount by weight of packaging and material associated with the 
products they sell, offer for sale or distribute for sale in or into the state.  
Under this program, packaging decisions will be directly influenced by a future fee schedule that 
will incentivize easier to recycle materials.  
Given that Maine the stakeholder input process of pre-rulemaking for the EPR program does not 
conclude until December 2023 with anticipated adoption of routine technical rules in summer 
2024, new packaging mandates as proposed in LD 1645 are unnecessary and 
counterproductive.  
Hundreds of global companies are already reducing plastic in their packaging and have 
committed to using recycled content. Banning plastics could result in these companies 
failing to meet their commitments, and simple substitution for packaging is not possible 
in many cases. Plastic is vital to modern life, from energy saving insulation to medical grade 

plastics used in surgeries and to lightweight vehicles. We support a circular economy where 
plastic is used instead of discarded, helping to keep it out of the environment. Specifically 
related to plastic packaging, many consumer packaging companies have committed to using 
recycled plastic content in their packaging.  
More than 400 global brand companies have committed to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s 
(EMF) New Plastics Economy initiative, which requires these companies to have 100% of their 
packaging recyclable by 2025 and include 25-50% recycled content in their packaging. A ban on 
plastics would result in less plastic available for these companies to meet their recycled content 
commitments or mandates.  
While the bill’s ban would require that these and other companies would switch to readily 
recyclable, reusable or compostable packaging, this is not possible in many cases. Outright 
bans on materials do not consider potential important tradeoffs including how certain 
packaging materials promote food safety or prevent food waste, a significant contributor 
to climate change as 25% to 30% of global emissions come from the food system.  
For these reasons, we respectfully request that the committee not move forward with LD 1645.  
 
Thank you for your consideration, 
Sincerely 
American Chemistry Council  
American Fuels & Petrochemical Manufacturers  
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers 
Berry Global 
Braven Environmental  
Brightmark  
Consumer Brands Association  
Flexible Packaging Association  
Household and Commercial Products Association 
Plastic Energy  
Plastics Industry Association  
Printing United Alliance 
Sealed Air 
Vinyl Institute  
Vinyl Siding Institute  
