“ 
ffS 
ll 
Lisa M. Keim 3 State House Station 
Senator, District I9 ' S 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Assistant Republican Leader THE MAINE SENATE 
13 l st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Lisa Keim before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
LD 653, An Act to Support Constitutionally Required Public Defense by Creating the 
Maine Ofﬁce of Public Defense Services 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. 
I am Lisa Keim, and I proudly represent the citizens of Senate District 19, which includes much of Northern 
Oxford County and communities in Franklin County. I am here to present LD 653, “An Act to Support 
Constitutionally Required Public Defense by Creating the Maine Ofﬁce of Public Defense Services. ” 
The concept of my bill is simple, though the title makes it sound more ambitious than it means to be. 
Simply put, the current name of Maine’s agency that is responsible for providing public defense to people 
unable to ﬁnancially afford representation themselves, does not ﬁt the activity. 
The public defense system in our state, currently named the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services 
(MCILS), can be accurately described as a group of Commission members that direct an ofﬁce that oversees 
and provides legal defense for the poor. The current name of Maine’s system of public defense is confusing, 
and make it extremely difﬁcult to advocate on the behalf of indigent people who, under the 6n‘ Amendment, are 
entitled to legal defense paid for by the Maine taxpayers. 
Maine people, who are required to pay the bill for their fellow Mainer’s defense, should at minimum have the 
unit described using words that they readily understand. 
I have heard the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services shortened to any number of monikers: Mickels, 
ILS, MCILS, miklas, and worst but least, Manekills. 
When I ﬁrst entered the Legislature, I myself had no idea what was being referred to as Indigent Legal Services 
I, like many others upon hearing the word indigent, immediately thought of the Word indigenous —a word far 
removed from what this agency is all about. 
If we are to advocate in the Legislature and to the broader community in Maine to fund the Work of this 
essential agency, at minimum the ofﬁce needs a name that regular people immediately understand. 
This name change should not wait. The current name of MCILS does a disservice to the people who are 
advocating for the 6"‘ amendment rights of all Mainers. 
G()l~’€i"!'?i7I €I?f Ovcrsig/rt (70mn2irfee 
Stale House (Z07) 287-1505 * Fm; (207) 287-1527 * Y’ai1!*‘ ree 1-80¢’)-423-690() * 7"I'Y F1’! 
Lisa. Kez'm@!egfs!afu1'e. 1z2a:' 1te.gov * Iegis/zz!zrr ‘e. Incline.g<)v/iwiczte
