/'-»=~~'»-'1 I “is <=:§,' 
LUBERTKES mam: 
L. HEIDEN runrnieaa can 
ZACHARY Maine 
TESTIMONY OF 
pA 
Ought to Pass as Amended — LD 653 
An Act to Support ConstitutionallyrRequired Public Defense by Creating the Maine Office of 
_ 
Public Defense Services 
‘ JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON IUDICIARY 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Zachary Heiden, and lam the Chief Counsel at the ACLU of 
Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties 
guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support 
LD 653, in an amended form that will ensure that Maine builds a constitutionally adequate public 
defense system. 
The Maine and U.S. Constitutions obligate the State of Maine to ensure that people accused of crimes 
and facing the loss of liberty are provided with the assistance of counsel. There is widespread 
agreement that Maine’s unique current system of relying almost completely on private, appointed 
attorneys to provide indigent defense is inefficient and results in ineffective assistance of counsel. This 
system is unable to attract nearly enough private attorneys to do this work, and it does not provide 
attorneys with any meaningful training, supervision, or support. As our Chief Justice explained, “we’ 
are having a bit of a crisis of appointed counsel in this state . . . We don't have enough lawyers who are 
willing to take these cases or are available to take these cases. And we, at the same time, are 
experiencing a crisis in the court system with a backlog—~particularly of criminal cases—that is just 
oveiwhelming at this point.”‘' 
In its current fonn, LD 653 takes a symbolic step: it creates a new “Maine Ofﬁce of Public Defense 
Services ” (under the supervision of the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services), and transfers 
nitor.org/chief~justice~says-maines-justice-system-is-failing/. ‘ https://www.themainemo
ACLU Maine 
LD 653--OTP 
Page 2 of2 
oversight of the provision of legal services from the Commission to the new Ofﬁce. This change in 
language is important, because it signals the Legislature ’s recognition that any solution to the current 
constitutional crisis must involve the creation of a working public defender system. 
But this change in title is only the first step.. The Legislature must start now on the process of making 
substantial structural reforms to build a public defense system. LD 653 should be amended to provide 
for the building of brick-and-mortar public defender offices in each of Maine’s eight prosecutorial- 
districts, eachwith a staff of employed public defenders, investigators, social workers, and 
administrative support. These public defender offices will attract new attorneys into a structured 
system with built-in supervision, training, and support. And building regional public (defender offices is 
an efficient use of resources: in contrast to paying a private assigned counsel $300,000 for a year of, 
full-time work, the state would pay a full-time line defender around $l.l0,000 —including both salary 
and health insurance? Employed public defender attorneys (unlike private counsel) could also qualify 
for federal law student loan forgiveness without any investment of state dollars, which would be 
another inducement to more attorneys to represent indigent defendants. Prosecutors already have 
offices and staff--why sl1ouldn ’t public defenders? 
No other state in the country relies on an almost exclusively private appointed system to fulﬁll their' 
constitutional duty to provide assistance of counsel. A hybrid indigent defense system, continuing to 
rely on private attorneys while at the same time building employed public defender offices in each 
prosecutorial district, will both be more efficient and provide more effective assistance of counsel. And 
a hybrid system will give the State maximum ﬂexibility to quickly respond to this constitutional crisis. 
Because any solution to our current quagmire will require a significant investment in a public defender 
system, we urge the committee to amend this bill to create an actual public defender system, and to 
vote Ought to Pass As Amended.2
» 
2 Cost estimates are all based on the figures compiled in MClLS’s FY 22-23 Budget Initiatives.
