Mabel 
Wadsworth 
Center 
Feminist. Local. Independent. 
Statement of Abb1e Strout-Bentes, Dlrector of Educanon and Community Engagement, 
Mabel Wadsworth Center to the J o1nt Standmg Commlttee on J ud1c1ary 
May 5, 2023 
_ LD 494, An Act to Conform State Fundlng to the Federal Hyde Amendment, 
L1m1t1ng Fundmg for Some Abortlon Servlces 
LD 771, An Act to Protect a Woman's Rlght to Wlthdraw Consent for an Abort1on 
LD 1197, An Act to Prevent CoercedAb0rt10n 
LD 1249, An Act to Protect the Quallty of Care Provlded v1a Telehealth by Prohibning 
Phys1c1ans from Prescnbing Ab0I'lZ1011-1Ildl1C111g Drugs or Devlces Through 
Telehealth or Other Electromc Communlcauon 
LD 1614, An Act to Requlre an Ultrasound and Certam Counsel1ng Before an Abort1on 
Ought Not to Pass 
Senator Carney, Representatwe Moonen, and members of the jo1nt standmg commlttee 
on J ud1c1ary, my name 1s Abb1e Strout-Bentes, I am the Dlrector of Educat1on and 
Community Engagement at Mabel Wadsworth Center m Bangor. Mabel Wadsworth 
Centerls the only mdependent, not-for-pro ﬁt, fem1n1st health center 1n Mame. We 
pI‘0V1d8 comprehenslve sexual and reproducuve healthcare, mcludmg prenatal care, 
aborhon care, b1rth control, STD test1ng and treatment, cancer screen1ngs, and other 
wellness care 
I am here today on behalf of our health center to oppose all ﬁve b1llS be1ng heard thls 
mormng.
Let’s be clear, the goal of these bills is to restrict access to 3.l')O1'l101'1 care and are part of 
an overall strategy to ban abortion. They are imnecessary and roll back important 
changes that have made access to abortion more equitable in Maine. 
The Supreme Court’s decision last June to overturn Roe v. Wade has ampliﬁed the 
disparities in accessing reproductive health care m the Umted States. Prior to that 
decision, lawmakers opposed to abortion spent decades passing state and federal 
legislation, similar to the bills presented today, that chipped away access to abortion. As 
a result, a pregnant person’s abihty to access the 3.bO1'l1OI1 they need depends on where 
they live and how much money or resources they have. 
At the same time, in Maine, we have followed the clear support of our community 
members by not only protecting access to abortion but also passing laws that expanded 
access to equitable care When I started at Mabel Wadsworth Center, a pregnant person 
had to travel to Portland, Augusta, or Bangor to access medication abortion care, and 
most patients had to pay out-of-pocket for their care. Now people living in our most 
rural COII1II1111 ‘11l16S can access medication abortion at their local family planning clinic or 
via telehealth with the pills mailed to their homes with the care covered by their 
insurance These changes have been critical to ensuring that every person m Maine has 
the ability to make decisions about their bodies and their lives 
Abortion is a very common medical procedure and a normal part of reproductive health 
lives. One in four women will have an abortion by the time they turn 45. The science 1S 
clear it is safe and life-savmg medical care‘ Addiuonally, access to abortion allows 
people to build the families they want and contributes to a thriving community. Please 
do not roll back the progress we have made in Maine. 
On behalf of Mabel Wadsworth Center, I urge you to oppose these bills 
Thank you for your time.
1 
https I/vvvvvv ans|rh org/research/research/abortions-can-be-prov:ded-safely-and-effectlvely-using-telehealt
h
