 
  
 
 
Written  Testimony  of Danielle  Pimentel,  J.D.  
Policy  Counsel,  Americans  United  for Life  
In Support  of L.D.  1249  
Submitted  to the Joint  Judiciary  Committee  
May  5, 2023   
 
Dear Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Danielle Pimentel, and I serve as Policy Counsel at Americans United for 
Life (“AUL”). Established in 1971, AUL is a national law and policy nonprofit organization 
with a specialization in abortion, end -of-life issues, and bioethics law. AUL publishes pro -life 
model legislation and policy guides,1 tracks state bioethics legislation,2 and regularly testifies 
on pro -life legislation in Congress and the states. Our vision at  AUL is to strive for a world 
where everyone is welcomed in life and protected in law. As Policy Counsel, I specialize in 
life-related legislation, constitutional law, and abortion jurisprudence.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1 249 (“LD 1249” or “bill”) . 
This bill  is a common -sense measure that  prohibits telemedical prescriptions  or the mailing 
of chemical abortion drugs, which  (1) Maine has the authority to pass post -Dobbs , (2) is 
consistent with the federal prohibitions on the mailing of abortion -inducing drugs, (3) 
protects the health and safety of women seeking chemical abortions, and ( 4) safeguards 
women against intimate partner violence and reproductive control.  I urge the Committee to 
support L.D . 1249 and defend  the welfare of women seeking chemical abortion drugs.  
I. Main e Has Broad  Powers  to Pass  Informed  Consent  and Health  and Safety  Safeguards  
for Women  Seeking  Chemical  Abortions   
In Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization , the United States Supreme Court 
overruled Roe v. Wade  and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey  and 
 
1 Pro-Life Model Legislation and Guides , AMS. UNITED  FOR  LIFE, https://aul.org/law -and-policy/  (last visited May 
4, 2023). AUL is the original drafter of many of the hundreds of pro -life bills enacted in the States in recent 
years.  See Olga Khazan, Planning the End of Abortion , ATLANTIC  (July 16, 2020), 
www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/07/what -pro-life-activists -really -want/398297/  (“Sta te 
legislatures have enacted a slew of abortion restrictions in recent years. Americans United for Life wrote most 
of them.”) ; see also Anne Ryman & Matt Wynn, For Anti -Abortion Activists, Success of ‘Heartbeat’ Bills was 10 
Years in the Making , CTR. FOR PUB. INTEGRITY  (Jun. 20, 2019) , https://publicintegrity.org/politics/state -
politics/copy -paste -legislate/for -anti -abortion -activists -success -of-heartbeat -bills -was -10-years -in-the-
making/  (“The  USA TODAY/Arizona Republic  analysis found Americans United for Life was behind the bulk of 
the more than 400 copycat [anti -]abortion bills introduced in 41 states.”).  
2 Defending Life: State Legislation Tracker , AMS. UNITED FOR LIFE, https://aul.org/law -and-policy/state -
legislation -tracker/ (last visited May 4 , 2023).  
2 
 
 returned the abortion issue to the democratic process.3 Federal courts now review abortion 
litigation under a rational basis review. T he Supreme Court notes: “[u]nder our precedents, 
rational -basis review is the appropriate standard for such challenges. As we have explained, 
procuring an abortion is not a fundamental constitutional right because such a right has no 
basis in the Constitut ion’s text or in our Nation’s history.”4 Accordingly, “States may regulate 
abortion for legitimate reasons ” if the law is rationally related to those reasons , “and when 
such regulations are challenged under the Constitution, courts cannot ‘substitute thei r social 
and economic beliefs for the judgment of legislative bodies.’”5 The Court recognizes that:  
These legitimate interests include respect for and preservation of prenatal life 
at all stages of development . . . the protection of maternal health and s afety; 
the elimination of particularly gruesome or barbaric medical procedures; the 
preservation of the integrity of the medical profession; the mitigation of fetal 
pain; and the prevention of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or 
disability.6 
Furthermore, “[a] law regulating abortion, like other health and welfare laws, is 
entitled to a ‘strong presumption of validity.’”7 In this regard, Maine  has broad powers to 
pass the bill, which safeguards the informed consent and health and safety of wom en seeking 
chemical abortion drugs.  
II. The Bill is Consistent  with  Federal  Law,  Which Prohibits  the Mailing  of Chemical  
Abortion  Drugs   
Federal law proscribes the mailing of chemical abortion drugs.  “Every article or thing 
designed, adapted, or intended for p roducing abortion  . . . is declared to be nonmailable 
matter and shall not be conveyed in the mails or delivered from any post office or by any 
letter carrier.”8 Similarly,  Congress prohibits “knowingly us[ing] any express company or 
other common carrier or interactive computer service  . . . for carriage in interstate or foreign 
commerce  . . . any drug, medicine, article, or thing designed, adapted, or intended for 
producing abortion .”9 The bill is consistent with these federal law s because it lik ewise directs 
“[a] person may not  . . . [s]hip an abortion -inducing drug or a device designed to produce an 
abortion by mail, express delivery service or other means of interstate commerce.”10 As 
 
3 Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, 142 S. Ct. 2228, 2242 –2243 (2022).  
4 Id. at 2283.  
5 Id. at 2283 –2284 (citations omitted).  
6 Id. at 2284.  
7 Id. (citation omitted).  
8 18 U.S.C. § 1461.  
9 18 U.S.C. § 1462 . Although a Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel memo explored the idea that federal 
laws do not prohibit the mailing of chemical abortion drugs, Members of Congress subsequently wrote to 
Attorney General Merrick Garland, reminding him that the “plain text and clear meaning of the law” prohibit 
the mailing of chemical abortion drugs.  Letter from James Lankford, Senator, U.S. Cong., et al., to Merrick B. 
Garland, Att’y Gen., U.S. Dep’t of Ju st. 1 (Jan. 25, 2023), 
https://www.lankford.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/dojletterabortionmail.pdf . 
10 H.P. 797 , § 2, 131st Leg., 1st Reg. Sess. (Me. 2023).  
3 
 
 discussed below, these prohibitions  are essential for the informed consent and health and 
safety of women seeking chemical abortions.  
III. In-Person  Medical  Evaluations  Are Essential  To the Health  and Safety  of Women  
Seeking  Chemical  Abortion  Drugs   
In-pers on visits are a necessary  health and safety safeguard  for chemical abortions. 
The Mayo Clinic states that: “Medical abortion isn’t an option if you . . . [c]an’t make follow -
up visits to your doctor or don’t have access to emergency care.”11 Medical instit utions are in 
agreement about this, as “[a] medical abortion involves at least two visits to a doctor’s office 
or clinic.”12 Follow -up visits and reporting are critical to ensure that if a woman has retained 
tissue, she receives essential follow -up care.  
But even before a chemical abortion, healthcare providers must confirm a woman is 
a medically appropriate candidate for chemical abortion. In most states, this consultation is 
with a physician. In a few states, like California, it can be done by a midlevel  provider, such 
as a nurse practitioner, certified nurse -midwife, or physician assistant.13 A number of 
medical conditions make a woman ineligible to take chemical abortion drugs, including 
having a potentially dangerous ectopic pregnancy (a pregnancy outside of the uterus) or 
having an intrauterine device (IUD) in place.14 Chemical abortion can not terminate an 
ectopic pregnancy and should not be used after the first seventy days of pregnancy due to 
heightened risk to the woman’s health.15 A physician can  only  diagnose  an ectopic  pregnancy  
by blood  tests  and an ultrasound, which means a physician  cannot determine via 
telemedicine whether a pregnancy is ectopic.16 
Determining  gestational  age usually  is done  in person  by ultrasound.  Ultrasound  is 
the most  accurate  method  to establish  or confirm  gestational  age in the first trimester.17 
Dating  a pregnancy  by using  a woman’s  last menstrual  period (LMP)  is far less accurate.  The 
American  College  of Obstetricians  and Gynecologists (ACOG)  indicates only one half of women 
accurately recall their LMP.18 In one study, forty percent of women had more than a five -day 
discrepancy between  their LMP dating and the ultrasound dating.19 In this regard, LMP 
dating is not nearly as precise  as an ultra sound.  But an accurate  measurement  of gestational  
 
11 Medical Abortion , MAYO CLINIC  (July 29, 2022), https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests -procedures/medical -
abortion/about/pac -20394687 (emphasis in original).  
12 Medical  Abortion , UNIV. OF CAL. SAN FRANCISCO HEALTH , www.ucsfhealth.org/treatments/medical -abortion (last 
visited May 4, 2023).  
13 Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2253(b) (2022).  
14 Questions and Answers on Mifepristone for Medical Termination of Pregnancy Through Ten Weeks Gestation , 
U.S.  FOOD & DRUG ADMIN . (Jan. 4,  2023), https://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarket -drug -safety -information -
patients -and-providers/questions -and-answers -mifepristone -medical -termination -pregnancy -through -ten-
weeks -gestation . 
15 Id. 
16 Ectopic Pregnancy , MAYO CLINIC  (Mar. 12, 2022 ), https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases -conditions/ectopic -
pregnancy/diagnosis -treatment/drc -20372093.  
17 Comm. on Obstetric Practice, Am. Coll. of Obstetricians & Gynecologists et al., Methods  for Estimating  the Due  
Date , Comm.  Op. No. 700,  at 1 (reaffirmed 2022).  
18 Id. at 2.  
19 Id. 
4 
 
 age is required to  show  that  a woman is  even  a candidate for  a chemical  abortion.  
Without an in -person evaluation, abortion providers also cannot test for Rh negative  
blood  type.  During  pregnancy,  if a woman  has Rh negative  blood  while  her fetus is Rh positive, 
the woman’s body may produce antibodies after exposure to  fetal  red blood  cells.20 Abortion  
can cause  maternal  exposure  to fetal  blood, even in the first trimester.21 Therefore, if 
indicated,  a healthcare  provider  must  give  a woman  with  Rh negative  blood  an Rh 
immune  globulin  injection.  Without the injection,  antibodies  can damage future pregnancies 
by creating  life-threatening  anemia  in fetal  red blood  cells.22 ACOG  describes  that “Rh testing 
is recommended in patients with unknown Rh status before medication abortion, and Rh D 
immunoglobulin should be administered if indicated.”23 Rh negative  blood  typing  is thus  a 
medically  necessary  test, but it cannot  occur  during  chemical  abortions  consultations that  are 
done  entirely  via telemedicine.  Thus, by prohibiting telemedical chemical abortion 
prescriptions, the bill safeguards the health and safety of women  in Maine.  
IV. The Use of Telemedicine  Exacerbates  the Risks  to Women  of Intimate  Partner  Violence  
and Reproductive  Cont rol  
There are grave informed consent  issues within abortion decisions because a  woman 
may be facing intimate partner violence (IPV). There are “[h]igh rates of physical, sexu al, and 
emotional IPV . . . among women seeking a[n abortion].”24 For women seeking abortion, the 
prevalence of IPV is nearly three times greater than women continuing a pregnancy.25 Post -
abortive IPV victims also have a “significant association” with “psy chosocial problems 
including depression  . . . , suicidal ideation  . . . , stress  . . . , and disturbing thoughts.”26  
Similarly, intimate partners, family members, and sex traffickers may be asserting 
reproductive control over the woman, which are “actions  that interfere with a woman’s 
reproductive intentions.”27 In the context of abortion, reproductive control not only 
produces coerced abortions or continued pregnancies, but it also affects whether the 
pregnancy was intended in the first place.28 Reproduct ive control is a prevalent issue for 
women. “As many as one -quarter of women of reproductive age attending for sexual and 
reproductive health services give a history of ever having suffered [reproductive control].”29 
 
20 Rh Factor  Blood  Test , MAYO  CLINIC  (July 29, 2022),  https://www.mayoclinic.org/tests -procedures/rh -
factor/about/pac -20394960.  
21 Id. 
22 Id. 
23 Comm. On Practice Bulletins —Gynecology and the Soc’y of Family Planning, Am. Coll. of Obstetricians & 
Gynecologists, Medication Abortion Up to 70 Days of Gestation , Comm. Op. 225, at 40 (reaffirmed 2023).  
24 Megan Hall et al., Associations Between Intimate Partner Violence and Termination of Pregnancy: A Systematic 
Review and Meta -Analysis , PLOS  MED., Jan. 7, 2014, at 1, 15.  
25 Comm. on Health Care for Underserved Women, Am. Coll. of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, Reproductive and 
Sexual Coercion , Comm. Op. No. 554, at 2 (reaffirmed 2022).  
26 Hall, supra note 24, at 11.  
27 Sam Rowlands & Susan Walker, Reproductive Control by Others: Means, Perpetrators and Effects , 45 BMJ  
SEXUAL & REPROD . HEALTH 61, 62, 65 (2019).  
28 Id. at 62 –63. 
29 Id. at 62.  
5 
 
 Medical professionals must “[s] creen for IPV in a private and safe setting with the 
woman alone and not with her partner, friends, family, or caregiver.”30 Yet, telemedicine 
cannot ensure that a coercive partner, friend, family member, or caregiver is not in the room 
with a woman seekin g a chemical abortion. In a telehealth setting, ACOG  recommends 
healthcare providers screen patients multiple times because patients  may not be able to 
disclose abuse each time they are screened.31 In other words,  domestic  violence  screening  
by telehealth  “may not allow individuals the privacy or safety needed to disclose abuse.”32 
Thus, telehealth ineffectively screens women seeking chemical abortions for domestic 
violence or coercion. If she changes her mind, no medical professional is there to help her. 
She is left alone to care for her physiological and psychological health, as well as her safety if 
complications or IPV arise.  Thus, by restricting telemedical chemical abortions, the bill is a 
critical safeguard against the risks of IPV and reproductive c ontrol.  
V. Conclusion   
Maine has broad powers to protect women’s welfare , especially for a bill that is 
consistent with federal prohibitions  on the mailing of chemical abortion drugs. I urge the 
Committee to support the bill as a common -sense protection for the informed consent and 
health and safety of women seeking chemical abortion drugs.  
Respectfully Submitted,  
      
 
Danielle Pimentel, J.D.  
      Policy C ounsel  
      AMERICANS UNITED FOR LIFE 
 
 
30 Comm. on Health Care for Underserved Women, Am. Coll. of Obstetricians & Gynecologists,  Intimate Partner 
Violence , Comm. Op. No. 518, at 3 (reaffirmed 2022).  
31 COVID -19 FAQs for Obstetricians -Gynecologists, Obstetrics , AM. COLL. OF OBSTETRICIANS & GYNECOLOGISTS  (rev. 
July 1, 2021), https://www.acog.org/clinical -information/physician -faqs/covid -19-faqs -for-ob-gyns -
obstetrics; see also Intimate Partner Violence , supra note 30, at 3 (noting IPV screening should occur periodically 
and “a t various times  . . . because some women do not disclose abuse the first time they are asked”).  
32 Id. 
