 
 
An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by Prohibiting Physicians 
from Prescribing Abortio n-inducing Drugs or Devices Through Telehealth or Other 
Electronic Communication  
Position: Support  
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee.  My name is 
Ingrid Duran, I am the State Legislative Director representing the National Right to Life 
Committee.  I come before you today to write  in support of  LD 1249 “An Act to Protect the 
Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by Prohibiting Physicians from Prescribing Abortion -
inducing Drugs or Devices Through Telehealth or Other Electr onic Communication .” 
LD 1249 is a  prohi bition of the use of tele -health  to dispense  chemical abortions ensures that a 
chemical abortion is done by a physician who, at a minimum, is present and physically 
supervising a ny other health care personnel involved the administration of the chemicals which 
induce the abortion.  Abortion can be treated differently than other procedure.  The United States 
Supreme Court in Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 325 (1980) emphasized that “[a]bortion is 
inherently different from other medical procedures because no other procedure involves the 
purposeful ter mination of a potential life.” A state, therefore, can regulate the performance of a 
chemical abortion differently than it regulates o ther things done via the internet. Requiring a 
physician’s physical presence during an abortion is not unreasonable and does not constitute an 
‘undue burden.’  
The Federal Drug and Food Administration (FDA) has cited at least 26 women have died due to 
complications ari sing from chemical abortions1.  These dangerous chemicals should not be 
dispen sed via tele -health without  the adequate screening and medical examinations  that a 
physician can provide.  The rate of incomplete abortion or failure for these drugs is very 
significant and women deserve better.   
The wo men and children in Maine deserve  better health care than “tele -health ” abortions from an 
abortionist on the internet from miles away - even out of  state.  I ask the committee to vote Oug ht 
to Pass on LD 1249 .  Thank you!  
 
                                            
1 https://www.nrlc.org/uploads/factsh eets/RUSafetyEfficacyFS.pdf  

