 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1249, An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by Prohibiting 
Physicians from Prescribing Abortion -inducing Drugs or Devices Through Telehealth or Other 
Electronic Communication  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:  
 
This letter is to provide information regarding the opposition of the Department of Health and 
Human Services to LD 1249, An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by 
Prohibiting Physicians from Prescribing Abortion -inducing Drugs or De vices Through Telehealth or 
Other Electronic Communication . 
 
This bill would prohibit the prescription of medication abortion drugs or devices by telehealth, 
telephone, the Internet, or any other digital communication. It would prohibit the shipment of any  
medication or devices that induce abortion through mail, express delivery service, or other means of 
interstate commerce. Finally, it makes any violation a Class C crime and subjects a person violating 
the prohibition to civil liability for wrongful death  and medical malpractice, as well as any 
professional disciplinary proceeding.  
 
This bill aggressively targets safe and appropriate access to sexual and reproductive health care. 
Medication abortion is widely -recognized as safe to initiate outside of a me dical setting. Providers 
are already limited in providing any medical care to what is within the scope of their profession and 
these proposed limitations are not based in any sound medical or safety concerns.  
 
Enacting this bill would limit access to abor tion in Maine . The Department is in strong opposition  as 
we firmly believe that these decisions should be made between an individual and their provider.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  

