 
  
Post Office Box 587 
Augusta, ME 04332-
0587 
t: 207.622.7524  
f: 207.622.0836 
 
LD 1249 An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via 
Telehealth Prohibiting Physicians from 
Prescribing Abortion-inducing Drugs or Devices through Telehealth 
or other Electronic Communication 
May 5, 2023 
 
 
Testimony of Laura Harper, Senior Associate, Moose Ridge Associates 
On behalf of 
Maine Family Planning 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary, my name is Laura Harper. I 
live in Hallowell and am a senior associate at Moose Ridge Associates. I 
am here today to present testimony on behalf of Maine Family Planning on 
LD 1249 An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth 
Prohibiting Physicians from Prescribing Abortion-inducing Drugs or 
Devices through Telehealth or other Electronic Communication. 
 
Maine Family Planning (MFP) has been providing telehealth services since 
2014, including contraception; medication abortion; sexually transmitted 
infection screening, diagnosis and treatment; and primary care.  During the 
Covid-19 pandemic, MFP pivoted rapidly and expanded its use of 
telehealth to assure that Mainers could continue receiving quality 
reproductive health care. We never closed our doors and in fact, because of 
the changes in telehealth policies due to the Public Health Emergency, we 
were able to provide services to Mainers who otherwise may not have had 
a way to obtain the care they needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
Maine Family Planning’s ability to make a wide range of sexual and 
reproductive health services available during the pandemic and beyond is 
based almost entirely on its groundbreaking use of telehealth technology to 
make medication abortion available in some of the state’s most rural 
communities. In other words, if we had not expanded access to abortion 
care via telehealth in 2014, chances are that thousands of Mainers would 
have been without access to other critical sexual and reproductive health 
services during the pandemic.  
 
We are not shy about the role that abortion care played in the delivery of 
all sexual and reproductive health services provided by MFP. We are 
proud that we pioneered telehealth in the delivery of medication abortion 
care and proud that we have served as a resource to abortion providers in 
other states. 
 
LD 1249 is yet another in a long line of cookie cutter legislative efforts 
from other states that rely on opinion and belief at the expense of hard 
facts regarding the safety of providing medication abortion care via 
telehealth.  
 
Here are the facts:  
 
From March of 2018 through March of 2019, a joint study was carried out 
by the National Institutes of Health and the Society of Family Planning, 
following 4584 people who received medication abortion medications by 
mail following a telehealth visit.  
 
--3,186 provided follow up information (70 percent); 
 
--Among these 2,797 (88 percent) confirmed use of the medications and 
provided outcome information; 
 
--Overall, 96.4 percent of those who used the medications reported 
successfully ending their pregnancy without surgical intervention; 
 
 
 
 
--One percent (1%) reported treatment for any serious event; and  
 
--No deaths were reported by family, friends, the authorities or the media. 
 
Among the 2,268 patients who provided information about their 
experience, 98.4 percent were satisfied.*  
 
LD 1249’s sole purpose is not to protect but to prevent patients from 
accessing a perfectly safe method of reproductive health care. We urge you 
to vote “Ought not to pass.” 
 
*(The Lancet Regional Health—Americas, June 10, 2022, “Safety and 
Effectiveness of self-managed medication abortion provided using online 
telemedicine in the United States: A population based study”, Aiken, 
Romanova, Morber, Gomperts) 
 
 
 
