/ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee 
Hetto, My name is Lori Gtoutier and I tive in Richmond . 
I testify today in support or LB 1249 
An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Teleheaith by Prohibiting Physicians from 
Prescribing Abortiori —iriducing Drugs or Devices Through Teieheatth or Other Eiectronic 
Communication- 
i submit the following description by Abbey Johnson- if you aren’t tarniliar with her, she was 
once a ctinic director for Ptanned Parenthood. She hersetf had a medicat abortion arid this is 
what she experienced. 
She started the procedure, it was simpie. After taking the iast dose of pitis she feit greati 
For about 1 0 minutes. Then it stariedshe described these symptoms; 
* excruciating abdominal pain, worse than she’d ever had 
* severe and heavy bteeding 
* crying and sweating srtting on the toilet for hours, vomiting 
* Biood clots the size of temons 
* took a hath-within minutes the water was bright red in her words, “tt looked like a crime 
scene arid i guess it was...f had murdered my baby” and she asked herself if one of those 
ciots was her baby * After 12 hrs in the bathroom with continua! bleeding, targe clots, nausea and vomiting 
She caited PP and described her expenence- they told her it was not abnormat. 
Eight weeks tater she stilt experienced heavy bleeding, blood clots, nausea, and excruciating 
pain. 
is this what we want for our daughters and young women? Imagine for a moment that you had 
a daughter that went through this Heart wrenching to say the least. is this the iegacy we want 
to be known for? The brave new worid? We can do a lot better than this and we owe it to future 
genaatioris. 
Lets not SUbj€Ci our young, girls, women and future mothers to this barbansm. Lets give them 
instruction on moral and virtuous living. That sex is sacred and should be reserved for 
marriage. That it’s part of the natural law. That God designed it this way for the flourishing of 
famifies and the human race. How much damage, pain, regret, and anguish could be avoided if 
we changed our approach instead of promoting that which causes so much damage and 
inﬂicts so mach pain on so many. 
Please vote ought to pass on LD 1249 arid the other five bitts 
Thank you,
