70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I 
am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic 
League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom 
flourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and 
including in governance. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 1249, An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via 
Telehealth by Prohibiting Physicians from Prescribing Abortion-inducing Drugs or Devices 
Through Telehealth or Other Electronic Communication sponsored by Representative Paul of 
Winterport 
 
LD 1249 prohibits the prescription of an abortion-inducing drug or a device designed to produce 
an abortion by telehealth, telephone, the Internet, or other type of digital communication and 
the shipment of an abortion-inducing drug or a device designed to produce an abortion by mail, 
express delivery service or other means of interstate commerce and makes a violation of this 
prohibition a Class C crime and subjects a person who violates the prohibition to civil liability for 
wrongful death and medical malpractice and to any relevant professional disciplinary 
proceeding.  
 
My interest in this bill comes from the realization that as the two sides fight vigorously to gain 
position, there are real women in the middle. Considering the stereotype of a young women in 
trouble, alone and scared…now we find she may be performing her own abortion while alone 
and that really troubles me. There is no one to help, there would seem to be no liability and I 
have to wonder if the known side effects of abortion like mental health issues would be 
compounded. 
 
 Nearly half of all abortions in America today are chemical abortions, becoming increasingly 
prevalent as some state legislatures and the FDA have rolled back regulations and safety 
measures. In a post-Roe world, where many states are having serious conversations about 
limitations on abortion, the abortion industry has frantically pushed for the expansion of mail-
order or internet abortions. The rise of chemical abortion is unquestionably a push by the 
advocates to supersede abortion laws around our country; to make abortion accessible to 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 everyone, in every state, all the time; and to ultimately increase the number of unborn babies 
killed in America today.  
 
 
 
Again, looking at this new industry concerns are many and include: 
 
*It increases the ease of access with little accountability, treating a pregnancy like a 
headache or some minor illness. A pregnant mom can obtain a chemical abortion 
online via telehealth, without a single visit to a doctor before or after the 
abortion. That is not healthcare. 
*It’s not safe for women. Abortion related complications are four times more likely 
during a chemical abortion than a surgical abortion, and 20 percent of women will 
experience some complications. Women have died from this method. 
*The lack of accountability for prescribers opens the door to fraud and abuse, 
allowing potential abusers to obtain the medication and use it to cause an abortion 
without the knowledge of pregnant mom. Scary thought. 
 
I thank Representative Paul for taking on this issue. This is another bill that seeks to protect 
women. I believe that is your calling, please support LD 1249. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
