Commonwealth v. Purnell
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
April 14, 2021, Argued; September 22, 2021, Decided
No. 71 MAP 2020
Reporter
259 A.3d 974 *; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610 **
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, Appellee v. 
SHERON JALEN PURNELL, Appellant
Prior History:  [**1] Appeal from the Order of the Superior 
Court at No. 1646 EDA 2019 dated May 28, 2020 Affirming the 
Judgment of Sentence in the Chester County Court of Common 
Pleas, Criminal Division, at No. CP-15-CR-4353-2016 dated 
March 18, 2019.
Commonwealth v. Purnell, 2020 PA Super 127, 233 A.3d 824, 
2020 Pa. Super. LEXIS 440 (Pa. Super. Ct., May 28, 2020)
Case Summary
Overview
HOLDINGS: [1]-The trial court did not abuse its discretion in 
allowing a witness to testify with the assistance of a comfort dog 
because it balanced the degree to which the accommodation will 
assist the witness in testifying in a truthful manner against any 
possible prejudice to defendant's right to a fair trial. Trial courts 
had broad discretion in controlling trial conduct and Pa. R. 
Evid. 611 allowed a trial court to consider whether a comfort 
dog could assist a witness in testifying in a truthful manner 
during a trial.
Outcome
Judgment affirmed.
LexisNexis® Headnotes
Criminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Defendant's 
Rights > Right to Fair Trial
HN1 [ ]  Defendant's Rights, Right to Fair Trial
A trial court should balance the degree to which the 
accommodation of a comfort dog for support during a witness's 
trial testimony will assist the witness in testifying in a truthful manner against any possible prejudice to the defendant's right to 
a fair trial.
Criminal Law & Procedure > ... > Standards of 
Review > De Novo Review > Conclusions of Law
HN2 [ ]  De Novo Review, Conclusions of Law
Issues of first impression present a court with a question of law. 
Accordingly, the scope of review is plenary, and the standard of 
review is de novo.
Governments > Courts > Authority to Adjudicate
HN3 [ ]  Courts, Authority to Adjudicate
It is indisputable that trial courts have broad discretion in 
controlling trial conduct. A court's power to maintain 
courtroom authority has long been upheld.
Criminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Examination of 
Witnesses
Evidence > Types of 
Evidence > Testimony > Examination
HN4 [ ]  Trials, Examination of Witnesses
Pa. R. Evid. 611 clearly and unambiguously confers upon trial 
courts reasonable control over the mode of examining witnesses 
and the ability to employ procedures aimed at determining the 
truth. Rule 611(a)(1). This language is sufficiently 
comprehensive to allow a trial court to consider whether a 
comfort dog may assist a witness in testifying in a truthful 
manner during a trial.
Evidence > Rule Application & Interpretation

Page 2 of 10
Governments > Courts > Rule Application & 
Interpretation
HN5 [ ]  Evidence, Rule Application & Interpretation
When interpreting the Rules of Evidence, the Supreme Court of 
Pennsylvania ascribes to the words of those rules their plain and 
ordinary meaning.
Criminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Defendant's 
Rights > Right to Fair Trial
HN6 [ ]  Defendant's Rights, Right to Fair Trial
With regard to a trial court's discretion to permit a dog to 
provide support to a testifying witness, it must balance the 
extent to which the accommodation will help the witness to 
testify reliably and completely against any possible prejudice to 
the defendant's right to a fair trial. In so doing, the trial court 
should consider the particular facts and circumstances for the 
request to have a dog accompany the particular witness, the 
extent to which the dog's presence will permit the witness to 
testify truthfully, completely and reliably, and the extent to 
which the dog's presence will obviate the need for more drastic 
measures to secure the witness' testimony. The trial court should 
balance these factors against the potential prejudice to the 
defendant and the availability of measures to mitigate any 
prejudice, such as limiting instructions and procedures to limit 
the jury's view of the dog. This balancing test guides a trial court 
to consider carefully the extent to which a comfort dog may 
assist a witness with providing truthful testimony, while 
balancing the need for that accommodation against potential 
prejudice to defendant. Particularly persuasive is the 
requirement that a trial court seek to minimize any potential 
prejudice to the defendant by considering the dog's training, 
providing limiting instructions, and employing means to limit 
the jury from viewing the dog.
Criminal Law & Procedure > Juries & Jurors > Jury 
Deliberations > Ability to Follow Instructions
HN7 [ ]  Jury Deliberations, Ability to Follow Instructions
The law presumes that the jury will follow the instructions of 
the court.
Criminal Law & Procedure > Appeals > Standards of 
Review > Abuse of DiscretionCriminal Law & Procedure > Trials > Defendant's 
Rights > Right to Fair Trial
HN8 [ ]  Standards of Review, Abuse of Discretion
Trial courts have the discretion to permit a witness to testify 
with the assistance of a comfort dog. In exercising that 
discretion, courts should balance the degree to which the 
accommodation will assist the witness in testifying in a truthful 
manner against any possible prejudice to the defendant's right to 
a fair trial and employ means to mitigate any such prejudice. An 
abuse of discretion occurs when a court has reached a 
conclusion which overrides or misapplies the law, or where the 
judgment exercised is manifestly unreasonable, or the result of 
partiality, prejudice, bias or ill-will.
Counsel: For Purnell, Sheron Jalen, Appellant: Heller, Maria T., 
Chester County Public Defender's Office, Chester County Pd's 
Office, West Chester, PA; Merrick, John R., Kennett Square, 
PA.
For Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Appellee: Casenta, 
Nicholas J., Jr., Ryan, Deborah S., Walschburger, Erik Thomas, 
Chester County District Attorney's Office, West Chester, PA.
For Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General, Amicus Curiae: 
Eisenberg, Ronald, Pennsylvania Attorney General's Office, 
Philadelphia, PA.
For Animal Legal Defense Fund, Assoc. of Prosecuting 
Attorneys & Lutheran Church Charities, Amicus Curiae: Myers, 
Karl Stewart, Stradley, Ronon, Stevens & Young, LLP, Stradley 
Ronon Et Al, Philadelphia, PA; Perry, Melissa Lynn, Stradley 
Ronon Stevens & Young, Philadelphia, PA.
Judges: BAER, C.J., SAYLOR, TODD, DONOHUE, 
DOUGHERTY, WECHT, MUNDY, JJ. Justices Saylor, Todd, 
Dougherty, Wecht and Mundy join the opinion. Justice 
Donohue files a concurring opinion.
Opinion by: BAER
Opinion
 [*977]  CHIEF JUSTICE BAER
We granted [**2]  allowance of appeal in this matter to consider 
the appropriate test to apply to a trial court's determination 
concerning whether a witness in a criminal case may utilize a 
"comfort dog" for support during his or her trial testimony. 
HN1 [ ] We hold that a trial court should balance the degree to 
which the accommodation will assist the witness in testifying in 
a truthful manner against any possible prejudice to the 
259 A.3d 974, *974 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **1
Page 3 of 10
defendant's right to a fair trial. Here, the trial court allowed a 
witness to testify with the assistance of a comfort dog, and the 
Superior Court concluded that the trial court did not abuse its 
discretion in this regard. For the reasons stated below, we agree 
with the Superior Court and, therefore, affirm that court's 
judgment.
I. Background
On October 3, 2016, Kevin Jalbert ("Victim") was shot seven 
times in Coatesville, Pennsylvania, and died as the result of the 
shooting. Several persons witnessed the incident, including 
Justin Griest and A.H.1 Appellant was identified as the shooter, 
and the Commonwealth charged him with first-degree murder, 
third-degree murder, and firearms not to be carried without a 
license.
Prior to Appellant's trial, the Commonwealth filed two motions 
that [**3]  are relevant to the instant appeal. First, the 
Commonwealth filed a motion explaining that, when a Chester 
County detective interviewed A.H. on the day of the murder, 
she informed him that she witnessed the shooter pull out his 
gun and that, before the shooter fled the scene, he saw her and 
pointed his gun at her. Commonwealth's Motion In Limine for 
the Admissibility of Witness Intimidation, 11/14/2018, at ¶2. 
A.H. also reported that she observed a gang in the area of the 
incident on the day of the shooting. Id.
This motion further explained that, on September 2, 2018, 
almost two years after the shooting, A.H. was with Justin Griest 
when he was assaulted at a gas station in Coatesville. Id. at ¶5. 
When police interviewed A.H. about the assault, she stated that 
she was afraid to speak about the group who committed the act 
because they were part of the gang that she saw when Victim 
was murdered. Id. at ¶6. A.H. also shared that she did not want 
to testify about the assault because she feared that someone 
from the gang would shoot her. Id. at ¶7. On November 7, 
2018, A.H. provided police with an audio and video recorded 
statement regarding the assault on Griest and her fear of 
retaliation. [**4]  Id. at ¶8. Concerned that A.H. may refuse to 
testify at Appellant's trial in a manner consistent with the 
statement that she gave to police on the day of the shooting, the 
Commonwealth asked the trial court, inter alia, to allow it to 
present to the jury A.H.'s November 2018 statement regarding 
the intimidation that she and Griest suffered. Id. at ¶¶ 10-13.
On the same day that the Commonwealth filed this motion in 
limine, it also filed a motion entitled "Commonwealth's Motion 
for Special Procedures During the Presentation of the 
1 A.H. was 13 years old at the time of the shooting. N.T., 11/19/2018, 
at 11.Testimony of Child Witnesses" ("Motion for Special 
Procedures"). Pertinent to the instant appeal, the 
Commonwealth requested that a "comfort  [*978]  dog"2 be 
present during A.H.'s trial testimony. Motion for Special 
Procedures, 11/14/2018, at ¶3. The motion explained that a 
sheriff's deputy would transport the comfort dog, Melody, to 
the court and that the dog would enter the courtroom before 
the jury's entrance. Id. at ¶4. According to the motion, the 
comfort dog would be placed in the witness stand outside the 
presence of the jury and would exit the courtroom after the jury 
left the room. Id.
On November 19, 2018, the trial court held a hearing on several 
motions, [**5]  including those described above. During the 
course of that hearing, it was revealed the A.H. is autistic. N.T., 
11/19/2018, at 30. In addition to explaining its motion 
regarding the comfort dog, the Commonwealth noted that the 
dog was trained for the purpose of accompanying witnesses in 
court. Id. at 50. In response to the Commonwealth's motion, 
Appellant's counsel stated his concern that the jury would see 
the dog and feel sympathy for A.H. Id. Defense counsel also 
feared that A.H. may comment on the presence of the dog 
given her alleged propensity to get distracted. Id. at 50-51.
The trial court acknowledged Appellant's concerns and 
conceded that it had no experience with comfort dogs in the 
courtroom. Id. at 51-52. When the court asked the prosecutor 
whether A.H. needed the assistance of a comfort dog due to her 
autism, counsel replied that the dog was necessary due to A.H.'s 
fear for her safety. Id. at 53. The court reserved making a 
decision on the issue.
On the day that the Commonwealth intended to call A.H. as a 
witness at trial, the trial court announced its ruling concerning 
the use of the comfort dog. The court explained that, while it 
found case law on the issue from other [**6]  jurisdictions, it 
was unable to locate any Pennsylvania jurisprudence that 
addressed the use of comfort dogs in courtrooms. N.T., 
11/28/2018, at 4-5. The court then ruled that it would permit 
the comfort dog to accompany A.H. during her testimony, 
though the court asserted that it would refer to the animal as a 
"service dog" to lessen the likelihood that the dog's presence 
would engender sympathy from the jury. Id. at 5.
The trial court further explained that the dog would be hidden 
under the witness stand but that it nonetheless was likely that 
the jury would notice the dog. Id. at 6. The court announced the 
manner in which it would manage the situation as follows:
2 The Commonwealth did not provide a definition of the term 
"comfort dog" in its motion. As mentioned infra, at the hearing on this 
motion, the Commonwealth explained that the dog was trained to 
accompany witnesses in court.259 A.3d 974, *977 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **2
Page 4 of 10
Therefore, the plan will be for the sheriff handler assigned 
to Melody out of the presence of the jury to walk into the 
courtroom with the witness, with Melody, they'll be 
situated together on the witness stand. The witness will not 
be called to the stand. She'll be in the stand when the jury 
arrives in the courtroom, just like Mr. Griest was for a 
different reason yesterday. So the jury has participated in 
that circumstance where a witness has already been on the 
stand when they come into the courtroom. And the sheriff 
handler [**7]  will stand to the side of the witness box, 
just like we've had numerous uniformed sheriffs in this 
courtroom throughout the trial, so that won't be of any 
particular note to the jury, I wouldn't think.
And if I understand from the sheriff handler that Melody if 
she gets excited has a pretty strong tail wag, so it wouldn't 
surprise me if there was some tail banging on the jury box, 
and I'll just simply make a reference to Melody that - I'm 
not sure what I'll say - glad to  [*979]  know she's still alive 
or something to that effect.
Id. at 6-7.
At that point, the trial court allowed Appellant to place his 
objection on the record, and he renewed his complaint that the 
presence of the dog would distract A.H. and create sympathy 
for her, prejudicing Appellant. Id. at 7-8. Although Appellant's 
counsel appreciated that the court would instruct the jury not to 
feel any sympathy for A.H., he stated his belief that the jury 
would have a difficult time following that instruction. Id. at 8.
Immediately before A.H. began her testimony, the trial court 
instructed the jury in the following manner:
Members of the jury, I have permitted out of your view a 
service dog to be present with this witness within or 
actually [**8]  under the witness box. The dog is present 
there now. The fact that I have permitted the presence of a 
service dog shall not be considered by you for any purpose. 
Particularly, you are not to attribute any sympathy to the 
witness because of this or for any other reason, nor shall 
you assess the credibility of her testimony differently than 
that of any other witness simply because of the presence of 
the service dog.
Id. at 63.
The Commonwealth then began to question A.H. The 
substance of her testimony is irrelevant to the issues presented 
in this appeal. We, however, note that there is nothing in the 
record to suggest that the comfort dog was in any way 
disruptive to the trial. We also observe that, after A.H. had been 
questioned for some time on the witness stand, the trial court 
called for a brief recess to allow A.H. to recover her composure, as she had started to weep. Id. at 98-106.
After the parties presented their evidence and gave their closing 
arguments, the trial court provided the jury with its general 
instructions. Pertinent to the instant matter, the court repeated 
the instruction that it gave to the jury before A.H. testified. 
N.T., 11/30/2018, at 71. The jury found Appellant [**9]  not 
guilty of first-degree murder but guilty of third-degree murder 
and firearms not to be carried without a license. The trial court 
sentenced Appellant to 20.5 to 47 years of imprisonment. 
Appellant filed post-sentence motions, which were denied. He 
then timely filed a notice of appeal and subsequently a statement 
pursuant to Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b).
In that statement, Appellant indicated that, on appeal, he 
intended to argue, inter alia, that the trial court erred by allowing 
A.H. to testify with the assistance of a comfort dog. The trial 
court briefly responded to this issue in its Pa.R.A.P. 1925(b) 
opinion. Trial Court Opinion, 8/23/2019, at 6-7. The court 
noted that: (1) its legal reasoning for allowing the dog to be 
present could be found on the record; (2) the dog was situated 
under the witness box prior to the jury entering the courtroom 
and could not be seen by the jury, and (3) it provided 
instructions to the jury concerning the presence of the dog.
II. Superior Court Opinion.
On appeal to the Superior Court, Appellant argued that the trial 
court erred by allowing the comfort dog to be with A.H. on the 
witness stand because: (1) the dog's presence generated 
sympathy within the jury to Appellant's prejudice; and 
(2) [**10]  the Commonwealth failed to establish the necessity 
for the use of the dog. The Superior Court rejected these 
arguments and ultimately affirmed Appellant's judgment of 
sentence in a published opinion. Commonwealth v. Purnell, 2020 
PA Super 127, 233 A.3d 824 (Pa. Super. 2020).
 [*980]  In so doing, the Superior Court stated that "[t]he use of 
comfort dogs for witnesses with mental, psychological, or 
emotional conditions appears to be a matter of first impression 
in Pennsylvania[.]" Id. at 834. The court then began its analysis 
by explaining, inter alia, that trial judges have the well-established 
power to maintain courtroom authority and must have broad 
discretion to keep control of their courtrooms. According to the 
court, "[t]his power to control courtroom proceedings includes 
the power to control the mode and order of examining 
witnesses and presenting evidence[.]" Id. at 835.
In support of this statement, the Superior Court relied upon 
Pennsylvania Rule of Evidence 611(a), which provides as 
follows:
The court should exercise reasonable control over the 
mode and order of examining witnesses and presenting 259 A.3d 974, *978 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **6
Page 5 of 10
evidence so as to:
(1) make those procedures effective for determining 
the truth;
(2) avoid wasting time; and
(3) protect witnesses from harassment or undue 
embarrassment.
Pa.R.E. 611(a). The court observed that appellate courts 
review [**11]  the application of Rule 611 deferentially and for 
an abuse of discretion. Purnell, 233 A.3d at 835.
Next, the Superior Court highlighted that, while Pennsylvania 
courts have not addressed the issue in this case, "appellate 
courts in multiple other jurisdictions have held that it is within a 
trial court's discretion to permit a witness to use a support 
animal, as part of each judge's power to manage trial conduct." 
Id. at 835-36 (collecting cases). The court then stated that it 
would utilize these decisions to guide its review of whether the 
trial court in the matter sub judice abused its discretion by 
allowing A.H. to testify with the help of a comfort dog. Id. at 
836.
At this point, the Superior Court turned its focus to Appellant's 
contention that allowing the Commonwealth's witness to use a 
dog to assist with testifying prejudices the defendant, largely 
because it suggests that the witness is vulnerable and worthy of 
sympathy. In response, the court explained that "[a]ll of the 
courts which have examined a challenge to the use of a comfort 
dog in a courtroom have concluded that the dog's presence is 
not inherently prejudicial." Id. (collecting cases) (footnote 
omitted).
The Superior Court then noted that the instant case shares 
striking [**12]  similarities to a recent decision of the Court of 
Appeals of Georgia, Jones v. State, 354 Ga. App. 568, 841 S.E.2d 
112 (Ga. Ct. App. 2020). Purnell, 233 A.3d at 836-37. According 
to the Superior Court, in Jones, the defendant objected to a State 
witness' use of a comfort dog on the basis that the dog would 
generate sympathy for the witness, who had post-traumatic 
stress disorder, and would prejudice the defendant's defense 
strategy. The Superior Court observed that, like in the instant 
matter, the trial court in Jones investigated the issue outside the 
jury's presence, ascertained the witness' condition and need for 
the support animal, and considered the dog's training. Id. at 837.
Moreover, the Superior Court stated, "The trial courts in both 
cases[, i.e., the Georgia trial court and the trial court in the 
instant matter,] also consulted with counsel to employ 
procedures designed to minimize the dog's presence and 
visibility to the jury." Id. (citations and internal quotation marks 
omitted). The Court of Appeals of Georgia ultimately concluded 
that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by allowing the 
State's witness to testify with the help of a comfort dog during a 
criminal trial.Utilizing Jones as a template, the Superior Court held that 
Appellant failed to  [*981]  demonstrate that [**13]  he was 
harmed by the trial court's decision. More specifically, the court 
concluded, "Given that the trial court in the current action 
likewise followed procedures to minimize the dog's presence, we 
equally cannot assume that the dog had any impact on the 
jurors, much less that it engendered sympathy for A.H." Id. at 
837. The court observed that, like the defendant in Jones, 
Appellant "had made the unsubstantiated assumption that the 
dog generated sympathy without any evidence in support 
thereof and ignoring the fact that some people are afraid of or 
dislike animals, especially dogs." Id.
After finding no merit to Appellant's prejudice argument, the 
Superior Court stated in a footnote that, when faced with a 
question of whether a State witness' use of a comfort dog 
prejudiced a criminal defendant, the Supreme Court of 
Connecticut adopted a balancing test in State v. Devon D., 321 
Conn. 656, 138 A.3d 849 (Conn. 2016). Id. at 837 n.11. In that 
case, the Supreme Court of Connecticut held that a "trial court 
should consider the particular facts and circumstances for the 
request to have a dog accompany the particular witness, the 
extent to which the dog's presence will permit the witness to 
testify truthfully, completely and reliably, and the extent to 
which the dog's presence [**14]  will obviate the need for more 
drastic measures to secure the witness' testimony." Id. The 
Court then noted that a "trial court should balance these factors 
against the potential prejudice to the defendant and the 
availability of measures to mitigate any prejudice, such as 
limiting instructions and procedures to limit the jury's view of 
the dog." Id.
After explaining the Connecticut Supreme Court's balancing 
test, our Superior Court noted that the trial court in the matter 
sub judice did not apply that test. The Superior Court, however, 
declined to require the retroactive use of that test. The court 
nonetheless determined that Connecticut's balancing test 
appears to be an appropriate assessment for this issue and 
advised trial courts to employ it moving forward. Id.
Lastly, the Superior Court addressed Appellant's contention that 
the Commonwealth failed to establish in the trial court that the 
use of a comfort dog was a necessity in securing A.H.'s 
testimony. Id. at 838. The court reported that its "review of case 
law concerning the use of comfort items and animals in 
courtrooms demonstrates that the majority of jurisdictions have 
concluded that a finding of 'necessity' or 'need' is not 
required [**15]  in order for the trial court to allow the presence 
of such items or animals, provided that such item or animal 
alleviates the stress that the witness may experience on the stand 
and hence helps the witness to testify truthfully and 
completely." Id. at 839 (collecting cases). The court found no 
compelling reason to disregard this rationale and ultimately 259 A.3d 974, *980 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **10
Page 6 of 10
rejected Appellant's position that, for a trial court to allow a 
witness to utilize a comfort dog, the court must find that the 
presence of the dog is necessary to secure the witness' 
testimony. Id. at 839-40.
III. Petition for Allowance of Appeal.
Appellant filed a petition for allowance of appeal in this Court, 
which we granted to address the following issues, as framed by 
Appellant:
(1) Did the Superior Court err in affirming the trial court's 
decision to permit a dog to accompany a testifying witness?
(2) Mindful of the rights of the accused, should a showing 
of need for special accommodation be required prior to its 
allowance?
Commonwealth v. Purnell, 243 A.3d 4 (Pa. 2020).
 [*982]  IV. Parties' Arguments.3
A. Appellant's Argument.4
Appellant insists that the trial court abused its discretion by 
allowing A.H. to utilize a comfort dog when she testified. 
Appellant submits that many states that have addressed [**16]  
this issue have employed a balancing test. According to 
Appellant, these states balance the ability to gain truthful 
3 Both of the issues in this case concern the test a trial court should 
apply when the Commonwealth seeks to have a witness testify with the 
assistance of a comfort dog. We, therefore, address these issues and the 
parties' arguments together. This issue of first impression presents the 
Court with a question of law. HN2 [ ] Accordingly, our scope of 
review is plenary, and our standard of review is de novo. Commonwealth v. 
Hill, 238 A.3d 399, 410-11 (Pa. 2020).
4 In his brief to this Court, Appellant presents several arguments, two 
of which we will dispose of in this note. First, Appellant argues that the 
trial court violated his constitutional right to due process by allowing 
A.H. to testify with the aid of a comfort dog. Appellant's Brief at 22-24. 
Appellant has waived this claim by raising it for the first time on appeal. 
Pa.R.A.P. 302(a).
Second, Appellant dedicates a significant amount of his brief 
attempting to draw incongruent parallels between allowing a witness to 
use a comfort dog and permitting a child victim to testify by alternative 
means, such as video depositions. As argued by the Commonwealth, 
there simply is no meaningful comparison to be made between these 
two concepts. Allowing a child to testify by alternative means intersects 
with a defendant's constitutional right to confront witnesses and has 
nothing to do with this case. Accordingly, further discussion of this 
contention is unnecessary.testimony from a witness by reducing his or her trauma against 
the potential prejudice to the defendant.
After summarizing several of these cases, Appellant asserts that 
the trial court abused its discretion by employing the allegedly 
extraordinary measure of allowing A.H. to use a comfort dog 
without making appropriate findings. For example, Appellant 
contends that the court failed to appreciate that the 
Commonwealth provided no reason for the special 
accommodation in its motion in limine. Further, at the pretrial 
hearing on the motion, when asked by the trial court to identify 
the reason for the request, the Commonwealth did not specify 
the witness' age or developmental disability, but only mentioned 
A.H.'s concern for her safety. Appellant observes that, at one 
point during the proceedings, defense counsel merely 
mentioned his belief that A.H. was autistic, but the 
Commonwealth continued to emphasize that the dog was 
needed to help A.H. feel safe.
In addition, Appellant argues, there was no testimony regarding 
whether utilizing the comfort dog would help A.H. 
provide [**17]  truthful testimony. In support of his position, 
Appellant relies on, among other cases, a decision of the 
Michigan Court of Appeals, People v. Shorter, 324 Mich. App. 529, 
922 N.W.2d 628 (Mich. Ct. App. 2018), where the court found 
that a trial court had erred in allowing a non-disabled adult to be 
accompanied by a support dog during her testimony. Appellant 
points out that, in reaching this decision, the Michigan court 
opined that it was not "convinced that allowing a support 
animal or person so that the witness would be better able to 
'control her emotions' necessarily aids the truth-finding 
process." Appellant's Brief at 36 (quoting Shorter, 922 N.W.2d at 
634-35).
Appellant also submits that the trial court erroneously made a 
sua sponte finding that A.H.'s autism necessitated the special 
accommodation. According to Appellant, this autism "finding" 
was not based on any evidence presented by the 
Commonwealth prior to the court allowing  [*983]  the comfort 
dog to accompany A.H. Appellant further asserts that the court 
erred by failing to make a record regarding whether this special 
procedure was a necessary measure to avoid trauma and to 
obtain truthful, reliable testimony. Without these findings, 
Appellant argues, the trial court's ruling was manifestly 
unreasonable and an abuse of discretion. [**18] 
Building on his position that the trial court should have made a 
record regarding the need for the comfort dog's assistance, 
Appellant reports that other states have passed legislation 
addressing the usage of dogs in courtrooms. Appellant 
maintains that, as of 2016, Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Hawaii, 
Illinois, and Oklahoma had passed legislation outlining the 
requirements for allowing a dog to be present in a courtroom. 
According to Appellant, two states explicitly require the 259 A.3d 974, *981 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **15
Page 7 of 10
prosecution to show that a special measure is necessary to 
facilitate the witness' testimony: (1) Delaware has adopted a 
"substantial need" standard; and (2) Hawaii has embraced a 
similar "compelling necessity" standard.
While Appellant acknowledges that many states have refused to 
adopt the "substantial need" or "compelling necessity" 
standards, he nonetheless maintains that some of those states at 
least require an "implicit" finding of necessity. In sum, 
Appellant urges this Court to adopt a rule requiring a trial court 
to determine whether the accommodation is necessary to avoid 
trauma for the witness and whether it will enable truthful 
testimony before allowing a witness to testify with the aid of a 
comfort [**19]  dog.
B. Commonwealth's Argument.5
The Commonwealth begins its argument by agreeing with the 
Superior Court that the use of a comfort dog is governed by a 
trial judge's authority over what occurs in his or her courtroom 
under Pa.R.E. 611. According to the Commonwealth, this 
power includes the discretion to control the mode and order of 
examining witnesses and presenting evidence. The 
Commonwealth highlights that appellate courts are deferential 
to trial courts' application of Rule 611. Indeed, the 
Commonwealth asserts, appellate review of a Rule 611 decision 
is limited to whether the trial court abused its discretion.
As to the present circumstances, the Commonwealth believes 
that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by allowing A.H. 
to utilize a comfort dog while testifying. The Commonwealth 
posits that there is absolutely no basis to claim that a comfort 
dog portrays any of the characteristics that Appellant alleges or 
creates inherent prejudice against a defendant. First, the 
Commonwealth asserts, while dogs are a well-liked species, not 
every person feels comfortable around them. Indeed, the 
Commonwealth posits, it is just as likely that a member of a jury 
would dislike dogs as would find [**20]  them endearing.
Second, the Commonwealth recounts that the trial court did not 
make any reference to the dog accompanying A.H. being a 
"comfort dog;" instead, the court referred to the dog as a 
"service dog." Along these lines, the Commonwealth highlights 
that the trial court instructed the jury not to have sympathy for 
the witness because of the presence of the dog, and we must 
5 The following parties jointly filed an amicus brief in support of the 
Commonwealth: Animal Legal Defense Fund, Association of 
Prosecuting Attorneys, and Lutheran Church Charities. The 
Pennsylvania Office of Attorney General and the Pennsylvania District 
Attorneys Association also jointly filed an amicus brief in support of the 
Commonwealth.presume that the jury followed this instruction.
Next, like the Superior Court, the Commonwealth believes that 
this case is substantially [*984]  similar to the Georgia Court of 
Appeals' decision in Jones, supra. In fact, the Commonwealth 
fully endorses the Superior Court's use of Jones in affirming the 
trial court's decision. Third, the Commonwealth asserts that the 
jury never saw the comfort dog because the trial court 
specifically crafted a plan to keep the dog out of the jury's view.
The Commonwealth also refutes Appellant's allegation that the 
trial court abused its discretion in allowing the use of the 
comfort dog without making appropriate findings. In this 
regard, the Commonwealth observes that the trial court held 
several hearings and discussions about the comfort dog before 
announcing its plan for allowing a generally 
inconspicuous [**21]  "service dog" to accompany A.H. The 
Commonwealth concedes that it never informed the trial court 
that A.H. was autistic. It, however, submits that defense counsel 
brought up A.H.'s autism before discussion of the comfort dog 
had even started, rendering it unnecessary for the 
Commonwealth to reiterate this fact. In short, the 
Commonwealth contends that the trial court's decision to allow 
A.H. to utilize a comfort dog was not a result of manifest 
unreasonableness, partiality, prejudice, bias, or ill-will.
In the alternative, the Commonwealth argues that if this Court 
finds that using Rule 611 is insufficient for a trial court to 
evaluate properly the use of a comfort dog, then the Court 
should adopt the balancing test from the Connecticut Supreme 
Court case of Devon D, supra, i.e., the balancing test endorsed by 
the Superior Court.6 The Commonwealth understands that the 
trial court in the instant matter did not utilize specifically this 
test, but it believes that the court conducted a substantially 
similar analysis.
Regarding Appellant's contention that the Commonwealth 
should have been required to prove that the use of a comfort 
dog was necessary to procure A.H.'s testimony, the 
Commonwealth suggests [**22]  that there is no easy way to 
prove need definitively, let alone special need, in these types of 
circumstances. Invariably, the Commonwealth avers, such a 
process would require a pretrial hearing with expert witnesses, 
and testimony from the actual witness would be difficult, as 
questions could not tread on trial issues that may traumatize the 
witness. By way of example, the Commonwealth recognizes that 
the trial court in the instant matter could have held more 
6 We respectfully reject the contention that this situation presents an 
"either/or" scenario. As our discussion below will make clear, we 
conclude that Rule 611 is applicable herein, and that it is appropriate to 
adopt the Connecticut Supreme Court's balancing test in applying the 
rule to the issue presented.259 A.3d 974, *983 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **18
Page 8 of 10
hearings regarding A.H.'s use of a comfort dog. However, the 
Commonwealth posits that it is unknown how A.H. would have 
fared emotionally during that hearing, especially given the 
difficulties that she encountered during her trial testimony.
Ultimately, the Commonwealth agrees with the Superior Court 
that a particular finding of necessity should not be mandated 
before a trial court may exercise its discretion to permit a 
comfort dog to accompany a witness. In this regard, the 
Commonwealth observes that most courts in other jurisdictions 
do not require such a finding, especially those courts that have 
decided the issue in recent years.
V. Analysis.
HN3 [ ] As a general matter, it is indisputable that trial courts 
have broad discretion in [**23]  controlling trial conduct. See 
Behr v. Behr, 548 Pa. 144, 695 A.2d 776, 778 (Pa. 1997) ("This 
Court has long upheld a court's power to maintain courtroom 
authority.").  [*985]  In furtherance of this traditional 
understanding of trial court control over trial conduct, this 
Court adopted Pennsylvania Rule of Evidence 611, set forth 
supra at 6-7.7 HN4 [ ] Relevant to the instant matter, Rule 611 
clearly and unambiguously confers upon trial courts reasonable 
control over the mode of examining witnesses and the ability to 
employ procedures aimed at determining the truth. Pa.R.E. 
611(a)(1). We hold that this language is sufficiently 
comprehensive to allow a trial court to consider whether a 
comfort dog may assist a witness in testifying in a truthful 
manner during a trial.8
Regarding a more specific standard that trial courts should 
utilize when called upon to address a witness' use of a comfort 
dog during trial, like the Superior Court, we find convincing the 
balancing tests adopted by our sister states, particularly the 
standard enunciated by the Connecticut Supreme Court in Devon 
D., supra. As noted above, in that case, the Court considered, 
inter alia, whether the trial court abused its discretion by allowing 
a dog to sit near a witness during her testimony to provide 
comfort and support. Devon D., 138 A.3d at 861. Similar to 
7 HN5 [ ] To the extent that we interpret Rule 611, we observe that, 
when interpreting the Rules of Evidence, we ascribe "to the words of 
those rules their plain and ordinary meaning." Commonwealth v. Brown, 
617 Pa. 107, 52 A.3d 1139, 1176 (Pa. 2012).
8 As the Superior Court observed, this holding aligns with several 
persuasive opinions of our sister states. See, e.g., State v. Millis, 241 Ariz. 
802, 391 P.3d 1225, 1233 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2017) ("In keeping with the 
trial court's 'broad discretion' in managing trial conduct, this court will 
not disturb a trial court's ruling regarding the use of a facility dog 
absent an abuse of discretion.").Appellant, the defendant [**24]  in that case argued that the 
trial court abused its discretion by allowing the witness to the 
use a comfort dog on the ground that the dog may have lead the 
jury to sympathize with the witness, to the defendant's 
prejudice. Id. at 862. The Connecticut Supreme Court rejected 
this argument.
In so doing, like this Court, the Connecticut Supreme Court 
initially concluded that trial courts possess the broad 
discretionary authority to permit the use of comfort dogs to 
assist witnesses to testify reliably. Id. at 865. Next, the Court 
rejected the notion that a trial court must expressly find that the 
special accommodation was necessary for the witness to testify. 
According to the Court, "the pivotal question is not whether the 
special procedure is necessary but whether it will aid the witness 
in testifying truthfully and reliably." Id. The Court noted that, 
"[b]ecause truthful and reliable testimony is an essential 
component of a fair trial, a finding that an accommodation will 
help a witness to testify more reliably also constitutes a finding 
that the accommodation is necessary." Id. at n.13.
HN6 [ ] After the Connecticut Supreme Court surveyed 
decisions from other jurisdictions, it concluded that, while a trial 
court [**25]  may exercise its discretion to permit a dog to 
provide support to a testifying witness, the court "must balance 
the extent to which the accommodation will help the witness to 
testify reliably and completely against any possible prejudice to 
the defendant's right to a fair trial." Id. at 867. In so doing, "[t]he 
trial court should consider the particular facts and circumstances 
for the request to have a dog accompany the particular witness, 
the extent to which the dog's presence will permit the witness to 
testify truthfully, completely and reliably, and the extent to 
which the dog's presence will obviate the  [*986]  need for 
more drastic measures to secure the witness' testimony." Id. 
Lastly, the Connecticut Supreme Court explained, "The trial 
court should balance these factors against the potential prejudice 
to the defendant and the availability of measures to mitigate any 
prejudice, such as limiting instructions and procedures to limit 
the jury's view of the dog." Id.
After careful consideration, we adopt this well-reasoned 
standard for purposes of Pennsylvania jurisprudence. In our 
view, this balancing test appropriately guides a trial court to 
consider carefully the extent to which a comfort dog 
may [**26]  assist a witness with providing truthful testimony, 
while balancing the need for that accommodation against 
potential prejudice to defendant. We find particularly persuasive 
the requirement that a trial court seek to minimize any potential 
prejudice to the defendant by, inter alia, considering the dog's 
training, providing the jury with limiting instructions, and 
employing means to limit the jury from viewing the dog.
Obviously, this standard did not exist in Pennsylvania law at the 
time that the trial court in the matter sub judice was called upon 
259 A.3d 974, *984 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **22
Page 9 of 10
to determine whether A.H. should be permitted to use a 
comfort dog during her trial testimony. We nonetheless 
conclude that the trial court exercised its discretion in a manner 
that substantially comports with the test. First, by way of the 
Commonwealth's motions in limine, the trial court was put on 
notice that: (1) A.H. was a juvenile that allegedly witnessed 
Appellant shoot and kill Victim; (2) A.H. was with Justin Grist 
when he allegedly was attacked by Appellant's fellow gang 
members in an attempt to intimidate him from testifying at trial; 
(3) A.H. feared that if she testified about this incident or against 
Appellant, she may be shot; [**27]  and (4) to allay A.H.'s fear 
of testifying, the Commonwealth was prepared to provide A.H. 
with a comfort dog.
The trial court then wisely held a hearing to address the 
Commonwealth's motions, at which it was revealed that A.H. 
was autistic and that the comfort dog was trained to accompany 
witnesses in court. The court ultimately permitted A.H. to utilize 
the dog during her testimony. However, in so doing, the court 
utilized several measures to mitigate against any potential 
prejudice the comfort dog could have caused Appellant. The 
court: (1) referred to the animal as a "service dog" to lessen the 
likelihood that the dog's presence would engender sympathy 
from the jury; (2) required that the dog enter and exit the 
courtroom outside of the jury's presence and that the dog 
remain hidden under the witness stand throughout A.H.'s 
testimony; and (3) twice instructed the jury not to consider the 
presence of the dog for any purpose, not to attribute any 
sympathy to A.H., and not to judge her credibility any 
differently. HN7 [ ] Importantly, "[t]he law presumes that the 
jury will follow the instructions of the court." Commonwealth v. 
Brown, 567 Pa. 272, 786 A.2d 961, 971 (Pa. 2001).
VI. Conclusion.
HN8 [ ] For the reasons explained above, we conclude that 
trial courts have [**28]  the discretion to permit a witness to 
testify with the assistance of a comfort dog. In exercising that 
discretion, courts should balance the degree to which the 
accommodation will assist the witness in testifying in a truthful 
manner against any possible prejudice to the defendant's right to 
a fair trial and employ means to mitigate any such prejudice. We 
further note that an abuse of discretion occurs when a court 
"has reached a conclusion which overrides or misapplies the 
law, or where the judgment exercised is manifestly 
unreasonable,  [*987]  or the result of partiality, prejudice, bias 
or ill-will." Commonwealth v. Gill, 651 Pa. 520, 206 A.3d 459, 466-
67 (2019).
Here, we discern no abuse of discretion on the part of the trial 
court. Indeed, despite any guidance in the law, the court 
considered the Commonwealth's contention that A.H. would be more likely to testify in a truthful manner with the support of a 
comfort dog. In addition, the court balanced that consideration 
against any potential prejudice the presence of the dog may 
cause Appellant. Lastly, the court mitigated any potential 
prejudice by employing multiple appropriate measures. 
Accordingly, we affirm the Superior Court's judgment, which 
affirmed Appellant's judgment of sentence.
Justices [**29]  Saylor, Todd, Dougherty, Wecht and Mundy 
join the opinion.
Justice Donohue files a concurring opinion.
Concur by: DONOHUE
Concur
CONCURRING OPINION
JUSTICE DONOHUE
I concur in the result reached by the Majority and I join in the 
adoption of the balancing test enunciated in State v. Devon D., 
321 Conn. 656, 138 A.3d 849 (Conn. 2016) for the trial court's 
guidance in deciding whether to permit the utilization by a 
witness of a comfort animal. The test we adopt includes, inter 
alia, consideration of "the extent to which the dog's presence 
will permit the witness to testify truthfully, completely and 
reliably[.]" Majority Op. at 16 (citing Devon D., 138 A.3d at 867). 
Regardless of the formulation of a balancing test, it is obvious 
that the first consideration for a trial judge must be whether the 
evidence supports a conclusion that the accommodation will in 
fact assist the witness. Here, the Commonwealth did not present 
evidence that the presence of the comfort dog would help the 
witness testify reliably and completely. Nonetheless, because 
defense counsel did not raise this issue before the trial court, it 
is not preserved for appellate review.1 Pa.R.A.P. 302(a) ("Issues 
not raised in the trial court are waived and cannot be raised for 
the first time on appeal."). Absent objection by the defense, I 
am constrained [**30]  to agree with the result reached by the 
Majority.
In Devon D., the Connecticut case from which the Court adopts 
1 Defense counsel objected to the dog's presence because it would 
create undue sympathy for the witness, N.T., 11/28/2018, at 7-8, and it 
would distract the witness. N.T., 11/29/2018, at 49-55. In his brief in 
this Court, Appellant argues that the trial court abused its discretion 
because there was no evidence that the presence of the dog would have 
a therapeutic benefit or assist the witness in testifying truthfully. 
Appellant's Brief at 34. No such objection to the accommodation in the 
case was made in the trial court.
259 A.3d 974, *986 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **26
Page 10 of 10
the balancing test, the trial court held an evidentiary hearing, at 
which the state called a licensed clinical social worker to explain 
how the presence of a comfort dog, Summer, would lessen the 
eight year old victim's anxiety about testifying. The social 
worker testified that the victim was anxious about testifying and 
that children who are anxious are less likely to be able to talk 
about their memories and life experiences. Devon D., 138 A.3d at 
867. The social worker also testified that Summer was trained to 
provide support to children who experienced anxiety, and her 
presence decreases people's anxiety levels and increases their 
ability "to engage and share difficult life situations." Id. at 861-
62. The social worker made the critical observation that when 
Summer was present, the victim was "less anxious and more 
verbal, to engage, to answer questions, and to talk." Id. at 867. 
With that thorough record, the Connecticut Supreme Court 
concluded that the dog would be of actual assistance.
 [*988]  In People v. Tohom, 109 A.D.3d 253, 257, 969 N.Y.S.2d 
123 (N.Y. App. Div. 2013), the prosecutor supported the 
request for the assistance of a comfort dog by calling a social 
worker who testified that the victim [**31]  was "unable to 
express her emotions" or discuss the abusive conduct 
underlying the case. The social worker also testified that the 
dog's presence enabled the victim to become "a lot more verbal" 
during therapy sessions and would allow the victim "to better 
express herself verbally" at trial. Id. at 257-58.
To support their requests for the assistance of a comfort dog, 
the prosecutors in the Connecticut and New York cases 
presented evidence that the witnesses' anxiety or reticence 
would make it difficult for them to testify and that the dogs' 
presence would enable the witnesses to testify more candidly 
and reliably at trial. In lieu of a social worker, a parent or close 
relative or another with actual knowledge of the witness's 
testimonial inhibitions and beneficial effect of the dog's 
presence in alleviating the barrier would likewise provide an 
evidentiary basis for allowing the accommodation. Whatever the 
source, evidence that the accommodation would assist the 
witness's testimony is crucial.
In the case before us, the Commonwealth presented no 
evidence to demonstrate that the presence of the sheriff's dog 
would enable the witness to testify more reliably and completely. 
The Commonwealth relied [**32]  on the facts that A.H. was a 
juvenile who allegedly witnessed Appellant shoot and kill 
Victim; that A.H. was with another witness when the witness 
was attacked in an attempt to intimidate him from testifying; 
and that A.H. feared that she may be shot for testifying. 
Majority Op. at 17. The Commonwealth's main justification for 
requesting the dog's presence was that the witness was fearful of 
coming to court. Although these hearsay statements by the 
prosecutor demonstrate that A.H. felt unsafe, there is no 
evidence that the presence of this comfort dog would alleviate her safety concerns and enable more reliable and complete 
testimony.2 On this record, there is no basis for a finding that 
the dog's presence would enable the witness to testify in a 
truthful manner.
Nonetheless, because defense counsel did not object to the lack 
of evidence demonstrating that the comfort dog would aid the 
witness in testifying truthfully and reliably, the issue was waived, 
and this Court cannot address the issue for the first time 
 [*989]  on appeal. Pa.R.A.P. 302(a). I therefore concur in the 
result reached by the Majority.
End of Document
2 At the hearing, the Commonwealth made clear that the fear of 
testifying was the only reason for having the dog present. N.T., 
11/19/2018, at 51 (stating that the witness "has voiced her fear of 
coming to court and I'm asking for the dog to be there as a comfort 
item for her"). There was no evidence that the dog made the witness 
feel safe. When the trial court inquired of A.H.'s autism, "Is that the 
primary reason why or what singles her out from other witnesses who 
were her same approximate age? I mean, why is it that you're 
mentioning her by name and not the others for the comfort dog?[,]" 
the Commonwealth answered, "A.H. has expressed to law enforcement 
that she is concerned about her safety coming to court and it's for that 
reason the Commonwealth is asking for the dog to accompany her to 
the stand." Id. at 52-53. Notably, the Commonwealth now lists various 
other facts suggesting support for the finding that the comfort dog 
would be beneficial, including that the witness was autistic, has learning 
disabilities and is easily distracted. Commonwealth's Brief at 28-29. 
However, no matter the justification for the concern regarding the 
witness's testimonial inhibitions, the Commonwealth needed to present 
evidence that the dog's presence would assist the witness. Since the 
comfort dog was the sheriff's dog, not the witness's dog, the record 
lacks even the most basic evidence that the witness was observed 
spending time with the animal newly introduced into her life, and that 
she reacted favorably to the dog.259 A.3d 974, *987 ; 2021 Pa. LEXIS 3610, **30
