Honorable  members of the Judiciary committee, good morning.
My name is Maureen Foss, I am a resident of the town of Monticello in Aroostook County Maine.  I am a 
Board Certified Behavior Analyst working with children and adults with developmental disabilities 
including Autistic Spectrum Disorder. I have a bachelor’s degree in social work, a master’s degree in 
criminal justice, a Post- master’s certificate in Applied Behavior Analysis and I am accredited to work 
both nationally and internationally as a Behavior Analyst.  I am also an unrepentant dog lover, having 5 
of my own at the moment which include 2 Dobermans, a German Shepherd, a Sporting dog and a mixed 
breed. I have owned dogs that have earned their CGC, and one who earned a therapy certification. One 
of my current dogs is currently working towards CGC certification. 
In all of the roles I’ve mentioned, I applaud this bill and encourage its passage.
Research going back more than 40 years supports that simply interacting with a pet reduces clinical signs 
and symptoms of stress more than interacting with a human, has positive cardiovascular effects and 
positive psychological effects, regardless of if a person is an “animal lover” or not.  There is qualitative 
evidence to support that children who are engaged in forensic interviews such as for sexual assault, 
physical violence and abuse are more likely to provide details in the presence of a service animal that 
that they would not have otherwise disclosed.  
This bill offers the opportunity to reduce or removes barriers to fact finding to support appropriate court 
findings and sentencing, as well as providing needed measurable stress reaction reduction to witnesses 
and victims experiencing stress.  
These outcomes are highly desirable for both the criminal justice process and for those who must 
participate in it after witnessing or being victimized by trauma causing crime.  
I am prepared to share those studies with the committee if requested.  
I do have a request for a change in the trainer /assessor qualifications and the assessment used to 
establish readiness for the dog.  
You define "Assistance dog organization" as an “… organization that is a member of an internationally 
recognized assistance dog association that has the primary purpose of 8 granting accreditation for 
assistance dog acquisition, dog training, dog handler training and dog placement.”
There are currently no organizations accredited in the state of Maine that meet these criteria according 
to Service Dog International.  
This leaves only the option of using a professional dog trainer to certify these dogs inside the State of 
Maine.  Unfortunately, there are no criteria, no laws, no applicable regulations identifying who may be a 
professional trainer.  
The AKC has a “we’ll take your word for it” policy. All that is required is paying $100, filling out an 
application and short online test to become a CGC evaluator. No proof of training of the trainer is 
required by the AKC or by the state of Maine to be a professional dog trainer.  
I believe lack of training for the dog trainer leaves this program open to a variety of problems that could 
affect safety for all involved. 
I would ask that any professional trainer who is training or certifying a facility dog for use in the 
courthouse be defined as someone who has been certified by the Certification Council for Professional 
Dog Trainers. There are currently 45 such trainers in the state of Maine. 
In terms of the testing for the dog, the CGC is a start, but not enough. As I mentioned, I have had several 
dogs that passed the CGC who I did not feel would be good therapy dogs.  The Public Access test for 
Service Dogs appears to be a more relevant standard. It effectively screens for the socialization, training, 
and temperament of the dog. The CGC is not stringent enough for the conditions that may occur in a 
courthouse.
I believe these changes to the current bill will assure safety for humans and canines alike and allow this 
program to support and focus efforts on victims and witnesses.  
 
References
Allen, K. M., Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B. (2002). Cardiovascular reactivity and the presence of pets, 
friends and spouses: The truth about cats and dogs. Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 727 – 739.
Allen, K. M., Blascovich, J., Tomaka, J., & Kelsey, R. M. (1991). Presence of human friends and pet dogs as 
moderators of autonomic responses to stress in women. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 61, 582 – 589.
Eddy, T. J. (1996). RM and Beaux: Reductions in cardiac activity in response to a pet snake. The
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184, 573 – 575.
Katcher,A.H. (1981). Interactions between people and their pets: Form and function. In B. Fogle 
(Ed.), Interrelationships between people and pets (pp. 41 – 67). Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Katcher,A. H., Friedmann, E., Beck,A.M.,& Lynch, J. J. (1983). Talking, looking, and blood pressure: 
Physiological consequences of interaction with the living environment. In A. H. Katcher & A. M. Beck 
(Eds.), New perspectives on our lives with companion animals (pp. 351 – 359). Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Shiloh, S., Sorek, G., & Terkel, J. (2003). Reduction of state-anxiety by petting animals in a controlled 
laboratory experiment. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping, 16, 387 – 395.
Vormbrock, J. K., & Grossberg, J. M. (1988). Cardiovascular effects of human-pet dog 
interactions. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 11, 509 – 517.
Wilson, C. (1991). The pet as an anxiolytic intervention. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179, 482 
– 489.
Wells, D. L. (2009). The effects of animals on human health and well-being.  Journal of Social Issues, 
65, 523-543.
