People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  1 
  
 
324 Mich. App. 529  
Court of Appeals of Michigan.  
PEOPLE of the State of Michigan, 
Plaintiff -Appellee,  
v. 
Dakota Lee SHORTER, 
Defendant -Appellant.  
No. 338629  
| 
Submitted May 1, 2018, at Lansing.  
| 
Decided June 7, 2018, 9:05 a.m.  
Synopsis  
Background:  Defendant was convicted in the Ingham 
Circuit Court, No. 16 -000519 -FH, Joyce A. Draganchuk , 
J., of third -degree criminal sexual conduct and 
fourth -degre e criminal sexual conduct. Defendant 
appealed.  
  
Holdings:  The Court of Appeals, Shapiro , P.J., held that:  
  
permitting non -disabled adult victim to testify while 
accompanied by a support dog and its handler was 
improper;  
  
even if trial court had inherent authority to allow support 
dog and handler to be present while victim testified, use 
of dog to make victim more comfortable and to control 
her emotions were improper bases for permitting dog; and  
  
trial court’s error in permitting victim to testify with a 
support dog and its handler was not harmless.  
  
Reversed and r emanded.  
  
O’Brien , J., concurred in part and dissented in part and 
filed opinion.  
  
**629  Ingham Circuit Court,  LC No. 16 -000519 -FH, 
Joyce A. Draganchuk, J.  
Attorneys and Law Firms  
Bill Schuette , Attorney General, Aaron D. Lindstrom , Solicitor General, Carol A. Siemon , Prosecuting Attorney, 
Joseph B. Finnerty, Appellate Division Chief, and 
Elizabeth L. Allen , Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for 
the people.  
Law Offices of Casey D. Conklin, PLC (by Donald J. 
Baranski) for defendant.  
Before: Shapiro , P.J., and M. J. Kelly and O’Brien , JJ. 
Opinion  
 
Shapiro , P.J.  
 
*531  Defendant appeals his jury conviction of 
third -degree criminal sexual conduct (CSC -III) 
(incapacitated complainant), **630  MCL 750.520d(1)(c) , 
and fourth -degree criminal sexual conduct (CSC -IV) 
(incapacitated complainant), MCL 750.520e(1)(c) .1 The 
trial court sentenced defendant to 30 to 180 months’ 
imprisonment for the CSC -III conviction and 12 to 24 
months’ imprisonment for the CSC -IV conviction. On 
appeal, defendant argues that the trial court erred by 
granting the prosecution’s motion to al low the 
complaining witness to testify while accompanied by a 
support dog and its handler. We agree, and so reverse and 
remand for a new trial.  
 1 
 The judgment of sentence describes the crime as 
involving an “incapacitated victim” but incorrectly lists 
the statute as MCL 750.520e(1)(b) , which corresponds 
to CSC -IV by force or coercion.  
 
 
 
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND  
The incident giving rise to the charges occurred early in 
the morning of May 1, 2016, in complainant’ s home in a 
mobile home community. Complainant and defendant 
both testified at trial, and their statements about the events 
of the day were generally consistent until the point in time 
when they prepared to go to sleep. Complainant and 
defendant, along wit h two other friends, traveled to a 
rodeo together in complainant’s car. The group had 
planned to camp nearby that night after the rodeo, but it 
rained and they decided to drive home instead. Defendant 
drove the group home *532  in complainant’s car and 
dropped off the other two friends first. When they arrived 
at complainant’s home, it was about 4:30 a.m., so she told 
defendant that he could sleep on an air mattress at her 
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  2 
 home that night and that she would drive him to hi s house 
when they woke up. Defendant and complainant had 
known each other for some time as friends. They had 
never spent the night together or had any sexual contact 
with each other, although they both agreed that they had 
been flirting during the day. Aft er entering the 
complainant’s home, they discovered that the air mattress 
had been left in the car and because it was raining, neither 
wanted to go back outside to get it. Complainant 
answered a phone call and sat on her bed when 
conversing. During that ti me, defendant lay down with his 
head on her upper leg, and complainant did not object. 
From this point in the chronology, the complainant’s 
testimony and defendant’s testimony differ significantly.  
  
Complainant testified that she told defendant that he co uld 
sleep with her in her queen -sized bed but that she would 
not engage in any sexual contact. She testified that “[w]e 
agreed that we could —as both adults we could sleep in 
my bed without being intimate, and I made that very clear 
to him.” She explained t hat they dressed in separate 
rooms, and that she was clothed in leggings and a t -shirt 
with a bra underneath. According to complainant, at about 
6:30 a.m., she woke to the sound of her roommate leaving 
for work, and discovered that defendant was sexually 
assaulting her. She testified that “[w]hen I woke up to my 
roommate leaving for work. I was on my back and 
[defendant] was to the left of me and he had unfastened 
my bra and his left hand was in my pants.” She explained 
that defendant had pulled down the fr ont of her leggings, 
that he was penetrating her vagina with *533  his fingers, 
and that his other hand was underneath her shirt and bra 
on her breast. Complainant stated that she was “terrified” 
and that she immediately jumped up, told defendant she 
needed to go to the bathroom, and went to the end of the 
hallway to her roommate’s room to seek help from Tyler 
Johnson, her roommate’s boyfriend.  
  
Defendant’s testimony as to what occurred before they 
fell asleep differed **631  from complainant’s only in that 
he testified that she did not make any statements about not 
wanting to have any sexual contact. Defendant testified, 
however, that he did not expect that there would be any 
sexual acti vity and that they changed clothes in separate 
rooms. Defendant testified that he was awakened by the 
sounds of the roommate leaving, and that when he awoke; 
he found that complainant had wrapped herself around 
him, i.e. she had “cuddled up” to him. Accord ing to 
defendant, complainant’s leg was across his waist and her 
head was on his chest. He stated that he attempted to roll 
her off him by pushing her hip and thigh, but that she 
“snuggled” back. He admitted that he kissed her on the 
forehead. Defendant te stified that he then fell back asleep. 
He testified that there had been no sexual contact, and he stated that the complainant’s behavior after she awoke 
was a complete surprise and that he did not understand it. 
On cross -examination, he agreed that he did not have the 
complainant’s consent to do anything sexual, and he 
repeated that he had not done so. He was also asked about 
statements he had made to the officer that the prosecution 
argued were inconsistent with his testimony. Defendant 
agreed that he told  the officer that he touched 
complainant’s butt and thigh and explained that this 
occurred while he was attempting to move her off him. 
When asked whether he had admitted to the officer *534  
that he had touched complaina nt’s belly and back under 
her shirt, defendant denied making such a statement. 
Defendant also testified that he could not offer a reason 
why the complainant would make up the charges against 
him. 
  
Johnson, complainant’s housemate’s boyfriend, testified 
that when complainant entered his room that morning, she 
was so upset that he could barely understand her. Because 
Johnson’s phone was dead, he and complainant walked to 
the park manager’s home to call the police. The manager 
described complainant’s emotiona l state as “absolutely 
hysterical to the point I couldn’t understand her.” He 
concluded that complainant was saying that there was a 
dead body in her bed and he informed the police of this in 
his 911 call. The manager testified that he then walked 
back to complainant’s house just as defendant was 
coming out the door and he told defendant that he should 
come with him because he had been reported as dead. 
Finally, he testified that when he and defendant reached 
his house, he asked defendant if he had done som ething 
wrong and defendant responded, “ ‘Yea, I did.’ ”2 The 
police officers, who testified, agreed that complainant was 
very upset when they arrived. One officer testified that 
“[s]he was shaking and her breathing was to the point 
where [she was] almost hyperventilating.”  
 2 
 Defendant testified on cross -examination that he was 
not certain whether the manager asked him  this 
question. When asked if he responded, “Yea, I did,” to 
that question he stated, “I don’t remember me saying 
that, but I can tell you I didn’t do anything to even 
reason my saying that.” He then agreed that he didn’t 
remember whether he said it or not  and the prosecutor 
pursued it further, asking, “Okay, so it’s possible you 
said that to him?” Defendant responded, “Yes, it is 
possible, but no, it’s not probable because I didn’t do 
anything to cause me saying that.”  
 
 
*535  After giving her statement to the police, the 
complainant went to Sparrow Hospital for a sexual assault 
examination. The sexual assault nurse examiner found no 
injury to the complainant’s vaginal area. A DNA test of 
the surface of her breast reveale d male DNA, but upon 
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  3 
 testing, it was determined that the DNA did not belong to 
defendant. Before the start of trial, the prosecutor and 
defense counsel informed **632  the court of these results, 
and the parties agreed th at it was not necessary to present 
a full chain of custody for the DNA.  
  
It appears uncontested that the defense counsel was not 
informed before trial that the prosecution intended to  have 
complainant testify while accompanied by a support dog 
and the animal’s handler. It was first raised during voir 
dire when the prosecutor asked potential jurors about the 
possibility of a support animal in the courtroom while the 
complainant testifie d. On the following trial day, before 
opening statements, the prosecution raised the issue again. 
When the judge learned that in addition to the dog, a 
handler would have to be present next to the witness stand 
to hold the dog’s leash, she expressed concer n about 
whether there was evidence of a “necessity for that 
support animal.” Defense counsel objected to the use of a 
support dog, noting that there had to be “some basis for 
the need for that animal to be here. You know, I usually 
experience this in kid’s  cases or something of that nature, 
and we’re dealing with an adult woman here. I’m not sure 
if there’s some special exception that gives rise to the 
need for this, but at this point I would ask that she testify 
solely on her own.” The trial court, citing People v. 
Johnson , 315 Mich. App. 163, 889 N.W.2d 513 (2016) , 
stated that “there should be some kind of a showing of a 
need that *536  it would promote the expeditious and 
effective ascertainment of the truth.” The prosecution 
responded:  
Judge, I think my response to that is it will limit her 
emotional outbursts when she’s testifying. This is a 
victim who has been teary eyed m ultiple times when 
I’ve spoken to her, without even getting into, you 
know, the facts of what occurred to her and the actual 
testimony that she will be giving. We did a trial 
preparation meeting at my office last week where 
Preston, the dog, was present. S he was less emotional 
with him in the room. She indicated she felt more 
comfortable and that this is something she wants. I 
think that it —it would be a benefit to both sides to have 
her control her emotions through the use of the support 
dog. 
The trial cou rt then granted the prosecution’s request, 
concluding: “That’s sufficient for this Court in that it will 
limit her emotional display on the stand. I agree that that 
could even be beneficial to the Defendant. And that 
there’s already been, sort of, a trial run with the dog and 
it’s been a successful one at that. So, I think that’s a 
sufficient basis for her to use the support animal while 
testifying.”  
  
When instructing the jury at the outset of the complainant’s testimony and, again, at the end of the trial , 
the court instructed the jury that it must “not allow the use 
of a support animal to influence your decision in any 
way” and that it “should not consider the witness’s 
testimony to be any more or less credible because of the 
animal’s presence.” Closing a rguments focused on the 
credibility of the complainant and defendant, and whom 
the jury should believe. The jury returned, after several 
hours, and advised the court that they had reached a 
verdict as to the CSC -IV charge, but not as to the CSC -III 
charge.  The court gave them the deadlocked jury 
instruction; they resumed *537  deliberations and, 
sometime later, returned a verdict of guilty on both 
counts.  
  
 
II. ANALYSIS  
Defendant contends that the trial court erred by allowing 
the complainant to testify while accompanied by a support 
animal and its handler.3 
 3 
 Defendant argues that the prosecution committed 
misconduct by failing to give proper notice and that his 
attorney  was ineffective for failing to object. Because 
of our decision, we need not address the question of 
notice or the performance of defense counsel. We note, 
however, that defense counsel did object to the use of 
the support dog as quoted earlier.  
 
 
**633  In making its ruling, the trial court relied on 
Johnson , 315 Mich. App. 163, 889 N.W.2d 513 . In that 
case, the defendant was accused of sexually assaulting his 
six-year-old niece, and the trial court permitted a support 
dog to be with the six -year-old and her ten -year-old 
brother during th eir testimony. Id. at 171 -172, 889 
N.W.2d 513 . The defense appealed on the ground that 
allowing the support dog was improper. Id. at 173, 889 
N.W.2d 513 . The Johnson  Court affirmed the conviction, 
finding no error and concluding, as a matter of first 
impression, that allowing the use of a support dog is 
within the authority of a trial court and is not “inherently 
prejudicial.” Id. at 181, 889 N.W.2d 513 . Johnson  also 
held that the statute governing the use of a support person , 
MCL 600.2163a(4) , did not apply to support animals. Id. 
at 175 -176, 889 N.W.2d 513 . 
  
The first question before us, therefore, is whether Johnson  
controls our decision. We conclude that it does not. In 
reaching this conclusion, we are cognizant of the fact that 
the language used in Johnson  sweeps with a broad brush 
and that the opinion contains language which, if one does 
not consider the facts of the case, could seem to be 
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  4 
 dispositive here. However , we *538  conclude that there is 
a fundamental difference between allowing a support 
animal to accompany a child witness, as in Johnson , and 
allowing the animal to accompany a fully abled adult 
witness, as in the instant case. Accordingly, we conclude 
that Johnson’s  holding was tied to the facts presented, i.e., 
the use of a support animal during a child’s  testimony. 
We do so for several reasons.  
  
First, allowi ng support animals for fully abled adults 
would be unprecedented, not only in Michigan, but 
apparently nationwide. Johnson  cites many out -of-state 
cases in s upport of its conclusion, but each of the cited 
cases involved a witness who was either a child or an 
adult with a developmental disability. Indeed, despite our 
efforts, we have been unable to find a case in any 
jurisdiction allowing the use of a support a nimal or a 
support person when the witness is a nondisabled adult. 
Therefore, Johnson’s  observation that “other jurisdictions 
have upheld this procedure as pa rt of a trial court’s 
inherent authority to control the courtroom,” id. at 171, 
889 N.W.2d 513 , while broadly stated, rests solely on 
cases involving children or developmentally disabled 
adults.  
  
Second, any reliance placed on MCL 600.2163a  in 
Johnson  was inapposite because that statute, by its terms, 
applies only if the witness is a child or a developmentally 
disabled adult. Johnson  noted that this statute grants a 
trial court the authority to allow a support person or take 
other action to pro tect a witness, such as using a screen. 
Johnson , 315 Mich. App. at 176 -177, 889 N.W. 2d 513 . 
However, by its terms, MCL 600.2163a  limits this 
authority to cases in which the witness is either “a person 
under 16 years of age,” “ a person 16 years of age or older 
with a developmental disability,” or a “vulnerable adult.” 
MCL 600.2163(1)(f) . The statute defines “developmental 
disabilit y” as “a condition that is attributable *539  to a 
mental impairment  or to a combination of mental and 
physical impairments....” MCL 600.6123a(1)(c). The term 
“vulnerable adult” is defined in other statutes as: “an 
individual age 1 8 or over who, because of age, 
developmental disability, mental illness, or physical 
disability requires supervision or personal care or lacks 
the personal and social skills **634  required to live 
independently”4 or a person who is “ unable to protect 
himself or herself from abuse, neglect, or exploitation 
because of a mental or physical impairment or because of 
advanced age.”5 There is nothing in the record to suggest 
that the complainant was developmentally disabled, 
mentally ill or physically disabled so as to require 
supervision, or that s he was unable to live independently. 
MCL 600.2163a; MCL 750.145m(u)(i) . Accordingly, 
MCL 600.2163a provides no autho rity for the situation presented in this case.  
 4 
 MCL 750.145m(u)(i) . 
 
 
5 
 MCL 400.11(f)  (defining ‘‘vulnerable’’); see also MCL 
400.11(b)  (defining ‘‘adult in need of protective 
services’’ or ‘‘adult’’ as a  ‘‘vulnerable person’’).  
 
 
Third, Johnson  refers to the trial court’s inherent authority 
over the courtroom. We agree that this authority is broad 
and that the practice of allowing child witnesses to ha ve a 
support animal or person is common enough that it is 
comparable to the examples offered in Johnson  of that 
authority. However, allowing a  nondisabled adult witness 
to have a support animal or person with them during 
testimony is a different circumstance. Given that we 
cannot find a single prior example of any court allowing 
such a procedure, we hesitate to conclude that it is simply 
a matte r of a trial judge’s inherent authority. If that were 
so, one would presumably be able to find prior examples 
of that authority being exercised somewhere.  
  
*540  Fourth, we note that the Johnson  decision repeatedly 
and properly notes the tender ages of the children 
testifying. Moreover, we find nothing in the opinion, 
despite its broad language, that indicates that the Court  
even considered whether its holding would apply in the 
setting of a fully abled adult. As already discussed, none 
of the cases relied on in Johnson  consider ed the issue in 
that context.6 
 6 
 By way of example, the very first line from a passage 
Johnson  quoted from People v. Tohom , 109 A.D. 3d 
253, 272 -273, 969 N.Y.S.2d 123 (2013)  reads, “ ‘ In 
fact, permitting a comfort dog to accompany a child 
victim  to the stand can be considered less prejudicial 
than allowing ‘‘support persons.’’ ’ ” Johnson , 315 
Mich. App. at 181, 889 N.W.2d 513 , quoting Tohom , 
109 A.D.3d at 272, 969 N.Y.S.2d 123  (emphasis 
added). Similarly, the court in State v. Dye , 178 
Wash.2d 541, 544, 309 P.3d 1192 (2013) , on which 
Johnson  relied, described the witness in that case as 
“suffer[ing] from significant developmental disabilities, 
including cerebral palsy , Kallman Syndrome , and mild 
mental retardation . He has an IQ (intelligence quotient) 
[of] 65, and although he is 56 years old, he functions at 
a mental age ranging from 6 to 12 years old.”  
 
 
Lastly, we note that Johnson  made no mention of 
allowing an animal handler to also accompany the witness 
during testimony. In the instant case, the complainant was 
accompanied not only by the dog, but also by the handler, 
who is a human being, which, unlike the situa tion in 
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  5 
 Johnson , triggers the requirements of MCL 600.2163(4)  
even if the witness is a child.  
  
Even assuming a trial court had the inherent authority to 
allow such a procedure, we would not approve its use if 
the basis for it was simply that doing so would allow the 
witness to be “more comfortable” or because “this is 
something she wants.” Nor are we convinced that 
allowing a support animal or person so that the witness 
would be better able to “control her emotions” necessarily 
aids the truth -finding process. This is particularly so in 
this case, where the prosecution presented evidence from 
four different witnesses that the complainant was 
hysterical, shaking, and *541  barely able to speak 
following the alleged assault and argued to  the jury that 
her emotional reactions were evidence of defendant’s 
guilt. In that context, it was particularly improper to allow 
a comfort **635  dog to help the complainant “control her 
emotions” while testifying. If th e adult complainant’s 
emotional state constitutes evidence of guilt, the jury is 
entitled to evaluate her emotional state uninfluenced by 
outside support, not only as it pertains to her own 
credibility, but also to determine the weight to be given to 
testimony by others who described her emotional state.  
  
For all these reasons, we conclude that allowing the 
complainant to be accompanied by a support dog during 
her testimony was error.  
  
Although the prosecution does not ask that we consider 
whether any such error was harmless, we have done so, 
and we conclude that the error was not harmless because 
it undermined the reliability of the verdict. People v. 
Feezel , 486 Mich. 184, 192, 783 N.W.2d 67 (2010) .7 
There were no witnesses to the actual *542  events other 
than defendant and complainant, and the only forensic 
evidence consisted of a different male’s DNA. Thus, the 
case turned almost exclusively on the jury’s evaluation of 
their respective credibility. Secondarily, it turned, in part, 
on the wei ght given by the jury to the testimony 
concerning complainant’s emotional state after leaving 
her bedroom that morning. These determinations were 
likely affected by the use of the support dog and handler. 
A juror can readily accept that a chil d might need support 
simply to be in a courtroom to be able to answer 
questions. With a fully abled adult, a juror is far more 
likely to conclude that the reason for the support animal 
or support person is because the complainant was 
traumatized by the act ions for which the defendant is 
charged .8 
 7 
 In considering whether an error was harmless, the 
relevant inquiry is ‘‘the ‘effect the error had or 
reasonably may be taken to have had upon the jury’s 
decision.’ ” People v. Straight,  430 Mich. 418, 427, 424 N.W.2d 257 (1988)  (citation omitted). The error 
justifies reversal if it is more probable than not that it 
affected the outcome. People v. Young , 472 Mich. 130, 
141-142, 693 N.W.2d 801 (2005) . An error is “outc ome 
determinative if it undermined the reliability of the 
verdict.” Id. at 142, 693 N.W.2d 801  (quotation marks 
and citation omitted). In making this determin ation, this 
Court should focus “on the nature of the error and 
assess[ ] its effects in light of the weight and strength of 
the untainted evidence.” People v. Lukity , 460 Mich. 
484, 495, 596 N.W.2d 607 (1999)  (quotation marks and 
citations omitted). Also, an error should not be 
considered harmless if “the error seriously affect[ed] 
the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial 
proceedings....” People v. Kimble , 470 Mich. 305, 312, 
684 N.W.2d 669 (2004)  (quotation marks and citation 
omitted). If the error is sufficiently “offensive to the 
maintenance of a sound judicial process,” then “it can 
never be regarded as harmless[.]” People v. Robinson , 
386 Mich. 551, 563, 194 N.W.2d 709 (1972) . 
 
 
8 
 Our dissenting colleague observes that the testimony of 
the police officer provided su bstantive evidence 
sufficient to uphold the conviction. One could argue to 
the contrary, but more importantly, the issue of 
harmless error is not determined by whether a jury 
could have convicted regardless of the error. 
Harmless -error review turns on whet her it was ‘‘more 
probably than not that the error affected the outcome” 
or “undermined the validity of the verdict.” Young , 472 
Mich. at 141 -142, 693 N.W.2d 801 . 
 
 
In sum, we conclude that a fully abled adult witness may 
not be accompanied by a support animal or support 
person while t estifying. Indeed, were we to rule that a 
fully abled adult may be accompanied by a support dog or 
person simply because they will be “more comfortable,” 
we would unlock a door that we have great hesitation 
about opening. At a minimum, this unprecedented c hange, 
if adopted, should be made by legislation, court rule, or a 
decision of our Supreme Court.9 
 9 
 One example of the unexpected consequences from 
permitting this practice will arise the first  time a 
criminal defendant requests a support animal while 
testifying. And allowing support animals for 
complainants but not defendants may implicate 
due-process concerns.  
 
 
**636  *543 Reversed and remand for a new trial. We do 
not retain jurisdiction.  
  
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  6 
 M. J. Kelly, J., concurred with Shapiro , P.J.  
 
 
O’Brien , J. (concurring in part and dissenting in part ).  
 
I agree with the majorit y that the trial court erred in this 
case by allowing the victim to use a support dog while 
testifying. However, I believe that the error was harmless. 
Therefore, I respectfully dissent in part.  
  
For preserved, nonconstitutional errors, reversal is not 
required unless the defendant establishes that it is more 
probable than not that the error was outcome 
determinative. People v. Lukity , 460 Mich. 484, 495, 596 
N.W.2d 607 (1999) . This standard does not “require 
actual innocence, but, rather, it should be viewed as a 
legislative directive to presume the validity of verdicts 
and to reverse  only with respect to those errors that 
affirmatively appear to undermine the reliability of the 
verdict.” People v. Mateo , 453 Mich. 203, 211, 551 
N.W.2d 891 (1996) ; see also MCL 769.26 . Thus, “[a]n 
error is deemed to have been ‘ outcome determinative’ if it 
undermined the reliability of the verdict.” People v. 
Elston, 462 Mich. 751, 766, 614 N.W.2d 595 (2000) . 
When determining whether an error was harmless, the 
focus is on the nature of the error “in light of the weight 
and strength of the untainted evidence.” Mateo , 453 Mich. 
at 215, 551 N.W.2d 891 . 
  
I agree with the majority that this case —like the vast 
majority of criminal sexual assault cases —had “no 
witnesses to the actual events other than’’ defendant and 
the victim and, therefore, largely came down to “their 
respective credibility.” However, unlike the majority, I 
believe that the effec t—if any —of the support *544  dog 
on the victim’s and defendant’s credibility was harmless 
in light of the untainted evidence that bolstered the 
victim’s credibility and damaged defendant’s.  
  
The manager of the trailer p ark where the victim lived, 
Joshua Kaimon, testified that, shortly after the assault 
occurred, defendant admitted to him that he had done 
something wrong. Specifically, Kaimon testified that, on 
the morning of the incident, he was outside his trailer with 
defendant waiting for the police to arrive and asked 
defendant if he did “something [he] shouldn’t have,” to 
which defendant replied, “ ‘Yea, I did.’ ”1 Officer Aaron 
Reynolds, who interviewed defendant on the morning of 
the assault, testified that defen dant initially denied that 
anything occurred while he was sleeping with the victim 
in her bed. However, according to Officer Reynolds, 
defendant later changed his story and admitted that, while 
the victim was sleeping, he attempted to kiss her, touched 
her butt, placed his hand on her upper thigh, and placed his hand underneath the victim’s shirt and touched her 
belly and back area. Officer Reynolds also testified that 
defendant told him that he had an erection “while they 
were cuddling.”2 The testimony of Officer Reynolds, 
**637  besides damaging defendant’s credibility, provided 
substantive evidence to convict defendant of 
fourth -degree criminal sexual assault (CSC -IV), MCL 
750.520e(1)(c) , if the jury found that defendant’s 
touching of the victim’s buttock while she *545  was 
asleep was intentional and for a sexual purpose, see MCL 
750.520a(f)  and (q).3 The majority does not contend that 
Officer Reynolds’s testimony was tainted by the victim’s 
use of a support dog. Therefore, even under the majority’s 
analysis, defendant’s CSC -IV conviction should be 
upheld. See Mateo , 453 Mich. at 215, 551 N.W.2d 891 . 
 1 
 As recognized by the majority, defendant testified that 
he could not remember whether he made the 
incriminating statement to Kaimon but a dmitted that it 
was possible he made the statement.  
 
 
2 
 Defendant denied some, but not all, of the statements 
that Officer Reynolds attributed to him, and he 
corroborated the officer’s testimony that he initially 
told the officer that nothing happened with the victim 
that morning.  
 
 
3 
 Defendant admitted that he told the officer that he 
grabbed the victim’ s buttock, but explained that it was 
accidental. He also admitted that he had an erection 
while he was in bed with the victim that morning, but 
explained that it was not due to sexual arousal.  
 
 
In contrast to defendant’s changing story, the victim’s 
story remained unchanged: she testified at trial that she 
woke up to defendant’s fingers inside her vagina and 
another hand on her bare breast. The officer who 
interviewed the victim following the incident, as well as 
the sexual -assault nurse examiner who exam ined the 
victim, testified that, when they spoke with the victim on 
the morning of the incident, she told them that she woke 
up to defendant’s fingers inside her vagina and his other 
hand on her breast. Evidence of the victim’s unchanging 
story bolstered h er credibility, while evidence of 
defendant’s incriminating admissions and changing story 
damaged his credibility. All this evidence was untainted 
by the trial court’s error of allowing a support dog to 
accompany the victim.  
  
The majority’s harmless -error  analysis does not appear to 
assess the effect of the trial court’s error “in light of the 
weight and strength of the untainted evidence.” Mateo , 
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  7 
 453 Mich. at 215, 551 N.W.2d 891 . Instead, it rests on the 
following analysis:  
A juror can readily accept that a child might need 
support simply to be in a courtroom to be able to 
answer quest ions. With a fully abled adult, a juror is far 
more likely to conclude that the reason for the support 
animal or support *546  person is because the 
complainant was traumatized by the actions for which 
the defendant is charged.[4] 
 4 
 This analysis does not appear to be fact -specific. 
Rather, the majority opinion appears to require 
automatic reversal if a fully abled adult is accompanied 
by a support animal. This conclusion is contrary to this 
state’s harmless -error jurisprudence. See People v. 
Graves , 458 Mich. 476, 483 -484, 581 N.W.2d 229 
(1998)  (rejecting a rule f or automatic reversal in 
harmless -error review).  
 
 
When reviewing the information —more accurately, the 
lack of information —placed before the jurors regarding 
the support dog, the majority’ s holding becomes unduly 
speculative. The support dog was barely mentioned 
during the course of the three -day trial. The first time it 
was mentioned was during voir dire when the prosecutor 
told jurors that the victim may be accompanied by a 
support dog. T he prosecutor asked jurors not to draw any 
conclusions from the dog’s presence, and all jurors 
confirmed that they could ignore the dog. The prosecutor 
did not discuss the dog any further.  
  
The next time that the dog was mentioned to jurors was 
before the  victim testified. At that time, the trial court told 
jurors that the victim would be accompanied by a support 
animal and gave the following instruction:  
You should disregard the [support] animal’s presence 
and decide the case based solely on the evidence 
presented. You should not consider the witness’s 
testimony to be any more or less credible **638  
because of the animal’s presence. You must not allow 
the use of a support animal to influence your decision 
in any way.  
The support dog was not mentioned at any point during 
the victim’s testimony, no other witness was asked about 
or mentioned the support dog, and neither party referred 
to the support animal during closing arguments. The dog 
was only mentioned one other *547  time: during final 
jury instructions, the trial court repeated its instruction 
that the jurors were to ignore the support animal and not 
draw any conclusions from its presence.  
  
On this record, I see no reason to make th e leaps necessary to find that a juror was “likely to conclude that 
the reason for the support animal ... [was] because the 
complainant was traumatized by the actions for which the 
defendant [was] charged.” No one gave any reason to 
jurors for why the supp ort dog was accompanying the 
victim. In fact, no one even explained to jurors what a 
support animal was. Thus, the majority’s conclusion 
assumes (1) that a juror had general knowledge about why 
someone may use a support animal and (2) what the juror 
was “l ikely to conclude” from the animal’s presence. 
With respect to this second point, this Court has 
recognized that the use of a support dog “does not give 
rise to primarily  prejudicial inferences, as it is possible for 
the jury to make a wide range of infere nces from the use 
of this procedure that are unrelated to defendant.” People 
v. Johnson , 315 Mich. App. 163, 180, 889 N.W.2d 513 
(2016) . Yet, without explanation, the majority concludes 
that “a juror is far more likely to conclude that the reason 
for the support animal” is related to defendant.5 The 
majority’s conclusion also assumes that (1) the juror 
disregarded the trial cour t’s instructions, despite the 
general rule that jurors are presumed to follow those 
instructions, People v. Graves , 458 Mich. 476, 486, 581 
N.W.2d 229 (1998) , and (2) the juror lied when he or she 
confirmed during voir dire that they *548  could ignore the 
dog’s presence. In my opinion, the majority’ s conclusion 
is “unduly speculative” and does not warrant finding that 
the error in this case was not harmless. Id. at 485 -486, 581 
N.W.2d 229  (recognizing th at an error is harmless if a 
conclusion to the contrary is “unduly speculative”).  
 5 
 The majority’s conclusion appears to be based on the 
fact that the victim was a “fully abled adult” without 
developmental disabilities. However, neither the 
victim’s age nor her lack of developmental disabilities 
was ever placed before the jury. Accordingly, it is 
speculation to even conclude that the jury viewed the 
victim as a fully abled adult.  
 
 
In sum, the only error was the trial court’s allowing a 
support dog to accompany the victim. This dog —which 
was barely mentioned throughout trial —did not, by its 
mere presence, add credibility to the victim’s claim of a 
traumatic experience because none of the jurors knew 
why the dog accompanied the victim. More importantly, 
any credibility that the suppor t dog’s presence may have 
added to the victim —or taken away from defendant —was 
minimal in light of the significant untainted evidence that 
damaged defendant’s credibility and supported the 
victim’s. Considering the untainted evidence, it is not 
more probab le that, had the victim testified without the 
aid of a support dog, a different outcome would have 
resulted. See Lukity , 460 Mich. at 495, 596 N.W.2d 607 . 
  
People v. Shorter, 324 Mich.App. 529 (2018)   
922 N.W.2d 628  
 
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  8 
 Because I do not believe that the error affected the 
reliability of the jury verdict, I would leave the jury’s 
verdict untouched.  
  All Citations  
324 Mich.App. 529, 922 N.W.2d 628  
 
End of Document  
 © 2023 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.  
 
 
 
 
