 
   
 
Stacey Ober , J.D.  
Government Relations 
Regional Manager  
New England  
   
 
 
 
March  15, 2023  
 
The Honorable Anne Carney , Senate Chair  
The Honorable Matt Moonen , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Cross Building,  Room 438 
Augusta , Maine 04333  
 
RE: Support LD 888, Allow ing Use of Courthouse Facility Dogs by Criminal Justice Agencies for Criminal Justice 
Purposes  
 
Dear Chair Carney , Chair Moonen , and Members of the Joint Committee :  
 
Founded in 1884, the American Kennel Club (AKC) is a not -for-profit organization that is recognized as a trusted expert 
in canine health, breeding, and training.  We advocate for the purebred dog as a family companion and promote the ideals 
of responsible dog ownership.  We represent over 5,000 dog clubs nationally, including  30 in Maine , whic h represent 
thousands of dog owners.  In 20 21, AKC licensed and sanctioned 1 11 events in Maine  where more than 9,000 dogs 
participated.  Surveys estimate that exhibitors spend $ 863 per show weekend, many of whom travel into Maine  to 
participate.  
 
In 2022, a  local  AKC breeder of Labrador Retrievers donated a puppy to undergo training and become the first official 
therapy dog onsite at the courthouse  in Aroostook County.   We are delig hted the Senate President has filed LD 888 to 
provide  definitions and further  a system to allow trained dog s to accompany witness es in courtroom appearances and 
other interactions where criminal justice is administered  across the state.  
 
Courthouse facility dogs provide a compassionate way to help traumatized victims tell their stories.   Their handlers 
undergo training, and their canine companions are certified in pet -assisted therapy programs offered through national 
service -dog organizations.  Each dog -and-handler team also acquaint s itself  with the legal process before they are all owed 
to participate .  As legally  neutral companions for witnesses during the investigation and prosecution of crimes, these dogs 
help the most vulnerable witnesses feel willing  and able to describe what happened.  The dogs also provide emotional 
support to participants in family court proceedings.  
 
AKC strongly urges the committee to  pass LD 888.  If I can be of any further assistance, I can be reached at 
stacey.ober@akc.org  or (919) 816 -3348.  Thank you.  
 
Regards,  
 
Government Relations Regional Manager, New England  
 
Cc:  The Honorable Troy Jackson, Senate President  
        Gary Anderson, President, Federation of Maine Dog Clubs  

