€ "“~ 
Q} t1%'§€:§;2 
t:,V{5§r'¢-G- .§E<;1‘}fZ 
/><a,‘lr»*-s¢.~;1' 
2t 
it 
\§_j *\- 2-: ‘-1-' W-=*% < tn. ‘Ag, I-Iv.» 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 888 
An Act to Allow Use of Courthouse Facility Dogs by Criminal Justice Agencies for 
Criminal Justice Purposes 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Wednesday, March 15, 2023 
Senator Camey, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Troy Jackson. I serve as President of the Maine Senate and proudly 
represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. I am here today to present LD 888, An Act to 
Allow Use of Cotuthouse Facility Dogs by Criminal Justice Agencies for Criminal Justice 
Purposes. 
Courthouse facility dogs are professionally trained and work in criminal justice agencies 
throughout the United States. They act as neutral companions during investigations and 
prosecutions of crimes. They provide emotional support to vulnerable witnesses, especially 
children and victims of abuse.‘ According to the Courthouse Dogs Foundation, as of August 19, 
2022, there were 295 dogs working in 4l states. The dogs are trained not to disrupt legal 
proceedings and remain calm throughout the judicial process. LD 888 is an opportunity for us to 
implement a program that will help vulnerable Mainers navigate the legal system. 
The bill before you lays out extensive training requirements for both the dog and its handler. The 
dog, often a Labrador, golden retriever, or a mix of both, must be at least two years of age and 
have graduated from a training program or been certiﬁed by an independent professional dog 
trainer. The courthouse dog handler must be a professional working in the criminal justice 
system. The handler and dog must also complete a minimum of 40 hours of training as a team. 
Once the dog and handler meet the necessary requirements, LD 888 would allow the dog access 
to not only the courts but to law enforcement agencies, the Department of the Attomey General, 
district attomey’s offices, and child advocacy centers. However, the access would only be 
granted during legal proceedings if authorized by the presiding judicial officer. Either party in 
the proceedings may request access to the facility dog. 
1 . 
httpssi/(999iJi7s°@ “(%‘U3§’§%f!'i%i20 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fa.\'(207)Z87-5862 * T011 Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Se11af0rJac/{son1@gmai1.com * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senale
This legislation was inspired by Holiday, the yellow Labrador who lives and trains with 
Aroostook County District Attorney Todd Collins in Presque Isle. Holiday will receive 208 hours 
of training before she can be officially licensed as a courthouse dog. She is currently 
participating in a training program in Houlton to accompany the district attomey during 
investigations. DA Collins is hoping that Aroostook County will become the frst district in 
Maine to use courthouse dogs to comfort children and victims of violent crimes? 
Permitting the use of courthouse dogs may also beneﬁt those who volunteer and work as ﬁrst 
responders and within the criminal justice system. Victim advocates, law enforcement officers, 
emergency medical responders, and numerous others experience an extreme amount of stress and 
trauma as they listen to distressing scenarios and view disturbing material as part of their job. By 
just being in the facility, a courthouse dog can be a calming presence and provide emotional 
support for these dedicated professionals. 
I ask you to join me in supporting LD 888. A facility dog can offer some comfort and solace to 
individuals in the aftermath of a traumatic event. lt will make our judicial system more 
accessible for those who need it. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I will attempt to answer any questions you may have. 
Zhttps://wgme.com/news/locaI/new-courthouse —pup-wil|-be —1st-of-its-kind-in- 
maine?fbclid=lwAROTLmuKOgDfvwdh3RIP5NbLC8tjr6dOyFqahKfqClB5sKaySheepPuRZfs
