Dear Committee Members,
I am the Director of the Somes-Meynell Wildlife Sanctuary on Mt. Desert Island and am writing 
today in support of LD 92, An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants. Most 
of our projects and activities focus on maintaining the healthiest watersheds possible, protecting 
the habitat of species who live here, and encouraging smart conservation practices via education 
and active volunteer engagement. The lakes, ponds, and streams of this island, with their high 
water quality and no known invasive plants, are of great value to local residents, visitors from 
around the world, and wildlife - but are easy to take for granted.
While on Courtesy Boat Inspection (CBI) duty at Long Pond (the largest of MDI's lakes), we are 
often reminded by boaters from other states how lucky we are. They share stories of having to 
mow their lakes to keep invasive vegetation mats down, cut channels for boat passage, and 
witnessing algae blooms causing oxygen depletion and massive fish kills.
We have been lucky in Maine so far, largely due to being tucked way up in the northeastern 
corner of our country, relatively far from large population centers, to have so few of our more 
than 6,000 lakes and ponds infested with aquatic invasive species. "Luck" is the key word, and 
luck is not usually an integral part of an effective management plan to defend against a serious 
threat that has the ability to: render waterbodies toxic from cyanobacteria; unusable for any 
recreational purposes; cause serious harm to fish, loons and other wildlife; and significantly 
reduce property values and property tax income for towns. 
Statewide CBI prevention efforts are aimed at directing boaters to check their own boats, 
trailers, and fishing equipment each time they leave and enter a water body. Cleaning, draining, 
and drying equipment that goes in and out of the water and removing all plants are the basic 
messages. These efforts will be most effective at protecting the scenic, recreational, and wildlife 
values of our valued lakes if they are implemented by everyone.
Having a Maine statute that requires boats and other equipment leaving a lake, pond, or 
stream to be drained prior to departure from the site and movement elsewhere can only 
help in reducing the likelihood of new infestations in our treasured water resources. The 
"courtesy" in CBI means that our boat inspections and efforts to promote boaters checking their 
own equipment is voluntary - dependent upon willing participation. 
While most citizens of our state, and others, recognize the importance of taking best possible 
care of one of Maine's greatest assets, having a law on the books should help achieve an even 
higher compliance rate. I think that actual law enforcement and citations from Game Wardens 
will be few and far between if this Act is passed - just as is the case with the law prohibiting the 
movement of any plants on a vessel. The adjustment in behavior (pulling drain plugs) will 
likely come about as a result of education efforts and reference to what makes sense. Being 
able to say “by the way, it is the law” will only help with compliance. [We have laws about 
vehicle speed limits everywhere that help keep speeding in check, with very few actual 
enforcement actions given the volume of traffic].
Boater education that includes reference to this law will likely bolster the effectiveness of 
prevention efforts. Awareness of the infestation threat and cascading effects of failure to 
prevent them is critical to success. DEP and IF&W are well aware of how much more expensive, 
time consuming, and labor intensive it is to mount an aquatic species removal/control effort 
compared with preventative measures. This committee recognizes that as well, as indicated by 
the recent important passage of LD 164.
LD 92’s provisions should become part of a sensible, cost-effective, broad approach to minimize 
the threat of aquatic invasive species. Volunteers and small conservation organizations provide a 
great deal of protection value for resources we are proud to have in this state. The Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee should endorse the passage of LD 92 to provide statutory 
support for sensible measures aimed at reducing the probability of new aquatic species 
infestations. Give those volunteers, concerned citizens, aquatic ecologists, biologists, and Game 
Wardens, who do understand the threat, another prevention focused law to refer to, and inform 
those who may not be as aware, to do the right thing for our lakes.
Sincerely,
Billy Helprin
