PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
To:  Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of the Joint Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director 
Date:  February 13, 2023
Re: Testimony in Support of L.D. 92
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Joint Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife thank you for allowing the Maine Rural Water Association the opportunity 
to provide testimony on L.D. 92, An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic 
Plants.  
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 
300 members. The vast majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities 
from around the state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy 
environment through the proper treatment of wastewater. 
The Maine Rural Water Association supports legislation that will preserve clean water in 
our state’s lakes and ponds. Many of the water utilities in Maine use treated surface water to 
supply their customers and that treatment is always easier when starting with a clean product. 
L.D. 92 would enhance existing measures in state law to prevent the spread of aquatic plants that 
can ultimately harm bodies of water and increase the resources required to treat that product for 
ratepayers. As you all know, it is much easier to keep something out of a body of water than it is 
to deal with it once transmission and spreading have taken place.
This bill creates a small task for boaters that will add mere minutes to their day of 
adventure but has the potential to save multiple bodies of water from invasive plants. The Rural 
Water community urges passage of this legislation and is happy to work with this committee on 
this, or any issue involving our state’s greatest resource, in the future. If you have any questions, 
please do not hesitate to contact me at Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org of 207-737-9014. 
