SAM ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@samofmaine.org 
wvvw.samila.org 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against 
LD 92, An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM Institute for Legislative Action 
February l3, 2023 
The Honorable Senator Lafontaine, Rep. Landry, members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, my 
name is David Trahan, I am the Executive Director of the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine-Institute for 
Legislative Action testifying neither for nor against LD 92, An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive 
Aquatic Plants. 
Our organization understands the importance of protecting Maine lakes from the threat of introducing invasive 
aquatic plants. Once the plants are in a Maine water body, there is very little that can be done, and that body of 
water will be changed forever. 
This bill is well intended but has some questions and implications that we feel need to be addressed prior to 
receiving our support. First, the deﬁnition of vessel appears to be drawn from statute related to coastal waters 
and is connected to oil spills, not sure how that deﬁnition transfers over to fresh water but appears to include 
anything that ﬂoats. 
Further conﬂict arises from the new mandate placed on boaters to drain any ﬂuids in the vessel prior to leaving 
the pond. This is a mandate, not a recommendation, yet, in another section it states, “nothing in this subsection 
allows a person to directly or indirectly discharge pollutants into waters of the state.” Well water ﬂows 
downhill, if one of these areas that must be drained at the lake and produces an oil slick or litter, is the boat 
owner liable for violations enforced by the Department of Environmental Protection? At the very least, sucha 
catch 22 mandate should provide a place to properly drain boats and allow boat owners to honor the intent of 
the law. 
This bill has the potential to create serious unintended consequences for boat owners and should be carefully 
vetted to insure it is not creating new environmental hazards. 
1|Page
