February 10, 2023
Dear Members of the I F & W Committee,
I would like to encourage you to support LD 92 An Act to Minimize the Propagation of 
Invasive Aquatic Plants.
I am the president of the East Pond Association, the first lake in the Belgrade chain of 7 lakes.  
In 2021, a resident noticed an unusual plant that she had never seen in our waters.  The plant 
fragment was examined by 7 Lakes Alliance and Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection representatives who agreed that it was Curly-leaf Pondweed (CLP), a highly 
aggressive, aquatic,  noxious, perennial  weed and a major threat to East Pond, North Pond 
and all of the Belgrade lakes.
Curly-leaf Pondweed has turions (seeds) which look like tiny pinecones which drop into the 
sediment and can grow all winter under the ice or lay dormant for up to 5 years.  Each plant 
can have as many as 100 turions.   As the plants die back later in the summer, it can result in 
masses of dead vegetation, and increased phosphorus levels causing algae blooms.  Potentially 
an infestation will decrease lake property values.  In Maine, Curly Leaf Pondweed has been 
found in: Legion Pond, Kittery; West Pond, Parsonsfield; the Kennebec River and recently the 
East Pond Serpentine and Old Mill Stream which connects to North Pond.  This CLP invasion is a  
very serious problem. Eradication will be costly and will require years of vigilance, removal 
and individual cooperation.  Public Education and community coordination are essential for 
success.
After careful inspection, it was determined that the infestation was confined to a half mile or so 
section of The Serpentine on East Pond and a small section of Old Mill Stream.  It is likely that 
plant fragments were carried on duck decoys or fishing lines via a private boat launch site.  A 
professional Dive Team hired by the DEP removed 160 gallons of plants during the summer of 
2021 with more being pulled by 7 Lake Alliance throughout September.  In 2022, 7 Lakes divers 
spent almost every day each week from May until September removing CLP plants.  We do not 
know what 2023 will hold, but there will be more plants to pull.
Any program that requires careful, diligent inspection of a watercraft as it leaves a water 
body will help reduce the spread of invasive plants.  The East Pond Association pays thousands 
of dollars each year to keep Courtesy Boat Inspectors at the IF&W Public Boat Launch for as 
many hours as possible and we cover additional hours with volunteers.  We published 1,000 
CLP informational brochures which we distributed in public places and by our CBIs at the boat 
launch.  We spoke with boaters asking them to avoid the infested area of the Serpentine and an 
IF&W floating buoy recommended that boaters turn around before entering the plant growth 
area.  Constant public education was required to reduce boat traffic in the area where divers 
were working.  Some boaters did not heed our warnings, but most were respectful and avoided 
the defined area.
Remediation is way more costly than prevention.
Please support LD 92 to help reduce the spread of invasive species in all Maine lakes.  Our 
numerous lakes are a precious recreational resource which affords tremendous economic 
impact on our Maine communities.
Edith Cornwall
East Pond Association President
289 Brickett Point Ests.
Oakland, ME  04963
Edith Cornwall
East Pond Association
LD 92
 

