MAINEQ 
AUDUBON 
Committee on Inland Fisheries & \‘{/ildlife 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
February 13, 2023 
RE: LD 92, A/1 Art to Minimize t/2e Propagation 0/‘ I mzaxiue Aquatic P/ii/its 
Dear Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wﬂdhfe Committee: 
My name is Eliza Donoghue and I am Maine Audubon’s Director of Advocacy and Staff 
Attorney. Maine Audubon is a Wildlife conservation non—profit -— We fulﬁll our mission to “conserve 
Maine’s Wildlife and wildlife habitat” by engaging people of all ages in nature through a science~based 
approach to education, conservation, and advocacy. On behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 
members and supporters, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 92, A/1 
Art Z0 Minimize the Pr-opagatia/1 of I /11/arrive Aqi/ativ P/mils. 
For the past 35 years, Maine Audubon has led a broad range of efforts focused on the health 
and Well-being of Maine’s Common Loons. From documenting the prevalence of lead poisoning as 
one of the leading causes of death in adult loons to providing educational programming to thousands 
of people in every county, loon conservation is central to Maine Audubon’s Work. Preventing and 
controlling the spread of invasive aquatic plant species is elemental to conserving the Common Loon. 
Clean water is essential to loons. Their primary prey is small (6 — 8”) fish. As visual predators, 
loons need to be able to see fish in order to pursue and catch them. Keeping invasive infestation 
contained and out of any new lakes in Maine is vital to the long-term health of Maine’s loon 
population. 
LD 92 would help to keep invasive aquatic species out of Water bodies by requiring persons 
removing a vessel from inland water bodies to drain the vessel prior to transporting it. This isa 
common sense, easily achievable action that will prevent signiﬁcant harm to water quality, Wildlife 
habitat, recreational opportunities, and the local economies that rely upon them all. 
Invasive aquatic plants like Eurasian watermilfoil are usually introduced into lakes and ponds 
when they “hitchhike ” on boats and their associated equipment. As of January 2020, more than 30 
Maine lakes and rivers are infested with 7 different invasive plant species. Once these species are 
introduced, they grow and spread rapidly, outcompeting native plants, and creating “blooms” that 
degrade habitat for ﬁsh and Wildlife. 
Maine’s nonprofits and lake associations, as Well as the Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection ’s Courtesy Boat Inspection and Lake and River Protection Sticker programs are Working 
diligently to manage for and, in some cases, remove invasive species, but they face a significant battle 
with limited capacity. LD 92 would add additional “capacity ” to these efforts and put Maine on par 
with neighboring states. W/hile existing Maine law prohibits the transport of aquatic plants, we do not 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 - (207) 781-2330 - maineaudub0n.org
require the quick step of draining boats before overland transport. New Hampshire, Vermont, and 
New York (along with 12 other states) do. 
Requiring the draining of boats before transport is quick, easy, and costs nothing, and will 
result in fewer invasive species “hitchhiking ” from one body of water to another, while continuing 
Maine’s tradition of hosting some of the cleanest lakes in the country. \Ve urge the Committee to 
support this bill. Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq. 
Director of Advocacy 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 - (207) 781-2330 - maineaudub0n.0rg
