. =5:sco* -- Q2-B95 r7 
c. 4% 
14" 5I 
c\I\‘.\“$ 
'E'ort/wloumft¥u'/Zak». 
P.O. Box 17 
Manchester, ME 04351 
Senator LaFountain and Representative Landry 
Members of the Ioint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Re: LD 92, AN ACT to Minimize the Propagation on Invasive Aquatic Plants 
My name is Iohn Stanek and I am a resident of West Gardiner, Maine. I am 
appearing before you today on behalf of the Cobbosseecontee Lake 
Association of which I am a member and serve as Vice President. Lake 
Cobbosseecontee is but 5 or 6 miles from where we sit today. We as an 
organization are in strong support of LD 92. We want to thank the sponsor, 
Representative Riseman for bringing this legislation for your consideration 
because it brings to the legislative light the grave threat to Maine lakes. In 
our opinion, adding this language to the statutes that address invasive plants 
is a common sense approach to help prevent a plant from being transported 
on a vessel and subsequently introduced into another body of water. I will 
add that this legislation represents a first step to what will be required should 
the citizens of Maine be asked to protect our lakes. 
Simply put, invasive aquatic plants are called invasives because they can 
travel from one water body to another. The most common way they are 
carried from one lake to another is on a watercraft that was not drained 
properly, cleaned properly, or dried properly. Cobbosseecontee is fighting 
three aquatic invasive plants. Variable leaf milfoil most likely entered our lake 
from Lake Annabessecook whose waters feed into ours. Eurasian Water 
Milfoil entered our lake, most likely from a boat coming in from another 
infested lake, requiring Maine DEP to use a targeted chemical herbicide to
treat the problem. The Cobbossee infestation occurred because one boat 
launched on Cobbossee that had one piece of Eurasian Watermilfoil that was 
scraped by a trailer, fishing gear, or propellor from some other lake in the 
northeast or beyond. The third invasive plant is European Frog-bit. How 
sustainable is relying on herbicidal treatments across the state against the 
annual budget of the DEP, as it is found in lake after lake? How long can this 
go on before the battle is lost and Maine lakes are deemed, one after the other, 
lost? 
The CLA supports this legislation and we hope it will be recommended 
unanimously for passage and we see it as a good beginning as to what is 
required to protect one of Maine's true assets, it's lakes. We are committed to 
advocating for comprehensive legislation that will require all watercraft to be 
thoroughly inspected prior to launch. This is currently the best way that 
invasives can be prevented from leaving one lake and ruining another 
lake. We recognize this is a difficult undertaking and it will take time before 
Maine requires Certified, not Courtesy, Boat Inspections. The CLA hopes that 
one day Maine will be able to reduce the threat to our beautiful lakes. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I'd be happy to answer any questions 
you may have or provide you with additional information on our efforts.
