 30 Mile River Watershed Association   Page 1 of 2 
 
 
 
 
 
RE: Testimony in SUPPORT  of LD 92:  
An Act to Minimize the P ropagat ion of Invasive A quatic Plants  
February 13, 2023  
Dear Chair  LaFountain , Chair Land ry and Distinguished Members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildl ife Committee:  
 
My name is Lidie Robbins  and I am  the Executive Director of the 30 Mile River 
Watershed Association  (30 Mile) . This watershed encompasses over 20 waterbodies in 
Central Maine.  We are a coalition of seven towns, nine lake associations and two 
conservation organizations . Our mission is to work as a community for clean and 
healthy lakes, ponds and streams in our watershed.  
 
30 M ile strongly supports LD 92 , requir ing boaters to take the simple yet incredibl y 
valu able  step of drai ning live wells and ba llast tanks in order to protect our Maine 
waters from the devast ating impacts of invasive aqu atic spec ies.  
 
For the past 15 years, 30 M ile has staffed boat l aunches across our watershed with 
Courtes y Boat Inspectors. Just last  year alone, our staff and volunteers logge d nearly 
2000  hour s of inspection s at four boat launches.  The thre at of inv asive aqua tic plan ts is 
the core reason 30 Mile was founded, and our CBI p rogram continues to be  a top 
priority for us.  
 
CBIs are on the front lines in the fight against invasive aqua tic plants  in Maine. CBIs not 
only check boats , they educate boaters about th e threat s of inva sives on our waters and 
about the law.  Curren tly, they are able to t ell boaters that i t is illegal to transport plants 
on their boat s, trailer s, and gear. Bu t they can ’t tell them that it is illegal to tra nsport 
wate r from la ke to lake – water that could easily  contain m any invasive  species , such as 
the tiny larva e of zebra mussels .  
 
When this bill failed two years ago, in spite of eno rmous  public support , there was 
much discussion  about how difficult this new law  would be to enforce, and that instead 
education  is the answer.   
 
Educ ation is important , yes, and it ’s what our CBIs do every day of the seas on. However, 
the value of  educa ting boaters on th is issue  is undermined by the absen ce of a l aw. 
 30 Mile River Watershed Association  
P.O. Box 132, Mount Vernon, ME 04352  
(207) 860 -4043     info@30mileriver.org     www.30mileriver.org  
 
 30 Mile River Watershed Association   Page 2 of 2 
 Is difficulty  with enforcement  enough reason to not have a  law? What is the value of any 
of these laws, if t hey are not easily enforced?  Most people will follow  a law, when 
aware of it, even if it would be easy to get away with breaking it . The current law 
prohibiting  transporting plants make s a statement that invasive  plants  are a serious 
issue, not one to be taken lightly. When our CBIs can reference the law  when talking to 
boaters , it give s their words far more impact  than  what would otherw ise be only our 
recommendat ion, because  we think it ’s the right thing to do.  
 
Would this la w actually be difficult to enforce? A ny wa rden could simpl y check a boat 
for water in it. It ’s no more difficult  to enforce tha n the current law  prohibiting 
transport of plants.   
 
The ris ks of  invasive species entering our lakes in M aine is high  and Maine needs 
stronger  laws to reduce the risk  of spre ad. We are lagging beh ind New Hampshire, 
Vermon t, New York and 12 othe r states that require  that drain plugs be  removed before 
from boats bef ore transport.  
 
The communities in our watershed, and throughout Maine, depend upon the health of 
these lakes  for our local economy, our tax base and our quality of life.  Our lakes are o ne 
of our most valuable natural resources . Losing them  to invasive species would truly be 
devastating  to our state .   
 
I urge you to support this simpl e yet powerful m easure and vote “ought to pass” on LD 
92. 
 
Sincerely ,   
 
Lidie Robbins   
Executive Director  
 
