Lakes Environmental Association 
‘ Protecting Maine's lakes since 1970 
February 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaF0untain, Representative Landry, and distinguished members of the 
committee, 
My name is Mary J ewett and I work for the Lakes Environmental Association in Bridgton where 
I manage our Courtesy Boat Inspection program. Additionally, I train the program directors for 
all Courtesy Boat Inspectors in the state. Over the years, I have trained hundreds of courtesy 
inspectors and BASS club members. Our inspectors have been pushing the clean, drain, dry 
message for many years, but most boaters are still unaware of the issue. 
Unfortunately, the general public does not have a full understanding of how invasive aquatic 
species move around or the devastating impact they can have. In Maine, we have a handful of 
invasive plants, the most common being milfoil, but we also have a few which are more 
aggressive, such as brittle water naiad, found in Lake Arrowhead. 
While invasive plants are a huge and on- going threat to the state, this bill addresses an even 
bigger issue. 
Invasive animals, like zebra mussels and spiny waterﬂea, could have a catastrophic impact on 
our pristine lakes, and the communities that rely on them. And since they are microscopic, and 
can suwive for long periods in standing water, draining boats is a way that individuals can 
reduce the risk of them coming to Maine. 
Just last year, zebra mussels were discovered in the St, John River watershed in Quebec, just 
miles from our border. With these invasive animals so close to Maine, it is more important than 
ever to do everything we can to prevent movement of water between lakes. 
Maine is unique and beautiful and we are all privileged to live here. Many other states, from 
giants like Califomia and Texas, to our smaller neighbors, New Hampshire and Vermont, have 
laws on the books that require boaters to remove drain plugs while traveling between 
waterbodies. These laws may vary in scope but they all have one thing in common; they werea 
reaction to existing infestations in those states. 
This bill presents an incredible opportunity to be proactive in the ﬁght against invasive species. 
Instead of waiting until We have found Zebra mussels in Sebago Lake, or Cobbossee, or 
Moosehead, and then scrambling to contain these infestations. Passing this bill could prevent this 
from happening. 
$1 I in _._ _ .__ _. i _ 
LEA 
230 Main Street, Bridgton ME 04009 207-61,7-8580 www.mainelakes.org 
.'"
There is no silver bullet when it comes to lake protection. No one law will magically erase all 
threats to these precious natural resources, but we can always take steps in the right direction. 
LD 92 is absolutely the right direction to take. 
As someone who has lived in Maine her entire life and who enjoys ﬁshing, kayaking, and 
spending time on our beautiful lakes, I urge you to pass this important bill. 
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
i/‘/‘M 
Mary J ewett 
LEA Director of Education and Invasives Prevention
