February 12, 2023
Dear Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
Re: LD 92 An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants
My name is Richard Dressler and I am writing in support of LD 92.  I am a resident of 
Glenburn and live year around on Pushaw Lake in Penobscot County.  I am writing in 
support of LD 92.
Currently, we believe Pushaw Lake and nearby Little Pushaw Pond are free of invasive 
species and we want to keep it that way.  However, given the presence of invasive 
plants in other lakes in Maine and nearby New Hampshire and with the increasing 
potential for introduction of invasive species to our lakes we are concerned.  Many boat 
owners move their boats around to different lakes.  Currently, Pushaw Lake is listed by 
DEP as having high risk for invasive aquatic plants.  Once introduced, invasive species 
grow and spread rapidly, outcompeting native plants, degrading habitat for fish and 
other wildlife, and potentially decreasing property values.  
Current law indicates “it is unlawful to place a watercraft that is contaminated with an 
invasive aquatic plant upon the inland waters of the state. (Title 12, Section 13068-A)”.   
LD 92 is an extension of this law by telling boat owners another way to prevent 
introduction of invasive species.  It may be an effective public education tool about this 
issue.  While enforcement may be a concern, enforcing the removal of drain plugs 
before transporting boats is on par with enforcing the current ban on traveling with 
plants on a boat trailer. Both can be enforced if the trailered boat is stopped, and both 
can be addressed with friendly education and outreach about the problems during a 
Courtesy Boat Inspection (CBI). The CBI program, which uses hired staff and hundreds 
of volunteers to inspect boats and trailers at boat launches across the state, has an 
excellent track record of informing boaters about (and not enforcing) invasive plant laws. 
Checking ballast plugs at the time of inspections is a great way to increase awareness 
about a new rule, at the same time reducing the risk of invasive species spread.
Please support this legislation to help protect our valuable lakes for all users of these 
resources.
Richard Dressler
Glenburn, Maine
