 February 13, 2023 
 Honorable David LaFountain, Senate Chair 
 Honorable Scott Landry, House Chair 
 Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
 100 State House Station 
 Augusta, ME 04333-100 
 RE:  LD 92 An Act To Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants 
 Dear Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of the Committee on Inland Fisheries and 
 Wildlife: 
 The  Maine  Water  Utilities  Association  (MWUA)  is  pleased  to  support  LD  92  An  Act  To  Minimize  the 
 Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants. 
 The  Maine  Water  Utilities  Association  is  a  nonprofit  association  based  in  Augusta  that  provides  support  for  water 
 works  professionals  throughout  the  State  of  Maine  in  advocating  for  safe  drinking  water  through  educational  and 
 technical  programming  as  well  as  advocacy  on  the  local,  state,  and  national  level.  The  Association  was  formed  in 
 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
 Many  Maine  water  utilities  use  surface  water  as  the  primary  source  of  drinking  water  supply.  Maintaining  a 
 high-quality  source  water  supply  is  the  first  line  of  defense  in  protecting  public  health  and  keeping  treatment  costs 
 manageable.  Invasive  aquatic  plants  represent  a  significant  risk  to  water  quality  and  aquatic  life  in  Maine’s  lakes, 
 ponds, rivers, and streams. 
 Prevention  of  an  infestation  is  ideal,  as  it  much  more  difficult  to  try  to  remediate  after  invasive  species  have 
 established.  Infestations  of  an  invasive  aquatic  species  can  change  the  ecosystems  of  water  bodies  and  impacts  the 
 ability  to  treat  the  source  water  for  a  drinking  water  supply.  To  combat  the  spread  of  invasive  species,  many  water 
 utilities  that  use  surface  water  partner  with  lake  associations  and  other  stakeholders  to  provide  courtesy  boat 
 inspection  services  at  boat  launches.  This  legislation  would  be  an  additional  preventative  measure  to  minimize 
 the ability of an aquatic invasive species to spread into another a water body. 
 While  existing  Maine  State  law  prohibits  the  transportation  of  aquatic  invasive  plants,  this  proposed  legislation 
 will  further  reduce  the  risk  of  a  boat  owner  unwittingly  transporting  aquatic  invasive  species  between  bodies  of 
 water  by  requiring  boat  operators  to  drain  all  water  from  their  boats  prior  to  the  boat  being  transported  away  from 
 the area where the boat left the water. 
 MWUA  has  long  supported  public  policies  that  help  protect  sources  of  drinking  water.  This  legislation  would 
 provide  additional  protections  to  reduce  the  risk  of  aquatic  invasive  species  entering  a  water  body.  Therefore, 
 MWUA strongly encourages the Committee to vote LD 92 Ought to Pass. 
 Yours for safe drinking water, 
 Roger Crouse 
 Chair, Legislative Committee, Maine Water Utilities Association 
 General Manager, Kennebec Water District 

