137 Main St. | PO Box 250 | Belgrade Lakes, ME 04918 | (207) 495-6039
www.7lakesalliance.org
Testimony In SUPPORT of:
LD 92, An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive 
Aquatic Plants
Submitted to the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, 
February 13, 2023
Dear Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, 
7 Lakes Alliance, a nonprofit organization committed to conserving the lands and waters 
of the Belgrade Lakes Region for all, fully supports LD 92, An Act to Minimize the Propagation 
of Invasive Aquatic Plants by requiring the removal of boat drain plugs before transportation. 
This act will bolster the current “Clean, Drain, Dry” initiatives in place at public boat launches led 
by Courtesy Boat Inspectors (CBIs), who are trained to inspect the ballast area and livewells of 
boats entering and leaving public boat launches. 
Invasive aquatic organisms (plants and animals) can survive for weeks in standing 
water, thus ballast waters can aid in the transport of invasive aquatic organisms unbeknownst to 
the boat owner. Many invasive aquatic animals (e.g. zebra mussels and spiny water flea) are 
microscopic in their larval stage, making it difficult for these organisms to be identified and 
removed by boat owners and trained CBIs alike. For this reason, the Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection developed the Clean, Drain, Dry protocols that all state-funded CBIs 
follow. 
Invasive aquatic organisms pose serious threats to the water quality and biodiversity of 
Maine lakes, are extremely costly to manage, and threaten local economies, property values 
and traditional uses of lake resources. For example: 7 Lakes and our partners have spent over 
$1.5 million managing invasive variable-leaf watermilfoil (Myriophyllum heterophyllum) since it 
was discovered in Great Pond in 2010. The negative impacts to water quality and ecosystem 
function from the introduction of invasive zebra mussels and the spiny water flea in the Great 
Lakes is well documented. While Maine does not have either of those invasive aquatic animals 
yet, we must be prepared for the inevitability that a boat harboring these or a wide range of 
other organisms arrives at one of our boat launches. Once an invasive aquatic organism has 
become established in a non-native area, it is almost impossible to eradicate. The cost of 
managing these long-term (often lifetime) commitments falls heavily on local non-profit 
associations. 
Considering the long-term financial commitment required to manage invasive aquatic 
organisms, we urge you to support LD 92.
Sincerely, 
Sharon Mann
Invasive Aquatics Program Director
7 Lakes Alliance 
