February 2023  
 
To: The Committee on In land Fisheries and Wildlife  
 
RE: LD 92– An Act to Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants  
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry , and members of the Committee on In land Fisheries 
and Wildlife , my name is Stacey Keefer, Director for the Maine Marine Trades Association  
(MMTA) , and a resident of Union . MMTA  represents over 120 Maine businesses and an industry 
comprised of boatyards, boat builders, marinas, boat dealers, and marine retailers.  
 
On behalf of the members  of MMTA , I would like to extend support for this bill that aims to 
preserve water quality and  protect  native  aquatic  species in Maine waters. Even if this type of 
requirement does not seem easily enforceable by the Department, it does  promote proper  and 
critical action that boaters need to take to help prevent the spread of aquatic invasive or 
nuisance species. Maine already has statute in Title 38 that prevents “ Transport any aquatic 
plant or parts of any aquatic plant, including root s, rhizomes, stems, leaves or seeds, on the 
outside of a vehicle, boat, personal watercraft, boat trailer or other equipment on a public 
road .” We believe this additional language  would  more clearly direct boaters to  the desired 
action.  We also believe this could be  easier to enforce  because presence of water in a boat can 
be more obvious than a visual inspection for plants or parts of plants.  Plus,  a draining 
requirement can also help prevent the spread of other aquatic invasive species –not just plant s 
as suggested in the title of the bill.  
 
One small concern we  would like to not e is that certain models of  pontoon boats and some 
sailboats may have drain plugs that are  not easily  or routinely  remove d. The compartments 
they drain are not normal areas of a boat  that could/should  have water entering and leaving 
such as a bilge . Nor do they normally hold water such as a live well . These drains  are only used 
if there is concern that the structure of the pontoon log or the keel of the sailboat has been 
cracked , punctured, or damaged in some way thus creating encapsulated water. It would not be 
practical to remove those types of plugs every time the boat was used. They are  typically n ot 
removed unless there has been an accident or structural failure and the owne r needs to check 
to make sure there are no leaks  to structural compartments . It seems appropriate to include  
language to exempt the removal of those types of drain plugs.     
 
Respectfully,  
Stacey Keefer  
Maine Marine Trades Association, Executive Director  
 
 

