 
 
  
February 13, 2023 
 
Dear Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Distinguished Members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee, 
 
My name is Toni Pied, Director of Conservation for Friends of the Cobbossee 
Watershed.  The Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed supports LD 92: "An Act To 
Minimize the Propagation of Invasive Aquatic Plants”.  
 
The Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed works to protect the 28 lakes, ponds, and 
streams of the Cobbossee Watershed, in Central Maine. The Friends’ Conservation 
Programs help prevent, detect, and manage invasive aquatic species, as well as 
prevent and mitigate non-point source pollution (runoff) in our lakes, ponds, and 
streams.  
 
With both infested and non-infested lakes in the Cobbossee Watershed, Friends of the 
Cobbossee Watershed manages a large Invasive Aquatic Species Program. The 
program includes prevention, early detection, and mitigation efforts, geared toward 
protecting and restoring our freshwater resources. There are a limited number of tools 
in our toolbox when it comes to preventing the spread of invasive aquatic organisms. 
A simple law, such as a “Clean, Drain, Dry Law” , that requires boaters to travel with 
an open drain plug is a common-sense measure  that will work in tandem with our 
Courtesy Boat Inspection program and educational efforts, to reduce the spread of 
invasive aquatic species . 
 
Now is the time to take care of our lakes, ponds, and streams.  The risks posed by 
invasive aquatic organisms grows each year. There are new infestations being found 
every year, and our state is surrounded by species we have not yet found in our lakes. 
Prevention is the most effective and least costly measure we can take to protect the 
beautiful, clean lakes we enjoy today, for the future. 
The Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed urges you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 92. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Toni B. Pied 
Friends of the Cobbossee Watershed 
toni@watershedfriends.com  
(207) 395-5239  
“Protecting the lakes, ponds, and streams of the Cobbossee Watershed 
through community engagement, conservation, and education.” 
 
PO Box 206 ∙ East Winthrop, ME 04343 ∙ www.watershedfriends.com  
mail@watershedfriends.com               (207) 395-5239 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Elizabeth Neale, 
President 
  
Todd Snider, 
President-elect 
 
Wayde Rankin, 
Treasurer 
 
Donna Davis-Rankin 
Secretary/Clerk 
 
Jim Adams 
Kathy Boggan 
Rob Brown 
Michael Goebel-Bain 
Tavis Hasenfus 
Marc Lacasse 
Scott Lanpher 
Peter Mendall 
Sandy Small-Hughes 
Brian Tarbuck 
Peter Washburn 
 
Staff 
  
Tamara Whitmore 
Executive Director 
 
Cami Wilbert 
Education and 
Outreach Director 
 
Jay Lindsey 
Slow the Flow 
Technical Adviser 
 
Toni B. Pied 
Director of 
Conservation 
 
Alex Dyer 
Conservation 
Programs Manager 
 
Mercedes Arnold 
Administrative & 
Marketing 
 
