Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
Municipalities 
  
Date: May 12, 2023 
 
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair 
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
 
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee  
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association 
 
Re: LD 419 – Resolve  to Initiate  a Working  Group  to Evaluate  Solutions  for Polling  
Places  at Schools  to Protect  Security  and Accessibility  
 
Position: SUPPORT 
 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is in support of LD 419 and we thank you for the 
opportunity to outline our points for your Committee. 
 
Clearly, the pandemic affected all aspects of our lives, including the administration of 
elections.  Although our members have mixed feelings about the use of schools for voting 
locations, many municipalities can find no other alternative for voting locations in their 
municipality.  Some clerks support the use of schools as polling places and embrace having 
students present during this event.  Others strongly oppose using schools as polling places 
when students are present due to traffic concerns when students are arriving and leaving 
for the school day, along with safety concerns for the school staff and students.   
 
Some school units warmly welcome the voting process, others bend to the pressure to 
provide the space for voting, and others have formally voted to prohibit voting from taking 
place at the schools.  Providing voters with a safe, secure and accessible voting place is 
immeasurably important.  Often, the only location within a municipality that meets the 
space and accessibility requirements are the schools.  Of note is that some private entities 
have now refused to host voting due to liability issues raised by insurance companies during 
the height of COVID, and religious entities are reluctant to host voting since some ballot 
measures may be in conflict with their core beliefs. 
 
It is recommended that the formation of a working group to study this topic be expanded to 
consider all types of venues that could be used as polling places, which may serve to 
highlight the need for the use of schools as the only viable option for voting. 
. 
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its  
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact  me at 
207)680-4210 or by email: pdubois@waterville-me.gov  . 
