HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
5!. 2 sTATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
A TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
my Roeder 
45 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-3 70-55 17 
Amv.Roeder@.lc2islaturc.maine.gov 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 1095, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Public Sector Bargaining in Public 
Schools by Providing an Exemption to the Time Limit on Negotiations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good aftemoon Senator Tipping, and fellow members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes a portion of 
Bangor. Today, Ipresent to you LD 1095, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Public Sector 
Bargaining in Public Schools by Providing an Exemption to the Time Limit on Negotiations. 
Current law provides that the obligation of a public employer that is a school district and a bargaining 
agent representing teachers to bargain collectively includes their mutual obligation to meet within l0 
days after receipt of written notice from the other party requesting a meeting for collective bargaining 
purposes. 
This bill changes the scope of the law from school districts to school administrative Lmits and from 
teachers to employees of the school administrative unit. It also adds an exception to the mutual 
obligation to meet if the parties have otherwise agreed in a prior written contract. It provides that this 
exception does not apply in circumstances relating to wages, hours, working conditions or contract 
grievance arbitration. 
Simply put, LD I095 clariﬁes a law we passed last session (LD 449, An Act To Strengthen the Ability 
of Public Employers and Teachers ’ Unions To Negotiate), that addresses possible “continuous 
negotiations ” that the bill never intended to create. My bill would ﬁx this particular issue. 
Both the Maine School Management Association and the Governor ’s Ofﬁce have worked on this bill 
and are in agreement. The Maine Education Association, who you will hear from shortly, has been 
working on an amendment with these two organizations that has also been agreed upon. I am onboard 
with this amendment as Well. 
Thank you for your consideration. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 23: Part of Bangor
