Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD 1095: An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Public Sector Bargaining in in Public Schools 
by Providing an Exemption to the Time Limit on Negotiations 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 1095, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding 
Public Sector Bargaining in Public Schools by Providing an Exemption to the Time Limit on 
Negotiations, although we have an amendment we hope the Committee will consider. Furthermore, We 
believe the current title of the bill is misleading and is does not meet the intent of the bill and we suggest 
the Committee consider amending the title of the bill as well. 
This bill is an effort to clarify a bill passed last session, LD 449, An Act T 0 Strengthen the Ability of 
Public Employers and Teachers ’ Unions T o Negotiate. LD 449 was passed by this Committee last 
session, passed by the House and Senate, and became law on May 8, 2022 without the Govemor’s 
signaturel 
Since the bill passed, we have learned there may be a concern about the ﬁnal language of the new law. 
Speciﬁcally, it has been raised that the new law may result in “continuous negotiations. ” We believe 
this is a remote possibility, but was certainly never the intent of MEA and I believe never the desired 
outcome of any of our local associations or school districts. 
LD 449 was intended to remove the impact of so-called “zipper clauses. ” These are clauses often 
inserted into contracts at the request of management and serve to “zip up” the contract, meaning any 
matter not covered by the collective bargaining agreement is not subject to negotiation during the term 
I 
To see the ﬁnal chaptered law as a result of LD 449, please see: 
WWW.inainclegislatureorg/legis/ ‘bilis/getPDF.asp ‘?papcr=HP0325&itcm:7&snum=l 30 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I134‘? Broadway, Bangor, ME 014401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
/I Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director5 
of the contract? This was a particular concem during the pandemic when districts with Zipper clauses 
sometimes prevented teachers or other school employees from having a voice over changes to working 
conditions if a zipper clause was contained in the local bargaining agreement. 
While MEA is content with the language of LD 449, we certainly do not want to see “continuous 
negotiations ” in school districts. We believe collective bargaining is an important way for workers and 
their employers to settle on terms and conditions of employment, and to make sure the voices of 
frontline educators are heard when changes are made to working conditions. Teachers ’ working 
conditions are students ’ learning conditions. I hope we all want to presewe this process. But we 
certainly have concerns if employers and workers settle on a contract, but either side can then suggest 
they want to renegotiate over matters already covered by their collective bargaining agreement. 
Currently, this can only happen via mutual consent and we would argue against any change to that 
standard. Instead, we would hope the Legislature will slightly adjust the language now in law due to LD 
449. 
It is important to note, this section of labor law is over 50 years old and has been subject to litigation 
over the past 50 years. When considering changes to labor law we need to both understand the speciﬁc 
changes and the litigation history and then act with great care. In this case, Ibelieve LD 449 was 
enacted with great care, yet still a potential unintended consequence was identiﬁed and this bill can 
hopefully serve as a vehicle to remedy the potential unintended consequence. 
Following passage of LD 449, the MEA participated in several meetings with our friends from Maine 
School Management and staff from the Govemor’s Office to understand the impact of the new law. 
After a few discussions, the participants came to an agreement to reﬁne the current law and we suggest 
the following amendment: 
2 Here is an example of a zipper clause contained in a contract covering ed techs in southern Maine: “A. This Agreement 
incorporates the entire understanding on all matters that were the subject of negotiations. During the life of this Agreement, 
neither party shall be required to negotiate, unless they agree otherwise, with respect to any matter covered by this Agreement. 
The parties will otherwise negotiate consistent with the requirements of the statutes of the State of Maine.” 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 06330 I l3-4:9 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Suggested Amendments: 
Amended title: An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Public Sector Bargaining in Public Schools by 
Strike the language of the bill and replace with this amendment: 
B-l. For a public employer that is a school éisteiet administrative unit and the bargaining agent 
representing teaehers-employees within the school-eii-striet-adininistrative unit to meet within 10 days after 
receipt of Written notice from the other party requesting a meeting for collective bargaining purposes, Q long as the parties have not otherwise agreed in a prior written contract, except that explicit waivers of 
collective bargaining over wages, hours, working conditions and contract grievance arbitration in 
a prior written contract may not be enforced for purposes of this paragraph. This obligation is 
suspended during the period between a referendum approving a new regional school unit and the 
operational date of the regional school unit, as long as the parties meet at reasonable times during that 
period; 
This amendment does two things. 
First, it clariﬁes that the language approved in LD 449 applies to all bargaining agents of school 
employees, not just teachers. This too may have been an oversight in the ﬁnal language of LD 449. 
Some attorneys for school districts have argued that the current language prohibiting the application of 
zipper clauses only applies to the bargaining agents of teachers, but this amendment will clarify that the 
language applies to all school employees, as intended in LD 449. 
The second thing this amendment does is clarify that collective bargaining agreements can not waive the 
right to bargain over wages, hours, working conditions and contract grievance arbitration. These matters 
are already mandatory subjects of negotiation and the language of this amendment will make it clear that 
a contract cannot waive the right to bargain over these mandatory subjects in a prior written contract. 
Maine School Management and staff in the Governor ’s Ofﬁce have agreed to this language and I believe 
we have an agreement about the proposed language and its application. We have all agreed to work 
together to address concerns and We all have a similar understanding of the impact the proposed 
language. In our discussions we beneﬁtted from the feedback of Neil Daly, the Executive Director of 
the Maine Labor Relations Board. We appreciate his suggestions, his guidance and his help. We believe 
the amended language preserves the intent of LD 449 while foreclosing the potential unintended 
consequence of continuous negotiations. 
We hope the Committee will vote ought to pass on the amended version of LD 1095, with the 
amendment provided above. Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine and I will 
do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401i 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 014736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
