Janet T. Mills  
GOVERNOR   
S T A T E  O F  M A I NE  
M A I N E  L A B O R  R E L AT I O N S  B O A R D  
90 S T A T E  H O U S E  S T A T I O N  
A U G U S T A ,  M A I N E   0 4 3 3 3 -0 0 5 4  
( 2 0 7 )  2 8 7 -2015  
W W W . M A I N E . G O V / M L R B  
 
 TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 1095  
 
“An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Public Sector Bargaining in Public 
Schools by Providing an Exemption to the Time Limit on Negotiatio ns” 
 
Neil P. Daly, Executive Director  
Maine Labor Relations Board  
April 4, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and members of the Jo int Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing , my name is  Neil Daly , and it is my privilege to serve as the  Executive 
Director of the Maine Labor Relations Board  (MLRB) . 
 
Today, I’m here to testify neither for nor against L.D. 1095 , with a focus instead on the 
procedural history of this bill  and a review of a potential amendment . 
 
As background, under Maine law , a public employer and union are required to negotiate in good 
faith over wages, hours, and working conditions, all of which are generally described as 
mandatory subjects of bargaining.   Historically, the law provided parties must bargain over these 
manda tory subjects of bargaining “as long as the parties have not otherwise agreed in a prior 
written contract .”  In turn, a public -sector employer owed a duty to engage in negotiations 
during the life of a contract, known as mid-term bargaining , over mandatory subjects of 
bargaining unless (1) the union waived its right to mid -term bargaining,  typically through what is 
known as a zipper clause,  or (2) the subject of the prop osed negotiations was already “covered 
by” the existing collective bargaining agreement.  
 
The 130th Legislature enacted a bill, originally presented as L.D. 449  during  that legislature, to 
address the impact of zipper clauses on bargaining during the life of a collective bargaining 
agreement.  As  passed, L.D. 449 removed the term “as long as the parties have not otherwise 
agreed in a prior written contract”  from  the statutory duty to bargain for school districts and 
teacher unions.  While this change preven ts a party from relying upon a zipper clause to refuse to 
bargain  mid-term, it also unintentionally raised  the question of whether  the law still prohibits the 
renegotiation of subjects covered by the existing contract.  
 
In the summer and fall of 2022, the Office of the Governor coordinated meetings with the Maine 
Education Association, the Maine School Management Association , and the MLRB  to discuss a 
resolution to the uni ntended, potential  impact of L.D. 44 9.  Ultimately, the parties reached 
agreement on language that  not only prohibits reliance  on a zipper clause  to refuse to bargain , 
but also ensures a party will not be obligated to once again negotiate subjects covered by the 
existing collective b argaining agreement.  
 
 It’s my understanding L.D. 1095 is the intended product of those discussions.  However, 
something was lost in translation  (as will happen) .  Specifically, the current draft bill does  not 
reflect the agreed -upon language and could be interpre ted as, again, permitting negotiations over 
subjects covered by the contract.  The good news is that MEA and MSMA have reiterated their 
commitment to the agreed -upon language from this past summer, and, as you have heard today, 
seek an amendment to reflect that agreement.   The B oard is fully  in support of the work of the 
parties to reach resolution on this matter.  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss L.D. 1 095.  I will try to answer any questions you 
have.  
