 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Com munity Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1095  
 
AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAWS REGARDING PUBLIC SECTOR BARGAINING IN PUBLIC 
SCHOOLS BY PROVIDING AN EXEMPTION TO THE TIME LIMIT ON NEGOTIATIONS  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing  Committee.  I am Steven 
Bailey , executive directo r of Maine School Management A ssociation, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association  in 
support of L.D. 1095 . 
 
Our understanding is that an amendment is being prepared  that will clarify the intent of the language of L .D. 
1095. Our testimony supports the intent of the amendment.  
 
L.D. 449 from the 130th Legislature was approved  and became law. This was considered the elimination of 
zipper clause, with the requirement to mee t within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the other party 
requesting a meeting for collective bargaining purposes. The statute, as adopted, left many unanswered 
questions about the application of the statute. The intent of L .D. 449 was not to a llow “anytime” negotiations 
on items that were already included within a collective bargaining unit, except under certain circumstances. 
L.D. 1095 is being presented  to provide a correction and refinement to the bill enacted in 2022.  
 
During Covid -19 there  were many instances where employees and the employer met to discuss mandatory 
items of bargaining  due to situations occurring during the pandemic . In most, if not all of these situations, the 
CBA was closed by a zipper clause, and items affecting pay or working conditions were not able to be 
negotiated as part of the usual process. In these instances, in many if not most of the districts, a memorandum 
of agreement was determined to be a way of providing adjustments to assist employees during the unusual 
period of the pandemic.  The MOA was signed, outside the CBA, and covered the circumstances brought on 
by Covid -19. 
 
It was recognized that there may be other times when it will be appropriate to enter into negotiations to 
consider situations that are not otherwise covered within the CBA. It is the position of the MSSA and MSBA 
that this not be an anytime negotiations and that the intent and expectation is that there not be continuous 
negotiations occurring. A CBA with set start and end dates brings with it a sense of stability and known 
expectations for the duration of the contract.  If there are circumstances, otherwise not anticipated, or brought 
on by previously unknown situations, then the language within L .D. 1095 can be utilized to consider these 
circumstances and allow for the parties to meet within 10 days after receipt of a written notice to meet for the 
purpose of collective bargaining. The language below helps to identify the restrictions we understand would 
be in effect with L .D. 1095.
 
 While this bill would prohibit zipper clauses (“ except that explicit waivers of collective bargaining over 
wages, hours, working conditions and contract grievance arbitration in a prior written contract may not be 
enforced for purposes of this paragraph) , it also prohibits negotiations on subject matter covered by existing 
contracts (“ as long as the parties have not otherwise agreed in a prior written contract”).  In other words, an employer 
would not be able to rely upon a zipper clause to refuse to bargai n over a mandatory subject of bargaining that 
is not covered by the existing collective bargaining agreement and a union would not be able to demand to 
bargain over a subject that is already covered by the CBA.  
 
It is important to note the prohibitions on zipper clauses and bargaining over covered -by subjects apply 
equally to an employer and union . 
 
Given these expectations and restrictions, L .D. 1095 makes more clear the intent of L .D. 449 from a year ago. 
Should this proposed bill pass, our associations will  be watching to see if it has the desired intent and not be 
seen as a means to keep the CBA open for continuous bargaining throughout the duration of the contract. 
Should that be the case, we will be back requesting further refinement . 
