Maine Voices: Restoring original Maine flag is the right 
idea -just maybe not right now 
§ pressherald_com/2023/O3/26irnainevoices~restoring~odginaE~maine~flag-is-the;ight-idea~}ust-maybe-not-rightrioiw ﬂwi 
By Chris Korzen March 26, 2023 
The Legislature is once again considering proposals to restore Maine’s original flag, the 
1901-vintage pine-tree~and-star banner that has experienced a tremendous resurgence in 
recent years. The case for bringing back this flag is strong, but it’s a move we should only 
make when Mainers of all stripes are on board. 
l know a few things about “the pine and star." Five years ago, l\/laine Flag Company - whichl 
co-founded and co-own with my business partner Bethany Field - took a chance and began 
making then-obscure original Maine flags in our Portland sewing shop. We had a hunch that 
Mainers would embrace the old design once they found out about it. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Chris Korzen, co-founder and co-owner of l\/laine Flag Company, is a resident of Portland. 
The response was instantaneous and oven/vhelming, so much so that within just a few weeks 
we shifted most of our business to 1901 flag production in order to meet demand, and spun 
off a new brand promoting the flag on hats, t-shirts and other merchandise. Other companies 
followed our lead and began sporting the flag on products of their own. Mainers voted with 
their flagpoles, and the once-forgotten standard has quickly become an enduring symbol of 
our state. 
Citizens and tourists alike love the flag’s simplicity and distinctiveness. Many prefer it to the 
current flag, which from a distance is difficult to distinguish from those of many other states. 
The original flag’s symbols also matter. The star represents the state motto — “Dirigo,” Latin 
for “l lead" — a nod to Maine’s outsized national influence. The pine evokes Maine’s 
economic strength and natural beauty.a
But l\/laine ’s current official flag (the blue one featuring the state seal) is also loaded with 
important symbols, and the movement to replace it comes during a period of unprecedented 
economic and social change. That flag’s most prominent features — a farmer and a sailor- 
represent economic mainstays that many feel face inundation by the tides of history. 
It is against this backdrop that we must ask whether this is really the right time to change our 
flag. 
Many believe the answer is “no.” The Legislature ’s proposal became a talk-radio punching 
bag, and social media erupted in fury the last two times it came up for consideration. 
In 2019, Rep. Will Tuell of East Machias told fellow lawmakers that he got “an earful” from 
constituents who asked whether the Legislature had better things to do using what he 
described as “colorful language." Around the same time I myself was dressed down for my 
role in bringing back the original flag by a Peaks Island bar patron whose family had fished 
Casoo Bay for generations. Things were hard enough for them, she said. Why did 1 want to 
inflict further indignity by “taking us off the flag?” 
These voices deserve to be heard. 
And those who believe our elected leaders have more pressing priorities are right. Restoring 
the original flag’s official status will do very little to address the urgent challenges facing our 
state. lt won’t end the opioid crisis, bring back the paper mills, lower inflation, or make 
housing affordable again. And at a time when cultural divides appear wider and deeper than 
ever, a change to the state flag hardly promises to bring people together. ln fact, if done 
wrong it will have exactly the opposite effect. 
Those like me who love the original l\/lalne flag should keep on flying it. And if the Legislature 
perceives a groundswell of support for the pine and star from all corners of Maine, then by all 
means it should make the switch. But let’s keep in mind that a flag that does not fly asa 
symbol of unity cannot fulfill its intended purpose. As much of a good idea as bringing back 
the pine and star may be, it’s something we should only do when we're ready to do it 
together. 
<< Previous 
Our View: Civil legal aid is __falling_short, hurting all of us 
Next» 
Commentary: For lraqis, the U.S. invasion isn’t a distant memory — it’s a daily devastation 
© 2023
