Jeffrey Willey
Portland
LD 86
Good Afternoon Chairman Nangle and Members of the Committee,
I write to urge you to vote in favor of LD 86 and to restore the Pine Tree State's 
original flag.
Our current flag fails at all principles of flag design. In fact, it is hardly a flag at all. 
Just like Vermont, New Hampshire, New York, Connecticut, and countless other 
states, we have chosen to slap our state seal on a blue bedsheet and called it a flag. 
Our seal is great, however, it does not belong on a flag.
A flag should be legible from far away as it flies atop a flagpole. Our current flag has 
words written on it and has minute details that nobody could replicate or decipher if 
flown from far away. It is not unique, as the flag of our great state should be. Nor is it 
popular, despite what some before this committee may argue. Worst of all, it has the 
state's name on it. A flag should speak for itself, and if you need to remind people 
looking at it what it is supposed to represent, you have failed.
The original State Flag has seen widespread adoption already, being flown above 
offices, fire departments, and in store windows. Residents wear it as clothing, masks, 
and adorn it on their coffee cups. It is a rare occurrence that I see our current flag 
outside anyone's home, let alone worn with pride.
Some might argue this is a waste of your time. However, I would argue that designing
a flag that all Maine people can be proud of, that inspires us, that unifies us, is 
incredibly important. We can keep the state seal and use it for what seals are supposed
to be used for, adorning police cars, public records, speaking podiums, and other more
practical uses. It will cost us nothing, as we already have to replace flags above our 
state buildings and schools on a regular basis, and it would mean a great deal to 
countless numbers of Mainers around the state, including myself. 
I strongly encourage you to vote in favor of LD 86 and finally restore the Pine Tree 
State's original flag to its former glory. I hope to see it fly high above our state capitol
soon.
