L HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
5‘; 2 STATE nous}; STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Sean Paulhus TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
677 Middle Street 
Bath, ME 04530 
Phone: (207) 75 l-7760 
Sean ._lﬁ2_1 __u_ll1i1s§Z§?.lcgislaturemaineAgog 
March 28, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Sean Paulh us presenting 
LD 86, An Act to Restore the Former State of Maine Flag 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Govemment, I am Sean Paulhus, Representative for House District 50 which includes the city 
of Bath. I am here to very proudly present LD 86, An Act to Restore the Former State of Maine Flag. 
Some of you may recognize this bill as one that has come before the committee in the past. This proposal 
was ﬁrst introduced by Representative Janice Cooper of Yarmouth in the 129"‘ Legislature who spoke 
eloquently and persuasively on the merits of reviving what is known colloquially as the original Maine 
ﬂag. While her initial proposal was ultimately unsuccessful, it was a catalyst for a movement that has only 
gained momentum in recent years. 
Mainers everywhere have brought this design back to prominence and popularity. Its unique and instantly 
recognizable design, also referred to as the “Polaris and pine” or “the star and pine,” now represents a 
symbol of pride, a symbol of place and a symbol of home to people across our state. 
Politically speaking, this ﬂag has brought people with all kinds of differing views together including 
Senator Susan Collins and Secretary of State Shenna Bellows who both regularly sported original Maine 
state ﬂag face coverings throughout the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This is because our original ﬂag embodies our Dirigo motto, it is pure Maine and cannot be mistaken for 
any other state’s ﬂag. In fact, flag design experts, also known as “vexilologists ” , agree. The best ﬂags 
tend to stand out and are usually a significant departure from ﬂag-versions of official seals. Our current 
ﬂag is easily lost in a crowd of other states’ ﬂags that are similarly marked by ornate, overcrowded seals. 
Mainers deserve a ﬂag that represents our values, our culture and our people and the original state flag 
does this far better than the current flag. We have so much to be proud of. It’s time we add our official 
state ﬂag to that list. 
In passing this bill, we would be both honoring our history and heritage and doing something that many 
Mainers have been asking for for years. Let’s listen to them this time. 
Thank you for the opportunity to present this bill. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
District 50 — Bath
