Department of the Secretary of State 
i: A 
<5 
t9i _;*_'-= _,"°“T"i "’ Sh B 11
’ , Sezfelizrye ofogigte 
‘g' I 
Kate McBrien 
Maine State Archivist 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
TESTIMONY OF SHENNA BELLOWS, MAINE SECRETARY OF STATE 
and KATE MCBRIEN, MAINE STATE ARCHIVIST 
Neither For, Nor Against 
L.D. 86, An Act to Restore the Former State of Maine Flag 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Govermnent; we are Shenna Bellows, Maine’s Secretary of State, and Kate 
McBrien, Maine’s State Archivist. Neither the Department of Secretary of State nor Maine State 
Archives, which falls under the Depa1tment ’s jurisdiction, have a formal position on L.D. 86. But 
we believe we have useful information that may assist the committee in its deliberations on this 
important legislation. 
Maine’s state ﬂag has undergone changes over the 200 years of our statehood. Perhaps most 
interestingly, our state did not designate an official ﬂag until 1901, which speciﬁed the ﬂag design 
in question today. We had no ofﬁoial ﬂag for our ﬁrst almost 100 years of statehood. For an 
unknown reason, this ﬁrst official design only lasted 8 years, before legislation changed the ﬂag to 
its current design in February of 1909. Unfortunately, any record of the debate around the change in 
ﬂag design did not survive, so we cannot provide any reasoning behind it. 
Before 1901, Maine had ﬂags, of course; but most were designed by state and local militias for their 
individual use. The Seal of the State of Maine, which now graces the blue shield of our current state 
flag, was designed by a joint legislative committee during the beginning of our statehood. A copy of 
their report resides in the Maine State Archives, and while a record of their deliberations does not 
exist, we do have the product. The seal of the state originally was meant as the official mark, the 
“seal” to represent Maine on ofﬁcial documents. Often affixed to state records with wax, the state 
seal elevated a document and the action it represented with great solemnity. It appears to have been 
a common sentiment throughout New England to carry that official seal role onto the state ﬂag. 
Several neighboring New England states adopted ﬂags like our current one, using their own state 
seals around 1909 as well. 
The original, 1901 ﬂag design is important as a commonly understood symbol of Maine and its 
connection to New England. The Pine Tree became an early symbol of New England, often viewed 
as referencing the Tree of Peace as well as New England’s, and certainly Maine’s, strong timber 
economy. Colonists used the pine tree symbol commonly on coins and ﬂags throughout the 17th and 
18“ centuries. Leading up to the Revolutionary War, the pine tree became a symbol of colonial 
unrest and resistance. This common symbol is now proposed as the new license plate design, tying 
it to the 1901 ﬂag and the symbols of our long and rich history and culture.
Symbolically today, ﬂags remind us of our unity as one people engaged in a common cause, and of 
surviving difﬁcult struggles together. The design of the ﬂag is made meaningful by the people who 
embrace it. The lack of debate in the record means We do not know why the ﬂag was changed in 
1909, which leaves us only to speculate. But it also frees us to make our own choice for what Would 
be the best and most appropriate ﬂag for the state today. As you deliberate L.D. 86, we believe the 
history of the proposed and the current ﬂag design may prove useful to you. 
We are happy to answer any questions you may have.
