 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Sr. Clinical Director 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT  
LD 1857, An Act to Create the Public Safety Health and Wellness Reimbursement Fund to 
Benefit Public Safety Workers and Volunteers 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports 
the passage of An Act to Create the Public Safety Health and Wellness Reimbursement Fund to 
Benefit Public Safety Workers and Volunteers. Public Safety is called to respond largely to 
individuals who are experiencing their worst days or toughest experiences in their lives. While 
many of us go to work with the potential of stress, law enforcement and other first responders 
know they will only be called upon if someone requires their assistance for safety or acute 
stress.   
The average individual will experience 2-3 critical or traumatic incidents during their lifetime, 
often involving law enforcement presences or responses. However, law enforcement will 
experience 168-170 incidents of critical or traumatic stress throughout the course of their 
career. Due to this, first responders are classified as the highest risk population for suicide 
death, higher rates of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress, and substance use disorders. 
The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) has found that public safety is 54% more likely 
to die of suicide than the general population. Associated with these challenges, officers 
experience high rates of divorce, struggles to maintain their career longevity, retention 
concerns in the profession, as well as multiple medical concerns such as high rates of cancer 
and cardiovascular disease. The National Institute for Health (NIH) research found that because 
of the multi-layered stress of public safety work, they are listed as having the worst 
cardiovascular health of any profession. The National Institute of Health also reported that as 
an impact of the work, the life expectancy of public safety workers is 21 years less than the 
general population. 
NAMI Maine has the privilege of working with the public safety population. As a result of the 
partnerships that have been established, peer support teams are growing across the state. 
There have been training and initiatives that have increased access to clinicians and mental 
health providers who have training and understanding of the unique aspects of public safety 
culture. However, nationally and in the State of Maine, we continue to lose more public safety 
to suicide than line of duty deaths. Federal Legislation has acknowledged the acute risks in 
passing the Hometown Hero Act in 2003, recognizing cardiovascular disease related deaths as 
line of duty. Federal precedent was also set in 2022, recognizing that suicide deaths because of 
work-related Posttraumatic Stress is also a line of duty death. Here in Maine, there is the 
presumption of eligibility for workers compensation for public safety workers diagnosed with 
posttraumatic stress.  
 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Sr. Clinical Director 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
There are national best practice models of treatment that are utilized with public safety, 
however often time funding restricts access to development and maintaining of these 
resources. Limited access to providers and appropriate insurance coverage is also restrictive. 
This committee is in the position to provide critical support and resources to those who are 
willing to sacrifice so much for our communities. This committee would also send the clear 
message that the health and wellbeing of our public servants is imperative to provide the best 
possible outcomes for the service of our state. Occupational Health Services has directly linked 
wellness and safety in the workplace, resulting in overall community safety. As other 
committees have recognized the importance of ensuring access to Critical Incident Stress 
Management, combatting the stigma associated with public safety of seeking assistance, this 
committee is in the position to proactively provide necessary resources and supports through 
critical funding and therefore NAMI Maine strongly supports the passage of LD 1857. 
 
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
 
