Lewis Schlosser
The Institute for Forensic Psychology
LD 1857
First responders are exposed to significantly more stressors and potentially 
traumatizing experiences due to occupational exposure than the average person. 
Despite some recent gains, there remains a strong stigma against seeking mental 
health treatment among first responders (please see 
https://www.policechiefmagazine.org/you-have-to-see-the-psych/?ref=0d0ccda59570
431f8aaa288f6c2507a8). The proposed legislation will assist Maine first responders 
with regard to their being able to access culturally competent mental health care. 
Ensuring that our first responders are mentally healthy is not only good for our 
communities, but it will also reduce the likelihood of misconduct. Said another way, 
for example, police officers who are psychologically unwell are more likely to engage
in misconduct. Given the great power and responsibility our society instills in law 
enforcement, it stands to reason that we should do everything in our power to ensure 
that our police officers remain mentally healthy across their career. As a police and 
public safety psychologist with nearly 20 years of experience in this field, I can 
confidently state that first responder mental health is one of the most important issues 
in need of attention in our society. Since 2016, more police officers have died by 
suicide than all line of duty deaths combined (please see First Help at 
https://1sthelp.org/. We owe a debt of gratitude to our first responders, and we should 
do everything in our power to reduce the frequency, and seek to eliminate, officer 
suicide. Most of the conversations in our country now center around police use of 
force and interactions between police and citizens. If our goal is positive 
police-citizen interactions, then we need to ensure that our police officers are mentally
healthy from the time they get hired until long into their retirement. Thank you for 
your time and attention. I welcome the opportunity to answer any specific questions 
you might have. Please support our first responders.
