 
1 
 
 
131st Legislature 
Senate  
of Maine  
Senate District 31 
 
 
    
Senator Donna Bailey 
3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Office (207) 287-1515 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey supporting 
LD 1857, An Act to Create the Public Safety Health and Wellness 
Reimbursement Fund to Benefit Public Safety Workers and Volunteers 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
May 12, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Esteemed Members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly represent Senate District 31, 
which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today, I am pleased to offer testimony in 
support of LD 1857, “An Act to Create the Public Safety Health and Wellness Reimbursement 
Fund to Benefit Public Safety Workers and Volunteers.” The bill sponsor, Representative Lynn 
Copeland, has already spoken about mental health, wellness and resiliency, the lack of resources 
for first responders, and the shortage of professional candidates to fill these positions in our 
communities. In my testimony, I will speak to some other aspects of the bill. 
 
Section 1 would establish the Public Safety Health and Wellness Reimbursement Fund based on 
known screenings that capture the cardiac risks for public safety workers. It would also promote 
confidential relationships with between public safety workers and volunteers and culturally 
competent mental health professionals. At the same time, it would provide opportunities and 
strategies for wellness and stress management in the public safety context – as well as referrals 
for ongoing confidential counseling should that be an individual’s desire. The Committee will 
hear from Dr. Lew Schlosser regarding this part of the bill. 
 
In addition, LD 1857 would ensure that such a provision shall not take away from any benefit 
provided to the employee but shall instead be a supplement to any existing benefit. After all, the 
whole goal of this bill to improve the health, resilience, and well-being of public safety workers 
and volunteers. It wouldn’t achieve this goal if the workers and volunteers lost any benefits. This 
supplemental benefit provides confidential care, which would not be disclosed to the employer. 
It is intended to detect risk and help the individual develop an informed personal path to address 
the risk with specialized knowledge and expert assistance.  
 
Just as important, LD 1857 would provide for a culturally competent provider, which means 
someone who is licensed with a specialized first responder certification designated by a state or 
national body – such as the American Psychological Association – or has specialized experience 
with the complex needs of each discipline of public safety employment. This includes the 
 
2 
 cumulative impact of exposure to traumatic events, impacts of cumulative trauma exposure on 
public safety professionals' physical and mental well-being, career-specific knowledge and 
sensitivity, and continuing specialized knowledge of public safety psychology. One example of 
such a certification is the Police and Public Safety Psychology Specialization through the 
American Board of Professional Psychology. 
 
To be specific, LD 1857 would establish payment for specialized cardiac bio inflammation 
markers to detect plaque-causing events that are precursors to cardiac disease. The testing can be 
blood work analysis or a more comprehensive in-person screening that includes metabolic testing 
and health and weight loss nutritional education. Why are we monitoring bio inflammation 
markers in public safety workers and volunteers? Well, the average age of a patient experiencing 
a heart attack nationwide is 65. However, if you look at law enforcement or public safety in 
general, the average age of public safety worker experiencing a heart attack is 49 – a difference 
of over a decade. Within this same group, 45% of law enforcement will have a heart attack under 
the age of 45; meanwhile, for the civilian population, just 7% of the population will have a heart 
attack. This results in the average life expectancy of a public safety worker being 57 years while 
the average life expectancy for a civilian is 79 years. Dr. Benjamin Stone will address these 
statistics in his testimony. 
 
This strain and the stress of the occupation doesn’t take a real life-or-death toll on law 
enforcement and police officers. The age-specific cancer rates among firefighters is 323% higher 
than that of the general population between the ages of 35 and 39. Moreover, it is attributed to 
more than 66% of deaths in this line of profession because they are asked to be exposed to 
harmful burning chemicals in the line of duty. Despite this, the baseline testing offered in 
workers compensation provisions are not covered by insurance. LD 1857’s Public Safety Health 
and Wellness Reimbursement Fund would cover this gap. Today, you’ll hear directly from 
firefighters who’ve experienced the consequences of this gap in coverage.  
 
All year long, the Legislature has been searching for solutions to better support public safety 
workers and volunteers – the police officers and the firefighters – who respond to crises, 
disasters, and emergencies across the state. LD 1857 offers a solution that can help take care of 
those who put their lives before their own and keep all of us safe. I urge the Committee to vote 
“Ought to Pass” on LD 1857. 
 
Thank you for your time, I would be happy to answer any questions.  
 
 
Donna Bailey 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco 

