'X 
Z’~. 
Eric Brakey l31“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 758, An Act to Account for the Impact of 
Inﬂation on the Taxation of Capital Gains and Losses 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
March 7, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation: I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, 
and Durham. Thank you for your consideration today as I present L.D. 758, An Act to Account 
for the Impact of Inﬂation on the Taxation of Capital Gains and Losses. 
This legislation is one of a series of measures I have introduced this session to help defend 
Maine people from the effects of inﬂation, generated by the reckless debasement of our currency 
through expansion of the money supply, which has taken place at the Federal Reserve Bank at 
the urging of both Republican and Democratic administrations in recent decades to fund massive 
federal deﬁcits. Today, Maine people are experiencing rates of inﬂation unseen since the 1970s 
when President Nixon ended the gold standard. 
As state legislators, we do not possess the powers Congress has to directly confront inﬂation 
(which could include ending print~and-spend deﬁcit ﬁnancing, auditing the Federal Reserve, and 
reconsidering the whole premise of central banking), there are steps we can take to reduce the 
harms of inﬂation currently hitting the savings and paychecks of Maine people. This is one such 
measure. 
L.D. 758 would simply account for inﬂation when calculating taxes on capital gains income, 
using the Consumer Price Index as a measurement for the shrinking value of the U.S. dollar. 
Under current law, if someone sells an asset after its nominal value (measured in U.S. dollars) 
has increased by 5%, that increase in nominal value is taxed as income. 
But what if the CPI indicates that the real value of the dollar (the purchasing power) has 
decreased by 7% during the timeframe the seller held the asset? That would mean the real value 
did not increase by 5%, but rather decreased by 2%. Bynot accounting for inﬂation, current 
policy is taxing capital losses as if they were income and capital gains as if they were much more 
fruitful than in reality. 
VVhen CPI hovered around 2-3 %, this unfairness Went largely ignored, but now that the d0llar’s 
value is evaporating at a faster rate than seen in half a century, it is urgent we make adjustments 
to how we calculate income taxes due on capital gains and losses. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of this proposal.
