TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 7, 2023 
LD 758 -— “An Act to Account for the Impact of Inﬂation on the Taxation of 
Capital Gains and Losses” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 758, “An Act to 
Account for the Impact of Inﬂation on the Taxation of Capital Gains and Losses.” 
Based on the Administration ’s understanding, the bill proposes an income 
tax subtraction modiﬁcation to Maine taxable income for individual taxpayers 
when the inﬂationary adjusted value of an asset is greater than the sale price of the 
asset. The modiﬁcation is equal to the amount that the inﬂation adjusted value of 
the asset exceeds the actual sale or disposition value of the asset to the extent that 
the gain is included in federal adjusted gross income and is not otherwise removed 
from Maine taxable income. Note that the bill title suggests the bill is intended to 
remove the effect of inﬂation from the taxation of capital gains, which isa 
common proposal at the federal level. This bill does not accomplish that goal and 
differs signiﬁcantly from recent federal proposals. 
Under federal law, a capital gain or loss arises from the disposition of capital 
assets. The amount of gain or loss is equal to the difference between the amount 
received from the sale or exchange less the taxpayer ’s basis in the asset. Basis 
generally equals the cost to acquire the property increased by major improvements
1
less allowable depreciation. Basis is not adjusted for inﬂation, resulting in some 
portion of a capital gain being a nominal gain and not a real (inﬂation adjusted) 
gain. If the intent of the bill is to index the basis of the capital asset for inﬂation, 
then the bill would require a signiﬁcant amount of revision. 
The complexity of taxing only the real capital gain at the state level would 
be signiﬁcant both for the taxpayer and MRS. Especially, when, as is the case here, 
the bill applies to all types of capital assets owned by Maine individual taxpayers 
and applies regardless of the period the asset is held. The bill would require a 
comparison of the dollar value of gain to the relative change in the CPI utilizing a 
complex calculation to compute the Maine subtraction modiﬁcation. Additionally, 
taxpayers who wish to claim the proposed deduction may need to obtain property 
appraisals to establish the value of the capital assets. 
In addition, the beneﬁt of indexing capital gains to inﬂation would go 
disproportionally to very high-income taxpayers. 
The Administration would like to note the following technical concerns: 
0 The legislative language is complex and may not be administrable as 
drafted. As previously mentioned, it differs signiﬁcantly with federal 
proposals to remove the impact of inﬂation from the taxation of 
capital gains. 
0 The bill does not specify a base value for purposes of determining the 
increase in the “value of the property ” (market value at date of 
acquisition, original basis, or adjusted basis), or whether the increase 
in the current “value of the property ” means market value or value 
received, and how market value should be determined.
2
It is unclear if the deduction is to be computed based on capital gains 
net of capital losses. 
The bill does not address situations where the ownership period is 
different than the period of time the asset has appreciated in value. For 
example, in some cases of gifted capital assets sold at a gain the donee 
will have a basis equal to the donor’s basis. Therefore, the donee will 
have owned the property from the date of receipt until the sale of the 
asset, but the property will have appreciated above its basis from the 
date the donor acquired the asset until the sale by the donee. 
The estimated ﬁscal impact and estimated administrative costs continue to 
be under consideration. As written, the bill may result in additional stafﬁng 
requirements to process affected individual income tax returns and to audita 
portion of those returns to validate deductions claimed. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill, representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
