       Beth Anne Lorigan 
       Kingman Elementary School 
       25 Park St., Kingman, Maine 04455 
       Blorigan54@gmail.com 
April 20, 2023 
 
Testimony submitted to the Maine Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
LD 1366, a Bill "An Act to Address Educational Technician Shortages in Public Schools by 
Establishing an Alternative Certification Pathway"  
Dear members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
I am the principal at the Kingman Elementary School, which is an Education in the Unorganized 
Territories (EUT) school, located in a rather remote, rural area of northern Penobscot County.  
Hiring and maintaining knowledgeable, qualified staff for our school has been challenging. The 
Learning Facilitator Program partnership between Eastern Maine Community College and the 
Maine Department of Education serves as a bridge to fill that gap. 
Last spring, our custodian came to me and shared that she had a significant number of college 
credits, but that she completed her course of studies. There were many deterrents for her; living 
in rural Maine, raising children, financial concerns, and travel each played a part in her not 
finishing, she had lost confidence that she would have the opportunity again.  We talked about 
the EMCC Learning Facilitator Program, and she was interested.  She asked for my thoughts as 
to whether she should apply and…I gave her a very enthusiastic “yes” and told her that I would 
be very willing to be her mentor and that is where we started.  By December of that same year, 
she had completed all of her classes and is now certified as an Educational Technician III!   
I knew Kim would do well because I had watched her commitment to her work as a custodian.  
And she was one of the top students in her class.  Because she did so well through from the start, 
I asked her if she would come back o work in the fall as our Title I Educational Technician at our 
school. This gave her the opportunity to work directly in our classrooms, learning how to work 
with students in a variety of settings, including one on one and small group instruction and 
supporting an entire class.  As her mentor, I worked closely with her, having regular meetings as 
well as many incidental conversations as the time passed. 
I can assure you that finding teaching staff in rural Maine is challenging.  The distance that 
students have to travel, and the cost have been detractors for many people who might otherwise 
have become certified and able to work in their local school.  I hope that you will provide the 
support that the EMCC Learning Facilitator Program requires.  It is an outstanding program, it is 
rigorous, and it is rewarding, and most importantly needed for our students! 
Sincerely, 
Beth Anne Lorigan 
Principal, Kingman Elementary School 
 
