I 
E"! Maine Community 
§ College System 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
323 State Street, Augusta. ME 04330-7131 
(207) 629-4000 I Fax (207) 629-4048 I mccs.me.edu 
TO: Senator Rafferty. Representative Brennan 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
FROM: David Daigler, President 
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 1366, An Act I0 Address Educational Technician Shortages 
in Public School by Establishing an Alternative Certiﬁcation Pathway 
DATE: April 20, 2023 
‘ _"t~4-V'_: —-On}-I. _‘_;=‘_::;-In; .1 ' 
i ::_ A~9~wQ~I._:_.-.90-0Q~q,__-_r_0~t ‘;‘-1 T. )===-=0-oval. _'_>_—..7-0‘ f=;=‘w$\(‘ L . ::;~_—_D~L" _ _ ‘>aJ~|,:; —_—=9hU\ 
Senator Rafferty. Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, please accept this testimony in strong support of LD I366 on behalf of the Maine 
Community College System. 
Maine’ s community colleges are dedicated to their mission: To create an educated, skilled and adaptable 
labor force that is responsive to the changing needs of the economy. In fulﬁlling our mission. we pride 
ourselves on being nimble. open minded, and comfortable with innovative solutions to serious problems. 
That's what led to the Learning Facilitator Program at Eastern Maine Community College. 
Two years before the pandemic even began, EMC C started developing this program with local school 
partners, because they agreed that Maine needed an accelerated experience-based program to prepare 
people to become Ed Tech Ills. They worked together and created a program that prepared students with 
speciﬁc skills. knowledge and abilities, learning through a combination of on-the-job apprenticeships 
and college-level instruction. This program was designed to ensure students could move to teacher prep 
programs if they decided to further their career, receive a bachelor ’s degree and become teachers. 
When the pandemic hit, the need for just this program was immediately evident. PK-l 2 schools were 
trying to reopen, there was a serious problem in ﬁnding enough people to staff the classrooms. The Mills 
Administration reached out to us to collaborate on ﬁnding a solution. The Learning Facilitator model 
was ready, and after ﬁnalizing the details with the Department of Education, EMCC launched the 
Learning Facilitator micro-credential program. It shortens the time needed to become an Ed Tech Ill, 
replacing it with hands-on, supervised classroom time where students were mentored by PK-12 teachers. 
It also serves the dual purpose of easing the hiring crisis at PK-12 schools and providing the Learning 
Facilitator students with ﬁnancial support and practical hands-on work experience to support — and be 
mentored by — the classroom teacher. 
In the three years since this program began. it has received strong reviews from many PK-12 leaders. the 
Department of Education. and our students. EMCC has graduated 170 Learning Facilitators, currently
has 143 more enrolled, and a waiting list of 480 people. EMCC has placed Learning Facilitator students 
in 195 schools. 
Now it is time to move to the next stage. This bill addresses a concern that Learning Facilitator students, 
who earn an Ed Tech III certiﬁcate at the end of their program, do not necessarily meet the state 
requirement of 90 college credits (in any academic program.) 
This was not an oversight, but a feature of this program design. The idea was that the Leaming 
Facilitator program addresses that issue by requiring students to complete 315 hours of classroom time 
under the direct mentorship of a classroom teacher. Program designers and Department of Education 
officials agree that those 315 hours provide an opportunity for students to demonstrate the skills 
necessary to be an effective Ed Tech. Also, those 90 college credits can be in any academic program— 
history or business or computer science ~ and do not necessarily include a single hour of teaching 
someone how to assist or support instruction of PK-I2 students in the classroom. 
On this key element of the program, I’d like to share a quote from an education expert: Sue Leighton, 
the director of Special Education at RSU24, which has hired Learning Facilitator students. She said, and 
I quote, “This program is far better preparation for this work than hiring someone with a degree that 
has nothing to do with education, whom we pay more simply because they have gone to college.” 
This leaming facilitator program is innovative and designed so every minute of the student’s time is 
directly related to their program goal: being a skilled and experienced educator prepared for the 
responsibilities of an Ed Tech III. This bootcamp-and-classroom experience roadmap gives students the 
book smarts and the practical experience they need to be successful. 
It deserves to be recognized as an alternative pathway to an Ed Tech III certiﬁcation. 
Years of work went into creating this innovative program. It’s the best way to train Ed Techs today, 
giving them hands-on, relevant experience in the ﬁeld. 
The pandemic created a unique opportunity to launch this program widely and with a large number of 
students. We have seen amazing results, which merits allowing the state’s Education Commissioner the 
ability to approve tested, innovative training programs to help our state’s teachers, ease Pre-K-12 
administration hiring problems, and most importantly, expand the number of people serving our state’s 
young people. 
I urge you to support this bill, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Thank you.
Spotlight on Learning Facilitator Program 
The Learning Facilitator program at Eastern Maine Community College (EMCC) 
provides a fast tracked earn-and-learn opportunity to become skilled Ed Tech lll 
workers. Students get ﬁnancial support and hands-on work experience through 
classroom apprenticeships, while K-I2 schools ease stafﬁng needs with qualiﬁed, 
motivated student workers. 
As the Ed Tech stafﬁng shortage continues in Maine’s K-l2 classrooms, Maine’s 
community colleges seek to continue this innovative, successful program. Current 
legislation (L.D. I366) would recognize it and similar programs as alternative 
pathways to an Ed Tech lll credential. 
Under the year-long Learning Facilitator Program, students complete a I0-day 
classroom bootcamp, 3 l 5 hours of teaching apprenticeship in a K- I 2 classroom, 
online coursework, and professional learning community meetings. Upon 
completion, students are eligible to receive an Ed Tech lll level certiﬁcation 
through the Maine Department of Education. 
n EMCC started developing the Learning Facilitator model with local school partners in 
20l8, two years before the pandemic hit. It was in development because EMCC 
education department leaders and school partners identiﬁed the need to provide an 
accelerated experience-based program that targeted speciﬁc skills, knowledge, and 
abilities through a combination of on-the-job learning and college-level instruction. 
0 Since 2020, 373 students have completed the bootcamp and I70 students have earneda 
Learning Facilitator micro-credential. Currently, there arel43 students enrolled in the 
program, with a waiting list of 480 people. Since the program began, I95 K-l2 schools 
have partnered with EMCC to provide paid teaching apprenticeships to these students. 
0 ln the I0-day bootcamp, students learn about managing a classroom, providing 
instructional support, and implementing positive guidance techniques. They complete 
ﬁngerprinting requirements, mandated reporter training, blood borne pathogens 
training, and are introduced to suicide awareness and prevention resources. 
v In the classroom apprenticeships, students support instruction and provide guidance to 
K-I2 students under the supervision of a mentor teacher or teaching team. ln addition 
to the classroom apprenticeship, students meet two times per month during the school 
year for deeper training. They earn digital badges in six core areas: Developmentally 
Appropriate Practice, Effective Observation, Positive Guidance, Instructional Strategies, 
Inclusive Practices, and Co-Teaching.
How do Maine’s K-12 schools benefit from the program? 
Primarily, the Learning Facilitator program helps K-I2 schools meet stafﬁng needs. 
The students are trained to step into positions to assist schools in providing 
quality support and instruction. Mentor teachers in DOE-funded cohorts receive 
a stipend for their work. 
What our partners and students are saying; 
“This past school year Calais Elementary School was fortunate enough to be able to 
collaborate with EMCC to have an Ed tech lll program speciﬁcally for Ed Tech ls that 
work for Calais School Department. . .. Not only does this increase their pay, it also 
allows me to give them more responsibilities. The morale booster and the confidence 
that this program has provided to the staff is immeasurable. ” — Principal Sue Carter, 
Calais Elementary School 
“Personally, l cannot believe l ﬁnished a full year course, including that crazy boot camp! 
So much information but done in a way that will be hard for me to ever forget lt felt so 
good to successfully earn nine college credits (FREE!) towards a bachelor's degree - thatl 
never EVER thought l would even attempt at getting. If you told me even a few years ago 
that this is what l would be doing I would have thought you were crazy. l am SO much 
happier working in education than in banking. l don't even miss the higher pay because 
this is that much more rewarding. ” — Learning Facilitator graduate, ﬁnal reﬂection. 
Maine Community College System April 2023
