           April 20, 2023 
My name is Erica Bernier. I am a full-time substitute teacher for RSU 24 in Hancock County and the 
Teaching Assistant for the Learning Facilitator Program at EMCC. 
I received my associate’s degree from EMCC in 2020 and enrolled in the Learning Facilitator program in 
the fall of the same year. Although I had my Ed Tech II credential, the program opened new doors for me 
as I gained more skills and the ability to manage classrooms more effectively through long-term 
assignments during the Covid-era and beyond.  
When I completed the program in 2021, I was asked to mentor the learners who were enrolled and 
eventually became the Teaching Assistant in January 2022. This program and the role I have now 
encouraged me to continue my education. I enrolled at UMPI and will graduate with my bachelor’s 
degree in two weeks. I will begin my master’s degree at UNE this fall. My experience with this program 
has opened many unique opportunities for me. 
Aside from my own experiences, I have a unique perspective of how this program has impacted those 
who have completed it. I have worked alongside learners in their schools as they moved through the 
program and watched them grow from individuals who had a natural ability to skilled professionals who 
can specifically meet the needs of their students through intentional planning and support. It has opened 
the door to new employment opportunities for them, increased their income, and given them the 
confidence to pursue their dreams. 
Not only that, but it has influenced the lives of hundreds of students across the state of Maine. These 
students now have support from individuals who understand the developmental, academic, physical, 
social, and emotional needs of their students and have gained specific skills and techniques to encourage 
their development. In turn, these students can flourish and attain greater outcomes because they have 
skilled educators in their lives. 
Through my role, I have developed relationships with the learners, and many have kept in touch with me 
as they move forward with their future employment and educational plans. Many of them I have spoken 
with have said that they may not have otherwise been able to achieve Ed Tech III status without this 
alternative pathway. Several of our recent cohort graduates have applied and enrolled in educational 
programs around the state, through our community colleges and the University of Maine system. Many of 
them are focused on becoming Special Education teachers, one of the areas we have the greatest need for 
in this state. They have told me that they would have never felt confident enough to take these risks 
without their experiences and opportunities presented through the program. 
The need for skilled staff within our classrooms continues to grow each year. Having access to an 
alternative pathway program for educational technicians not only helps to meet the need of staffing 
shortages with skilled professionals but also increases the success and post-secondary education rates of 
individuals across the state, especially those in rural areas. I urge you to consider the value and impact 
that LD 1366 will have on our current students and staff and the future of education in the state of Maine. 
Sincerely, 
 

