Jon Doty
Bradley
LD 1366
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: 
I write to you today in support of LD 1366.  I am Assistant Superintendent of RSU 
#34 (Old Town area).  I have been working with regional partners for more than a 
dozen years to both improve pre-service educator preparation, and to collaborate to 
navigate, and eventually get ahead of, worsening shortages in educator workforce. 
My school district fares relatively well compared to many when it comes to staffing, 
as we have worked hard for at least a dozen years to collaborate with post-secondary 
partners, and we geographically have four educator preparation programs nearby.  
Despite those advantages, we have had 3-7 open Ed Tech roles on any given day this 
year.  There simply aren’t enough people entering or persisting in this field.  These 
shortages result in students not getting the services and supports they need day-to-day,
and put additional staffing/coverage strain on the other adults near that open position. 
Alternative pathways to Ed Tech certification have been vital for the past several 
years, and I shudder to consider how much more challenging staffing would have 
been for ourselves and others without this option.  Well-supported alternative 
pathways - with coursework, earning credentials, and mentoring supports - help great 
people more rapidly prepare to meet students’ needs.  This pays off well for students, 
and also for the careers of the adults serving them.  
I am extremely encouraged by the progress made in alternative pathways to Ed Tech 
certification, maintaining a focus on quality and preparation while recognizing the 
times we are in.  We are very much in a staffing crisis for the educator workforce, and
I urge you to continue to support LD 1366 and similar measures so that we can 
emerge from that crisis and best serve Maine’s students going forward. 
With appreciation for your service to Maine, 
Jon Doty, Ed.D.

