Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
" 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD 343: An Act to Invest in an Educational Technician Training Program to Address Shortages 
in Public Schools. 
LD 1366: An Act to Address the Educational Technician Shortages in Public Schools by 
Establishing an Alternative Certification Pathway. 
Mallory Cook, Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement, 
Maine Education Association 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association, and a certiﬁed English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am here to provide testimony in support of both LD 343: An Act to Invest in an 
Educational Technician Training Program to Address Shortages in Public Schools and LD 1366: An Act 
to Address the Educational Technician Shortages in Public Schools by Establishing an Altemative 
Certiﬁcation Pathway. 
MEA has stood before you many times this session, expressing our concerns about the critical educator 
shortage, which spans all roles in our schools. To illustrate, a quick Serving Schools search for Ed. Tech 
III openings in Maine yields nearly 400 results. As you are hearing today, compensating our support 
staff a living wage is certainly the best recruitment tool; in addition to this, continuing our investment in 
Eastern Maine Community College’s Learning Facilitator Program will also help to address these 
vacancies. This rigorous, competency-based program affords participants the opportunity to enhance 
their abilities to provide quality support and instruction for students. Upon completion of the program, 
these individuals are eligible for Ed. Tech. Ill certification through the Department of Education, so it 
makes sense that most of the participants currently hold Ed. Tech. I and II certiﬁcates. This program 
provides signiﬁcant ﬁnancial incentives for those who complete it. A starting Ed. Tech. I in Houlton 
makes $14.12 per hour; a starting Ed. Tech. III makes $20.16; that is a difference of $6.12 an hour. In 
addition to the ﬁnancial incentive, the program is also sought by those who already hold Ed. Tech. Ill 
certiﬁcation, indicating that the program emphasizes the foundational skills needed to succeed ina 
school. This is no surprise given the program’ s focus on Leaming Foundations, Inclusive Practices, 
Developmentally Appropriate Practices, Positive Guidance, Effective Observation, Instructional 
Strategies, and a Teaching Apprenticeship. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 0l+l»0l 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207—622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
‘ '"" 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
In addition to equipping education technicians with the skills needed to meet student needs, this program 
also has the potential to cut in halfthe current Serving School Ed. Tech. III vacancies. In May of 2022, 
Eastem Maine Community College reported 250 people on their Leaming Facilitator waiting list. with 
more coming in daily. At present, individual applicants rely on the Department-funded spots to take 
advantage of the program; however, there are districts who have funded cohorts of their own, as they 
have identiﬁed how the program will benefit their students and staff. As the program gains more 
traction, it is likely the demand will grow. LD 1366 would enable the Commissioner to approve more 
programs like Eastern Maine’s. Should those programs follow the Leaming Facilitator model, we could 
expand access to those who want to improve their skills. 
Last week, you heard testimony on LD 1217 which aims to create an alternative teaching certiﬁcation 
pathway, targeting underrepresented demographic groups. In that testimony MEA emphasized the 
importance of diversifying our workforce. Investing in this program is another way in which we can 
support that priority. Julia Hazel, Portland Public School’s Director of BIPOC Career Pathways and 
Leadership Development commended the Department on their approval of the Leaming Facilitator 
Program. Portland Public Schools have had 12 educators participate in the program; 9 of whom are 
BIPOC, and 8 of those 9 are immigrants. This program has created an accelerated pathway, which 
removes a structural barrier. 
Also of note is data from the first Leaming Facilitator cohort that shows participants ’ growing interest in 
professional development and career advancement. In 2021, 21 participants noted an interest in pursuing 
teacher certiﬁcation; 8 participants enrolled in degree programs during their time in the program. 
I had the pleasure of observing a Learning Facilitator Program online class, and I was exceptionally 
impressed by the work of these educators. The investment made by the Department to support this effort 
should continue. as the program is strong, effective, and addresses a critical need in our educator 
workforce. 
Thank you and I will do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.0rg
