State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCAITON 
Testimony of Michael Perry, Acting Director of Higher Education and Educator Supports 
In Support of: L.D. 1366 
An Act to Address Educational Technician Shortages in Public Schools by Establishing an 
Alternative Certification Pathway 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Brennan 
Co-sponsored by: Representatives Cloutier, Dodge, Fay, Mastraccio, Murphy, Salisbury and 
Sargent and Senators Pierce and Rafferty 
Date: April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Michael Perry, and I am here today representing the Department of Education in 
support of L.D. D 1366, An Act to Address Educational Technician Shortages in Public Schools 
by Establishing an Alternative Certification Pathway, which proposes to create an alternative 
pathway to an Educational Technician III certification that does not require the minimum 90 credits 
of approved study. 
An applicant who successfully completes a training program approved under this legislation may 
receive an Education Technician III certificate if they meet all other certiﬁcation qualifications 
established by State Board rule, outside the 90-credit requirement. Already, there exists in the 
updated language for Rule Chapter 115: The Credentialing of Education Personnel (Part I),a 
means for applicants who have completed approved training programs to receive an Emergency 
Educational Technician III certification. Instead of a mandatory 90 credit hours of instruction, 
applicants must complete a program which focuses on competency in the targeted skills required 
of an Ed Tech III in the classroom. 
The Maine education community continues to struggle with an educator workforce shortage. 
Creating a pathway for ed techs to more easily enter the classroom could offer some immediate 
relief to the ﬁeld as we continue to strengthen the educator workforce. Our ed techs are a valuable 
resource to our schools, and we support the ﬂexibility this bill provides for bringing them into the 
classroom. 
For these reasons, the Department is in support of LD 1366, An Act to Address Educational 
Technician Shortages in Public Schools by Establishing an Alternative Certification Pathway. I 
would be happy to answer any questions the Committee may have, and I will be available for work 
sessions on this bill.
1
