 
  
CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1046  (Support )  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1046, An Act to Decriminalize Public Drinking  
 
DA: March 27 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony regarding LD 1046 .   
 
 CLAC  members support the concept of decriminalizing public drinking, and  submit this 
testimony to identify possible unintended consequences that may result  from such a change.   
 
 An arrest for public drinking may serve to de -escalate volatile situations.  For some 
neighborhoods, this intervention can  represent a significant q ualify -of-life issue, and 
decriminalization does not address the underlying causes leading to excessive drinking in public  
places or associated conduct that may be directed at innocent members of the public.    
 
 Treating public drinking as a civil violati on will result in enforcement by means of civil 
summonses.   An individual who fails to appear in court on such a summons will be adjudged to 
have committed the offense in default.   The fine imposed on that default can only be enforced 
through mechanism s available to enforce civil judgments, and may result in increased costs to the 
court for attempts to collect unpaid fines , as well as uncollectible fines.     
 
 If the Legislature does decriminalize public drinking, CLAC recommends that the civil 
violation  be retained, with the appropriate update to the statutory reference, as a listed offense 
within the homelessness protocol statute, 17 -A M.R.S. § 18,  in order that law enforcement 
encounters with individuals summonsed for public drinking will still result in referrals for the 
services identified in the protocol.   Thus with respect to section 3 of the bill, CLAC recommends 
not striking the reference to public drinking, but updating the reference to reflect any 
reclassification of the offense.   
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the C o-Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
 
 Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crim es in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
