Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 POWSBO 
AMERICAN Clllll. LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine . wwwaclumaine org 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass As Amended - LD 1046 
An Act to Decriminalize Public Drinking 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY 
March 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support this bill aﬂer amending it to 
remove the civil. penalty. 
If enacted, this bill would change public drinking from a crime to a civil violation 
punishable by a $100 ﬁne. Removing the civil penalty would vastly improve this bill and‘ make 
Maine more livable for Working class people and people from racial and ethnic minorities. 
Public drinking bans are inherently discriminatory. They are disproportionately applied 
against people with low income and low wealth and unhoused people, who are less likely than 
those with means to drink outdoors on private property. In the aftennath of the COVID-19 
lockdown, many municipalities expanded the outdoor dining and bar footprint, encouraging 
people with disposable income to freely drink in public. In contrast, Mainers who cannot afford 
to patronize a bar or restaurant with outdoor seating, or do not own or know someone who owns 
a large yard or patio, face criminal punishment for utilizing the outdoor space available to them: 
a park, a sidewalk, or some other public place. For this very reason, those mostly likely to drink 
in a public park today, and therefore those most likely to owe a ﬁne, are low-income and 
unhoused.I 
Moreover, unhoused people are disproportionately people of color and people with 
disabilities. In 2022, although Black and African American people made up less than 2% of
l
Maine’s population, they made up 35% of the state’s unhoused population. ‘ Evidence from other 
parts of the country shows that alcohol-related offenses are disproportionately enforced against 
racial and ethnic minorities?i 
While we are encouraged by the desire to remove criminal penalties, we do not think' 
changing the ﬁne from a criminal to a civil penalty will end the different treatment that people 
with money and people without money receive. Civil penalties still require a person to show up 
in court, and to pay a ﬁne. If the person does not show up in court, the judge can issue a bench 
warrant, ordering arrest. And, for most who are unhoused, $100 is a signiﬁcant ﬁne to pay off, 
that could take years to work off' 
' 
For these reasons, this bill in its current form is likely to push people in poverty deeper 
into poverty, and disproportionately punish unhoused people and members of racial and ethnic 
minority groups. We therefore urge you to not only decriminalize, but to also fullylegalize 
drinking in public. Please vote ought to pass as amended aﬂer removing this bill’s civil penalty. 
I 
2022 Point in Time Count, Maine Housing, Maine State Housing Authority, at 2, available at 
https:/fwwwmainehousing.org/docs/default-source/housing~repo1ts/2022~point-in-time-survey-~ 
statewide.pdi ‘?sfvrsn=laa6861 5 __7. 
2 Camplain R, Camplain C, Trotter RT 2nd, Pro G, Sabo S, Eaves E, Peoples M, Baldwin JA. 
Racial/Ethnic Differences in Drug- and Alcoh0l~Related Arrest Outcomes in as Southwest County 
From 2009 to 2018. Am J ‘Public Health. 2020 Jan;1l0(Sl):S85-S92. doi: 
10.2105/AJPH.20l9.305409. PMID: 31967892; PMCID: PMC6987943 (“With regard to 
alcohol, racial/ethnic minorities are more likely to experience negative consequences, such as 
arrest and detainment for drinking, potentially because of perceived racial discrimination and 
racial/ethnic stigma. The Southwest United States, for example, has a long history of 
oveirepresentation of [American Indian/Alaska Native (AI/AN)] persons in the justice system 
speciﬁcally for alcohol-related offenses, yet AI/AN people in the Southwest have higher alcohol 
abstention rates than in the general population. ”)t
2
