Jared Bornstein 
Support for LD 360 & 371 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed members of the 
State and Local Government committee. l am here today representing the Androscoggin County 
Commission. We regretfully are in front of you all asking for your help to resolve some issues 
that have been weighing on the Commission for some time now. You have the power to 
alleviate these problems with your vote in support of LD's 360 and 371. These problems center 
around an aging and decrepit sheriff's office that presents workplace safety issues for the 
Deputies and support staff. The Commission responded to the need for a new building by 
purchasing a property using ARPA funds, a lifeline for the county that came from COVID policy. 
The building is paid for and ready to be used, but is being arbitrarily blocked by the City of 
Auburn. The county commission has met every request for more information, changing and 
adding aspects of the project to appease the city. Each time a barrier has been overcome 
another is erected with the ultimate goal of this project being abandoned and the Sheriff's 
department staying in the moldy basement they currently work out of. 
The need for these bills has been accurately described by others, so l will focus on the 
bills themselves. First, LD 360 allows the county commission to search for and eventually 
occupy buildings outside of Auburn, in Lewiston, should the relationship with its county seat 
remain untenable. There is no pragmatic or logical difference between the two cities, this bill 
just allows the county to have the flexibility they need. l want to be clear that there is currently 
a process for changing the county seat, which involves a referendum. The reason the county 
decided to come to the legislature for this change is specifically that we wish to avoida 
referendum. We fear that a campaign for this referendum would be fought between a county 
and the county seat and it would not serve the interest of the taxpayers. lt would be expensive, 
messy and is unnecessary. 
The second bill, LD 371 addresses the issue of the sheriff's department directly. It 
exempts public safety and government buildings from the new onerous approval process that 
the city put in place specifically targeting the new sheriff's department. This bill does not create 
a special process or exemption for the county, it negates a special process that was designed to 
hinder their efforts at a new sheriff's department building. The county will still have to go 
through the normal approval process, the same approval process that was in place before they 
were unfairly and specifically targeted. This law is also targeted only at this situation, beinga 
private and special law, it will not have any unintended consequences because of how specific 
to this situation it is. 
Thank you for hearing these bills, l look forward to any questions that the committee 
may have.
