However, through a series of events, the City of Auburn has made it nearly impossible for the 
county to occupy the building placing multiple moratoriums on building and occupancy. They 
recently passed an ordinance that gave the City Council the ability to veto any occupancy effort 
by the county — beyond the approval of the zoning committee. In fact the City speciﬁcally zoned 
the county out of going anywhere outside of where they currently reside and a few blocks around 
them. Planning for the future hasbecome impossible. _
_ 
After being contacted by members of the commission and watching the process play out I have 
presented the following bills on their behalf. The bills in front of you today would do two things: 
1. Give the county the ability to locate outside of Auburn. If the City of Auburn does not 
want to Work with the County, they need the ability to locate elsewhere. Dealing with this 
in the normal process through referendum does not give the County time to deal with the 
very real crisis going on with the building and puts them in the untenable position of‘ campaigning against one of their own cities. The County does not want to leave Auburn, 
but does need the ability to make decisions that are best for their employees and the 
county as a whole. 
2. Revoke the City’s enforcement of its new process around govermnent buildings. The City 
has done a lot of work to inject uncertainty into the process. The County purchased a 
property that was correctly zoned and in an ideal location for their purposes. They 
worked with a willing seller on the open market and were punished by the city after the 
fact. This private and special law would apply only to this situation to better account for 
any unintended consequences. We have done the best we can to narrowly apply this law 
to this speciﬁc situation. 
County government is a unique creature in Maine’s governmental structure. They have no power 
over their own property and are the guest of the County seat they occupy. They have no redress 
except for the Legislature or the courts. The County has chosen to go to the Legislature because 
they are the creation of the Legislature. The Courts would be much more costly for both the 
County and the City of Aubum. The big loser in that situation is the taxpayer. 
Androscoggin County simply wants to use a building that they purchased for a constitutionally 
required role that they play — hosting the sheriffs ofﬁce. The County played by the rules and 
were punished for unspeciﬁc reasons. This has left deputies literally in the dark, out in the cold, 
and up to their ankles in ﬁlth. Our Sheriffs department deserves more. 
A representative of Androscoggin County will be here to answer speciﬁc questions, but I would 
be happy to try to answer questions you may have. 
Thank you and I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on these bills.
