HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES V "' 
2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
g‘ 
. AUGUSTA, MAINE 043330002 
(207) 287-1400‘ 
Kristen Clouﬁer TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Assistant Majority Leader 
33 Charles St. 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
Phone: (207) 807-1637 
KriSten.CloutierQtilcgislature.maine.gov 
May 16, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Kristen Cloutier supporting 
LD 360, An Act to Amend the Androscoggin County Charter 
LD 371, An Act to Address Certain Local Zoning Ordinances 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Good afternoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed colleagues of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. I am Representative Kristen Cloutier andI 
represent House District #94, part of my hometown of Lewiston. I am testifying today in strong 
support of LDs 360 and 371, which would assist Androscoggin County in its efforts to relocate 
its Sheriff ’s Department. 
First, let me provide some background information. 
The Androscoggin County Sheriff ’s Department currently resides in the county building in 
Auburn, which is in dire disrepair. They have purchased a new building that ﬁts all of their 
needs, is structurally sound and is in a prime location near the City’s new ﬁre station on Route 4, 
headed towards Tumer. In early 2022, the City of Auburn became aware that the County was 
closing on this property. Unsuppoitive of the move, Auburn’s City Council passed a moratorium 
on new public safety buildings to block the Sheriff ’s Department from occupying the building 
they had just purchased. This moratorium was extended until this past winter, when they enacted 
a new ordinance requiring the County to gain approval from the Planning Board, but then 
allowing the City Council to later arbitrarily deny it. Since then, the City of Aubum has 
consistently blocked relocation to the Route 4 site, expressing concerns that a new jail would be 
erected there. Meanwhile, the County continues to maintain the opposite, going so far as to bar 
itself from ever doing so in the deed to the property. The County Commission has tried 
unsuccessfully for over a year to work with the City to address these baseless claims and 
roadblocks, all while Androscoggin County deputies breathe in black mold and trudge through 
ankle deep water from seasonal ﬂooding in their current building. 
These two bills would provide a means of resolving the current situation. 
LD 360 would allow Androscoggin County government buildings to be located in either Auburn 
or Lewiston, giving the County the ﬂexibility it needs to deliver public services in the most 
efficient and cost-effective manner possible. This would provide a simple and expedient solution 
should Aubum continue to be an unfriendly and unwilling host to county govemment. While the 
District 94: Part of Lewiston
referendum process would be the usual procedure for the transition of a county seat, correcting 
the problem through legislative action is necessary in this circumstance given the County’s 
current challenges with the City and the prospect of having to publicly campaign against its 
second largest member. 
LD 371 would ensure that the approval process for the new Sheriff ’s Department reverts back to 
a logical and pragmatic system, free from the political and personal considerations currently 
taking place. It applies ONLY to new public safety and government buildings and exempts jails 
and detention centers, eliminating the City of Auburn’s stated concem. 
For many reasons, locating the Sheriff ’s Department on the Route 4 site would be beneﬁcial. It 
will shorten response time for calls for service outside of Auburn, it will spread the public safety 
footprint across more of the City (instead of being next door to the Auburn Police Department 
where it is currently located), and it will act as a deterrent for some of the dangerous driving on 
Route 4 that results in multiple fatal crashes every year. Most importantly, it will provide 
employees of the Sheriff ’s Department with a new workplace free from public health and safety 
hazards. 
I am happy to support Androscoggin County and our Sheriff ’s Department in these efforts andI 
am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 94: Part of Lewiston
