TESTIMONY OF 
Deirdre Gilbert 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1915 Resolve, to Establish a Grant Program to Issue Shellfish Licenses to 
Qualified Disabled Veterans 
Before the Committee on Marine Resources 
Sponsored by Senator Vitelli 
Date of Hearing: May 18, 2023 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, my name is Deirdre Gilbert, Director of State Marine Policy for the Department of Marine 
Resources, and l am testifying on behalf of the Department neither for nor against LD 1915. 
LD 1915 directs the Department to create a grant program that would make awards for shellfish 
restoration projects to municipalities that agree to make municipal shellfish licenses available to 
disabled veterans. Under existing law (Title 12 Section 6671) municipalities may adopt shellfish 
conservation ordinances, and those ordinances may include the establishment of qualifications fora 
license, including municipal residency, subject to certain provisions. 
ln towns with robust shellfish resources, licenses are often in high demand, especially the 10% of 
licenses that must be made available to individuals who are not town residents. When available, those 
licenses are currently allocated by the town through a lottery process and/or prequalification through 
an investment of conservation time, and there is currently no preference given to disabled veterans 
who may wish to pursue this activity as their livelihood. 
lf the Legislature wishes to incentivize muncipalities to increase their available shellfish licenses by 
providing funds to those muncipalities who are willing to make new licenses available to disabled 
veterans, the Department can administer such a grant program. However, it would be very beneficial 
to obtain some additonal guidance from the committee, to ensure that we design this program in such 
a way that will ensure that your objectives in providing this funding are met. Specifically: 
0 With the proposed funding of $10,000, how many towns does the committee expect would 
participate in this program? For reference, the Department recently released a ”mini-grant" 
progam for muncipalities using $20,000 from the Department's Opportunity Fund. We 
proposed issuing 5 grants of $4,000 but learned that the general reaction to that amount was 
that it was not sufficient to generate interest from many municipalities. For this reason, we 
would anticipate that proposed funding for this program would be sufficient to incentivize at 
most 2 municipalities. 
0 How many additional licenses for disabled veterans would the committee expect a municipality 
be willing to authorize? ls one additional license sufficient to meet the objectives of creating 
this program?
0 What is the expectation for how many years the muncipality will continue to offer the 
additional license? Understanding this will be important for the Department to know what to 
require in making the award. Would the original recipient be grandfathered, or have some 
other assurance of obtaining the license in a subsecquent year? 
0 ls the expectation that the new license(s) created be made available at the current cost charged 
by the municipality, or at no-cost, as is sometimes the case with licenses made available for 
disabled veterans? 
0 ls the expectation that the license holder meet all other muncipal licensing requirements, 
including any conservation time obligations that may be included? 
It is difficult to anticipate the level of interest that this opportunity would elicit from muncipalities, but 
if there are more applications than available grants, it is not immediately clear to the Department how 
we would select among interested towns, except perhaps through a subjective evaluation of where the 
highest quality harvesting opportunity would be provided. 
ln closing, as we have indicated to Senator Vitelli, the Department stands ready to administer this 
opportunity if requested. We ask only for sufficent guidance to ensure that we understand your 
objectives in making this opportunity available so that we can design this program to ensure those 
objectives are met. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
