May 18, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources  
 
RE: LD 1915 – Resolve, to Establish a Grant Program to Issue Shellfish Licenses to 
Qualified Disabled Veterans  
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Marine Resources , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government Relations 
Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine . I appreciate this opportunity to 
submit written comments in support of  LD 1915 , Resolve, to Establish a Grant 
Program to Issue Shellfish Licenses to Qualified Disabled Veterans .  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature  and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th large st landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our ch anging climate.  
 
Our organization fully embraces the principles of equity and recognizes the importance 
of integrating them into all aspects of our work  to achieve TNC’s vision of a world 
where “the diversity of life thrives” . It is with great enthusiasm t hat we express our 
support for the proposed bill that directs the Department of Marine Resources to 
establish a program aimed at awarding grants for shellfish restoration projects, with a 
special emphasis on shellfish seeding, to municipalities that commit  to reserving 
municipal shellfish licenses for qualified disabled veterans.  
 
TNC has committed to continually identifying and seizing opportunities to understand, 
check, surrender, share, and use our power to increase equity. One of our strategies for 
conn ecting people with nature includes, “Working with communities to promote 
lasting economic prosperity through natural solutions and community driven 
sustainability.” The proposed program accomplishes this goal by lifting  up the 
community of disabled veterans and ensuring that they are able to engage in 
meaningful work that benefits both our environment and their personal well -being.   
 
TNC urges the committee to support LD 1915 . Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment and I am available to answer questions at any time.  
