   
 
1 | P a g e  
 
S A F E T Y          I N T E G R I T Y     C O M P L I A N C E  
 
                       
        
 
 
 
 
Date:    03/07/2023  
FROM:  Christopher Cyr, Executive Director of Risk Management   
To:      Maine Legislature ; Transportation Committee  
Re:      Testimony in support of LD 607  
 
"Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of                
Extending Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley"  
 
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Transportation, m y name is Christopher C yr, and I  serve as the Executive 
Director of Risk Management for RF Chamberland, Inc ., a third -generation trucking  and 
warehousing  interest  in St. Agatha.  On behalf of the owners, Mark and Dale 
Chamberland, I am here to enthusiastically voice their support for LD 607 .  
 
Most products originating in Aroostook County are transported by truck . A ride from 
Houlton to Fort  Kent however,  will evidence the resulting damage on those legacy state 
highways . Recent annual trends reveal 98.7% of total manufactured tonnage is 
transported by trucks in Maine . Last year, Maine State Police inspected 19, 678 of those 
trucks  to ensur e they were fit for Maine roads. Yet little has been done north of Houlton 
to ensure  roads are fit for  Maine trucks. Although the size and weights of these vehicles 
have changed drastically in the past half -century, they operate on surface roads designed 
and built well before the second world war .  
 
Chamberland trucks alone logged over se ven million miles last year conveying products 
from the St. John Valley to markets throughout the United States . All those trucks return 
home with products Aroostook citizens and businesses use every day. Yet despite their 
vital role in the region’s economy, they still must meander their way  through every small 
town and hamlet , as they have since the 1930’s.  
 
 
 
PO BOX 188  
St. Agatha, ME   04772  
Phone (207) 543 -6607  
Fax (207) 543 -9328  
 
   
 
2 | P a g e  
 
S A F E T Y          I N T E G R I T Y     C O M P L I A N C E  
 
 
 
 
 
Municipalities are also impacted by the absence of an Interstate , as evidenced by Van 
Buren ’s Industrial Park complex that’s the envy of Aroostook . Part of the reason it’s so 
picturesque  however , is because it’s so empty.  Aroostook  towns struggle to attract 
industries which rely on  shipping , due in part to the absence of modern transportation 
access . The Loring Commerce Center in Limestone has suffered the same fate, with 
antiquated shipping corridor s hindering growth . The Crown of Maine is full of towns with 
vacant store fronts and empty industrial parks, primed  for revitalization.   
 
 
In conclusion , consider the tireless efforts of Senator Susan Collins affecting change in 
federal law to allow trucks over 80,000 lbs. to use Interstate 295, instead of restricting  
them to Route 1 as they had  been  for decades. As a retired Maine Trooper, I remember 
well the days of 100,000 lb. tanker trucks hauling Jet -A fuel enroute to the Brunswick 
Naval Air Station, threading their way through the pedestrians and baby carriages in front 
of LL Bean . It is impossible to overstate the effect her efforts had on transportation safety 
for the towns between Scarborough and Gardiner . Those heavy commercial vehicles 
belong on a controlled access highway, engineered for their size and weight, not Freeport 
Village proper. We feel  citizens in Aroostook towns deserve similar relief . The same 
historic opportunity to impact highway safety faces you now. On behalf of RF 
Chamberlan d, we applaud  your efforts to finally connect The Valley with the rest of Maine 
and the nation . In solidarity with the citizens and businesses of St. John’s River Valley, 
please deem LD 607 “ought to pass ”. Thank  you all for your time and consideration . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Most Respectfully,  
 
 
Christopher Cyr  
Executive Director  
         
