Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN 
Executive Director 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Before the Committee on Transportation regarding LD 607 — Resolve, to Direct 
the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending 
Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley 
Wednesday, March 15, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on Transportation, my 
name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the Professional Logging Contractors of 
Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is the voice of Maine’s logging and 
trucking industry. The PLC was formed in 1995 to represent independent contractors in a rapidly_ 
changing forest industry. 
As of 2021, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,000 people directly and were 
indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 2,500 jobs. This employment and the 
investments that contractors make contributed $582 million to the state’s economy. Our 
membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate members, 
employs more than 75% of the individuals who work in this industry and is also responsible for 80% of 
Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in support of LD 
607 - Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending 
Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley. We would like to thank Representative Albert and Senator 
Jackson for bringing this legislation before the committee and while we understand that it isa 
longshot to legislate the construction of one road as a priority over another in the state, we do feel that 
the importance of this route to the forest economy in Maine cannot be overstated. 
The logging industry in Maine was in the midst of a reinvention process until the onset of COVID 19 
and the digestor explosion at the Jay mill in April 2020. As a result of mill closures, curtailments and 
inﬂation created by the response to COVID 19, we are estimating that Maine has lost 30% of its 
harvesting capacity and the layoff of nearly 1,000 people in harvesting and hauling since 2020. In just 
four years, the industry has shrunk from an annual economic impact of $620 million to $582 million 
and total jobs have been reduced from 9,000 to 5,500. 
The state simply needs market expansions and better infrastructure to create efﬁciencies that save 
money and increase proﬁtability. 
In the spring of 2016, members of Maine’s Congressional delegation convened a working group of the 
forest products industry, affected communities, and other stakeholders to develop shared strategies to 
strengthen and diversify Maine’s forest industry and rural economies. Together, this group, which is 
now called the Forest Opportunity Roadrnap for Maine (FOR Maine), has prioritized a path forward to 
achieve prosperity for the state.
Goal 1 of the FOR Maine effort is to sustain and grow the forest products economy from $8.5 billion to 
$12.5 billion by 2025. Goal 1, Strategy 1G calls for, “improvements in transportation and logistics 
infrastructure for moving wood and value-added products to market” . As chair of the FOR Maine 
transportation committee, I am proud to report that our industry is working very closely with Maine 
DOT to identify infrastructure priorities for capital investments, including existing highways, haul 
routes and transportation facilities. We have also made the statement that, “to ensure 
competitiveness, Maine needs a long-term funding strategy to make critical investments in the rail, 
road and port infrastructure necessary to cost-effectively move wood out of the forest to market and 
for value added products to reach their final destination ”. 
As you will note in the attached For Maine Transportation Committee Recommendations document, 
several roads in Aroostook County were listed as priority haul routes for the forest products 
community. With this in mind, we also know that there is one golden route that would provide 
maximum opportunity to move forest products safely and efﬁciently. This route would be the 
extension of I-95 from Houlton to the St. John Valley. 
To emphasize the immediate impact that this type of investment would make, I would like to point out 
the tremendous success of our federal delegation ’s efforts to increase the weight limit on I-95 to 
100,000 lbs. Moving logging trucks out of small communities has not only increased safety, but it has 
provided tremendous efficiency for logging companies to move raw forest products long distances in 
an expedient manner. This success could be replicated in Aroostook County, but only with significant 
investment of state and federal resources. 
Each year, I hear continuous complaints from our membership regarding the physical condition 
of haul routes in Aroostook County, especially Rte. 11, Rte. 161 and Rte. 1. All who utilize these 
routes for delivery of raw forest products report signiﬁcant deterioration of the roadway, 
increased truck maintenance costs, worker's compensation claims and reduced proﬁtability. 
Logging and trucking companies operate annually on a razor thin margin. The loss of markets 
and inﬂation near 50%, in addition to the impacts of poor road conditions are leading to the 
demise of many of our members. Adding insult to injury is a severe driver shortage and we have 
the ingredients of a perfect storm that could severely impact the future of our industry. 
For members like ours who rely heavily upon Maine's roads, increased vehicle maintenance and 
workers‘ compensation claims from drivers who operate trucks on roads that are in dire need of 
repair, could make the difference between whether a company continues to operate or not. 
Without creative thinking and investment in big ideas like an extension of I-95 to the St. John 
Valley, it could lead to even more of our members laying off employees or shutting their doors for 
good. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this legislation and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you might have.
