 1 Testimony on LD 609 A Resolve to Direct the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending Interstate 95 to the Saint John Valley  The Honorable Senator Chipman, Chair The Honorable Representative Williams, Chair And Distinguished Members of the Transportation Committee  My name is Don Tardie and I currently serve as President of the Ashland Area Economic Development Corporation and provide testimony in support of LD 607.  Passage of LD 607 is very important for our Corporation’s goals to revitalize the industrial and commercial sectors of our Region in Aroostook County.  In 2021, our Corporation was successful in acquiring a former lumber mill site with the expressed objective to revitalize Economic Development in Ashland by establishing a Renewable Energy Park.  Our Corporation currently has an investor interested in developing a Combined Heat and Power Platform with the potential for bolt on business to utilize the available process steam and electricity.  As it is with the cost of doing business today, it is critical to have an efficient infrastructure to obtain and get products to market. The opportunity to extend Interstate 95 North to the Saint John Valley will provide opportunities to have businesses expand and attract new businesses in Aroostook County. The future significance of extending I 95 North can be summed up as follows: 1. To get products more efficiently to market and reduce the carbon footprint for transportation. 2. The safety attributes cannot be overemphasized as long haul trucking will be utilizing the I 95 corridor rather than utilizing the lower grade secondary roads built in the 1950’s and 60’s.   
 2 3. Economic Development opportunities will definitely be encouraged to take advantage of our abundant timber, agricultural, and recreation resources. 4. Enhance our rural economy by promoting the quality of life our region provides for young families and educational opportunities for aspiring students in post secondary education.  I ask for your support for Aroostook County and vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 607.  Respectfully Submitted, Don Tardie  President, Ashland Area Economic Development Corporation. tardied@yahoo.com 207-551-6100 154 Goding Road Ashland, Maine 04732  
