Testimony in Support of LD 607, Resolve, to Direct the Department of 
Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending Interstate 95 to 
the St. John Valley
March 15, 2023
Chairman Chipman, Chairwoman Williams, and Honorable Members of the Transportation Committee; 
My name is Elizabeth Frazier and I am an attorney at Pierce Atwood, representing Twin Rivers Paper 
Company. Twin Rivers is pleased to support LD 607, Resolve to Direct the Department of Transportation 
to Examine the Feasibility of Extending Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley. 
Twin Rivers Paper Company is headquartered in Madawaska, Maine. As a proud employer of over 450 
Mainers in the St. John Valley, Twin Rivers supports directing the Department of Transportation to study 
the feasibility of extending Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley. In addition to providing ease of access to 
our remarkable corner of the state, we believe extending Interstate 95 could have substantial economic 
development impacts for the region. 
While Twin Rivers has an established presence in the region and years of experience making and moving 
paper goods in and out of Madawaska, there are many business opportunities that undoubtedly go 
missed by smaller or start-up companies who perceive the transportation challenges as a barrier to 
business in our region. Cities like Bangor, Lewiston, and Auburn have seen significant in-migrations in 
recent years. As Maine continues to grow in appeal to remote workers, we hope to capitalize on some of 
that in-migration in the St. John Valley – direct access from I-95 would make us a more attractive place 
to settle. 
We welcome the opportunity to participate in any such feasibility study, and to share our stories and 
perspectives on how the St. John Valley is a critical economic development hub for Maine, and one with 
untapped potential. We look forward to being a part of this process if it goes forward and thank this 
committee for its time and consideration of the matter. 
Sincerely, 
Elizabeth M. Frazier
On behalf of the Twin Rivers Paper Company 
