 Albert Farms Inc  March 13, 2023 791 Main St Madawaska ME 04756 Roger Albert and Maine Legislature: You requested my thoughts on a proposed 4 lane highway from Houlton to the St John Valley and here they are.   Connectivity.  I have been in business for 30 years and have constantly fought the battle of the perception that the St John Valley is “at the end of the world”.  Strangely, my Canadian neighbors 2 miles from my office on the Trans Canadian Highway consider themselves to be in the center of Canadian commerce.  I’m sure many committee members consider the Valley is “at the end of the world”  because of the travel time it takes to get here, but think nothing of driving to Boston for an event, the same travel time away.  The perception is very real and has held the County back economically for decades.  A limited access highway would open opportunities for many businesses in the County.  The increased connectivity would help existing businesses attract the workers they need.  A major complaint from many professionals applying for jobs in the County is that they cannot get to the rest of our country for training, entertainment, etc easily.  The St John Valley has exported its youth for generations and now faces a dramatic decline in working age population.  Without adequate connectivity this decline will continue, with the area locked in a downward spiral of less and lower paying jobs and inadequate healthcare.  If this sounds dramatic, it is because it is that bad.  The graduating class in Madawaska has shrunk from 160 students in the 70’s to 25 in recent years.  Can’t get more dramatic than that.  A 
  
2 limited access highway would reduce travel time by upwards of an hour, greatly improving the connectivity of the County. Carbon Footprint:  If a limited access highway were built to the County, the fuel savings would be about 20 gallons of diesel per truck per trip.  Passenger vehicles would save 5 gallons per trip.  While I do not have the traffic numbers, I’m sure MEDOT came provide them and a good estimate of the fuel savings and reduction of carbon load.  We all know how important carbon reduction is, and in the absence of any traffic reductions in the southern part of the state, this is a very real and tangible way of reducing emissions. Financing:  MEDOT has no doubt produced a cost benefit analysis of a limited access highway to the County.  From MEDOT’s point of view, a new road would cost a lot of money(true) but would generate less revenue for the department because the fuel savings would translate into less fuel tax to fund the department.  Why would a department endorse such a project?  Legislature should consider a public/private partnership where the State of Maine would provide for land acquisition and permitting and private equity would build the road and charge appropriate tolls.  Both sides of this argument have been at it since I95 was terminated in Houlton, why don’t we let the free market evaluate the project?   Sincerely, Jeffrey Albert, Pres Albert Farms Inc. 
