Town of Eagle Lake, Maine
P.O. Box 287
Eagle Lake, ME 04739
36 Devoe Brook Road          Eagle Lake, ME 04739         Phone: 207.444.5511       Fax: 207.444.2810
The Town of Eagle Lake is an equal opportunity employer.  To file a complaint, write to John Sutherland, Town 
Manager, PO Box 287, Eagle Lake, ME 04739 or call (207) 444-5511.March 13, 2023
To: Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and other esteemed members of the Joint 
       Standing Committee on Transportation. 
Senators and Representatives,
I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on LD 607, to extend the interstate 
highway system north to the St. John Valley. As an individual who grew up in Ashland and spent most 
of my life in Aroostook County I can say that in my opinion this is long overdue. 
Route 1 and Route 11 are the primary north - south routes to move from the current interstate highway 
system to points north. It is also the main artery for transporting goods and people south. The new 
limited access highway will increase safety for all those that use it. Each year a number of people are 
killed in head on collisions on these roads. White outs during the winter months add to the risk. 
Sharing the road with large trucks challenge the most experienced driver. Dodging moose and other 
wildlife makes the travel even more dangerous. As the Aroostook County economy moves toward 
tourism as an economic driver, we must prepare to have the roadways necessary to accommodate the 
increased traffic. A limited access highway with all traffic traveling in the same direction will mitigate 
the risk to the fullest extent possible. 
I have witnessed the effects of the long term out migration of Aroostook County residents. This leaves 
blighted communities in their wake. Travel the downtown main streets of Aroostook County 
communities like Van Buren, Caribou, Ashland, Limestone, Eagle Lake, and a number of small 
communities in the St. John Valley, you will see blight everywhere. Downtowns are full of vacant and 
decaying store fronts where businesses once thrived. Towns like Van Buren, Ashland, Caribou, Eagle 
Lake, Masardis and many more show the effects of this outbound migration with their main street 
littered with empty store fronts and empty lots provide evidence that these communities once thrived. 
The closing of Loring, the empty Aroostook Center mall, the tearing down of generating plants in 
Ashland and Fort Fairfield and the closing and leveling of the J.Paul Levesque stud mill in Ashland 
are signs of a detracting Aroostook County economy. 
We need to focus on turning this trend around and look to position Aroostook County to move forward 
in a positive direction. Extending the interstate highway system to the St. John Valley would be a 
major asset to Aroostook County communities. Many companies that are the backbone of the 
Aroostook County economy are companies that process Aroostook County natural resources. Whether 
it is farming, including potato and broccoli harvesting, or the forest products industry, these industries 
rely on big trucks to take their products to markets, bring their raw materials and processing materials 
to their plants. These industries pay good wages and allow County residents to provide for their 
families. Their drawback is that they rely on commercial trucks to keep their industry moving forward. 
Meeting one of these commercial trucks on the roadway can intimidate the most experienced driver. 
When these roads were built, many were prior to the 1930s, there was no idea of the size and weight 
that today’s commercial trucks that share our roadways. 
Going forward, we see opportunity in developing new industries like the proposed Green 4 Maine 
 Town of Eagle Lake, Maine
P.O. Box 287
Eagle Lake, ME 04739
36 Devoe Brook Road          Eagle Lake, ME 04739         Phone: 207.444.5511       Fax: 207.444.2810
The Town of Eagle Lake is an equal opportunity employer.  To file a complaint, write to John Sutherland, Town 
Manager, PO Box 287, Eagle Lake, ME 04739 or call (207) 444-5511.company who is looking to relocate to the Loring Commerce Center. They are proposing the creation 
of up to 600 new jobs. Other opportunities include the aerospace industry. This is the kind of 
development that creates good paying jobs. These are the kind of positions that we need to turn the 
Aroostook County economy around. Seeing this company thrive in Aroostook County will encourage 
other business to consider relocating to create more opportunities for our residents and communities. 
Having a limited access highway extending from Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley will position 
Aroostook County to grow and thrive in the 21st century. 
I want to show my support for LD 607.  Interstate highway systems have proven to bring growth to 
areas around them. They provide a safe artery for transportation of goods and people traveling in and 
out of Aroostook County. The highway will be an important asset in reversing the out migration of 
Aroostook County residents and provide a catalyst for future economic development in a beautiful 
area of the state of Maine that we are fortunate enough to call home. 
Regards,
John Sutherland
Eagle Lake Town Manager. 
John Sutherland
Eagle Lake
LD 607
Please review my letter of support for LD 607
