Testimony of Maria R. Fuentes , Maine Better Transportation Association  
In Support of   
LD 607 – Resolve,  To Direct the Department  of Transportation to Examine the Possibility of Extending 
Interstate 95 to St. John Valley  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
March 15, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representat ive Williams and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation :  
My name is Maria Fuentes , and I am testifying today in support  of LD 607 on behalf  of Maine Better 
Transportation Association  (MBTA). MBTA is a statewide coalit ion made up of members who plan, design, 
build, maintain, operate,  and use Maine’s transportation infrastructure network.  Members include design 
engineers, transportation contractors and equipment dealers, airports, shippers, marine and bus companies, 
public works officials and others committed to our mission of advocating for long-term funding for the state’s 
transportation network  to improve the quality of life and enhance the economy for Maine people.   
We support LD 607 because i t addresses a  critical transportation corridor that was  promised decades ago 
to the citizens, municipalities and businesses in Aroostook County - and has been since abandoned.  As a result, 
that critical part of Maine has been deprived of the potential for economic  development that other r egions in 
Maine have  enjoyed, a long with t he mobility enhancements that would come with completing the interstate.   
A four-lane interstate  connecting Aroostook County to southern and coastal Maine and Canada has been a topic 
of conversation for more than 75 years — since the original legislation forming the M aine Turnpike Authority 
passed in 1941. That bill c alled for an independent state agency to construct and operate a Turnpike "from some 
point at or near Kittery to a point at or near Fort Kent." W hen the federal government approved the  Interstate 
Highway Act in 1956, plans to continue a four -lane toll highway were shelved , in effect cutting off northern  
Maine from the rest of the s tate.   
Completing the expansion to Aroostook County  would provide economic activity to the region and 
communities  which would en hance livability by making the area m ore easily access ible to people and to freight.  
Moving products is critical to the natural -resourced based industries which are the backbone of that region of 
Maine, including agriculture and the woods products industry.  
A study would help determine how the area ’s transportation infrastructure deficiencies are inhibiting 
economic developm ent in Maine.  The extension of the highway and potential for b ringing additional jobs to the 
region would provide not only economic  opportunit ies for local people, but also mobility opportunities .  
Younger people are discovering northern Maine and Aroostook has attracted remote workers who enhance the 
community in many wa ys in addition to paying taxes.  I believe many others would come because it could open 
the region up to new residents, and new Mainers who are looking for a beautiful  and safe place to work and 
raise  families , while also enjoy the amazing outdoor  recreational opportunities available in the “Crown of 
Maine. ”  
While many improvements have been made over the years  with constrained resources , more needs to be 
done.  We are very grateful that Senator Susan Collins was able to secure f unding for significant investments in 
Presque Isle and Caribou , not to mention the transformative initiative  she le d to increase truck weight s to 
100,000 pounds on the interstate .  Now the timing is right to perform a feasibility study and eventuall y provide 
the connectivity . access and economic vitality that a highway would create , particular ly in our modern global 
economy.   
We hope the Committee will supp ort LD 607 with a un animous ought -to-pass vote.  Thank you for 
considering the MBTA ’s testimon y and for your distinguished service to the State of Maine . 
