188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
Testimony of Matthew Marks in Support of LD 607 
“Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending 
Interstate 95 to the St. John Valley ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
March 7, 2023  
 
Senator  Chipman , Representative Williams , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on T ransportation , I am  Matt Marks, a Principal at Cornerstone Government Affairs 
and here today on behalf of my client the Associated General Contractors of Maine  (AGC Maine).  
 
In 2018, the country celebrated the completion of Interstate 95 , but many in Maine and 
specifically  residents of  Aroostook County recognized a long -discussed problem as the highway 
abruptly ended before connecting integr al sections of Northern Maine  leaving Route 11 or Route 
1 as the alternative.  
 The Northern Maine Economic Development report
1 cited deteriorating road conditions and 
distance to large markets as a weakness. Across Maine, Twenty percent of Maine’s rural roads 
are rated in poor condition –  the tenth highest rate in the nation-  and 23 percent are in mediocre 
condition. The rate of traffic fatalities on Maine’s non -Interstate, rural roads is more than double 
the fatality rate on all other roads in the state – 1.67 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles of 
travel vs. 0.71. There were 123 fatalities on Maine’s non -Interstate, rural roads in 2020. Rural 
roads are more likely to have narrow lanes, limited shoulders, sharp curves, exposed hazards, pavement  drop -offs, steep slopes, and limited clear zones along roadside s according to an 
independent report by TRIP
2-a transportation research group.  
 Northern Maine’s  economic activity, forestry, agriculture , outdoor recreation,  and 
manufacturing would be assisted by transportation infrastructure improvements. Transportation 
equity for residents of rural Maine includes both commercial and residential access to safe, 
reliable , and expedient means of travel. T he Loring Commerce Cen ter announced a developer  
will rehabilitate 600 apartment  units and according to a press release will be the "largest 
commercial and industrial park in the state of Maine offering access to an immense airfield, the longest airstrip (over 12,000 ft long) as a prominent and premiere Air Cargo Distribution Hub for national points of presence in Maine and beyond.”  
 Assembling a st akeholder group to determine the feasibility  of expanding Interstate 95 and 
reviewing both economic and safety data will be instrumental  in examining the future of 
transportation for Northern Maine. AGC Maine encourages the Committee to pass this bill.  
 
1 Northern Maine Development Economic Report: https://www.nmdc.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/07/2018 -2023 -CEDS.pdf  
2 Trip Rural Road Report for Maine: https://tripnet.org/reports/rural- connections -maine -news -release- 10-13-2022/  
