2- *+-4 l 
w ,. 
,..» , .w.~.\___ 1- 
M1 . ‘“-5'3‘-‘“‘ 
’ 5’ 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 607 
Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending 
Interstate 95 to the St. lohn Valley 
Presented to the Ioint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Wednesday, March 15, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Troy Jackson. I represent Aroostook County in 
the Maine Senate and have the great honor of serving as Senate President. As a lifelong 
resident of the St. ]ohn Valley, I am here today to testify in favor of LD 607, “Resolve, to 
Direct the Department of Transportation to Examine the Feasibility of Extending Interstate 
95 to the St. Iohn Valley." The proposal would allow the Department to study the feasibility 
of extending Interstate 95 to the St. Iohn Valley and report back to this committee no later 
than December 6. 
In 1941, the Maine Legislature established the Maine Turnpike Authority for the explicit 
purpose of building and maintaining a highway "from a point at or near Kittery in York 
County to a point at or near Fort Kent/'1 With that vote, the state made a promise to 
connect one end of the state to the other, uniting northern and southern Maine. In reality, it 
was nothing more than a broken promise. 
Though Maine's stretch of I-95 begins in Kittery, it currently ends in Houlton, stopping 
about 100 miles or two hours short of its planned destination. However, the people, 
businesses and communities in northern and central Aroostook are the ones who continue 
to pay the price for this unfinished project. 
First and foremost, this is a safety issue. The lack of health care professionals, especially 
specialists, in rural Maine means that County residents often have to drive to Bangor for 
significant health care needs. The only way to get there is driving up and down the dark, 
narrow and winding roads until you reach Houlton. The dangers include black ice, moose 
collisions and poor quality roads. 
1 
p|_ 1§4qe (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * TOIIF/'ee I-800-423-6900 * TTY 7]] 
Senat0rJacks0r11@gmai/. com * Web Sire: legislature.mai11e.g0v/senate
Second, it would improve the conditions of local roads. In northern and central Aroostook 
County, local roads experience wear and tear not seen south of Houlton. Though we don't 
have the same volume of traffic, the sheer size and weight of the vehicles hauling wood 
products, potatoes and other produce have led to the deterioration of major roadways, like 
Route 11 and Route 161. Connecting the St. Iohn Valley to I-95 would alleviate the pressure 
on local roads. 
Finally, connecting the Crown of Maine to the interstate system would benefit our rural 
economy. It would boost the growing outdoor recreation economy in the region and 
literally put northern and central Aroostook County on the map. 
For decades, we were told that connecting Northern Aroostook County to New England's 
electric grid was practically impossible — nothing more than a pipe dream. Now, that pipe 
dream is on the cusp of becoming reality. The Northern Maine Transmission Line cleared 
major bureaucratic hurdles and is on track to bring down energy costs, create good-paying 
jobs and unlock untold economic opportunity in rural Maine. 
The same can be true for the expansion of I-95. The time to connect Maine's interstate 
system to the Valley is now. LD 607 is the latest effort spearheaded by the Aroostook 
County delegation to keep this project alive and connect the St. John Valley to Maine's 
interstate system. It isn't the first time a study has been proposed or conducted but the 
difference now is that there is momentum to get this done. That starts with a study but we 
cannot let it end there. 
Thank you for your time today. l hope you will join me in supporting LD 607. I would be 
happy to answer any questions from the committee. 
###
