 
   
                              State of Maine  
                      Office of the Public Advocate  
                      112 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0112 
         (207) 624 -3687 (voice) 711 (TTY)   
         www. maine.gov/meopa  
  
                                          Janet T. Mills  
                                                     GOVERNOR  
 
                               William  S. Harwood  
                               PUBLIC ADVOCATE  
 
 
 
1 
 Testimony Neither for nor Against  
LD 1888, “An Act to Reduce Electricity Costs for Maine's Consumers and Businesses 
by Amending the Laws Governing Renewable Resources ” 
May 23 , 2023 
 
Senator  Lawrence , Representative  Zeigler  and distinguished m embers of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities , and Technology,  
 My name is William Harwood, here today as Public Advocate, to  testif y neither for 
nor against  LD 1888 , “An Act to Reduce Electricity Costs for Maine's Consumers and 
Businesses by Amending the Laws Governing Renewable Resources .” The OPA apologizes 
for not being able to testify on this bill at the public hearing and appreciates the sponsor 
bringing this bill forward.  
Our Office supports capping Class II REC costs by establishing an ACP mechanism, 
as exists for Class I/IA RECs. These costs ultimately end up being paid by ratepayers who 
are already suffering under historically high electricity prices. However, we support giving 
the PUC some flexibility to adjust the ACP, as needed to balance the competing goals of 
promoting renewable energy and keeping electricity affordable.  
The OPA recognizes that different Class II REC generators have different functions 
in our society, so it may be important to set different ACPs for hydropower generation than 
trash to energy generation. Although the environmental benefits are uncertain, OP A 
recognizes that Class II RECs may be important to the continued operation of Maine’s three 
trash to energy facilities. While it is difficult to be sure how much of a subsidy is needed, 
OPA does not want the rug to suddenly be pulled out from under these facilities that may be 
relying  on th is subsidy. The OPA recommends that the amount of subsidy for these three 
facilities be determined by adjusting the so -called multiplier to provide them the minimum 
number of RECs needed for the next few years. Between n ow and the scheduled phase out 
of the trash -to-energy multiplier, the GEO and PUC should investigate the continued need 
 
   
                              State of Maine  
                      Office of the Public Advocate  
                      112 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0112 
         (207) 624 -3687 (voice) 711 (TTY)   
         www. maine.gov/meopa  
  
                                          Janet T. Mills  
                                                     GOVERNOR  
 
                               William  S. Harwood  
                               PUBLIC ADVOCATE  
 
 
 
2 
 for a ratepayer subsidy for these facilities. If, in the long run, a subsidy is needed for these 
facilities to survive and the environme ntal benefits justify the subsidy, the OPA recommends 
that it  be provided by taxpayers rather than ratepayers.  
Finally, OPA recognizes that the Committee has preliminarily decided in an amended 
version of LD 187 that Class I ACPs should be dedicated to exp anding benefits to low 
income ratepayers under the LIAP Program. OPA supports and appreciates this important 
decision. The OPA recommends that Class II ACPs also be dedicated to supporting the 
LIAP program. However, the amount of the ACP should be set base d solely on balancing 
the competing goals of promoting renewables and keeping electricity affordable, rather than 
maximizing LIAP benefits.  
Thank you for your time, attention , and consideration of this testimony. The Office 
of the Public Advocate looks for ward to work ing with the Committee on LD 1888  and will 
be available for  the work session to assist the Committee in its consideration of this bill.  
 
Respectfully  submitted , 
    
William S. Harwood  
Public Advocate   

