 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 783, An Act to Protect Certain Private Emergency Services Personnel  
from Liability Under the Maine Tort Claims Act  
 
April 6, 2023 
 
Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Stephen 
Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am 
writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners 
Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 783. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Firefighters and emergency medical services employees are crucial to keeping our communities 
safe and healthy. Unfortunately, it has become difficult for many counties, especially rural counties, to maintain 
adequate levels of personnel to fill these roles and perform this important work. 
 
Maine’s Tort Claims Act provides certain immunities from tort claims for individuals who act on behalf of a 
governmental entity in official capacity, temporarily or permanently, and with or without compensation from 
local, state, or federal funds. Such individuals are defined as “employees.”  Under LD 783, the term “employee” 
would be narrowed in the case of “emergency medical services personnel” by excluding a private firefighter, a 
private emergency medical services employee or an employee of another private service that provides an 
emergency response unless the person is acting: (1) without compensation; and (2) either at the request of a 
governmental entity or in response to a life-threatening emergency. If passed, such private emergency services 
personnel would not be covered by the Maine Tort Claims Act if they were compensated, nor would they be 
covered if they were acting without the request of a government entity or in response to a life-threatening 
emergency. Under the latter provision, a volunteer responder who is responding without the request of 
government and in response to an event that is not life-threatening would also not be covered by the Tort Claims 
Act. 
 
As a form of local government, counties employ firefighters and private emergency medical services employees 
to provide necessary services for our communities. It is not clear how narrowing the scope of the Maine Tort 
Claims Act with regard to individuals responding to fire or medical emergencies assists local governments in 
dealing with staffing limitations in this field. While our Association does not take a position on this bill, we 
write to question the necessity of this bill, to provide information regarding the challenges that many counties 
currently face in hiring and maintaining emergency medical services employees, and to provide insight as to the 
potentially detrimental effect that LD 783 may have on counties as drafted. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 783 
April 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
