Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name is Alicia Rea and I live in Lewiston. I am writing today in support of LD 
1902.  
 
LD 1902 proposes regulation of the collection, use, and sharing of consumer health data 
that is not currently protected by HIPAA. As a law student at the University of Maine School of 
Law, I foresee this bill adding significant value in Maine, protecting those who utilize health 
services from having their private information shared and providing a right of action if 
companies violate privacy regulations. 
 
Notably, this bill seeks to prohibit geofencing of healthcare services when the geofence is 
used to identify, track, collect data from, or send notifications to a consumer who enters the 
virtual perimeter. Prohibiting this data from being collected and the potential of being bought 
could save lives, giving piece of mind to health services consumers who depend on in-person 
care. Concerns about data privacy have no place in making healthcare decisions that are more 
appropriate for discussion between healthcare professionals and consumers. 
 
Beyond the prohibition of geofencing, this bill provides protections for healthcare 
consumers in case of privacy violations. Establishing a private right of action will ensure 
companies work diligently to protect the data of their consumers while also providing consumers 
with an option if companies do not take steps to give data private. 
 
As a healthcare consumer myself, I would value these additional protections beyond what 
is already in place through HIPAA. The My Health My Data Act is needed in Maine, both to 
bring awareness to the fact that not all health data is already protected and to add additional 
protections for what is not currently covered. 
 
For these reasons, I respectfully request that you vote Ought To Pass on LD 1902. Thank 
you for your time and your consideration. 
 
Respectfully, 
Alicia Rea 
Lewiston (HD 93, SD 21) 
