STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
May 22, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1902, An Act to Protect Personal Health Data 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance supports the L.D. 1902’s goal of protecting consumers’ health care 
information but opposes the bill to the extent that it could conflict with consumer health information 
protections that already exist in Title 24-A, Chapter 24, the Insurance Information and Privacy 
Protection Act.  
L.D. 1902 establishes consumers’ rights to their health data and defines the obligations of regulated 
entities that collect, use, and share consumer health data.  The bill defines a “regulated entity” to be 
any entity that does business in Maine or targets Maine consumers and collects, shares or sells 
consumer health data or determines the purpose and means of processing consumer health data.”  
Prohibitions include selling consumer health data and erecting a geofence around certain health care 
entities.  There is a private right of action and enforcement by the Office of the Attorney General.  
Violations are enforceable under the Maine Unfair Trade Practices Act.  The bill would not apply to 
government agencies or to health care information subject to HIPAA and HITECH confidentiality 
requirements or to specified federal and state health care provider confidentiality laws. 
The HIPAA/HITECH exemption at proposed 10 M.R.S. § 1350-X is broad but has implications for 
the Title 24-A law mentioned above.  The Insurance Information and Privacy Protection Act 
establishes standards for collecting, using, and disclosing information relating to insurance 
transactions.  This Act provides for limited private actions against insurance entities and criminal 
penalties.  Because the Superintendent enforces Title 24-A we would recommend proposing an 
exception for consumer health data covered by the Insurance Information and Privacy Protection Act, 
should the Committee decide to move this bill forward. 
We would be glad to work with the sponsor to come up with appropriate language. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
 
Cc: Representative Margaret O’Neil 
