May 22, 2023 
 
     I am submitting my testimony on LD 1973 and LD 1902 to protect what the Maine legislature 
has already chosen as being one of our rights protected under existing Maine Law - though it 
could be even stronger and address more of those that see to profit from our actions - without 
our knowledge.  
     The willingness of some to intrude in what many would consider a privacy right - that of 
being able to have our habits, health and insight into our home life sold to and used by others 
without our permission is not just a Maine concern but one that is up front and center in the EU 
as well. There the governments see to care and fight against big tech companies such as Meta. 
Here we need to stand up to those that intrude, even in our governmental actions, and in this 
case bills that are  tied to money and profits at the expense of voters and the users of the 
internet - a tool that is increasingly beneficial in our daily lives, growing in demand as some 
finally get connected after so many years of ISP inactivity and continuing interference (read 
Spectrum).  
     Internet privacy should not be a risk enhanced by ISPs and supported by our elected 
government, but one threat the government is able to protect us from. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
T. H. Butler Smythe 
Butler  Smythe
Blue Hill 
LD 1902
As Submitted in the attached.
     I am submitting my testimony on LD 1973 and LD 1902 to protect what the Maine
legislature has already chosen as being one of our rights protected under existing 
Maine Law - though it could be even stronger and address more of those that see to 
profit from our actions - without our knowledge. 
     The willingness of some to intrude in what many would consider a privacy right - 
that of being able to have our habits, health and insight into our home life sold to and 
used by others without our permission is not just a Maine concern but one that is up 
front and center in the EU as well. There the governments see to care and fight against
big tech companies such as Meta. Here we need to stand up to those that intrude, even
in our governmental actions, and in this case bills that are  tied to money and profits at
the expense of voters and the users of the internet - a tool that is increasingly 
beneficial in our daily lives, growing in demand as some finally get connected after so
many years of ISP inactivity and continuing interference (read Spectrum). 
     Internet privacy should not be a risk enhanced by ISPs and supported by our 
elected government, but one threat the government is able to protect us from.
Respectfully,
T. H. Butler Smythe

