 
 
 
 
 
EPIC Statement  1 LD 1902 Health Privacy  
Maine State Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  
 
May 22, 2023  
 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair  
The Honorable Matt Moonen , House Chair  
Maine State Legislature  
Judiciary Committee  
230 State Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
 
Dear Chair Carney, Chair Moonen , and Members of the Committee:  
 
EPIC writes in support of LD 1902  regarding the privacy of personal health data . Health data 
is among the most sensitive forms of personal data, yet there are few settled rules regarding the 
sharing and use of this data .1 LD 1902 gives the Maine Legislature the opportunity to prevent the 
mass collection and monetization of  Mainers’ sensitive health data . A similar law was recently 
enacted in Washington  State.2 
 
The Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) is a public interest research center 
established in 1994 to secure the fundamental right to privacy in the digital age for all people 
through advocacy, research, and litigation .3 This testimony i s based largely on an analysis done by 
EPIC Fellows  Sara Geoghegan and Dana Khabbaz  in 2022 .4  
 
Current Law Fails to Adequately Protect Health Data  
 
Since the creation of the Hippocratic Oath around 400 B.C., protecting the privacy of patients 
has been a key component of the physicians’ code of conduct. However, over time, health 
information use has expanded into many organizations and individuals who are not subject to 
medical ethics codes, including employers, insurers, government program administrators,  attorneys, 
and others. Additionally, advancements in technology have given rise to fitness trackers, wearable 
devices, extended reality technology, and other new gadgets that collect, process, and make 
inferences relating to health information. Many assum e that the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) protects  their health information generally, when in fact most of the 
health data collected outside of the doctor/patient or insurance relationship is not covered by 
HIPAA.5 
 
1 EPIC, Full of Holes: Federal Law Leaves Americans’ Personal Data Exposed  (Apr. 27, 2023), 
https://epic.org/full -of-holes -federal -law-leaves -americans -personal -data-exposed/ .  
2 EPIC, Washington S tate Legislature Passes Health Data Privacy Law  (Apr. 18, 2023), 
https://epic.org/washington -state-legislature -passes -health -data-privacy -law/.  
3 EPIC, About EPIC , https://epic.org/about/ .  
4 Sara Geoghegan and Dana Khabbaz, Reproductive Privacy in the Age of Surveillance Capitalism  (July 7, 
2022), https://epic.org/reproductive -privacy -in-the-age-of-surveillance -capitalism/ .  
5 Sara Morrison, HIPAA, the health privacy law that’ s more limited than you think, explained , Vox (Jul. 30, 
2021)  
EPIC Statement   LD 1902 Health Privacy  
Maine  State  Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  2 
 
The recent Supreme Court decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization  poses 
an unquestionable threat to the safety and privacy of abortion providers and patients. The 
implications are all the more harrowing in light of the technological realiti es of today: a huge data 
broker industry that sells our location data and most sensitive information to private and government 
purchasers alike.  
We are only beginning to witness the impact of the Dobbs  decision on individual privacy.6 
The decision poses a critical threat to privacy rights when combined with today’s vast personal data 
collection systems . If a woman travels to Maine from a state where abortion is illegal in order to 
obtain reproductive care, law enforcement in her home state could obtain th e data collected about her 
location, her online activity, and more either by purchasing it from a data broker or via subpoena. 
LD 1902, by limiting the amount of health data collected on individuals, will limit law 
enforcement’s ability to prosecute a woma n for obtaining a legal abortion in Maine.  
Mass Collection of Locat ion Data Is Particularly Harmful to Those  Seeking Health Care  
Commercial and government entities collect vast amounts of personal information about 
individuals, including location data. Location data can reveal the most sensitive characteristics about 
a person, including  their health conditions or status . Phones and devices generate location data which 
is collected by various entities and may be sold to data brokers, advertisers, or  the government.  
Data brokers use secret algorithms to build profiles on every consumer based on their online 
activities, often without the consumer’s knowledge. Using profiles to target advertisements to 
pregnant people is not new. In 2012, it was report ed that  Target sent maternity and pregnancy related 
advertisements to a teenager before she told her family she was pregnant.7 As the article, Target 
Knows You’re Pregnant , explained : 
All Target customers are assigned a Guest ID. Associated with this ID i s 
information on ‘your age, whether you are married and have kids, which part of 
town you live in, how long it takes you to drive to the store, your estimated salary, 
whether you’ve moved recently, what credit cards you carry in your wallet and what 
Web si tes you visit.’  
Analyzing this data, combined with a customer’s purchase history, could produce a “pregnancy 
prediction” score, which includes an estimate of the customer’s due date. Post Roe, these types of 
profiles  (which have become even more invasive and sophisticated in the past decade)  could be 
weaponized against individuals who seek abortions in states where abortion is illegal.  LD 1902 
would help prevent this type of targeting by placing limits on the collecti on of health data and 
prohibiting the sale of such data.  
Data brokers play a pervasive role in the location data market. Data brokers buy, aggregate, 
disclose, and sell billions of data points on Americans, including their location data.  They operate 
with effectively no oversight or regulation. Data brokers collect health information, including period 
 
6 Cat Zakrzewski, et al. , Texts, web searches about abortion have been used to prosecute women , Wash . Post 
(July 2022), https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/07/03/abortion -data-privacy -prosecution/ .  
7 Kelly Bourdet, Target Knows You're Pregnant  (Feb. 2012), https://www.vice.com/en/article/qkkepv/target -
knows -you-re-pregnant .  
EPIC Statement   LD 1902 Health Privacy  
Maine  State  Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  3 
tracking information.8 Brokers also collect information from the sites individuals visit online and the 
advertisements that they click on, and make inferenc es from this data. And, thanks to the 
proliferation of smartphones and wearables, data brokers collect and sell real -time location data.9 
Advertising companies also collect and use location data, including the location of sensitive 
location such as aborti on clinics, as well , and advertisers can use that information to target people . 
Just last week, the Wall Street Journal reported that an antiabortion group was using phone location 
data to target advertisements to individuals who visited Planned Parenthood  clinics.10 The article 
reported:  
The aim of the campaign was to educate women about alternatives to terminating a 
pregnancy, according to a Veritas Society website that was online until late last 
year. On that site, Veritas Society said it could identify  phones on the premises of 
abortion clinics and extract their device IDs —the unique identifiers given by Apple 
and Google to mobile devices to help advertisers target consumers across phone 
apps and websites. With such IDs and some basic analysis, it is so metimes possible 
to link a phone to a real -world address, and potentially a name, the Journal has 
previously reported. It couldn’t be learned whether Veritas Society took that step. 
“We captured the cell phone IDs of women who visited all Planned Parenthoo d 
locations in Wisconsin along with similar locations and their associated parking 
areas,” the Veritas Society website said.  
This practice, where a n entity defines a geographical boundary and targets mobile devices within 
that boundary, is known as geofenc ing. LD 1902 would prohibit this form of  geofencing around an 
entity that provides in -person health care services . This is a critical measure  that would protect 
Mainers from this extremely invasive targeting and manipulation.  
Suggested Amendment: Remove Co nsent Option  
 EPIC would recommend a change to LD 1902 to remove the option for entities to collect 
consumer health data with consent even if the collection of such data is not strictly necessary to 
provide the service the individual has requested. The bes t protection would be to restructure §1350 -
Q so that regulated entities may only collect consumer health data if “strictly necessary ” to provide a 
product or service that the consumer has requested . This change  was made  to similar bill in Congress 
when it was reintroduced earlier this month.11 It is also the requirement for the collection of sensitive 
 
8 Justin Sherman, Your Health Data Might Be for Sale , Slate Future Tense (June 2022), 
https://slate.com/technology/2022/06/health -data-brokers -privacy.html .  
9 Jon Keegan and Alfred Ng, There’s a Multibillion -Dollar Market for Your Phone’s Location Data , The 
Markup (Sept. 30, 2021), https://themarkup.org/privacy/2021/09/3 0/theres -a-multibillion -dollar -market -for-
your-phones -location -data.  
10 Byron Tau and Patience Haggin, Antiabortion Group Used Cellphone Data to Target Ads to Planned 
Parenthood Visitors , Wall Street Journal (May 18, 202 3), https://www.wsj.com/articles/antiabortion -group -
used-cellphone -data-to-target -ads-to-planned -parenthood -visitors -
446c1212?st=1581hk7jp9lm35x&reflink=desktopwebshare_permalink .  
11 Congresswoman Sara Jacobs, Rep. Sara Jacobs Leads Reintroduction Of My Body, My Data Act To Protect 
Reproductive And Sexual Health Data  (May 17, 2023), 
https://sarajacobs.house.gov/news/documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=786 .  
EPIC Statement   LD 1902 Health Privacy  
Maine  State  Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  4 
data in the American Data Privacy a nd Protection Act  in Congress , which  was favorably reported by 
the House Energy & Commerce Committee on a 53 -2 bipartisan vote last session and is expected to 
be reintroduced soon.  This standard  would prevent consent fatigue by consumers by placing a 
basel ine limit on when entities may even ask to collect sensitive health data.  
Conclusion  
 
Health data has long been considered sensitive. It is time for our laws to catch up to 
technology . The obligation to protect and limit the collection of health data should fall on the entities 
collecting it, not individuals seeking health care. We urge the  Committee vote “ought to pass” on LD 
1902 .  
If EPIC can be of any assistance to the Committee, please contact EPIC Deputy Director 
Caitriona Fitzgerald at fitzgerald@epic.org.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Caitriona Fitzgerald  
Caitriona Fitzgerald  
EPIC Deputy Director  
