May 19, 2023 
To: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee 
From: Hannah G. Babinski 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1902, “An Act to Protect Personal Health Data” 
 
Good morning, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee, my name is Hannah G. Babinski. I am a resident of Portland, and I am writing today 
as a student of the University of Maine School of Law and a privacy advocate to testify in support 
of LD 1902, “An Act to Protect Personal Health Data.” For the following reasons, I respectfully 
urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1902.     
Prior to beginning law school at the University of Maine School of Law, where I focus on 
Information Privacy Law, I was under the impression that HIPAA governed all health information. 
After learning what HIPAA actually covers, I was hit with the realization that much of the health 
information about individuals shared in the modern day is not only not protected by HIPAA but 
not protected by any legislation at all, federally or otherwise. This gap in coverage and protection, 
among other reasons, necessitates the development of legislation like LD 1902. For the following 
reasons, I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1902: 
• LD 1902 Acts as a Regulatory Gap-Filler to Existing Deficits. LD 1902 fills the current 
regulatory gap left by HIPAA, protecting health data that is not “covered,” including health 
data collected by apps on smartphones, WebMD and other medical or quasi-medical 
website searches, and data collected by smart devices like Apple watches and Fitbit 
devices. These services and devices collect extremely sensitive personal health data and, 
currently, lack even the most basic data privacy protections. This is not only ineffective to 
protect sensitive health data generally but dangerous.  
• A Lack of Effective Regulation Negates Existing HIPAA Protections. A lack of 
effective regulation of such personal health data negates the protections already established 
by HIPAA. If personal health information is being tracked and collected by third parties 
via apps, services, and devices that consumers believe are private and safe and such 
information is similar to that of the health information maintained by doctors and other 
HIPAA “covered entities,” then the protections established by HIPAA are null and void 
since the private information may still be shared absent protections at will by the third 
parties. As such, LD 1902 is a natural extension of the protections of HIPAA and a bolster 
the existing regulations.  
• There is Currently a Lack of Consumer Understanding and Consent to Data 
Collection and Sharing. Most consumers are completely unaware that their sensitive 
health information is even being collected and likely shared at the direction of the 
collecting third parties when utilizing services, websites, and devices. As such, under the 
current system, consumers are offered no way to consent to the collection and sharing of 
their private information. 
• LD 1902 Acts as a Protective Measure for Women’s Rights and Healthcare. 
o Following the recent and controversial reversal of the decision of Roe v. Wade in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization, many neighboring states have 
enacted regressive policies, limiting if not wholly eliminating abortion access rights 
for women. Without comprehensive federal privacy protections and the safety net 
established in the Roe v. Wade decision to fall back on, LD 1902 acts as a protective 
measure for women seeking reproductive healthcare access and protects them from 
any retaliation or discrimination as a result of their own healthcare decision-making 
in the state of Maine.  
o Further, these restrictions apply to companies that collect personal information 
related to a person’s reproductive or sexual health and gender-affirming care, 
including information such as data related to pregnancy, menstruation, surgery, 
termination of pregnancy, contraception, basal body temperature, or diagnoses. As 
such, LD 1902 would protect people who, for example, use fertility or period-
tracking apps or are seeking information about reproductive health services. 
• LD 1902 Restricts Geo-Fencing Around Healthcare Facilities. Since geofencing has 
been used to track individuals entering and exiting healthcare facilities, a restriction on 
such use would allow individuals to seek healthcare without fear of discrimination. For 
example, such a restriction would protect the privacy of individuals entering, say, Planned 
Parenthood, an HIV treatment clinic, an STD testing facility, a cancer treatment facility, 
and so on. This provision could also help women and other persons seeking reproductive 
care from neighboring states with restrictions on reproductive healthcare and abortion 
services who could travel to Maine for care.  
• A Lack of Effective Regulation Has a Chilling Effect on Speech and Expression. A 
lack of effective regulation and protection from health-related information being shared 
may result in Mainers feeling unsafe to be honest about their health and their concerns. For 
example, with the knowledge that health-related websites, like WebMD, collect sensitive 
health information and share such information at will, individuals may be less likely to 
explore symptoms they may be experiencing or conduct research into specific diagnoses 
they have received from a healthcare professional. Likewise, since some health apps and 
devices track female menstruation and health conditions, individuals may feel as though 
they have to lie about their health in order to preserve their privacy. Privacy fears should 
never stand in the way of healthcare. 
• LD 1902 Provides Individuals with the Ability to Exercise Basic Privacy Rights.  
o LD 1902 would provide Mainers with the necessary and basic privacy rights to 
access and delete their reproductive health information. Further, the bill would 
require companies to disclose what information they process and why, providing 
transparency and ensuring that the companies that maintain sensitive health data 
are held accountable. These basic privacy rights echo the rights established by law 
in several other states, including California, and internationally with the General 
Data Protection Regulation, or GDPR. Maine should, thus, follow the precedent of 
the other states that have taken part in instilling privacy rights for our citizens and 
protecting Mainers against abuse and misuse of health data.  
o Likewise, LD 1902 provides Mainers with a private right of action. This provision 
allows Mainers to take on companies that violate their privacy and empowers them 
to bring suit, which not only places more control in the hand of Maine citizens but 
also ensures that companies take regulations seriously.  
• The Protections of LD 1902 are Not Unduly Burdensome on Companies. LD 1902 
would require businesses and non-governmental organizations to act responsibly and treat 
the personal information concerning reproductive health care in their stewardship with care 
and consideration. Specifically, this bill would restrict third parties from collecting, using, 
retaining, or disclosing reproductive health information that is not essential to providing 
the consumer requested services.  
 
For these reasons, I respectfully urge this Committee to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1902. Thank 
you for your time and consideration.  
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Hannah G. Babinski 
