May 22, 202 3 
To: Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee  
From:  J. Shinay  
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1902, “An Act to Protect Personal Health Data”  
My name is  J. Shinay . I am a resident of Portland and a student at the U niversity of Maine 
Scho ol of Law.  I am writing both in my role as a law student and in my personal  capacity to urge you 
to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1902  for the following reasons . 
1) LD 1902 as Assuring a Right to Privacy for H ealth Care Data  
 In the after math of the Dobbs decision, the long-held C onstitutional right to privacy  in 
healthcare , as grounded in the concept of  Subs tantive Due P rocess, is under attack. Regardless of 
one’s personal opinions regarding the bac kground of the Dobbs  decision, th e Supreme Court has in 
no uncertain terms suggested that  all health care decisions an d personal health care data may no 
longer be protected  under the right to priv acy.1 Additional protections are therefore needed to ensure 
the legac y that will soon be wrought by Dobbs  does not  broadly  threaten  health care privacy rights.  
2) LD 1902 as Providing Additional Protection for Gaps in HIPPA Cover age 
Although  HIPPA serves as  a crucial protec tor of  consumer health  care dat a, this law is often 
misunderstood  and provides  insufficient protect ion. HIPPA  serves  only to protect that  health care  
data transmitted  to specific health care providers who interface with health insurance providers.2 This 
means data collected by apps, private devices, webs ites, or even providers who do not utilize 
 
1 See Dobbs v. Jackson, 597 U.S.  __, 9 (2022) (stating the right to privacy is found nowhere in the Constitution  and 
that the language of the document provides a fi xed sta ndard of rights ).  
2 See generally  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 , Pub. L. 104 -191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996).  
insurance are not protected und er HIPPA . As such,  it is vital that we ensure this data is properly 
protected by passing LD 1902.  
3) LD 1902 as P rotecti ng the Dignity and Safety of Trans Mainers  
Finally, I urge you to  pass LD 1902 for reasons  that personally  affec t me as a constitu ent and 
citizen of Maine. I am a trans non -binary perso n who plans to undergo certain med ical interventions 
towards gender affirmation . Across America , people like me are being target ed by anti -trans 
legislation that seeks to strip us of our health care and privacy rights. I live in fear that these laws 
may soon be founded in Maine , and my entire personal life may be up for debate. Whil e this bil l will 
not prevent further attacks and may not protect trans health care broadly, it will provide at least one 
safeg uard against tr ans Mainers having some of the  private information  about their gender 
affirmation care  broadcasted to the world  or to other third parties. I am hopeful the tides of anti -trans 
legislation  will soon abate. In the me anwhile, however, bills like LD  1902 will help make me and 
other trans Mainers feel safe to pursue  all the different forms of  health care they need  to feel at home 
and at peace in their own bodies. The right to feel safe in one ’s own skin is more than just a legal 
right  – it is a human right.  
For these reasons, I respectfully urge this Committee to vote “Ought to Pass” on 1902. Thank 
you for  your time and consideration.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
J. Shinay  
