 
 
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  1 :: 
 
 
 
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Suite 400  
Washington, D.C. 20004  
P :: 202.783.8700   
F :: 202.783.8750   
W:: AdvaMed.org  
May 22, 2023  
 
Senator An ne Carney , Chair  Representativ e Matt Mo onen, Chair 
Committee on Judiciary  Committee on Judiciary  
State House, Room 438  State House, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
RE: LD 1902 , An Act to Protect Personal Health Data  
 
Dear Chair  Carney, Chair Moonen, and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee,  
  
On behalf of the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), I am writing to express our 
concerns  regarding LD  1902 and the potential fo r confusion with other , broader legisla tion being 
considered before the committee  such as LD  1705. AdvaMed is the largest medical technology 
association, representing the innovators and manufacturers tra nsforming health care through 
earlier disease detection, less invasive procedures, and more effective treatments.  
AdvaMed advocates a patient -centered framework for the use and disclosure of health information  
and has worked in a number of states this year who ha ve also looked at protectin g healthcare data 
specifically, such as  Washington and New York . 
We commen d the au thor for recognizing  that unique considerations exist with respect to  
guarantee ing robust patient data protections  through the three provisions for protected health 
information, patient identifying inf ormation, and healthcare information in §1350 -X. However, we 
propose ad ditional  amendments  to ensure the appropriate use and privacy of personal health data  
so that those already allowed the  appropriate access can continue complying with federal law . 
These amendments would  prevent the stifling of critical medical research and jeopardizing patient 
access to health technolog y innovations that improve outcomes and quality of life.  They are  
narrowly tailored to enable proper data sharing, so that physicians and patients have access to 
critical, life or death information in a timely manner and so providers are not bogged down in 
cumbersome and duplicative paperwork – needlessly wasting vital time before tests and treatments 
can be administered . 
  
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  2 :: 
 
 
We ask that you clarify the exis ting exempt ions with the following language so that critical 
healthcare  data does not remain in the scop e of LD 1902. 
 
This Article/C hapter /Part does not apply to  Information that is:  
1. Protected Health Information  (PHI) subject to HIPAA & related regulations (45 CFR 160, 45 
CFR 162, & 45 CFR 164)  
2. Patient Identifying Information  (PII) subject to 42 CFR 2 (SAMHSA -Confidentiality of 
Substance Use Disorder Patient Records)  
3. Personal data used or shared in Research Condu cted in accordance with one or more of the 
following policies for the Protection of Human Research Subjects : 45 CFR 46; International 
Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Good Clinical Practice Guidelines (GCP); 21 CFR 50; or 
21 CFR 56.  
4. Created for purposes of the Federal Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 , and 
related regulations;  
5. Patient Safety Work Product  for purposes of 42 CFR 3, established pursuant to 42 USC 
299b-21 through 299b -26; 
6. Derived from any of the health care -related information listed in this subsection and  De-
identified  in accordance with the requirements in 45 CFR 164 (HIPAA) ; 
7. Maintained by an entity that meets the definition of  Health Care Provider under HIPAA (45 
CFR 160.103) to the extent that the entity main tains the information in the manner required 
of Covered Entities with respect to PHI under HIPAA and related regulations (45 CFR 160, 
45 CFR 162, & 45 CFR 164);  
8. Included in a  Limited Data Set as described at 45 CFR 164.514(e), to the extent that the 
inform ation is used, disclosed, and maintained in the manner specified at 45 CFR 
164.514(e);  
9. Information originating from, and intermingled to be indistinguishable with,  or information 
treated in the same manner as PHI/PII  that is maintained by:  
o A Covered Entit y or Business Associate  as defined by HIPAA and related regulations; 
or 
o A Program  or a Qualified Service Organization  as defined by 42 CFR 2 (SAMHSA)  
10. Used only for Public Health Activities and purposes as described in 45 CFR 164.512(b);  
11. Used only to addres s Evidentiary Requirements for Coding, Coverage, and Reimbursement 
associated with Medicare and other federal health care payers (Veteran’s Health 
Administration, TRICARE, Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP)), Tribal/Indian Health 
Services, State Me dicaid and CHIP, and private insurance payers; and  
12. Subject to [STATE -SPECIFIC MEDICAL PRIVACY LAW(S)]  
 
 
  
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  3 :: 
 
 
Private Right of Action  
The US Chamber of Commerce, in  a whitepaper released last year, demonstrates that private 
rights of action are inefficient and ineffective for addressing privacy concerns. In fact, private rights 
of action in the privacy context often:   
• Undermine appropriate agency enforcement and allo w plaintiffs’ lawyers to set policy 
nationwide, rather than allowing expert regulators to shape and balance policy and 
protections   
• Result in inconsistent and dramatically varied, district -by-district court rulings   
• Lead to grossly expensive litigation and  staggeringly high settlements that disproportionally 
do not benefit individuals whose privacy interests may have been infringed   
• Hinder innovation and consumer choice by threatening companies with frivolous, excessive, 
and expensive litigation, particular ly if those companies are at the forefront of 
transformative new technology   
 
AdvaMed advocates a patient -centered framework for the use and disclosure of health information . 
In order to remain consistent and avoid conflicting mandates b eing considered in other data 
privacy focused l egislation , we urge the committee  to take our concerns into consideration and 
include these exemptions in LD 1902.   
 
Thank you for considering our request , we look forward to working with you on this important 
matter. P lease contact me rkozyckyj@advamed.org  with any questions you may have .   
 
Sincerely,  
Roxy Kozyckyj  
Director, State Government and Regional Affairs  
Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed)   
 

