 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1498
H.P. 953 House of Representatives, April 5, 2023
An Act to Create an Advocacy and Complaint Process for Health 
Care Providers Within the Bureau of Insurance
Reference to the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative PERRY of Calais.
Cosponsored by Representative O'NEIL of Saco, Senator LAWRENCE of York and
Representatives: DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach, 
MATHIESON of Kittery, STOVER of Boothbay, Senator: CURRY of Waldo.

Page 1 - 131LR1454(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA c. 56-A, sub-c. 2, headnote is amended to read:
3SUBCHAPTER 2
4CONSUMER HEALTH CARE DIVISION  AND PROVIDER ASSISTANCE 
5DIVISIONS
6Sec. 2.  24-A MRSA ยง4323 is enacted to read:
7ยง4323.  Health Care Provider Assistance Division
81.  Division established.  The Health Care Provider Assistance Division, referred to in 
9 this section as "the division," is established within the bureau.  The division shall work in 
10 coordination with other bureau sections and staff to accomplish the duties set forth in 
11 subsection 4.
122.  Director.  The Director of the Health Care Provider Assistance Division, referred 
13 to in this section as "the director," is the head of the division.  The director is appointed by 
14 the superintendent and is subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Professional and 
15 Financial Regulation.  The director is subject to the Civil Service Law.
163.  Staff.  The superintendent may hire or assign personnel as determined necessary to 
17 perform the duties of the division subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
18 Professional and Financial Regulation and subject to the Civil Service Law.  The personnel 
19 are supervised by the director in consultation with the superintendent. The qualifications 
20 of those personnel must reflect the needs and responsibilities relating to the division's duties 
21 under this subchapter.
224.  Duties.  The duties of the division include:
23 A.  Providing access to the division through a toll-free number;
24 B.  Providing information to providers regarding health plan coverage;
25 C.  Assisting providers in navigating the health insurance industry;
26 D.  Assisting providers with concerns specific to individual patients, such as denied 
27 claims and prior authorization requests;
28 E. Addressing provider concerns on issues that may have a market-wide impact, such 
29 as unnecessary credentialing delays and misapplication of accepted medical standards;
30 F. Assisting providers with complaints relating to licensees under the bureau that may 
31 have violated a statute or rule;
32 G. Collecting and disseminating information regarding the activities of the division;
33 H. Submitting an annual report by January 1st of each year to the Commissioner of 
34 Professional and Financial Regulation and the joint standing committee of the 
35 Legislature having jurisdiction over insurance matters describing the activities carried 
36 out by the division in the year for which the report is prepared, analyzing the data 
37 available to the division and evaluating the problems experienced by providers; and
Page 2 - 131LR1454(01)1 I.  Performing other duties as the superintendent may prescribe.
25.  Complaint process; investigations.  The following procedures apply to a complaint 
3 submitted under subsection 4, paragraph F.
4 A. A provider requesting assistance or filing a complaint shall complete a grievance 
5 form as prescribed by the division.
6 B. For a complaint or requests for assistance with concerns specific to individual 
7 patients, the provider must submit a release of information form.
8 C. Upon receipt of the grievance form under paragraph A, the division shall investigate 
9 the matter.
10 D. For complaints relating to individual patients that include a release of information 
11 form, the division shall provide the provider a response that may include documents 
12 relating to a patient's claim.
13 E. For complaints relating to individual patients that do not include a release of 
14 information form, the division shall provide the provider a response limited to a 
15 summary of the outcome of the investigation.
16 F. For complaints concerning issues that relate to violations of statutes or rules, the 
17 division shall provide the provider a response that summarizes the division's findings.
18 G. If the complaint concerns issues that may have a market-wide impact, the division 
19 shall refer the matters to the appropriate unit within the bureau and notify the provider 
20 that the provider will be contacted further only if the unit requires additional 
21 information.
22 H. An individual or entity that transacts insurance in this State or is otherwise subject 
23 to the authority of the bureau shall, upon request of the division, provide the division 
24 with all documents and information relevant to an investigation under this subsection 
25 within 10 business days or any additional time as approved by the division for complex 
26 matters.
27 I. The division may establish other procedures relating to the investigation of 
28 complaints under this subsection.
296.  Disclosure of documents and information.  Except as provided in this subsection, 
30 documents and information from an insurer or a national association of insurance 
31 commissioners, law enforcement agency or regulatory agency is confidential, is not subject 
32 to a subpoena, is not subject to discovery or admission into evidence in a private civil action 
33 and may not be the subject of testimony of the bureau.  The bureau may:
34 A. Use documents and information obtained through an investigation under this section 
35 as part of a regulatory or legal action brought as part of the duties of the bureau;
36 B. Share documents and information with other state, federal and international 
37 regulatory agencies, including a national association of insurance commissioners, an 
38 international association of insurance supervisors or a bank for international 
39 settlements as long as the recipient agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the 
40 documents and information;
41 C. Provide to a provider who made a complaint against an insurer a copy of the 
42 insurance company's letter to the division in response to the complaint as long as that 
Page 3 - 131LR1454(01)43 information does not interfere with a civil, criminal or administrative enforcement 
44 proceeding; or
3 D. Disclose to the public the number of and nature of complaints and requests filed 
4 with the division under this section.
57. Rules.  The bureau may adopt rules to implement this section.  Rules adopted 
6 pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, 
7 subchapter 2-A.
8SUMMARY
9 This bill establishes the Health Care Provider Assistance Division within the 
10 Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, Bureau of Insurance to assist health 
11 care providers in obtaining information about health insurance plans, assist health care 
12 providers in navigating the health insurance industry, assist health care providers with 
13 concerns specific to coverage for individual patients and issues that may have market-wide 
14 impact and provide a system for health care providers to submit complaints about violations 
15 of statutes or rules.1
2
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
