 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1109
H.P. 705 House of Representatives, March 9, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Create Consistent Election Dates for Citizen-initiated 
Referenda in Even-numbered Election Years
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BRADSTREET of Vassalboro.
Cosponsored by Representatives: ARATA of New Gloucester, CARLOW of Buxton, 
DUCHARME of Madison, LANDRY of Farmington, POIRIER of Skowhegan, SARGENT of 
York.

Page 1 - 131LR1541(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง2 is amended to read:
52.  Referral to electors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 
6number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures 
7on petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by electors, the 
8 number of signatures shall not be less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in the 
9 last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature 
10 was made shall be written next to the signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if 
11 it is dated more than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the 
12 Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the 
13 Legislature at the session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors together 
14 with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in such 
15 manner that the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both. When 
16 there are competing bills and neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against 
17 both, the one receiving the most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held in 
18 November of an even-numbered year not less than 60 days after the first vote thereon be 
19 submitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of the votes given for and against both.  If 
20 the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature without change, it shall not go to a 
21 referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand made in accordance with the preceding 
22 section. The Legislature may order a special election on any measure that is subject to a 
23 vote of the people.
24Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub-ยง3 is amended to read:
253.  Timing of elections; proclamation by Governor.  The Governor shall, by 
26 proclamation, order any measure proposed to the Legislature as herein provided, and not 
27 enacted by the Legislature without change, referred to the people at an election to be held 
28 in November of the even-numbered year in after which the petition is filed.  If the Governor 
29 fails to order a measure proposed to the Legislature and not enacted without change to be 
30 submitted to the people at such an election by proclamation within 10 days after the recess 
31 of the Legislature to which the measure was proposed, the Secretary of State shall, by 
32 proclamation, order such measure to be submitted to the people at an election as requested, 
33 and such order shall be sufficient to enable the people to vote.
34Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
35Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
36 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
37 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
38 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
39 resolution by voting upon the following question:
40 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to hold elections on 
41 citizen-initiated referenda only in November of even-numbered years?"
42 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
43 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
44 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
Page 2 - 131LR1541(01)45 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
46 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
47 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
48 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
49 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
6Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
7 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
8 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
9SUMMARY
10 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to require that all direct 
11 initiatives of legislation appear on an election ballot for the election to be held in November 
12 of even-numbered years.1
2
3
4
5
10
11
12
