 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1536
S.P. 609 In Senate, April 5, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Amend the Governor's Power to Reprieve, Pardon and 
Commute Sentences and Remit Penalties
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 131LR2123(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, ยง11 is repealed and the following enacted in its 
5 place:
6Section 11.  Power to remit fines and forfeitures and grant reprieves, 
7commutations of sentences and pardons; board of pardons; report by 
8Governor to Legislature.  The Governor has the power to remit fines and forfeitures, 
9 subject to rules and regulations prescribed by statute; and, after conviction, to grant 
10 reprieves, commutations of sentences and pardons, including cases of juvenile offenses, 
11 except in cases of impeachment. The Governor shall nominate and appoint a board of 
12 pardons, subject to confirmation as provided in Article V, Part First, Section 8, as 
13 prescribed by statute, to hear a recommendation or petition for reprieve, pardon or 
14 commutation. The board shall hear the recommendation or petition in open session and 
15 give an opinion on the recommendation or petition in writing to the Governor, after which 
16 the Governor may grant or refuse the reprieve, commutation or pardon, as the Governor 
17 determines best for the public safety. The Governor shall report to the Legislature at each 
18 session every remission of fines and forfeitures and every reprieve, commutation or pardon, 
19 or denial of reprieve, commutation or pardon, with the Governor's reasons for the denial, 
20 and the opinion of the board of pardons in each case required to be referred, stating the 
21 name and crime of the person convicted, the sentence, the date of the conviction and the 
22 date of the reprieve, commutation or pardon.
23Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
24Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
25 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
26 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
27 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
28 resolution by voting upon the following question:
29 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to amend the 
30 Governor's power to pardon and remit penalties to grant reprieves, 
31 commutations of sentences and pardons, after conviction, including cases 
32 of juvenile offenses, except in cases of impeachment, to create a board of 
33 pardons and to require the Governor to provide reports to the Legislature 
34 about fines, forfeitures, reprieves, commutations and pardons?"
35 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
36 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
37 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
38 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
39 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
40 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
41 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
42 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
Page 2 - 131LR2123(01)1Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
2 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
3 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
4SUMMARY
5 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to amend the Governor's 
6 power to pardon and remit penalties to grant reprieves, commutations of sentences and 
7 pardons, after conviction, including cases of juvenile offenses, except in cases of 
8 impeachment, and to create a board of pardons.5
6
7
8
