 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1832
H.P. 1164 House of Representatives, April 27, 2023
An Act to Require Reimbursement of Fees for Treatment Rendered 
by Public and Private Ambulance Services
(AFTER DEADLINE)
(EMERGENCY)
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205.
Reference to the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CYRWAY of Albion.
Cosponsored by Senator BAILEY of York and
Representatives: ARFORD of Brunswick, DILL of Old Town, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, 
MORRIS of Turner, NUTTING of Oakland, PERRY of Calais, PRINGLE of Windham, 
Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 131LR2421(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, ambulance services are losing business; and
4Whereas, a reduction in ambulance services poses an immediate threat to the health 
5 and safety of residents of the State; and
6Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
7 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
8 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
9 therefore,
10Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
11Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง98 is enacted to read:
12ยง98.  Ambulance service reimbursement
13 Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, an ambulance service must be 
14 reimbursed for the cost of treating a person, regardless of whether the ambulance service 
15 transports the person to a hospital. An ambulance service may charge the same amount as 
16 a hospital charges to treat a person in the emergency department without admitting the 
17 person.
18Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
19 takes effect when approved.
20SUMMARY
21 This bill requires an ambulance service to be reimbursed for the cost of treating a 
22 person, regardless of whether the ambulance service transports the person to a hospital.21
22
