 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1716
H.P. 1105 House of Representatives, April 18, 2023
An Act to Establish a Repairability Index for Consumer Electronic 
Products
Reference to the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CRAFTS of Newcastle.
Cosponsored by Representatives: COPELAND of Saco, DAVIS of East Machias, KUHN of 
Falmouth, LEE of Auburn, MURPHY of Scarborough, PLUECKER of Warren, SMITH of 
Palermo, ZEIGLER of Montville.

Page 1 - 131LR1132(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  10 MRSA c. 235 is enacted to read:
3CHAPTER 235
4REPAIRABILITY INDEX FOR CONSUMER ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS
5ยง1500-R. Definitions
6 As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms 
7 have the following meanings.
81. Consumer electronic product.  "Consumer electronic product" means a cellular 
9 telephone, laptop computer, television monitor, electric lawnmower, top-loading washing 
10 machine, vacuum cleaner or high-pressure washer designed and intended for residential 
11 use by a consumer.
122. Department.  "Department" means the Department of Economic and Community 
13 Development.
143. Producer.  "Producer" means a person that:
15 A. Has legal ownership of the brand of a consumer electronic product sold or offered 
16 for sale in the State; or
17 B. Imports into the State for sale a consumer electronic product that is branded by a 
18 person that meets the requirements of paragraph A and has no physical presence in the 
19 United States.
20ยง1500-S. Repairability index for consumer electronic products
21 In accordance with the provisions of this section and rules adopted by the department 
22 pursuant to subsection 6, the department shall solicit from producers and make publicly 
23 available a repairability index for consumer electronic products sold or offered for sale in 
24 the State.
251. Indexing criteria.  The department shall solicit from producers a repairability index 
26 for each consumer electronic product sold or offered for sale in the State based on the 
27 following 5 criteria:
28 A. The commitment by the producer of the product to make technical documents 
29 regarding the product available free of charge to repairers and consumers;
30 B. The ease of disassembly of the product, the types of tools required for disassembly 
31 and characteristics of the product's fasteners that must be removed or otherwise 
32 manipulated to allow for disassembly;
33 C. The availability of spare parts for the product, taking into consideration both the 
34 duration during which spare parts will be sold by or otherwise made available through 
35 the producer and the anticipated delivery time of spare parts from the producer to the 
36 repairer or consumer;
Page 2 - 131LR1132(01)1 D.  The price of spare parts for the product, taking into consideration the producer's 
2 suggested retail price for the product compared to the price of the spare parts for the 
3 product; and
4 E.  Other criteria specific to the category of the product as determined by the 
5 department by rule.
62. Publication of repairability index scores; producer and seller notifications.  In 
7 accordance with rules adopted by the department and based on information available to the 
8 department, after reviewing each of the criteria listed in subsection 1 for each consumer 
9 electronic product, the department shall make available on its publicly accessible website 
10 each of the repairability index scores calculated for consumer electronic products.  The 
11 department shall provide a copy of the repairability index score to the producer of the 
12 product, if known to the department, and to any person that, to the department's knowledge, 
13 sells the product at retail in the State.  The department shall periodically update repairability 
14 index scores for consumer electronic products when the department determines that, based 
15 on additional information available to the department, a published repairability index score 
16 for a product may no longer be accurate.
173.  Retail sales notice.  A person that sells a consumer electronic product at retail in 
18 the State that receives a notification from the department regarding the product's 
19 repairability index score shall ensure that, within 90 days of receipt of the notification:
20 A. The product's repairability index score is prominently displayed on the product or 
21 near the pricing information for the product within the retail location; and
22 B. Information regarding the calculation and meaning of the repairability index score 
23 for the product is made available to a potential purchaser of the product within the store 
24 or upon request.  The department shall develop and make such information available 
25 to persons selling consumer electronic products at retail in the State.
264. Producer publication.  A producer of a consumer electronic product that receives 
27 a notification from the department regarding the product's repairability index score shall 
28 ensure that, within 90 days of receipt of the notification, the producer makes available to 
29 consumers on a publicly accessible website or upon request the product's repairability index 
30 score and information regarding the calculation and meaning of the repairability index 
31 score for the product.  The department shall develop and make such information available 
32 to producers of consumer electronic products sold or offered for sale in the State.
335. Producer and retailer outreach; technical assistance.  The department shall 
34 conduct outreach to producers of consumer electronic products sold or offered for sale in 
35 the State and to persons selling such products at retail in the State regarding the provisions 
36 and requirements of this chapter and shall provide technical assistance to such producers 
37 and persons in complying with the requirements of this chapter.
386.  Rules. The department shall adopt rules necessary for the implementation and 
39 administration of this chapter.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine 
40 technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
41SUMMARY
42 This bill directs the Department of Economic and Community Development to solicit 
43 from producers of consumer electronic products a repairability index for the following 42
43
Page 3 - 131LR1132(01)44 types of consumer electronic products: cellular telephones, laptop computers, television 
45 monitors, electric lawnmowers, top-loading washing machines, vacuum cleaners or high-
46 pressure washers designed and intended for residential use by consumers.
4 The department is required to make available on its publicly accessible website each 
5 of the repairability index scores calculated for consumer electronic products and provide a 
6 copy of the repairability index score to the product's producer and to any person that sells 
7 the product at retail in the State.  The product's producer and persons selling the product at 
8 retail are required to provide information regarding the product's repairability index score 
9 to consumers and potential purchasers of the product within 90 days of receipt of the 
10 notification from the department.  The department is directed to adopt routine technical 
11 rules relating to the repairability indexing of consumer electronic products.1
2
3
