 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1518
H.P. 973 House of Representatives, April 5, 2023
An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their 
Children from Public School Classes or Activities That Include 
Certain Controversial Viewpoints
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative THORNE of Carmel.

Page 1 - 131LR1330(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง4710-C is enacted to read:
3ยง4710-C.  Parental rights regarding controversial viewpoints
41.  Definition.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, 
5 "controversial viewpoints" means any ideas that espouse, promote, advance or compel 
6 students to believe any of the following concepts:
7 A.  Individuals of one race, color, sex or national origin are morally superior to 
8 individuals of another race, color, sex or national origin;
9 B.  An individual, by virtue of the individual's race, color, sex or national origin, is 
10 inherently racist, sexist or oppressive, whether consciously or unconsciously;
11 C.  An individual's moral character or status as either privileged or oppressed is 
12 necessarily determined by the individual's race, color, sex or national origin;
13 D.  Individuals of one race, color, sex or national origin cannot and should not attempt 
14 to treat others without regard to race, color, sex or national origin;
15 E.  An individual, by virtue of the individual's race, color, sex or national origin, bears 
16 responsibility for, or should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment 
17 because of, actions committed in the past by other individuals of the same race, color, 
18 sex or national origin;
19 F.  An individual, by virtue of the individual's race, color, sex or national origin, should 
20 be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment to achieve diversity, equity or 
21 inclusion;
22 G.  An individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish or any other form of 
23 psychological distress on account of the individual's race, color, sex or national origin; 
24 and
25 H.  Virtues such as merit, excellence, a strong work ethic, fairness, neutrality, 
26 objectivity and racial color blindness are racist or sexist or were created by individuals 
27 of a particular race, color, sex or national origin to oppress individuals of another race, 
28 color, sex or national origin.
292. Removal from class or activity. A parent is entitled to remove the parent's child 
30 temporarily from a class or other school activity if the class or school activity conflicts with 
31 the parent's religious or moral beliefs or if the parent considers the class or school activity 
32 to espouse, promote, advance or compel the parent's child to adopt controversial 
33 viewpoints.  A parent temporarily removing a child from a class or other school activity 
34 under this section must deliver to the teacher of the parent's child a written statement 
35 authorizing the removal of the child from the class or other school activity.  A parent is not 
36 entitled to remove the parent's child from a class or other school activity to avoid a test or 
37 to prevent the child from taking a subject for an entire semester.
38SUMMARY
39 This bill allows a parent to remove the parent's child temporarily from a class or other 
40 school activity if the class or school activity conflicts with the parent's religious or moral 39
40
Page 2 - 131LR1330(01)41 beliefs or if the parent considers the class or school activity to espouse, promote, advance 
42 or compel the parent's child to adopt controversial viewpoints as defined in the bill.1
2
