 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1782
H.P. 1145 House of Representatives, April 25, 2023
An Act to Empower Jurors by Allowing Instructions That They 
May Find a Defendant Not Guilty if a Guilty Verdict Would Yield 
an Unjust Result
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative BOYER of Poland.
Cosponsored by Senator GROHOSKI of Hancock and
Representatives: FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor, MILLIKEN of Blue Hill, RISEMAN of 
Harrison, ROEDER of Bangor, THERIAULT of Fort Kent, WARREN of Scarborough, 
WHITE of Guilford, Senator: HICKMAN of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 131LR1383(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  15 MRSA ยง1261 is enacted to read:
3ยง1261.  Jury instructions
4 In all criminal trials in which a jury is impaneled, at the close of evidence, the court 
5 shall instruct the jury of the jury's responsibility to determine the facts in controversy in the 
6 case and apply the law as the court instructs to those facts. Upon request of the defendant 
7 or the defendant's attorney, the court shall instruct the jury as follows:
8 "If you have a reasonable doubt as to whether the State has proved any one or 
9 more of the elements of the crime charged, you must find the defendant not 
10 guilty.  However, if you find that the State has proved all the elements of the 
11 crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt, you must find the defendant guilty 
12 unless you find based upon the facts of the case that a guilty verdict will yield 
13 an unjust result, in which case you may find the defendant not guilty."
14SUMMARY
15 This bill allows an instruction to a jury impaneled in a criminal case that the jury may 
16 find a defendant not guilty even if the jury finds the State has proved all the elements of 
17 the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt if the jury finds based upon the facts of the 
18 case a guilty verdict would yield an unjust result.15
16
17
18
