 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 772
S.P. 331 In Senate, February 21, 2023
An Act to Establish a Process to Vest Rights for Land Use Permit 
Applicants
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator POULIOT of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Senator: HICKMAN of Kennebec, Representatives: BOYLE of Gorham, 
COLLINGS of Portland, MORRIS of Turner.

Page 1 - 131LR1486(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง685-C, sub-ยง13 is enacted to read:
313.  Right established; right accrual.  An applicant for a permit required by a land 
4 use ordinance has the right for the commission to consider the approval, disapproval or 
5 conditional approval of an application for the permit solely on the basis of any orders, 
6 regulations, ordinances, rules, expiration dates, fees or other requirements in effect at the 
7 time the original application for the permit is filed for review for any purpose, including 
8 review for administrative completeness. A right to which a permit applicant is entitled 
9 under this subsection accrues on the filing of an original application that gives the 
10 commission fair notice of the project and the nature of the permit sought.  An application 
11 is considered filed on the date the applicant delivers the application to the commission or 
12 deposits the application with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed 
13 to the commission.  A certified mail receipt obtained by the applicant at the time of deposit 
14 is prima facie evidence of the date the application was deposited with the United States 
15 Postal Service.
16Sec. 2.  30-A MRSA ยง4364-D is enacted to read:
17ยง4364-D.  Consideration of land use permit
181. Right established. An applicant for a permit required by a land use ordinance has 
19 the right for a municipality to consider the approval, disapproval or conditional approval 
20 of an application for the permit solely on the basis of any orders, regulations, ordinances, 
21 rules, expiration dates, fees or other requirements in effect at the time the original 
22 application for the permit is filed for review for any purpose, including review for 
23 administrative completeness. 
242. Right accrual. A right to which a permit applicant is entitled under this section 
25 accrues on the filing of an original application that gives a municipality fair notice of the 
26 project and the nature of the permit sought.  An application is considered filed on the date 
27 the applicant delivers the application to the municipality or deposits the application with 
28 the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the municipality.  A certified 
29 mail receipt obtained by the applicant at the time of deposit is prima facie evidence of the 
30 date the application was deposited with the United States Postal Service.
31SUMMARY
32 This bill gives an applicant for a land use permit the right to have a municipality or the 
33 Maine Land Use Planning Commission review the application solely on the basis of any 
34 orders, regulations, ordinances, rules, expiration dates, fees or other requirements in effect 
35 at the time the original application for the land use permit is filed for review.32
33
34
35
