 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1589
H.P. 1034 House of Representatives, April 11, 2023
Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Adopt Rules 
Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, 
Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SMITH of Palermo.
Cosponsored by Representatives: BAGSHAW of Windham, FREDERICKS of Sanford, 
GRIFFIN of Levant, HENDERSON of Rumford, RUDNICKI of Fairfield, SOBOLESKI of 
Phillips, WHITE of Guilford.

Page 1 - 131LR1823(01)1Preamble.  Whereas, the purpose of public education in America is to produce 
2 knowledgeable and competent adults able to participate as informed citizens in the 
3 democratic process; and
4Whereas, education in a democracy is best served by teaching students how to think, 
5 not telling them what to think; and
6Whereas, our country is divided over many issues affecting its citizens; and
7Whereas, it has been established through surveys that a majority of kindergarten to 
8 grade 12 teachers discuss controversial issues in their classrooms; and
9Whereas, it has been established that some teacher training institutions, teacher 
10 licensing agencies, state education departments and professional teacher organizations 
11 have condoned and even encouraged this behavior under the guise of "teaching for social 
12 justice" and other sectarian doctrines; and
13Whereas, time spent on political or ideological indoctrination takes time away from 
14 instruction in the academic subjects taught by public educational institutions including the 
15 foundational subjects of mathematics, science, English, history and civics and prevents 
16 students from receiving the best possible public education as funded by the taxpayers of 
17 the State; and
18Whereas, parents and taxpayers have a right to expect that taxpayer resources will be 
19 spent on education, not political or ideological indoctrination; now, therefore, be it
20Sec. 1.  State Board of Education to adopt rules prohibiting teachers in 
21public schools from engaging in political, ideological or religious advocacy in 
22the classroom.  Resolved: That the State Board of Education shall adopt rules 
23 prohibiting teachers in public schools from engaging in political, ideological or religious 
24 advocacy in the classroom.  Rules adopted under this resolve must be clear and provide 
25 enforcement mechanisms for appropriate and professional ethical behavior by teachers 
26 licensed in the State in tax-supported schools to prohibit teachers from using the classroom 
27 to engage in political, ideological or religious advocacy.
28Sec. 2.  Rules criteria.  Resolved: That the rules adopted under section 1 must 
29 prohibit a teacher in a public school during class time or while otherwise operating within 
30 the scope of employment as a teacher from doing the following:
31 1.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any candidate or nominee for public office or 
32 any elected or appointed official regardless of whether the official is a member of the local, 
33 state or federal government;
34 2.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or enacted legislation or 
35 regulation regardless of whether the legislation or regulation is pending or proposed or has 
36 been enacted at the local, state or federal level;
37 3.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or decided court case or 
38 judicial action regardless of whether the court case or judicial action is at the local, state or 
39 federal level;
40 4.  Endorsing, supporting or opposing any pending, proposed or executed executive 
41 action by an executive or executive branch agency at the local, state or federal level;
Page 2 - 131LR1823(01)1 5.  Introducing any controversial issue that is not germane to the topic of the course 
2 being taught;
3 6.  Endorsing, supporting or engaging in any activity that hampers or impedes the 
4 lawful access of a military recruiter to the school campus;
5 7.  Endorsing, supporting or engaging in any activity that hampers or impedes the 
6 actions of local, state or federal law enforcement;
7 8.  Advocating in a partisan manner for any side of a controversial issue; the rules must 
8 require a teacher to provide students with materials supporting both sides of a controversial 
9 issue being addressed and to present both sides in a fair-minded, nonpartisan manner; or
10 9.  Segregating students according to race or singling out one racial group of students 
11 as responsible for the suffering or inequities experienced by another racial group of 
12 students.
13 For purposes of this section, "controversial issue" means an issue that is a point made 
14 in the most recent electoral party platform of any party that is qualified for the ballot at the 
15 state or federal level.
16Sec. 3.  Violations; notice; training.  Resolved: That rules adopted under section 
17 1 must contain clear guidelines for enforcement and provide penalties for violations up to 
18 and including termination.  The State Board of Education shall provide written notice to all 
19 affected teachers, parents and students of their respective rights and responsibilities under 
20 the rules and shall provide at least 3 hours of annual continuing teacher education to 
21 affected teachers to instruct the teachers in the teacher responsibilities required by the rules.
22Sec. 4.  Voluntary adoption of educator's code of ethics.  Resolved: That the 
23 Department of Education shall request all state professional teacher organizations and 
24 unions to voluntarily adopt an educator's code of ethics and professional responsibility that 
25 incorporates the rules adopted under section 1 and that specifically prohibits teachers in 
26 kindergarten to grade 12 instruction from using the classroom for political indoctrination.
27Sec. 5.  Major substantive rules.  Resolved: That rules adopted under section 1 
28 are major substantive rules as defined by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, 
29 subchapter 2-A.
30Sec. 6.  Committee required to report out legislation.  Resolved:  That on 
31 review of the rules adopted under section 1, the joint standing committee of the Legislature 
32 having jurisdiction over education and cultural affairs shall report out legislation to 
33 incorporate the rule-making authority of the State Board of Education authorized by this 
34 resolve into the Maine Revised Statutes.
35SUMMARY
36 This resolve directs the State Board of Education to adopt major substantive rules 
37 prohibiting teachers in public schools from engaging in political, religious or ideological 
38 advocacy in the classroom or from introducing any controversial subject matter that is not 
39 germane to the topic of the course being taught, with penalties for violations up to and 
40 including termination of the teacher.  This resolve requires the State Board of Education to 
41 provide written notice of the rules to all affected teachers, parents and students and for 
42 teachers to receive annually at least 3 hours of continuing teacher education to instruct the 36
37
38
39
40
41
42
Page 3 - 131LR1823(01)43 teachers on the rules.  This resolve directs the Department of Education to request 
44 professional teacher organizations and unions to voluntarily adopt an educator's code of 
45 ethics and professional responsibility that incorporates the rules and that specifically 
46 prohibits teachers in kindergarten to grade 12 instruction from using the classroom for 
47 political indoctrination.  The resolve requires the joint standing committee of the 
48 Legislature having jurisdiction over education and cultural affairs to report out legislation 
49 to incorporate the rulemaking described in this resolve into statute.1
2
3
4
5
6
7
