 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 931
H.P. 578 House of Representatives, March 2, 2023
An Act to Expand the State's Workforce by Supporting the 
Transition from Incarceration to Employment
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SAYRE of Kennebunk.
Cosponsored by Representative PRINGLE of Windham, Senator MOORE of Washington and
Representatives: BOYER of Poland, ROEDER of Bangor, SALISBURY of Westbrook, 
SARGENT of York.

Page 1 - 131LR1735(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2CONCEPT DRAFT
3SUMMARY
4 This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
5 This bill proposes to charge the State Workforce Board with the responsibility of 
6 preparing a plan to expand the State's current workforce development programming for 
7 incarcerated persons and persons reentering the community after incarceration in 
8 consultation with the Department of Corrections and the Department of Labor in calendar 
9 year 2023. The responsibility for execution of this plan would rest with those departments 
10 beginning January 1, 2024.
11 This bill also proposes adopting the specific recommendations of the Jail Navigator 
12 Focus Group on Transition/Reentry, which include the following.
13 1.  The Legislature would set standards for all jails to conduct mental health and 
14 substance use assessments within 48 hours after booking for all residents, both pretrial and 
15 sentenced, and provide needed substance use disorder treatment. Mental health and 
16 substance use disorder treatment and recovery services would be offered and supported 
17 throughout the resident's stay and planned for upon release.
18 2.  The Legislature would increase support for the Department of Health and Human 
19 Services to supply all jails with sufficient intensive case manager staffing with case loads 
20 that reflect best practice ratios of 20 residents to one intensive case manager to prepare and 
21 support all residents upon release. This support would help reduce the major barriers to 
22 successful reintegration into the community such as housing, transportation, food security, 
23 mentorship and health care services. Intensive case managers would continue to support 
24 the individuals' reentry into the community until the individuals are fully established with 
25 community-based case managers or providers.
26 3.  The Legislature would support and fund access at every level of treatment, including 
27 community-based services, for individuals with mental health challenges and substance use 
28 disorder, including co-occurring disorders.  The Legislature would also direct the 
29 Department of Health and Human Services' office of MaineCare services to explore a 
30 MaineCare supportive housing services benefit.
31 4.  The Legislature would support and fund access for peer-to-peer mentorship 
32 programs at each jail in the State.
33 5.  The Legislature would support funding for intensive case managers, working with 
34 community partners, to create programs for those leaving incarceration and returning to our 
35 communities to supply those individuals with items of immediate need such as personal 
36 hygiene items, fentanyl test strips, naloxone hydrochloride, a cellular telephone with 
37 limited minutes and recovery and prevention literature, as well as established housing and 
38 initial appointments for treatment. The provision of these goods and services would be 
39 tracked for reporting purposes.
40 6.  The Legislature would direct all jails to track assessments, treatment and reentry 
41 services provided, preferably with one common management information system, to 
42 determine which services are needed most often to inform investments with specific 4
Page 2 - 131LR1735(01)43 metrics to be developed.  In addition, this tracking should enable jails and other 
44 stakeholders to ascertain which reentry services achieve the best outcomes for reducing 
45 recidivism.
4 7.  The Legislature would consider how to use the development of the new Certified 
5 Community Behavioral Health Clinic model of care in this State as a major connector to 
6 post-release community treatment.1
2
3
