 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1412
H.P. 908 House of Representatives, March 30, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights 
Under the Law
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative RECKITT of South Portland.
Cosponsored by Senator VITELLI of Sagadahoc and
Representatives: COPELAND of Saco, DHALAC of South Portland, GRAMLICH of Old 
Orchard Beach, PERRY of Calais, SALISBURY of Westbrook, SARGENT of York, SUPICA 
of Bangor, Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 131LR0565(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Equality of rights.  Equality of rights under the law may not be denied 
6 or abridged by the State or any political subdivision of the State based on the actual or 
7 perceived race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, 
8 age, physical or mental disability, ancestry or national origin of an individual.  The 
9 Legislature has the power to enforce this section by appropriate legislation.
10Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
11Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
12 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
13 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
14 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
15 resolution by voting upon the following question:
16 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the denial 
17 or abridgment by the State or any political subdivision of the State of equal 
18 rights based on the actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex, sexual 
19 orientation, gender identity, gender expression, age, physical or mental 
20 disability, ancestry or national origin of an individual?"
21 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
22 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
23 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
24 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
25 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
26 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
27 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
28 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
29Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
30 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
31 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
32SUMMARY
33 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the denial or 
34 abridgment by the State or any political subdivision of the State of equal rights based on 
35 the actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender 
36 expression, age, physical or mental disability, ancestry or national origin of an individual.33
34
35
36
