 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1477
S.P. 597 In Senate, April 5, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Align the Proceedings for Circulating Written Petitions for 
People's Vetoes and Direct Initiatives with Federal Law
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative SUPICA of Bangor and
Representative: BOYER of Poland.

Page 1 - 131LR2055(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง20, as amended by CR 2019, c. 1, is further 
5 amended to read:
6Section 20.  Meaning of words "electors," "people," "recess of 
7Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written 
8petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions for direct 
9initiative.  As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words "electors" 
10 and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; "recess of the 
11 Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session of the Legislature; "statewide 
12 election" means any election held throughout the State on a particular day; "measure" 
13 means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the people, or 2 or more such, or part 
14 or parts of such, as the case may be; "circulator" means a person who solicits signatures for 
15 written petitions, and who must be a resident of this State and whose name must appear on 
16 the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the circulator's residence as qualified to vote 
17 for Governor; "written petition" means one or more petitions written or printed, or partly 
18 written and partly printed, with the original signatures of the petitioners, or, as authorized 
19 by law, the alternative signatures of persons with physical disabilities that prevent them 
20 from signing their own names, attached, verified as to the authenticity of the signatures by 
21 the oath of the circulator that all of the signatures to the petition were made in the presence 
22 of the circulator and that to the best of the circulator's knowledge and belief each signature 
23 is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and accompanied by the 
24 certificate of the official authorized by law to maintain the voting list or to certify signatures 
25 on petitions for voters on the voting list of the city, town or plantation in which the 
26 petitioners reside that their names appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation 
27 of the official as qualified to vote for Governor.  The oath of the circulator must be sworn 
28 to in the presence of a person authorized by law to administer oaths.  Written petitions for 
29 a people's veto pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, Section 17 must be submitted to the 
30 appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or state election officials as authorized 
31 by law, for determination of whether the petitioners are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 
32 p.m., on the 5th day before the petition must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State, 
33 or, if such 5th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day 
34 which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday.  Written petitions for a direct initiative 
35 pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, Section 18 must be submitted to the appropriate officials 
36 of cities, towns or plantations, or state election officials as authorized by law, for 
37 determination of whether the petitioners are qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on 
38 the 10th day before the petition must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State, or, if 
39 such 10th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day 
40 which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday.  Such officials must complete the 
41 certification of only those petitions submitted by these deadlines and must return them to 
42 the circulators or their agents within 2 days for a petition for a people's veto and within 5 
43 days for a petition for a direct initiative, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, 
44 of the date on which such petitions were submitted to them.  Signatures on petitions not 
45 submitted to the appropriate local or state officials by these deadlines may not be certified.  
46 The petition shall set forth the full text of the measure requested or proposed.  Petition 
Page 2 - 131LR2055(01)47 forms shall be furnished or approved by the Secretary of State upon written application 
48 signed and notarized and submitted to the office of the Secretary of State by a resident of 
49 this State whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of that 
50 resident as qualified to vote for Governor.  The full text of a measure submitted to a vote 
51 of the people under the provisions of the Constitution need not be printed on the official 
52 ballots, but, until otherwise provided by the Legislature, the Secretary of State shall prepare 
53 the ballots in such form as to present the question or questions concisely and intelligibly.
8Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
9Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
10 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
11 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
12 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
13 resolution by voting upon the following question:
14 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to remove the 
15 requirement that a circulator of a citizen's initiative or people's veto 
16 petition be a resident of Maine and registered voter in Maine?"
17 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
18 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
19 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
20 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
21 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
22 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
23 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
24 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
25Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
26 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
27 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
28SUMMARY
29 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to remove the requirement 
30 that a circulator of a citizen's initiative or people's veto petition be a resident of this State 
31 and registered voter in this State.1
2
3
4
5
6
7
29
30
31
