 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1520
H.P. 975 House of Representatives, April 5, 2023
Resolve, Directing the Department of Education and Department of 
Health and Human Services to Study Placing Child Care Facilities 
in Secondary Schools
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative GOLEK of Harpswell.
Cosponsored by Senator PIERCE of Cumberland and
Representatives: BRENNAN of Portland, CLUCHEY of Bowdoinham, DODGE of Belfast, 
MILLETT of Cape Elizabeth, MURPHY of Scarborough, RANA of Bangor, SARGENT of 
York, Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland.

Page 1 - 131LR0372(01)1Sec. 1. Department of Education and Department of Health and Human 
2Services to study placing child care facilities in secondary schools. Resolved: 
3 That the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human Services shall 
4 jointly study placing child care facilities in secondary schools.
5Sec. 2. Purposes of child care facilities in secondary schools. Resolved: That 
6 the purposes of a child care facility in the study under this resolve include:
7 A. Providing an on-site training center for secondary school students in child 
8 development and child care courses involving the developmental stages of infants, 
9 toddlers and preschool children;
10 B. Providing nurturing quality child care and age-appropriate learning experiences in 
11 a safe and secure environment for infants, toddlers and preschool children;
12 C. Providing quality child care for secondary school staff and employees during 
13 employment hours;
14 D. Creating a source of early childhood educators and caregivers to help reduce the 
15 shortage of child care workers in the State; and
16 E. Being organized for and focusing on the needs of children and parents receiving the 
17 services and the students, staff and employees of the secondary school. 
18Sec. 3. Characteristics of child care facilities in secondary schools. 
19Resolved: That the study under this resolve must study potential characteristics for child 
20 care facilities in secondary schools, including:
21 A. Serving children of secondary school staff and employees who are infants, toddlers 
22 and preschool children;
23 B. Being staffed by a qualified child care educator who is hired by the school 
24 administrative unit of the secondary school and receives full state benefits as an 
25 employee of the secondary school;
26 C. Serving as a classroom to provide hands-on experience as part of an early childhood 
27 education and development course or curriculum for students in grades 11 and 12, with 
28 a certificate awarded at graduation to a student who has completed 2 years of study in 
29 the course, including an adult education student under paragraph H;
30 D. Providing child care to children of students and others in the community if space is 
31 available once all children under paragraph A have been served;
32 E. Providing child care to children in the community whose family's household income 
33 is at or below the federal poverty level;
34 F. Charging a fee for child care, which may be adjusted based upon the income of the 
35 parent or guardian of the child, based upon recommendations of the Department of 
36 Education, the Department of Health and Human Services and other child care service 
37 providers, and accepting a child care voucher or other child care assistance;
38 G. Providing child care for free or at a discount to a secondary school staff member or 
39 employee as an employment incentive or benefit; 
40 H. Operating from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. on school days, coordinated with the school year, 
41 or year-round and on holidays or weekend days or operating in conjunction with adult 
42 education students who may receive a certificate under paragraph C; and
Page 2 - 131LR0372(01)1 I. Determining adequate space, staffing and resources to provide a quality child care 
2 service.
3Sec. 4. Report. Resolved:  That, no later than December 6, 2023, the Department of 
4 Education and the Department of Health and Human Services shall submit a report on the 
5 study under this resolve, along with any recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing 
6 Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. The committee may report out legislation 
7 based upon the report to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
8SUMMARY
9 This resolve directs the Department of Education and the Department of Health and 
10 Human Services to jointly study placing child care facilities in secondary schools to serve 
11 infants, toddlers and preschool children of secondary school staff and employees, and 
12 children of students and families in the community if space is available, including families 
13 with household incomes at or below the federal poverty level.  The study is required to 
14 consider the purposes of such a child care facility including serving as a classroom for 
15 secondary and adult education students taking child care education and development 
16 courses, with a certificate provided for completing 2 years of course work, and 
17 characteristics of the child care facilities including charging a fee with a sliding scale for 
18 children whose family household income is at or below the federal poverty level, accepting 
19 child care vouchers or other child care assistance or providing the child care for free or at 
20 a discount to secondary school staff members and employees as an employment incentive 
21 or benefit.9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
