 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1000
H.P. 636 House of Representatives, March 7, 2023
Resolve, to Convene a Firearm Range Safety Working Group 
Within the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ROBERTS of South Berwick.
Cosponsored by Representatives: CLUCHEY of Bowdoinham, DOUDERA of Camden, 
MASTRACCIO of Sanford.

Page 1 - 131LR2285(01)1Sec. 1.  Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to convene firearm 
2range safety working group. Resolved: That the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
3 Wildlife shall convene a firearm range safety working group to review firearm range safety 
4 and access to firearm safety information in the State. The working group shall study 
5 whether firearm ranges have access to the most current standards regarding and information 
6 on ensuring the safe operation of firearm ranges and any possible improvements to firearm 
7 range safety statewide.  Working group membership may include representatives of firearm 
8 ranges in the State, firearm interest groups, municipal officials from municipalities where 
9 firearm ranges are located, interested members of the public, including members of the 
10 public who live near firearm ranges, and any other representatives of groups or individuals 
11 that the department determines can provide constructive input to the working group.
12Sec. 2.  Report. Resolved: That the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
13 shall report the findings of the working group under section 1, including any recommended 
14 legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife no later than 
15 December 6, 2023.
16SUMMARY
17 This resolve directs the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to convene a 
18 firearm range safety working group to review firearm range safety and access to firearm 
19 safety information in the State and to report its findings to the Joint Standing Committee 
20 on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife no later than December 6, 2023.17
18
19
20
