 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 987
S.P. 406 In Senate, March 2, 2023
An Act to Promote Electricity Price Stability for Standard-offer 
Service
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator VITELLI of Sagadahoc.
Cosponsored by Representative ZEIGLER of Montville and
Representatives: COLLINGS of Portland, FOSTER of Dexter.

Page 1 - 131LR0350(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง3212, sub-ยง7 is enacted to read:
37.  Designation of long-term standard-offer service provider.  Notwithstanding any 
4 other provision of this section, the commission is authorized to designate one or more 
5 standard-offer service providers to provide standard-offer service for a term of up to 10 
6 years.  Subject to a plan approved by the commission, the designated standard-offer service 
7 providers are responsible for purchasing the supply of electricity needed to provide 
8 standard-offer service to customers located in the service territories of investor-owned 
9 transmission and distribution utilities.
10 The price for standard-offer service provided pursuant to this subsection must be set 
11 periodically by the commission, except that prices may not be changed more frequently 
12 than every 6 months. A standard-offer service provider may also petition the commission 
13 for approval of change to standard-offer service prices.  The commission shall establish 
14 prices that provide sufficient revenue for the standard-offer service provider to recover its 
15 costs of supplying standard-offer service.
16SUMMARY
17 This bill authorizes the Public Utilities Commission to designate one or more standard-
18 offer service providers to provide standard-offer service for a term of up to 10 years.17
18
