Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 616
H.P. 393 House of Representatives, February 14, 2023
An Act to Protect Health Care Professionals Providing 
Reproductive Health Care Services
Reference to the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative KUHN of Falmouth.
Cosponsored by Senator PIERCE of Cumberland and
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, MOONEN of Portland, PERRY of Calais, 
PRINGLE of Windham, SAYRE of Kennebunk, ZAGER of Portland, Senators: BRENNER of 
Cumberland, CARNEY of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 131LR0907(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2304-D is enacted to read:
3ยง2304-D.  Insurance discrimination based soley on provision of reproductive health 
4care services  
51.  Discrimination prohibited.  An insurer that provides medical malpractice 
6 insurance in this State may not deny, cancel, refuse to renew or restrict coverage of any 
7 licensed health care professional or require the payment of additional charges by a health 
8 care professional who provides, authorizes, recommends, aids, assists, refers for or 
9 otherwise participates in an abortion or any other reproductive health care services 
10 provided for the purpose of an abortion performed on an individual on the sole basis that 
11 the health care professional is acting in violation of another state's law or revocation or 
12 other adverse action against a health care professional's license in another state.
132.  Action based on adverse action in another state prohibited.  An insurer that 
14 provides medical malpractice insurance in this State may not deny, cancel, refuse to renew 
15 or restrict coverage of any licensed health care professional or require the payment of 
16 additional charges by a health care professional as a result of an adverse action against the 
17 health care professional's license in another state, including but not limited to revocation, 
18 suspension or other disciplinary action as a result of a health care professional providing, 
19 authorizing, recommending, aiding, assisting, referring for or otherwise participating in an 
20 abortion or any other reproductive health care services provided for the purpose of an 
21 abortion if the adverse action is solely based on a violation of the other state's law that 
22 prohibits abortion and any related reproductive health care services in that state or for a 
23 resident of that state.
24SUMMARY
25 This bill prohibits an insurer that provides medical malpractice insurance in this State 
26 from taking any adverse action against a health care professional that provides abortion or 
27 other reproductive health care services on the sole basis that a health care professional is 
28 acting in violation of another state's law or a revocation or other adverse action against a 
29 health care professional's license in another state.25
26
27
28
29
