 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1629
S.P. 646 In Senate, April 12, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Recognize the Right to Personal Privacy
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.

Page 1 - 131LR1538(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Natural rights.  All people are born equally free and independent, and 
6 have certain natural, inherent and unalienable rights, among which are those of enjoying 
7 and defending life and, liberty and personal privacy, acquiring, possessing and protecting 
8 property, and of pursuing and obtaining safety and happiness.
9Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
10Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
11 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
12 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
13 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
14 resolution by voting upon the following question:
15 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to explicitly recognize 
16 a natural right to personal privacy?"
17 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
18 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
19 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
20 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
21 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
22 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
23 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
24 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
25Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
26 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
27 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
28SUMMARY
29 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to recognize the people's 
30 natural, inherent and unalienable right to personal privacy.29
30
