 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1120
S.P. 454 In Senate, March 9, 2023
Resolve, to Install a Suicide Barrier on the Penobscot Narrows 
Bridge
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator CURRY of Waldo.
Cosponsored by Representative ARFORD of Brunswick and
Senators: CHIPMAN of Cumberland, GROHOSKI of Hancock, LaFOUNTAIN of Kennebec, 
LYFORD of Penobscot, Representatives: GEIGER of Rockland, PAUL of Winterport, 
RUSSELL of Verona Island, WILLIAMS of Bar Harbor.

Page 1 - 131LR1155(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, a common method of suicide is jumping from high structures, including 
4 bridges, buildings and parking structures; and
5Whereas, the Penobscot Narrows Bridge, with its substantial height of well over 100 
6 feet combined with its lack of safety barriers, presents a dangerous risk for people with 
7 suicidal ideations; and
8Whereas, there have been numerous suicide attempts from the Penobscot Narrows 
9 Bridge since its construction in 2006, many of them resulting in death; and
10Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
12 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
13 therefore, be it
14Sec. 1.  Pedestrian barrier fences. Resolved:  That the Department of 
15 Transportation shall construct and maintain pedestrian barrier fences on the Penobscot 
16 Narrows Bridge crossing the Penobscot River on Route 3 between the Town of Prospect 
17 and the Town of Verona Island for the purpose of suicide prevention.
18Sec. 2.  Report.  Beginning 6 months after the effective date of this resolve and every 
19 subsequent 6 months until the fences are installed as required in section 1, the Department 
20 of Transportation shall report on the progress of the installation to the joint standing 
21 committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over transportation matters.
22Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
23 takes effect when approved.
24SUMMARY
25 This resolve directs the Department of Transportation to construct and maintain 
26 pedestrian barrier fences on the Penobscot Narrows Bridge for the purpose of suicide 
27 prevention and requires the department to report on its progress every 6 months until the 
28 installation of the fences is complete.25
26
27
28
