 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 813
H.P. 502 House of Representatives, February 21, 2023
Resolve, to Study Methods to Increase Access to Medication-assisted 
Treatment for Substance Use Disorder
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative EATON of Deer Isle.
Cosponsored by Senator GROHOSKI of Hancock and
Representatives: CRAFTS of Newcastle, GRAHAM of North Yarmouth, MATHIESON of 
Kittery, MILLETT of Cape Elizabeth, MILLIKEN of Blue Hill.

Page 1 - 131LR2036(01)1Sec. 1.  Working group; access to medication-assisted treatment.  Resolved:  
2 That the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future shall convene a working group to study 
3 the feasibility of and barriers to establishing a mobile methadone clinic in the State and 
4 other methods to increase local access to medication-assisted treatment for substance use 
5 disorder.  At a minimum, the office shall invite to be members of the working group the 
6 director of opioid response within the office, the Commissioner of Health and Human 
7 Services, the Commissioner of Corrections, a member of the Maine Board of Pharmacy, 
8 representatives of organizations offering medication-assisted treatment, a representative of 
9 hospitals in the State and individuals who represent organizations that are actively involved 
10 with issues relating to substance use disorder in the State including at least one individual 
11 from each of the following regions: Washington and Hancock Counties; Kennebec, 
12 Somerset and Penobscot Counties; York and Cumberland Counties; Aroostook and 
13 Piscataquis Counties; Knox, Waldo, Sagadahoc and Lincoln Counties; and Oxford, 
14 Franklin and Androscoggin Counties.  By December 6, 2023, the office shall submit a 
15 report related to the study, including recommendations and any suggested legislation, to 
16 the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.  The committee may report 
17 out a bill relating to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature.
18SUMMARY
19 This resolve directs the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future to convene a 
20 working group to study the feasibility of and barriers to establishing a mobile methadone 
21 clinic in the State and other methods to increase local access to medication-assisted 
22 treatment for substance use disorder.  It requires the office to submit a report related to the 
23 study, including recommendations and any suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing 
24 Committee on Health and Human Services by December 6, 2023 and authorizes the 
25 committee to report out a bill relating to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 
26 131st Legislature.19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
