 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1170
H.P. 742 House of Representatives, March 14, 2023
Resolve, to Promote Passenger Rail for Commuters
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative O'NEIL of Saco.
Cosponsored by Senator CHIPMAN of Cumberland and
Representatives: MALON of Biddeford, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, SACHS of Freeport, 
WILLIAMS of Bar Harbor, Senators: DAUGHTRY of Cumberland, INGWERSEN of York, 
PIERCE of Cumberland.

Page 1 - 131LR2317(01)1Sec. 1. Study by Department of Transportation. Resolved: That the 
2 Department of Transportation shall, in coordination with the Northern New England 
3 Passenger Rail Authority, conduct a study to evaluate improvements to the passenger rail 
4 service between Brunswick and Boston, referred to in this resolve as "the service." The 
5 study must identify potential changes to the service to facilitate commuting by rail and to 
6 increase the overall usability of the service.
7 1. The study must: 
8 A. Examine the level of departure frequency needed to service the majority of 
9 commuters on the service; 
10 B. Evaluate the frequency of train departure times and identify the specific measures 
11 required to achieve additional departure times; 
12 C.  Identify the optimal schedule needed to accommodate commuters and increase 
13 overall usability of the service. This section of the study must include an evaluation of 
14 peak use by commuters and design a schedule catering to peak use; 
15 D. Take into consideration local transit and parking options in coordination with the 
16 proposed schedule or schedules; 
17 E. Identify optimal trip times for the service that would be competitive with the average 
18 driving time between Brunswick and Boston, including specific measures to reduce the 
19 trip duration and to reduce delays in order to make trip duration comparable to a drive;
20 F. Identify any potential station locations that may increase access to the service;
21 G. Address improvements to the rail system used by the service;
22 H. Address improvements to the operation of the service; and
23 I. Evaluate the economic impact of increasing the number of trips offered by the 
24 service. 
25 2. The Department of Transportation shall submit a report on the study to the joint 
26 standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over railroad matters by January 
27 1, 2024. 
28SUMMARY
29 This resolve directs the Department of Transportation, in coordination with the 
30 Northern New England Passenger Rail Authority, to conduct a study to evaluate 
31 improvements to the passenger rail service between Brunswick and Boston. 29
30
31
