 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1495
H.P. 950 House of Representatives, April 5, 2023
Resolve, Establishing the Commission to Study the Role of Critical 
Minerals as a Resource in the State
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative CRAFTS of Newcastle.
Cosponsored by Senator RENY of Lincoln and
Representatives: BELL of Yarmouth, CAMPBELL of Orrington, DOUDERA of Camden, 
LANDRY of Farmington, SOBOLESKI of Phillips, THERIAULT of Fort Kent, Senators: 
FARRIN of Somerset, KEIM of Oxford.

Page 1 - 131LR1121(01)1Preamble.  Whereas, critical minerals are an indispensable resource for the people 
2 of and businesses in the United States and in the State as a means to use electric fuel rather 
3 than fossil fuel for transportation, electrical storage and myriad other critical issues; and
4Whereas, Maine does not have sources of fossil fuel but it does have sources of 
5 critical minerals; and
6Whereas, the mining of critical minerals in Maine is not practicable under the current 
7 law governing mining of critical minerals regardless of whether the minerals can be mined 
8 safely and without potential acid drainage; now, therefore, be it
9Sec. 1. Commission established. Resolved: That the Commission to Study the 
10 Role of Critical Minerals as a Resource in the State, referred to in this resolve as "the 
11 commission," is established.
12Sec. 2. Commission membership. Resolved: That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 
13 353, the commission consists of the following members: 
14 1.  One member of the Senate who is a member of the party holding the 2nd largest 
15 number of seats in the Legislature, appointed by the President of the Senate; 
16 2.  One member of the House of Representatives who is a member of the party holding 
17 the largest number of seats in the Legislature, appointed by the Speaker of the House;
18 3.  The Director of the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future or the Director of the 
19 Governor's Energy Office or a director's designee, appointed by the Governor;
20 4.  The Commissioner of Environmental Protection or the commissioner's designee;
21 5.  The State Geologist or the State Geologist's designee;
22 6.  One member of a of federally recognized Indian nation, tribe or band in the State, 
23 appointed by the Speaker of the House based on the joint recommendations of the tribal 
24 governments of the Mi'kmaq Nation, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, the 
25 Passamaquoddy Tribe at Motahkomikuk, the Passamaquoddy Tribe at Sipayik and the 
26 Penobscot Nation. If the tribal governments do not make a unanimous joint 
27 recommendation, the Speaker of the House shall appoint one member of a federally 
28 recognized Indian nation, tribe or band in the State;
29 7.  The following members appointed by the President of the Senate:
30 A. One member of the public residing in northern Maine; and
31 B. One member representing an organization involved in the protection of the 
32 environment; and
33 8.  The following members appointed by the Speaker of the House:
34 A.  One member of the public residing in western Maine; and
35 B.  One member representing business interests in the State. 
36 The Speaker of the House shall invite a representative of the United States Department 
37 of Energy to serve as a member of the commission.
38Sec. 3. Chairs. Resolved: That the Senate member is the Senate chair and the House 
39 of Representatives member is the House chair of the commission.
Page 2 - 131LR1121(01)1Sec. 4. Appointments; convening of commission. Resolved: That all  
2 appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this  
3 resolve. The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative  
4 Council once all appointments have been completed. After appointment of all members, 
5 the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 
6 after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been  
7 made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority for  
8 the commission to meet and conduct its business.
9Sec. 5. Duties. Resolved:  That the commission shall study issues associated with 
10 the current limits on mining of critical minerals in the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act 
11 and, within the context of international climate change, whether mining of such minerals 
12 in the State can be accomplished safely with appropriate restrictions.  For the purposes of 
13 this resolve, "critical mineral" means a metallic or nonmetallic element that is essential for 
14 the functioning of modern technologies and to the economic or national security of the 
15 State or the Nation and that has a supply chain vulnerable to disruption.  In undertaking the 
16 study, the commission shall review:
17 1.  How other jurisdictions, including other states and countries, identify sites at which 
18 mining of critical minerals can be conducted safely and the extent to which environmental 
19 protection issues involved in mining of critical minerals could be adequately addressed to 
20 ensure long-term public safety if mining of critical minerals is permitted with appropriate 
21 safeguards;
22 2.  The amount of critical mineral resources currently identified in the State; 
23 3.  The legal and ethical principles regarding the mining of critical minerals in the State; 
24 4.  The extent to which critical mineral resources will be needed in the State and the 
25 Nation in the future for household, government, business, commercial, security and other 
26 purposes;  
27 5.  The quality of currently available mining methods, including underground and 
28 open-pit mining, and processing methods and the need for measures to quantify the ability 
29 of companies that mine or process critical minerals to mine or process safely in the State if 
30 such mining or processing is permitted; 
31 6.  The nature and use of natural resource extraction taxes in other states and the 
32 advantages and disadvantages of natural resource extraction taxes in the State; and 
33 7.  The relationship between mining of critical minerals and climate change in the State, 
34 including an analysis of what actions other states are taking to address this issue.
35 If the commission finds that environmentally safe mining of critical minerals can be 
36 accomplished in the State and that such mining would benefit the State, the commission 
37 shall develop recommended legislation to ensure that sustainable extraction of critical 
38 minerals is  conducted in a way that is clean and safe for the State's residents and will meet 
39 the needs of commercial, business and security interests.  The commission shall identify 
40 the need for additional state resources to implement its recommendations.
41Sec. 6. Staff assistance. Resolved: That the Legislative Council shall provide  
42 necessary staffing services to the commission, except that Legislative Council staff support 
43 is not authorized when the Legislature is in regular or special session.
Page 3 - 131LR1121(01)1Sec. 7. Consultant.  Resolved:  That, in accordance with Legislative Council 
2 policies, the commission may retain a consultant for technical assistance in performing its 
3 duties.
4Sec. 8. Report. Resolved: That, no later than December 6, 2023, the commission 
5 shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including any 
6 suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural 
7 Resources. The committee may report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 131st 
8 Legislature.
9SUMMARY
10 This resolve establishes the Commission to Study the Role of Critical Minerals as a 
11 Resource in the State to study issues associated with the current limits on mining of critical 
12 minerals in the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act and, within the context of international 
13 climate change, whether mining of such minerals in the State can be accomplished safely 
14 with appropriate restrictions.10
11
12
13
14
