 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1019
H.P. 655 House of Representatives, March 7, 2023
An Act Regarding Water Testing Related to Salt and Sand Storage 
Facilities
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative HASENFUS of Readfield.
Cosponsored by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 131LR1961(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง652, sub-ยง2, as amended by PL 1987, c. 769, Pt. A, ยง84 and PL 
3 2003, c. 689, Pt. B, ยง6, is further amended to read:
42.  Private water supplies.  In the event an owner of land adjacent to a state or state 
5 aid highway conceives that a private water supply on that land has been destroyed or 
6 rendered unfit for human consumption by the department constructing, reconstructing or 
7 maintaining the highway, such  the owner may apply in writing to the department for a 
8 determination of the alleged cause and assessment of the damage and, if  such  the claim is 
9 founded on construction, the owner shall present such  the application within 24 months 
10 after completion date of the work as that date appears in the records of the department. For 
11 purposes of this subsection, "state or state aid highway" includes any salt and sand storage 
12 facility located along that state or state aid highway to supply salt and sand for use on that 
13 highway.
14 The application shall  must set forth the name and address of the owner, the owner's source 
15 of title, the location of the property, a description of the damage, the cause to which the 
16 damage is attributed and the name and address of any lien holder.
17 A.  If the department determines that it did not cause the alleged damage to such  the 
18 water supply, a copy of the determination shall  must be served by registered or certified 
19 mail or by personal service as required for service of a summons on a complaint in the 
20 Superior Court.
21 B.  If the department determines that any damage to the privately owned water supply 
22 was caused by the department constructing, reconstructing or maintaining the highway, 
23 a copy of the determination shall  must be served by registered or certified mail or by 
24 personal service as required for service of a summons on a complaint in the Superior 
25 Court and the department shall set forth an offer of settlement  which shall be either  that 
26 offers:
27 (1)  To replace the water supply; or
28 (2)  To repair the damage to the water supply; or
29 (3)  To pay a designated sum of money; or
30 (4)  To purchase the realty served by the water supply in the event the cost of repair 
31 or replacement of the water supply exceeds the appraisal value of the realty.
32 C.  The department may issue rules and regulations in accordance with standards of the 
33 Department of Health and Human Services and the United States Department of Health 
34 and Human Services, Public Health Service regarding water potability for the 
35 determination of the degree of contamination, pollution or fitness for domestic use.
36 D.  The department shall in its determination consider the necessity for installation or 
37 replacement of piping, tanks, pumps, heating systems or other related fixtures. The 
38 Department of Transportation shall  department may not condition installation or 
39 replacement on the owner giving possession or title of any privately owned piping, 
40 tanks, pumps, heating systems or other related fixtures on his  the land to any agency of 
41 this State, unless agreed to by the property owner.
Page 2 - 131LR1961(01)1 E.  If the department is unable to settle at what it deems  determines to be a reasonable 
2 settlement, the department or owner may apply to the State Claims Commission in 
3 writing for a determination of the alleged cause and assessment of the damage.  The 
4 proceedings shall  are then  be the same as in condemnation cases.
5 F.  This subsection shall  does not apply to private water supplies after June 26, 1969 
6 where the location does not allow for or provide for adequate surface drainage.
7 G.  This subsection shall  does not apply to private water supplies now located or 
8 hereafter located within the right-of-way limits.
9 H.  This subsection shall  does not apply to any private water supply damaged by 
10 construction, reconstruction or maintenance which  that the department determines to 
11 have already been contaminated or polluted by another source to the degree said  the 
12 contamination or pollution would have rendered it unfit for human consumption.
13 I.  The following provisions apply with respect to a private water supply located on 
14 property adjacent to a salt and sand storage facility.
15 (1)  The department shall arrange for and pay the cost of testing the private water 
16 supply every 2 years for any contaminants that may derive from the salt and sand 
17 storage facility.
18 (2)  If an owner of land adjacent to a salt and sand storage facility shows in an 
19 application under this subsection that the owner's water supply is contaminated by 
20 any contaminants that may derive from the salt and sand storage facility, the 
21 contamination is presumed to have been caused by that storage facility, and the 
22 department shall offer a settlement in accordance with paragraph B unless the 
23 department can demonstrate that the contamination was not caused by the salt and 
24 sand storage facility.  The department shall provide a demonstration that the 
25 contamination was not caused by the salt and sand storage facility in any 
26 determination served pursuant to paragraph A.
27SUMMARY
28 This bill includes salt and sand storage facilities in the law governing the contamination 
29 of private water supplies adjacent to state or state aid highways.  It requires the Department 
30 of Transportation to arrange for and pay the cost of testing the private water supplies every 
31 2 years for any contaminants that may derive from the salt and sand storage facilities.
32 It also provides that if an owner of land adjacent to a salt and sand storage facility 
33 shows the owner's water supply is contaminated by any contaminants that may derive from 
34 the salt and sand storage facility, the contamination is presumed to have been caused by 
35 that storage facility, and the department is required to offer a settlement to remedy the 
36 situation unless the department can demonstrate that the contamination was not caused by 
37 the salt and sand storage facility.28
29
30
31
