 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1382
S.P. 547 In Senate, March 28, 2023
An Act to Establish the Guiding Public Health Principles of Focused 
Protection for Pandemics of a Highly Infectious Respiratory Disease
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative SAMPSON of Alfred and
Senators: KEIM of Oxford, MOORE of Washington, Representatives: BAGSHAW of 
Windham, BOYER of Poland, FREDERICKS of Sanford, JAVNER of Chester, LEMELIN of 
Chelsea, MORRIS of Turner.

Page 1 - 131LR1682(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง820-A is enacted to read:
3ยง820-A.  Principles of focused protection for a pandemic of a highly infectious 
4respiratory disease
51.  Focused protection.  The public health response of the State to a pandemic of a 
6 highly infectious disease must be guided by principles of focused protection under 
7 subsection 2.
82.  Guiding principles of focused protection.  The guiding principles of focused 
9 protection include that:
10 A.  Public health advice must consider the impact on overall public health rather than 
11 be solely concerned with a single disease and consider the benefits and harms of any 
12 public health measure, weighing the short-term versus the long-term consequences of 
13 the measure;
14 B.  Public health policy must protect the most vulnerable populations of the State, 
15 including children, low-income families, individuals with disabilities and the elderly, 
16 and may not shift the burden of protecting against the disease from the affluent to the 
17 less affluent;
18 C.  Public health advice must address the needs of each population in the State within 
19 the cultural, religious, geographic and other contexts of the population. If a population 
20 in the State believes that places of worship are essential, the public health advice should 
21 consider places of worship as essential in determining the advice;
22 D.  Public health policy must be based on comparative risk evaluations, risk reductions 
23 and reducing uncertainties using the best available scientific evidence but recognizing 
24 that risk cannot be entirely eliminated;
25 E.  Public health recommendations must present facts as the basis for guidance and 
26 may not employ fear, shame or falsehood to manipulate the public;
27 F.  Medical interventions may not be forced on a population, and a population may not 
28 be coerced into medical interventions, and medical interventions must be voluntary and 
29 based upon informed consent. A public health official must advise and may not set 
30 rules and must provide information and resources for an individual to make an 
31 informed decision; and
32 G.  Public health authorities must be honest and transparent with what is both known 
33 and unknown, advice given must be evidence-based and explained by data and the 
34 authorities must acknowledge errors or changes in evidence as soon as the authorities 
35 are aware of the changes.
36SUMMARY
37 This bill establishes principles of focused protection for a pandemic of a highly 
38 infectious respiratory disease for public health authorities to follow, including:
39 1. Considering the impact on overall public health instead of being focused on a single 
40 disease;37
38
Page 2 - 131LR1682(01)1 2. Weighing the short-term versus the long-term consequences of any public health 
2 measure;
3 3. Protecting vulnerable populations and not shifting the burden of protecting against 
4 the disease from the affluent to the less affluent;
5 4. Addressing the needs of various populations in the State, including considering 
6 places of worship essential;
7 5. Basing comparative risk evaluations, risk reductions and reduction of uncertainties 
8 on using the best available scientific evidence but recognizing that risk cannot be entirely 
9 eliminated;
10 6. Presenting facts as the basis for guidance and not employing fear, shame or falsehood 
11 to manipulate the public;
12 7. Not forcing medical interventions on a population, which must be voluntary and 
13 based upon informed consent rather than coercion; and
14 8. Being honest and transparent, giving fact-based and data-based advice and 
15 acknowledging errors or changed evidence.
