 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1173
H.P. 745 House of Representatives, March 14, 2023
An Act Directing the Bureau of General Services to Ensure 
Adequate Air Quality in All State-owned and State-leased Buildings
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative MONTELL of Gardiner.
Cosponsored by Senator CARNEY of Cumberland and
Representatives: ANKELES of Brunswick, COPELAND of Saco, KESSLER of South 
Portland, MALON of Biddeford, O'CONNELL of Brewer, RISEMAN of Harrison, 
SHAGOURY of Hallowell.

Page 1 - 131LR1594(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง1742-H is enacted to read:
3ยง1742-H.  Bureau of General Services; air quality assurance in state-owned and state-
4leased buildings
5 The Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of General Services 
6 shall ensure adequate air quality in buildings owned or leased by the State, whether used 
7 by the executive, judicial or legislative branches, including but not limited to buildings in 
8 the State House complex.  In order to ensure adequate air quality, the department shall test, 
9 inspect and monitor all factors that may affect air quality in each building, including by 
10 testing for radon, formaldehyde, mold, microbial growth, vermin and any other potential 
11 source of air contamination.  The department shall develop and implement action plans to 
12 remedy air quality issues that are discovered and to maintain adequate air quality, including 
13 but not limited to action plans for inspecting and, as appropriate, installing, renovating or 
14 redesigning building ventilation systems.
15Sec. 2.  Report and recommendations.  By January 15, 2024, the Department of 
16 Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of General Services shall provide to the 
17 Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs a report on its testing 
18 and inspection of buildings as required under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, section 
19 1742-H together with a report of action plans developed or implemented under that section 
20 as well as an estimate of any costs the department identifies to complete actions necessary 
21 to ensure adequate air quality in accordance with that section.  The Joint Standing 
22 Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs may report out a bill to the Second 
23 Regular Session of the 131st Legislature to fund all costs identified by the department in 
24 its report.
25SUMMARY
26 This bill does the following.
27 1. It directs the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of 
28 General Services to ensure adequate air quality in buildings owned or leased by the State, 
29 whether used by the executive, judicial or legislative branches, including but not limited to 
30 buildings in the State House complex.  The department is directed to test, inspect and 
31 monitor all factors that may affect air quality in each building and develop and implement 
32 action plans to remedy air quality issues that are discovered and to maintain adequate air 
33 quality. 
34 2. By January 15, 2024, it directs the Department of Administrative and Financial 
35 Services, Bureau of General Services to provide to the Joint Standing Committee on 
36 Appropriations and Financial Affairs a report on its testing and inspection of buildings 
37 together with a report of action plans developed or implemented as well as an estimate of 
38 any costs the department identifies to complete actions necessary to ensure adequate air 
39 quality.  The Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs may report 
40 out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 131st Legislature to fund all costs identified 
41 by the department in its report.26
