 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1878
H.P. 1203 House of Representatives, May 3, 2023
Resolve, to Create the Council to Transition Long Creek Youth 
Development Center
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Speaker TALBOT ROSS of Portland.
Cosponsored by Representatives: LOOKNER of Portland, MATHIESON of Kittery, 
MILLIKEN of Blue Hill, SALISBURY of Westbrook.

Page 1 - 131LR1193(01)1Sec. 1.  Council established; powers and duties. Resolved:  That the Council 
2 to Transition Long Creek Youth Development Center, referred to in this resolve as "the 
3 council," is established to transition juvenile corrections programs currently under the 
4 authority of the Long Creek Youth Development Center to community providers. The 
5 council shall determine which services are needed, the funding needed for those services, 
6 the qualifications of community service providers eligible to contract for services and the 
7 community service providers that receive funding.  The council shall consider the number 
8 of children in need of services, the locations of the services and of the children and the 
9 needs of the individual children.
10Sec. 2.  Council membership. Resolved: That the council consists of the 
11 Commissioner of Corrections, the Commissioner of Health and Human Services, the 
12 Commissioner of Education, 2 community providers of residential services and 4 former 
13 residents of Long Creek Youth Development Center.  The commissioners shall jointly 
14 appoint the community providers and former residents.
15SUMMARY
16 This resolve establishes the Council to Transition Long Creek Youth Development 
17 Center, consisting of the Commissioner of Corrections, the Commissioner of Health and 
18 Human Services, the Commissioner of Education, community providers of residential 
19 services and former residents of Long Creek Youth Development Center, to transition 
20 juvenile corrections programs currently under the authority of the Long Creek Youth 
21 Development Center to community providers.16
17
18
19
20
21
