 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1056
S.P. 425 In Senate, March 7, 2023
An Act Restricting State Assistance in Federal Collection of 
Personal Electronic Data and Metadata
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.
Cosponsored by Representative BOYER of Poland and
Senators: GUERIN of Penobscot, TIPPING of Penobscot, Representatives: ANDREWS of 
Paris, MORRIS of Turner, WHITE of Guilford.

Page 1 - 131LR2187(01)1Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
2Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง60 is enacted to read:
3ยง60.  Federal collection of electronic data or metadata
41.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 
5 following terms have the following meanings.
6 A. "Electronic data" means information related to an electronic communication or the 
7 use of an electronic communication service, including the contents, sender, recipient 
8 or format of an electronic communication, the precise or approximate location of the 
9 sender or recipient of an electronic communication at any time during the electronic 
10 communication, the time or date the electronic communication was created, sent or 
11 received and the identity of a person or device involved in the electronic 
12 communication, including an Internet protocol address.
13 B. "Metadata" means information generally not visible when a document created 
14 electronically is printed describing the history, tracking or management of the 
15 electronic document, including information about data in the electronic document that 
16 describes how, when and by whom the data were collected, created, accessed or 
17 modified and how the data are formatted.
182. Prohibition on assistance to federal agencies.  A department, agency or political 
19 subdivision of the State may not assist, participate with or provide material support or 
20 resources to enable or facilitate a federal agency in the collection or use of a person's 
21 electronic communications unless one or more of the following apply.
22 A. The person has given informed consent.
23 B. The collection or use of the electronic data or metadata is pursuant to a warrant, 
24 based upon probable cause, that particularly describes the person, place or thing to be 
25 searched or seized.
26 C. The collection or use of electronic data or metadata is in accordance with a legally 
27 recognized exception to the federal warrant requirements.
28SUMMARY
29 This bill restricts an agency, department or political subdivision of the State from 
30 assisting, participating with or providing material support or resources to facilitate a federal 
31 agency's collection or use of a person's electronic communications.29
30
31
