 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1307
H.P. 832 House of Representatives, March 23, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Require Constitutional Officers to Be Elected by Statewide 
Election
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative ANDREWS of Paris.
Cosponsored by Senator STEWART of Aroostook, Senator FARRIN of Somerset and
Representatives: DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor, 
SUPICA of Bangor, WARREN of Scarborough, Senators: BALDACCI of Penobscot, 
BENNETT of Oxford, BRAKEY of Androscoggin, HICKMAN of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 131LR0778(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Second, §1 is amended to read:
5Section 1.  Election.  The Secretary of State shall be chosen biennially at the first 
6 session of the Legislature, by joint ballot of the popular election on the same date and in 
7 the same manner as provided by this Constitution for the election of Senators and 
8 Representatives in convention.
9Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Second, §1-A is amended to read:
10Section 1-A.  Succession to the office of Secretary of State.  If a vacancy occurs 
11 in the office of the Secretary of State, the first deputy secretary of state shall act as the 
12 Secretary of State until a Secretary of State is elected by the Legislature during the current 
13 session if in session, or at the next regular or special session popular election.  A vacancy 
14 in the office of the Secretary of State may be filled by a new election.
15Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Third, §1 is amended to read:
16Section 1.  Election.  The Treasurer shall be chosen biennially, at the first session of 
17 the Legislature, by joint ballot of the popular election on the same date and in the same 
18 manner as provided by this Constitution for the election of Senators, and Representatives 
19 in convention.
20Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Third, §1-A is amended to read:
21Section 1-A.  Succession to the office of Treasurer.  If a vacancy occurs in the 
22 office of Treasurer of State, the deputy treasurer of state shall act as the Treasurer of State 
23 until a Treasurer of State is elected by the Legislature during the current session if in 
24 session, or at the next regular or special session popular election.  A vacancy in the office 
25 of Treasurer of State may be filled by a new election.
26Constitution, Art. IX, §11 is amended to read:
27Section 11.  Attorney General.  The Attorney General shall be chosen biennially 
28 by joint ballot popular election on the same date and in the same manner as provided by 
29 this Constitution for the election of the Senators and Representatives in convention.  
30 Vacancy in said office occurring when the Legislature is not in session, may be filled by 
31 appointment by the Governor, subject to confirmation as required by this Constitution for 
32 Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court.
33Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
34Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
35 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
36 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
37 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
38 resolution by voting upon the following question:
39 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that the 
40 Secretary of State, the Treasurer of State and the Attorney General be 
Page 2 - 131LR0778(01)41 elected by the people biennially in the same manner as members of the 
42 Senate and the House of Representatives?"
3 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
4 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
5 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
6 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
7 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
8 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
9 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
10 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
11Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
12 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
13 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
14SUMMARY
15 This resolution proposes a constitutional amendment that provides for direct popular 
16 election beginning in 2024 of the Secretary of State, the Treasurer of State and the Attorney 
17 General biennially in the manner currently provided for Senators and Representatives.1
2
15
16
17
