 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1150
S.P. 477 In Senate, March 13, 2023
Resolve, Requiring the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry to Document, Disclose and Publish All Best 
Management Practices Regarding the Use of Noise Devices to 
Control Birds at Orchards
(EMERGENCY)
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.
Cosponsored by Representative: HASENFUS of Readfield.

Page 1 - 131LR0693(01)1Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 
2 become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and
3Whereas, agricultural activities often occur in close proximity to residential 
4 neighborhoods; and
5Whereas, it is important that best practices are used in agricultural activities to reduce 
6 as much as possible the conflict between the agricultural activities and the residents of the 
7 neighborhoods; and
8Whereas, agricultural activities for this year's growing season will commence well 
9 before the end of this legislative session; and
10Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 
11 the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 
12 immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 
13 therefore, be it
14Sec. 1.  Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 
15document, disclose and publish all best management practices regarding use 
16of noise devices to control birds at orchards. Resolved: That, by June 1, 2023, the 
17 Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry shall document, disclose and 
18 publish all best management practices in the department's possession or knowledge 
19 regarding the use of noise devices to control birds at orchards, including publishing the 
20 practices on the department's publicly accessible website.  
21Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this legislation 
22 takes effect when approved.
23SUMMARY
24 This resolve directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 
25 document, disclose and publish all best management practices in the department's 
26 possession or knowledge regarding the use of noise devices to control birds at orchards, 
27 including publishing the practices on the department's publicly accessible website.24
25
26
27
