 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 776
S.P. 335 In Senate, February 21, 2023
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Establish the Right to Bodily Autonomy
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.
DAREK M. GRANT
Secretary of the Senate
Presented by Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec.

Page 1 - 131LR0484(01)1Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 
2 Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 
3 proposed:
4Constitution, Art. I, ยง26 is enacted to read:
5Section 26.  Bodily autonomy.  Every person has a natural, inherent and inalienable 
6 right to bodily autonomy.
7Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date.  
8Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 
9 respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding 
10 a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November following the 
11 passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment proposed in this 
12 resolution by voting upon the following question:
13 "Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to declare that every 
14 person has a natural, inherent and inalienable right to bodily autonomy?"
15 The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 
16 and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding square 
17 below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and declared 
18 in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of State in 
19 the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall review the 
20 returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the amendment, 
21 the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment becomes part of 
22 the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation.
23Secretary of State shall prepare ballots.  Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 
24 shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies of 
25 this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.
26SUMMARY
27 This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine by declaring that every 
28 person has a natural, inherent and inalienable right to bodily autonomy.27
28
