 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper131st MAINE LEGISLATURE
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023
Legislative Document No. 1934
H.P. 1242 House of Representatives, May 15, 2023
Resolve, to Improve the Coordination and Delivery of Planning 
Grants and Technical Assistance to Communities in Maine
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.
ROBERT B. HUNT
Clerk
Presented by Representative SACHS of Freeport.
Cosponsored by Senator DUSON of Cumberland and
Representatives: CLOUTIER of Lewiston, COPELAND of Saco, GERE of Kennebunkport, 
GOLEK of Harpswell, MALON of Biddeford, MATLACK of St. George, RANA of Bangor, 
SARGENT of York.

Page 1 - 131LR1185(01)1Sec. 1. Review of planning grants and technical assistance to communities 
2in this State. Resolved: That the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future shall review 
3 opportunities and structural changes in the organization of State Government and make 
4 recommendations that will result in the improved coordination and implementation of 
5 planning grants and technical assistance programs for communities in this State and 
6 regional planning and development organizations. The review must:
7 1. Consider the municipal planning grants and technical assistance needs of 
8 communities, especially the smallest and most underfunded communities, particularly 
9 related to navigating complex challenges, including, but not limited to, land use planning, 
10 climate resilience, natural resource protection, transportation, housing development, 
11 economic development and infrastructure;
12 2. Consider state programs that currently exist to provide municipal planning grants 
13 and technical assistance to communities in this State to help them address those needs, and 
14 identify gaps in services and geographic coverage;
15 3. Consider mechanisms to support municipalities and regional planning and 
16 development organizations in competing for ongoing competitive state and federal funding 
17 opportunities;
18 4. Recommend the most effective organizational structure for state-funded programs 
19 that support local government to ensure that municipalities and regional planning and 
20 development organizations that support communities have the support they need in a 
21 coordinated, easily accessible manner with fewer points of entry; and
22 5. Recommend the optimal organizational structure and staffing configurations and 
23 include a summary of budget implications to improve coordination and implementation of 
24 planning grants and technical assistance.
25Sec. 2. Consultation. Resolved: That the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future 
26 shall consult with diverse stakeholders, including representatives of municipalities and 
27 regional planning and development organizations, to provide input on their needs and 
28 recommendations, and the office shall coordinate recommendations with leadership and 
29 staff from the state agencies that manage programs and grant funds across State 
30 Government that support community planning and technical assistance, including the 
31 Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, the Department of Community and 
32 Economic Development, the Department of Marine Resources, the Department of 
33 Transportation, the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and the Department of 
34 Environmental Protection, and coordinate with the Department of Administrative and 
35 Financial Services to consider and develop recommendations regarding any budget and 
36 staffing issues.
37Sec. 3. Report. Resolved: That the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future shall 
38 submit a report including proposed legislation and financial and staffing implications with 
39 regard to its review and consultation under this resolve to the Joint Standing Committee on 
40 State and Local Government and the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
41 Financial Affairs by December 6, 2023.
Page 2 - 131LR1185(01)1SUMMARY
2 This resolve directs the Office of Policy Innovation and the Future to review 
3 opportunities and structural changes in the organization of State Government and make 
4 recommendations that will result in the improved coordination and implementation of 
5 planning grants and technical assistance programs for communities in this State and 
6 regional planning and development organizations. The office must consult with diverse 
7 stakeholders when conducting its review and report to the Joint Standing Committee on 
8 State and Local Government and the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
9 Financial Affairs by December 6, 2023.2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
