'“’ ; \.11.;,{-;:= 
>5?‘ =1.e\=*>»-"'"- 
.. = 
Z V 
'5 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Trafﬁc Safety Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 
JANET T. MILLS COL. WILLIAM ROSS 
GOVERNOR CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT 
COMMISSIONER DEPUTY cnnar 
Testimony of Lt. Bruce Scott 
NEITHER FOR N011 AGAINST LD 1076 
An Act to Expand the Use of Traffic Cameras for School and Work 
Zones _ 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Aaron 
Turcotte, and I am the sergeant of the State Police-Traf ﬁc Safety Unit.I 
am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety 
and the Maine State Police NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 1076. 
This bill would allow for speed cameras to be used in School zones and 
construction zones. Many states already allow for speed cameras but 
have strict rules on use, none of which are provided within this bill. 
This bill doesn't provide any guidance or place any restrictions on the 
use of cameras and the allowable enforcement as a result of the images 
and information captured. The use of speed cameras is a public policy 
matter but this committee should be aware of some potential concerns 
as they deliberate. Studies indicate the proper use of speed cameras 
can effectively reduce speed and crashes in the areas they are in use, 
but Committee should be cautioned with the following; 
1N TEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207)624-8945 (Fax)
Most states require the violation to be conﬁrmed by a police ofﬁcer 
prior to the issuance ofa . ticket, set maximum ﬁnes, do not allow the 
conviction to go on a person’s driving record, prohibit insurance 
premium hikes, require a warning for a ﬁrst offense, sets minimum 
speed before summonses may be issued, require signage to warn 
motorists, require approval by DOT, etc. The fallibility of the 
equipment, the state’ s burden of proof, the lack of ability for the 
alleged offender to challenge, the equipment ’s accuracy all need to be 
considered when writing this type of law. 
Also, speed cameras don’t immediately stop the behavior and don’t 
take into consideration any of the factors that a police ofﬁcer in the 
ﬁeld may consider such as the use of discretion when road and trafﬁc 
conditions may be conducive to higher or lower speeds at that time. 
The operator ’s reason for the violation is not considered, such as 
rushing a pregnant woman expecting immediate delivery, an ill, or 
even worse dying person, to the ER. Driving history and other factors 
that are used to determine if voluntary compliance can be achieved 
without the issuance of a summons are not considered. 18 states 
currently allow some form of automated speed enforcement. Missouri 
Supreme Court issued two rulings in 2015 indicating that speed 
cameras were unconstitutional in their state, and they are no longer in 
use there. This was primarily because their law shifted the burden onto 
the owner of the vehicle to prove they were not driving as opposed to 
current practice that requires the prosecutor to prove who was driving 
at the time of the violation. 
In Maine, the state must prove who the operator of the vehicle was at 
the time of the violation. The state must also demonstrate that the 
radar unit was properly set up, tested for functionality, and checked 
for calibration prior to use and then must also prove the radar unit was 
operated by a trained police ofﬁcer. When this burden is met, then and 
only then, is the onus shifted onto the alleged offender to prove the 
radar reading wasn’t accurate or somehow it wasn’t their vehicle in the 
radar beam. 
Also, vendor supported systems often have strings attached to them 
including a requirement that tickets to be issued, even under the 
state’ s objection, to ensure enough revenue is generated. This has 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
caused contention across the country and created the narrative that 
speed cams are merely a money grab for the state. Clarifying the 
funding structure so vendors are not paid on a per ticket basis can help 
overcome that burden." 
For these reasons, we are NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 1076. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State 
Police, I thank you for your time and would be happy to try and 
answer any questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207)624-7088 (Fax)
