 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, Esq.  
 
LD 1076 – Ought Not to Pass  
 
An Act to Expand the Use of Traffic Cameras for School and Work Zones  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
 
April 4, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, good afternoon. My name is Michael Kebede, and I 
am policy counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed t o advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions through advocacy, education, and litigation. On 
behalf of our members, we urge you to vote against this bill because it would unduly 
expand the surveillance capabilit ies of law enforcement.  
 
The ACLU has a long history of working with legislators of both parties to preserve 
the privacy rights of the people of Maine, to protect against government overreach 
and unnecessary intrusion into our lives . Traffic cameras allow for government 
monitoring of our drivi ng behaviors at a scale that exceeds what is possible when 
using traditional traffic enforcement methods. Installing cameras, regardless of the 
purpose, are a step toward a surveillance camera culture that the state of Maine 
has rejected for decades and th at we should all hesitate to embrace . 
 
While the Legislature  might scrupulous ly cabin the permissible uses of new law 
enforcement capabilities, police agencies can and have exceeded those purposes, at a 
cost to our civil liberties. Indeed, t his very bill admirably restricts the permissible 
uses of traffic cameras to enforcement of se ctions 2074 and 2075 of Title 29 -A. 
However, some law enforcement officials might succumb to the temptation to use 
this technology for purposes not clearly articulated in th is bill.  
 
As bad , the bill’s own language currently includes a possible loophole t hat would 
allow a law enforcement agency to use traffic cameras for any law enforcement 
purpose. The bill’s proposed subsection 3 (lines 34 to 40, page 1) reads:   
 
3.  School zones.  The State or a municipality may use a traffic surveillance 
camera equipped with a speed measurement device in a school zone to prove or 
enforce a violation of section 2074, subsection 1, paragraph A. A photograph, 
microphotograph, videotape or other record ed image or audio produced by a traffic 
  
 
surveillance camera mounted in a school zone is confidential and may only be 
released to a law enforcement officer for the purpose of an investigation into a 
violation of the law  or to a law enforcement officer, pros ecutor, defendant or court for 
the purpose of a prosecution of a violation of the law . 
 
A reasonable person would read highlighted portions  as referring to the law 
described in the subsection ’s first sentences – i.e., “section 2074, subsection 1, 
paragraph  A.” However, a law enforcement agency bent on a more expansive 
reading  (and, therefore, more expansive surveillance capabilities)  might read the 
highlighted language to mean any law. The bill’s s ubsection 4 (lines 41 to 43 on 
page 1 and lines 1 to 5 of pa ge 2) includes the same language (“a violation of the 
law”), so that section is similarly vulnerable to an unduly expansive misreading.  
 
But even if the committee amends the bill to make it crystal clear what “the la w” 
means, i t is wiser for policymakers to deny highly invasive tools to law enforcement. 
We urge you to instead investigate other methods to solve the serious problem of  
irresponsible driving : speed bumps; bike lanes; barriers between bicycles and cars; 
and still mor e solutions that do not expand police powers .  
 
Thank you for your time and attention.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
