 
1 
 
 
131st Legislature 
Senate of 
Maine  
Senate District 23 
 
   Senator Mattie Daughtry 
Assistant Majority Leader 
3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Office (207) 287-1515 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing 
LD 1076, An Act to Expand the Use of Traffic Cameras for School  
and Work Zones 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
April 4, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly represent Senate 
District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part 
of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 1076, “An Act to Expand the Use of 
Traffic Cameras for School and Work Zones.” 
 
For the 131st Legislature, traffic safety is a top priority for my constituents who are increasingly 
using active transportation networks – which often connect or overlap with roads – for 
commuting, exercising, or working. That’s why, in the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, I introduced a bill that would require teachers to instruct their students on basic, 
consistent traffic safety curriculum. I believe the need for traffic safety education is critical 
because Maine continues to set grim new records with 21 pedestrians dying on a Maine road in 
2022. Pedestrians need to know how to keep themselves safe, and drivers need to know how to 
watch for pedestrians. 
 
In March, this Committee held a public hearing for a bicycle and pedestrian safety bill that my 
fellow Brunswick lawmaker (and Transportation Committee Member) Representative Dan 
Ankeles brought forward. In his testimony, he stated: “In 2021, we had the largest increase in the 
nation in pedestrian deaths.” That’s a staggering statistic, especially for a geographically large, 
rural state like Maine. Later that same month, this Committee heard and worked on a bill from 
Representative Paige Zeigler that would have increased the penalties for texting and driving. As 
you all know, the Committee ultimately voted against the bill, but it expressed strong, bipartisan 
support for increased, ongoing awareness campaigns that highlight the dangers of texting while 
driving. I thank the Committee for taking this action; it will undoubtedly help protect cyclists, 
drivers, and pedestrians – and will save their lives. 
 
But education and higher fines are individual components of the overall strategy for making 
Maine roads safer for vulnerable users. Now that I’ve reviewed some of this other work, I’d like 
to turn your attention to the bill before you all today, LD 1076, “An Act to Expand the Use of 
Traffic Cameras for School and Work Zones.” As the bill title suggests, LD 1076 would allow 
 
2 
 the limited deployment of automated speed enforcement devices – also known as traffic speed 
cameras – in school and work zones. Traffic speed cameras would help law enforcement officers 
identify drivers who are speeding through school and zones, where students and construction 
workers are at risk and vulnerable. Nationwide, approximately 25,000 children  are injured 
annually, and more than 100 are killed on average while walking to or from school. These 
unintentional pedestrian injuries are the fifth leading cause  of injury-related death in the United 
States for children ages 5 to 19; whereas, teens have twice the death rate of younger children and 
account for half of all child pedestrian deaths. If we can’t keep our kids safe at or near school, 
then we are failing them. 
 
When we talk about law enforcement, some groups and people raise legitimate concerns that 
particular devices or tools could be used to disproportionately target minority or non-white 
populations. In order to reduce that risk, law enforcement officers undergo implicit bias training 
that can help them refrain from racial profiling and apply the law evenly and fairly to all people – 
no matter their appearances. A traffic camera, however, is not a person. It simply collects data: 
the speed of the car and the license plate number. If the car is speeding, then law enforcement 
can issue a ticket. We already use a similar system for school buses that have been equipped with 
traffic cameras.  
 
Although the traffic speed camera lacks implicit bias, the person who decides where to place the 
camera may not. I’d welcome language to amend that bill that would make it clear these cameras 
cannot be used disproportionately in minority communities. I’d also welcome language that 
would clarify that these traffic speed cameras can be used only for enforcing speed violations, 
rather than other behaviors. I understand that cameras will increase the surveillance powers of 
law enforcement, so it’s important that we clearly define where the cameras can be installed and 
what they will be used for. 
 
Typically, you’ll hear lawmakers talk about Maine “leading the way” on an issue. In this case, I 
am asking you to let Maine join the 18 states and 171 communities  which already use traffic 
speed cameras. After New York City installed fixed traffic speed cameras, speeding has dropped 
72 percent  while crashes with injuries have declined by 8 percent. We need to use a variety of 
tools for making Maine’s roads safer, and traffic speed cameras can help us reverse the trend of 
increasing pedestrian deaths.  
 
As I close, I want to thank the Bicycle Coalition of Maine, especially Jim Tasse and Angela 
King, who worked so hard on this bill. We began meeting months ago, so – pun intended – it’s 
been “a long road.” On a serious note, I’m grateful for their advocacy to make Maine roads safer 
for pedestrians and cyclists.  
 
And with that, I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
might have. 
 
 
Mattie Daughtry 

 
3 
 Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23 
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth 
 
