 
 
4/4/2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation,  
My name is Zoe Miller and I facilitate the Moving Maine Network. We are a multi-sector, 
statewide collaborative working to ensure all Mainers have access to transportation regardless 
of background, destination, or geography. I am testifying in support of LD 1076 An Act to 
Expand the Use of Traffic Cameras for School and Work Zones.   
In 2022, the Moving Maine Network developed policy priorities through input from hundreds of 
stakeholders representing various interests and lived experiences across the state. Increasing 
safety on Maine’s roads and sidewalks emerged as a top priority. We are especially concerned 
with ensuring that Maine’s roads and sidewalks are safe places for those traveling outside of a 
motor vehicle. Speeding traffic is one of biggest threats to safety for people who walk, bike, and 
wheel. And we know that many people are traveling outside of a motor vehicle are doing so 
because they cannot drive or cannot afford to have a vehicle. This includes people with 
disabilities, older adults, people with low incomes, and youth.  
Automated speed enforcement – or speed cameras -- can be an effective tool for reducing 
operating speeds, especially in locations where data shows that there are frequent speed-
related fatal and serious injury crashes. Studies find that cameras reduce the percentage of 
speeding vehicles by 14-65% percent, and serious injury and fatal crashes by 11-44% percent. 
Results from New York City’s speed camera program found that, in the zones where cameras 
were installed, total crashes declined by 15%, total injuries by 17%, fatalities by 55%, and 
excessive speeding violations by 60%. 
Research shows that speed cameras are more effective at reducing speeding than manual 
enforcement because cameras are consistent and predictable for drivers. Data from NYC’s 
speed camera program shows that, on average, daily violations at typical camera locations 
decline over time as drivers become aware of the cameras and drive more responsibly. NYC 
Department of Transportation also found that between 2014-2016, 81% of drivers did not 
receive more than one violation, further evidence that the cameras created an overall behavioral 
change. 
In closing, the Moving Maine Network supports this LD 1076 because slowing down traffic is a 
critical tool for making roads and sidewalks safe places for all Mainers. 
 
Sincerely,  
Zoe Miller, Facilitator, Moving Maine Network 
Zoe@movingmaine.org 
