TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 4/12/23 
LD 1345 —An Act to Permit Municipalities to Establish by Ordinance a Program 
for Partial Deferral of Property Taxes for Seniors 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------~------ 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee -— good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD I 3 45 — An Act to Permit 
Municipalities to Establish by Ordinance a Program for Partial Deferral of 
Property Taxes for Seniors. 
This bill competes with, and in some Ways duplicates, the existing optional 
municipal property tax deferral program (36 M.R.S. chapter 908—A), State property 
tax deferral program (36 M.R.S. chapter 908), State property tax stabilization 
program (36 M.R.S. chapter 908-B), and property tax fairness credit (36 M.R.S. 
§52l9-KK). The existence of several similar but competing state and municipal 
programs that are intended to accomplish the same goal will be administratively 
complex and will create confusion with taxpayers and municipal ofﬁcials. Any 
issues with the existing programs should be addressed directly, instead of layering 
on another complicated property tax relief program for seniors. 
The Administration would also like to note the following technical concerns: 
0 The bill denies participation in a municipal program if a taxpayer has been 
determined eligible for the state deferral program. If the intent is to only
1
disqualify someone who is actually participating in the deferral program, 
that should be clariﬁed. 
0 As noted, the language of the bill denies participation in the new program to 
those participating in any property tax deferral program, but then references 
section 908-B, which is the stabilization program and not a deferral program 
0 Allowing municipalities to restrict eligibility to residents who have lived in 
that municipality for multiple years may present a constitutional issue. 
0 Looking at the language of the bill, the last paragraph in section 3 should 
refer to the lists in sections 4 and 5, and the liens in section 6. In addition, 
the 2nd and 3rd paragraphs of subsection 4 are inconsistent and confusing. 
The 2nd paragraph states that the municipality must record a list with the 
registry identifying participants and including their name, address, and 
deferred tax amounts. The 3rd paragraph then states that the municipality 
can only release public information on the program in statistical summary as 
long as it doesn’t include individually identiﬁable information. 
0 Finally, the application for the program and related hearings are treated as 
conﬁdential, presumably because of information related to household 
income. Adding the layer of conﬁdentiality will create additional 
administrative burdens for municipal ofﬁcials in a tax system that is 
generally public. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
