MOFGA Testimony In Support Of 
LD 525 - An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them 
to Organize for the Purposes of Collective Bargaining 
April 18, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the ]oint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Heather Spalding and I am deputy director of 
the Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association (MOFGA). I am speaking in support of 
LD 525 - An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the Purposes of Collective 
Bargaining. MOFGA supported this initiative in the last Legislature and we are advocating again 
for reform of national and state farm labor laws. 
A broad-based community, MOFGA is creating a food system that is healthy and fair for all of 
us. Through education, training and advocacy, we are helping farmers thrive, making more 
local, organic food available and building sustainable communities. MOFGA certifies 535 
organic farms and processing operations representing roughly $90 million in sales and we are 
working hard to create opportunities for Maine's next generation of farmers. Each of these 
farmers is a Maine businessperson for whom economic health and environmental health are 
interdependent. 
We also have dedicated vast human and financial resources to developing the farm labor pool 
and training the next generation of Maine farmers. We offer an introductory farm 
apprenticeship program, beginning farmer training through our two-year Iourneyperson 
program, and a Farm Resilience Program for farmers in years 5-10 of their business when 
they're statistically the most likely to experience business failure. Many farmers who own 
MOFGA-certified operations got their start as apprentices on MOFGA farms decades ago. They 
now are hosting apprentices and committing to being mentors as well as employers. 
MOFGA supports the idea that all working people should have the opportunity to organize to 
ensure healthy and fair working terms and conditions. We are happy that this legislation 
enshrines and protects that opportunity for farmworkers, whose labor is physically demanding, 
often dangerous, low paid, and absolutely essential to all of us. 
LD 525 rights an historical wrong — an exemption in the National Labor Relations Act of 1935 
(NLRA), which, while protecting workers‘ rights to join unions, specifies that the term 
'employee' shall not include any individual employed as an agricultural laborer. We believe that 
this carve-out in the NLRA is indefensible and we applaud House Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
for her leadership in bringing back legislation to give farm workers in Maine the right to 
organize. 
_. 
_ ,;, _,,»,._ 
<5” , ‘."*‘@~_, 
it .:.,F§v~ _ 6» 
201-sea-4142 - www.mofga.org l‘ 
Po Box 110. Unity. ME 04988P
2 
a “Q; '4» .1 
‘j/Mic;<3
LD 525 would ensure that farm workers and their employers could negotiate for fair payment, 
job security, scheduling, paid time off, workplace safety, unemployment and other terms and 
conditions. If Maine were to pass LD 525, we would join nine other states that have passed 
collective bargaining for farm workers. Those states are: Arizona, California, Hawaii, Kansas, 
Massachusetts, New Iersey, New York, Oregon and Wisconsin. 
In the last Legislature we heard statements from members during the floor debate suggesting 
that there is no abuse of farm workers in Maine and therefore no need for such legislation. 
Though we sense that most farms in Maine do treat their workers very well, we have heard 
many personal stories, some of which you'll hear today, indicating that the balance of power is 
dangerously tipped toward employers who can take advantage of lax farm labor laws. We have 
heard accounts of verbal and physical abuse, wage theft, and poor housing conditions. Even if 
there were no such incidents, we maintain that the practice of collective bargaining should be 
approached as an opportunity for both farm workers and employers, not an onerous or divisive 
challenge. 
We have had questions from our farmers about the benefits of this legislation and whether this 
bill would help farmers gain access to a well-trained and dependable work force. MOFGA 
believes that open and effective communication and negotiating are the hallmarks of successful 
businesses. While we do not have an employees ’ union at our organization, we dedicate 
significant financial and human resources to our workplace culture and empower employees to 
work together to make our personnel policies the best they can be. 
While we recognize that the economic, political, seasonal and environmental forces that impact 
farming are very different from other employment sectors, we believe that the protected right to 
organize is needed to create an agriculture that is healthy and fair for all. Farm workers should 
be able to advocate for their interests without fear of retribution and we appreciate that 
advocacy is easier when there is a united front. 
Thank you very much and I would be happy to answer questions if you have any. 
>(~>(->(~>1~>(->(->('>l'X->(->(-$->l~*>(->(->l'>(->H(-9!->1->HF>F>t>l ‘>l'>(->1->(->H(->(->F>('>(->(->l->l- 
The Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association (MOFGA) started in 1971 and is the oldest and 
largest state organic organization in the country. We're a broad-based community that educates about 
and advocates for organic agriculture, illuminating its interdependence with a healthy environment, local 
food production, and thriving communities. We have 15,000 members, we certify more than 500 organic 
farms and processing facilities representing $90 million in sales, and we are working hard to provide 
training and create opportunities for Maine’s next generation of farmers. Each of these farmers is a Maine 
businessperson for whom economic health and environmental health are interdependent. While MOFGA 
envisions a future of healthy ecosystems, communities, people and economies sustained by the practices of 
organic agriculture, we attribute our success to collaboration and outreach to growers across the 
management spectrum.
