Jack McAdam 
McDougal Orchards LLC 
Springvale, Maine 
 
Committee on Labor and Housing 
LD 525 HP 330 
An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the Purposes of Collective 
Bargaining 
 
Committee Members: 
 
I am against this bill. I do not understand why it’s needed. 
 
As an agritourism farm we generally hire high school students for summer work. They require constant 
supervision. They are paid the minimum wage which means we have to pay our long time employees 
more than minimum wage. 
 
Our routine work hours are 8-4 Monday through Friday with 30 minutes for lunch (unpaid) and two 15 
minute (paid) breaks, one at 10:00 am and the other at 2:00 pm. One employee, who is coasting to 
retirement, takes every Friday off. Another works until 2:00 pm and later if we need him. A working 
mother comes in a 9:00 am and leaves at 2:00 pm and some days at noon. She sometimes has to leave 
early due to a sickness or a bus cancellation. 
 
We are very flexible, if they need time off we usually okay it. When we need them for planting or 
harvest they are here. On hot/humid days they can leave at noon if they want to. 
 
If the business makes money at the end of the season we pay every employee (agricultural and retail) a 
bonus. We take a percentage of the net profit and we figure in how many hours they worked since 
opening day. The more hours worked the more dollars in their bonus. One employee referred to this as 
profit sharing.  
 
If agricultural employees were to strike wouldn’t they do it during planting or harvest time. I do not 
recall seeing anything in the bill about striking. This would delay planting and the harvest. During 
harvest the crop may be ruined. A no strike clause? 
 
Almost every farm operation is different. It’s not like a Starbucks or Chipotle employee that does pretty 
much the same jobs. 
 
As you can see we value our longtime employees. We’ve been lucky getting retail employees but not as 
many as we would like. I have heard from other businesses in town that our current and past employees 
love(d) working here.  
 
Are there bad farm owners in Maine that do not care about their employees? 
 
Thank you for reading this. 
 
Respectfully submitted  
Jack McAdam 
