Testimony of Jeannie M. Tapley, Director of Operations, Maine Potato Board to 
the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
April 18, 2023 
LD 525 — An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the 
Purposes of Collective Bargaining 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee; I 
am Jeannie Tapley, Director of Operations for the Maine Potato Board (MPB) and would like to 
express the MPB's opposition to LD 525: An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them 
to Organize for the Purposes of Collective Bargaining. 
We are here in opposition to LD 525, which if passed would be very detrimental to all 
agriculture in this state, As I was preparing this testimony, I am plagued with the question of 
why this bill is thought to be needed. When a farmer hires an employee, that employee knows 
what the job duties are and what the compensation for performing those duties will be. If an 
issue arises, the Maine Department of Labor is available to help employees and employers to 
resolve those issues. Unionization is not needed and would cause another undue burden and 
regulation on our agricultural community. 
This bill gives the perception that Maine agriculture mistreats their employees and this simply is 
not true. Most employees on family farms are treated as just that — family. In surveying our 
growers, the minimum average hourly wage for full time employees is $21.30; the highest being 
around $28.00, which is far greater than minimum wage and on top of that wage, most farmers 
provide beneﬁts to their employees such as health and dental plans, paid time off, company 
vehicles, etc. 
Maine potato growers understand how crucial it is to hire quality staff and do their very best to 
keep those employees; collective bargaining would destroy that relationship. Passing this bill 
allows outside organizations to dictate what is allowed on family farms that have no invested 
interest other than collecting dues. This bill will simply drive a wedge between farmers and the 
employees. 
In Maine, we have a very limited time in which to raise and harvest crops; in the potato industry, 
that is approximately 120 days. Agriculture is also faced with factors we have no control over 
such as the weather; we cannot plant a crop until ground conditions are suitable, we cannot plant 
in wet soil conditions and if it rains, cultivation and management of the crop during the summer 
is impacted. Harvesting can only begin when the crop has reached maturity and again cannot be 
done in wet conditions. 
If Lmionization is allowed for farm workers, this could cause an inten'uption at crucial 
production times, as well as the potential to cost small farm families thousands of dollars if there 
arises a need for mediation, arbitration, and legal fees. Small farms cannot afford the time lost 
with their crops as well as the added costs this bill could cause. Farmers already have a very low 
proﬁt margin and this bill could essentially drive up the cost of food for all in Maine.
The potato industry in Maine has always taken great pride in what we do, how we take care of 
the land, and provide healthy quality food to Maine residents and beyond; this also includes 
taking care of our employees. If LD 525 passes many potato growers will have to make hard 
business decisions to ensure they can continue to operate; in some cases that will mean rather 
than facing unionization, they may look to federal programs such as H2A migrant workers 
instead of the local workforce or to invest in equipment that will allow them to hire fewer 
employees. I also worry with the current inﬂation on diesel, fertilizer, electricity, etc. that some 
of our small farm families will be faced with the hard decision on whether to get done farming 
because they will not be able to afford staying in operation. 
We ask that you vote ought not to pass on LD 525 and show your support for agriculture in 
Maine and the staff that those farm families employ. I will be happy to answer any questions 
you have; I will be available for the work session and can provide any additional information 
necessary.
