1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
In Support of:  
LD 398,  HP0249 , An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees 
Under the Wage and Hour Laws , Sponsored  by Speaker  Rachel  Talbot Ross  of Portland  
LD 525,  HP0330 , An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the Purposes 
of Collective Bargaining , Sponsored by Speaker  Rachel  Talbot Ross  of Portland  
LD 1483,  SP0604, An Act to Protect the Rights of Agricultural Workers , Sponsored by 
Senator Craig  Hickman  of Kennebec  
 
April 1 8, 2023  
Senator Tipping , Representative  Roede r, members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, my 
name is Jeff McCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service Employees 
Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees Association repre sents over 13,000 workers across the state .   
 We’re here in support of LD 1483, LD  398 and LD 525. We see LD 1483, after talking with Senator  
Hickman , as a bill that should be codified immediately into state law.  We look forward  to seeing  LD 
398 and LD 525 be ing worked by the committee , the administration  and stakeholders , and then 
being  passed and signed into law. 
 
In 2023, Maine ’s elected officials should be doing everything  they can do to make sure workers 
have safe working conditions, humane housing accommodations and protections against 
employer intimidation in every industry.  Effort s to allow  farmworkers the right to organize and 
join a union to negotiate fair wages , reas onable schedules  and working conditions seem 
reasonable . The right to organize and join a union should be a basic human right.  
 
We understand that some farmers and farm owners may have concerns . We are hopeful the 
work of the committee can answer questions and concerns . We understand farming is extremely 
difficult work and we are aware that farming in Maine at times has been challenging  financially . 
I have worked on agricultural issues  in the past in my professional capacity and while in elected 
office. I have seen the L egislature do go od bipartisan work to help farmers. With LDs 398, 525 
and 148 3, I see an opportunity for the Legislature to do important work to support farm workers.  
I struggle that in 2023 we are debating farmworkers ’ fundamental First Amendment right to 
freedom of association and freedom of assembly. We as an organization believe t he right of 
workers to organize is a fundamental human right that all workers deserve. Those rights should not cease to exist simply because you work in  one industry verses another. We  also are aware  of 
the history surrounding this  issue.  
2 
 Agriculture in Maine is challenging . Farmers and farmworkers do incredible work as part of 
Maine ’s natural -resource -based economy. I understand the opposition and know that many in 
opposition today are caring people and many are good to the people who work for them. A t the 
same time,  we cannot ignore that workers  are being exploited and have been exploited in our 
great state in recent history . Our state policies and  laws should be used and updated to do all 
we can to  protect people from exploitation.   
 
I am happy to take any questions. Thank you.  
 
 
 
