MAINE LEGISLATURE 
131“ Legislature, First Regular Session 
Testimony of Michael Guare, Pine Tree Legal Assistance 
in Support of L.D. 398: 
“An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees 
under the Wage and Hour Laws” 
and in Support of L.D. 525: 
“An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize 
for the Purposes of Collective Bargaining" 
April 18, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and Members of the Committee: 
My name is Michael Guare. I am an attorney at Pine Tree Legal Assistance in Bangor. I work in 
our F armworker Unit and I have been representing migrant fann workers in Maine since 1998. 
There is a growing recognition in our country that the exclusion of farm workers from laws 
which provide some of the most basic rights which other workers have in the workplace is 
unnecessary and simply wrong. Attached to th written version of my testimony today is 
information about the steps taken in other states to right this historical injustice. Thirty states 
have extended the protection of their minimum wage laws to farm workers and there are now8 
states which have extended the right to receive overtime pay to farm workers. Also, while I did 
not have time to prepare or attach detailed information about this, according to the National 
Agricultural Law Center, 14 states provide collective bargaining rights to fann workers. 
The importance of these protections for farm workers cannot be overstated. The US Department 
Labor periodically commissions a report called the National Agricultural Workers Survey, or the 
“NAWS” . According to NAWS Research Report No. 16, dated January, 2022 (the most recent 
NAWS data available), the mean and median personal income of non-H-2A farmworkers in the 
United States is between $20,000 and $24,999 per year and the mean and median family income 
for farm workers is between $25,000 and $29,999 per year. Moreover, many farm workers have 
annual incomes far below even those amounts: the NAWS reports that 20% of all farm workers 
in the US, and 44% of all migrant farm workers, have annual family incomes below the federal 
poverty level. Another very telling statistic is that in Maine, the minimum wage is $13.80 per 
hour. Assuming 40 hours a week and 52 weeks a year — which is a very generous assumption for 
farm workers given the seasonal and intermittent nature of their work — that works out to an 
amiual income of $28,704, which exceeds the mean and median annual personal income for farm 
workers reported in the NAWS and is close to the top of the range of mean and median annual 
family income for farm workers reported in the NAWS. In other words, many, if not most, fann 
workers earn less than what we have determined here in Maine is the minimum which workers 
should be able to earn.
In my own experience as an advocate for farm workers, I have seen many examples of what the 
lack of legal protections for farm workers can mean in the real world. On several occasions, I 
have met with workers who complained about a problem they were having in the workplace— 
but it was a problem which did not involve a violation of the law. I advised them that the best 
way at least for most workers to deal with such a problem was to discuss it with the employer 
and try to work it out. However, I also had to advise them that because they were farm workers 
and did not have legal protection for engaging in concerted activity — protection which LD 525 
would provide — if the employer decided to ﬁre them in response, they would have no legal 
I'€COl1I'S€. 
Finally, I would like to brieﬂy describe to you the details of one of the cases I am currently 
working on, a case which brings the reasons why this legislation is so important into very clear 
focus. I am not at liberty to share any names with you, but I represent two workers who were 
employed at dairy here in Maine. In January, one of them asked their employers for a 25¢ raise, 
from $12.25 to $12.50 an hour. The employers refused and the workers then gave notice of their 
intention to quit. The next day, the employers came to the trailer where the workers were housed 
while the workers were eating lunch. One of the employers grabbed one of the worker’s phone, 
slammed it on the table 4 times, scattered and threw some of the food around the room and 
poured Pepsi onto what was left on the table. The employer spoke very harshly and called the 
worker very vulgar names which I should not repeat here and then grabbed the other worker and 
pushed him up against the refrigerator. While that was going on, the other employer told the ﬁrst 
worker that they had to stay and work without a raise because they had promised to do so— 
which the workers do not recall doing. The workers requested their last checks but the 
employers told the workers that they were not going to give them their last checks and told them 
to leave, which the workers did. We have since been able to obtain most of the unpaid wages.I 
would point out to the Committee that if these workers had been getting the minimum wage of 
$13.80 they might not have needed to ask for a raise in the ﬁrst place, and if they had had the 
right to act in concert, to request a raise and the employers knew that it would be illegal to 
retaliate against them for doing so, it might have been possible for this situation — and others like 
it - to have worked out without a violent confrontation. 
For these reasons I urge the Committee to vote “Ought to Pass” on both LD 398 and LD 525. 
Thank you.
