Janet T. Mills  
GOVERNOR   
S T A T E  O F  M A I NE  
B O A R D  O F  A R B I T R A T I O N  A N D  C O N C I L I AT I O N  
90 S T A T E  H O U S E  S T A T I O N  
A U G U S T A ,  M A I N E   0 4 3 3 3 -0 0 5 4  
( 2 0 7 )  2 8 7 -2015  
W W W . M A I N E . G O V / M L R B  
 
  
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 525 
 
“An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the 
Purposes of Collective Bargaining ” 
 
Neil P. Daly, Executive Director  
Maine Labor Relations Board  
April 18, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Neil Daly, and it is my privilege to serve as the Executive 
Director of the Maine Labor Relations Board (MLRB) . 
 
The following  testimony  is neither for , nor against , L.D. 525.  In sum, L.D. 525 provides 
agricultural employees  working on farms with at least five employees  the right to organize and 
engage in collective bargaining.  Under the proposed bill, the MLRB would be responsible for 
(1) conducting elections, (2) deciding related disputes over the composition of bargaining  units, 
(3) administering bargaining impasse resolution procedures, and (4) adjudicating complaints of 
alleged prohibited practices.  With several exceptions, L.D. 525’s proposed framework for 
agricultural labor relations is comparable to the established p rocedures currently enforced by the 
MLRB for the State’s four public -sector labor relations laws.  
 
In terms of L.D. 525’s impact to MLRB operations, it is difficult to predict with any certainty.  If 
a large percentage of eligible farm workers in Maine dec ided to organize or file related 
complaints, it would likely result in a volume of filings that the Board could not accommodate 
without negatively impacting the level of service we provide to our existing parties.  However, 
after consulting with those stat es where farm workers are permitted to organize, it appears 
unlikely that such a high percentage of farm workers will pursue filings with the Board , at least 
initially .1  As a result, the Board should be able to accommodate with our existing resources , for 
the time being,  the anticipated filings if L.D. 525 is enacted.  
 
 
1 Available information indicates sixteen states allow agricultural workers to organize.  Those states are Arizona, 
California, Hawaii, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, 
Ohio, Oregon, Washington, Wisconsi n.  Of these states, only California sees a consistently high volume of filings 
from agricultural workers.   In the past year , New York has seen a marked increase in  farm -related  filings  - this 
increase  has not overwhelmed their existing resources , but th ey are in the process of hiring staff to assist in 
conducting representation elections involving non -English speakers . 
 
 
 On the other hand, if the actual  filings greatly exceed our expectations, I anticipate requesting 
additional resources from a future legislative session.   For example, p otential cost s could  include 
obtaining translation services for hearings related to prohibited practice complaints or disputes 
over representation petitions  should the individuals involved not speak English as a primary 
language .  The actual scope of this impact, if any, may take several years to develop  and 
ascertain . 
 
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss L.D. 525.  I will try to answer any questions you have.  
 
