Noami  Brautigam
Monroe
LD 525
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing: 
My name is Noami Brautigam. I am a resident of Monroe. My partner, James Gagne, 
and I own and operate Second Frost Farm, where we grow diversified vegetables with
a crew of 3 seasonal employees.  Before starting Second Frost Farm, I was a 
farmworker for about five years.  Today I am testifying in support of LD 398 and LD 
525 as both a farm owner/employer and also as a former farmworker. 
I believe LD 398 and LD 525  should become law because all workers, including 
farmworkers deserve safe and dignified work and these protections for farmworkers 
will building a more resilient food system.
Before owning our farm, I worked for several amazing farmers around the state.  I 
came to these farm jobs with the privileges of being white, from a middle class 
family, college educated, cis-gendered and with English as my first language.  I loved 
farm work and as a farmworker I also found myself in a number of unsafe and 
undignified work situations including being expected to work longer days during 
heatwaves, being tasked with operating a tractor while a child rode on the 
transplanting attachment and working 55 hours per week for $125 and off grid 
housing.  I hope the experience of other farmworkers who come to their jobs with less
or different privileges than I are heard today.
Some farmers will tell you these bills are not necessary because they have great 
relationships with their employees.  While I am glad that many of my peers have 
mutually respectful relationships with their employees, these bills are not about 
individual relationships, are they?  Of course there exist farm employers and 
employees who have very positive, non-explotive relationships but the other reality is 
the current system in place also allows for farm employees to exploit their workers.  
As the climate crisis worsens and working conditions become more severe due to 
extreme weather it is going to be increasingly important to have farmworker 
protections/ bargaining ability. This couldn't be more true for farmworkers in the 
Pacific Northwest who worked through 115 degree conditions last spring. As work 
environments become more dangerous, I want farmworkers in the state of Maine to be
able to organize like the farmworkers in California did around demands such as more 
rigorous heat standards, undoubtedly saving lives.
Let us acknowledge that a sustainable food future is one that also includes the 
sustainability of its workforce.  I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 398 and LD 
525 as a beginning to building a resilient, dignified food system.
Thank you,
Noami Brautigam
554 Dickey Hill Rd
Monroe, ME 04951
secondfrostfarm@gmail.com
