 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  April 18, 2023  
 
Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (“MIRC ”) regarding:  
 
• LD 398 : An Act to  Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees Under the 
Wage and Hour Laws  
• LD 525 : An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the Purposes of 
Collective Bargaining  
• LD 1483 : An Act to Protect the Rights of Agricultural Workers  
 
Dear Members of the Committee on  Labor  and Housing : 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights 
Coalition . MIRC is  a statewide network  of almost 100 member organizations  working to enhance the 
lives of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC aspires  to advanc e systemic change s in Maine through 
collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and gro wing immigrant 
communities are heard.  
A key segment of Maine ’s immi grant communit ies are its agricultural farm workers , often people 
originally from Central America n or Caribbean nations  who do enormously hard work fo r not enough 
money . From blueberry farmers in Washington County to vegeta ble farmers in York County and various 
places in between, immigrant agricultural  workers are a pivotal part of Maine ’s economy.  
Many f armworkers  toil for wa ges that have not k ept up with inflation. For too many of them, those wa ges 
were not that high to begin with.  Comp ounding the ir often low pay are issues such as in adequate housing, 
wage theft,  difficult if not  unsafe working conditions, intimidation and har assment from employers, 
separation from friends and family, and other challenges. We are g rateful that many Maine State 
Legislator s have noticed the har d work done by Maine ’s agricultural workers and have proposed ways to 
improve their working conditions. Due to time constraints  and the fact that all three share a public hearing 
time, I am submitting testimony in support of three bills at once : 
• LD 398 provides they are cover ed by the same laws regarding  overtime & wages as other wo rkers 
• LD 525  would increase their access to workers ’ rights for organization and collective bargaining  
• LD 1483  provides protections for access to healthcare , education, legal services, and so on  
In the peak days of the COVID -19 pandemic , many of these folks were called “essential workers .” They 
were people who continued to ensure we got the food and other produ cts we need ed to get by . Now m ore 
than ever before, they need to be treated to fai r wage and hour laws, safe conditions, and access to worker 
rights.  MIRC is proud to join organizations such as Mano en Mano, the Maine Center for Economic 
Policy, the Maine AF L/CIO , and more in su pport of these bills  which would address those  concerns .  
Thank you for your consideration  of this important  matter. 
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston, ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
### 
