STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1056, An Act Restricting State Assistance in Federal Collection of Personal 
Electronic Data and Metadata 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
The purpose of this letter is to provide you with background information. This bill would 
prohibit, except under limited circumstances, state agencies from assisting federal agencies in 
collecting or using a person’s electronic communications.  The exceptions are if the person has 
consented, a warrant has been issued describing the person, place or thing to be searched or 
seized, or the use of electronic data or metadata is in accordance with a legally recognized 
exception to the federal warrant requirements. 
The Superintendent of Insurance regulates the business of insurance in Maine.  In that capacity, 
the Superintendent has entered into various MOUs with several Federal agencies, such as the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), and with the National Association of 
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)1 covering information sharing related to joint investigation 
efforts.   This bill would undercut those efforts by limiting what data the BOI may share.  The 
bill might also make other federal and state enforcement agencies reluctant to renew or enter into 
new information sharing agreements with the Superintendent. 
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any 
further assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
 
 
 
1 The NAIC is the standard setting membership organization of insurance regulators in the United States.  The NAIC assists state 
insurance regulators, individually and collectively, in serving the public interest through protecting consumers and ensuring fair, 
competitive, and health insurance markets.  See www.naic.org .  
