MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement in Opposition to L.D. 1056,  
An Act Restricting State Assistance in Federal Collection of Personal 
Electronic Data  and Metadata
March 29, 2023  
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of the Cumberland 
Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of 
Police Association in opposition to LD 1056.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and personal 
relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action in law 
enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police training 
and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for equality of law 
enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the prevention and detection 
of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics; and to promote the 
profession of law enforcement as an integral and dedicated force in today's society 
sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This bill restricts an agency, department or political subdivision of the State 
from assisting, participating with or providing material support or 
resources to facilitate a federal agency's collection or use of a person's 
electronic communications. 
We understand that there is a balance between an individual’s right to privacy and 
the public’s right to live in a safe community. However, we think that LD 1056 
puts too much emphasis on the individual without necessary regard to the public.  
One of our missions is to advance the prevention and detection of crime and this 
would directly contradict that mission. This bill would prohibit us working with 
our federal partners on very serious criminal matters. For example, matters like 
school threats, child abductions, and child pornography. These are matters that 
require close collaboration with our partners in federal law enforcement, and we 
welcome every chance that we get to broaden our resources so that we can resolve 
a matter quickly and efficiently. This way the victim finds peace more quickly and 
the public stays safe from further harm that the person might cause the community.  
If passed, we know that this bill would restrict our ability to resolve a threat to the 
public.  We would request that this committee vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1056.  
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President Chief 
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
And, on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank the 
committee members for your work on this Committee.  
