5 
Eric Brakey 
Senator, District 20 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 043,33 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1056, An Act Restricting State Assistance in 
Federal Collection of Personal Electronic Data and Metadata 
Before the Maine Legis|ature ’s Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Tuesday, March 28, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, 
Poland, and Durham. Today, l am here to present L.D. 1056, "An Act Restricting State 
Assistance in Federal Collection of Personal Electronic Data and Metadata. “ 
Ten years ago, U.S. Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR) asked the Director of National intelligence, 
James Clapper, in an open meeting of the Senate Intelligence Committee whether the National 
Security Agency (NSA) “collect[s] any type of data at all on millions or hundreds of millions of 
Americans? ” 
“No, sir," Clapper responded. “There are cases where they could inadvertently perhaps collect 
[data on Americans], but not wittingly. ” 
Thanks to the actions of a whistleblower named Edward Snowden (who remains persecuted by 
our federal government to this day), we know that Director Clapper lied to Congress. We know 
that the federal government has engaged in mass surveillance of every single American through 
the bulk collection of our digital data and metadata — all without an individualized warrant from 
a judge, articulating probable cause that a crime has been committed, as the 4th Amendment of 
our U.S. Constitution requires. 
ln his memoir, Snowden wrote, “I participated in the most significant change in the history of 
American espionage — the change from the targeted surveillance of individuals to the mass 
surveillance of entire populations. l helped make it technologically feasible for a single 
government to collect all the world’s digital communications, store them for ages, and search 
through them at will.” 
To recognize the danger of intelligence agencies with this kind of power - who can lie toA 
Congress about their unconstitutional actions and suffer no penalty -— let's look to the past of 
the FBl’s treatment of Martin Luther King, Jr. With the technology of the 1960s, the FBI targeted 
him for his political activism, spied on him, tapped his phones, threatened to disclose alleged 
affairs, and attempted to push him toward suicide.
Now imagine it is 2023 — with the technology of today. With little legal oversight, they could 
track his every move with GPS data, see every phone call he’s ever made, and learn what 
websites he is browsing. Further, they do not even need to do this in real time. With bulk data 
collection on everyone (stored in gigantic data centers, like the NSA’s Massive Data Repository 
in Bluffdale, Utah —- 1.5 million square feet, ﬁlled with sewers to hold many exabytes of data), they 
can look back at all of your digital footprints for decades. 
This all gives new meaning to the saying, “Show me the man and l will show you the crime." How 
can you have a functional democratic system when political dissidents can be targeted in this way? 
One thing l have always appreciated about the Maine Legislature is the bipartisan support this 
institution has demonstrated over the years for the 4th Amendment rights of the Maine people. l 
remember when this committee endorsed — and the legislature passed into law - protections 
requiring state ofﬁcials to observe due process and get a warrant from a judge to access cellular 
telephone records, handle GPS tracking data, place cameras on an individual ’s private property, or 
conduct drone surveillance. 
These laws do not prohibit the use of surveillance tools by state and local law enforcement. Rather, 
they uphold the constitutional requirements of due process, requiring a warrant from a judge. 
But while Maine has endeavored to hold our officials to the high standards of our Constitution, our 
federai government has shown no such regard. That is why this legislation is needed. 
This bill is known popularly as the “4th Amendment Protection Act." lt would prohibit state, county, 
and municipal ofﬁcials from assisting, participating with, or providing material support to the federal 
government in the collection or the use of a person's electronic data or metadata, absent informed 
consent, proper due process, or another legally recognized exception to federal warrant 
requirements. 
l brought this legislation forward once before in the 127th Maine Legislature. The majority of this 
committee voted to support it then. lt passed the House of Representatives by a vote of 82-58, but 
failed in the Senate. 
Today, l have brought this legislation back because the federal government ‘s respect for our 4th 
Amendment rights has not improved in the years since —— and it is time for the State of Maine to 
assert that we will not be party to these unconstitutional activities against the civil liberties of the 
Maine people and the American people. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. l will gladly take questions.
