P0 Box 7860 
Portland, ME D4112 
www.ac|umaine org 
AMERICAN GIVIL LIBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1056 — Ought to Pass 
An Act Restricting State Assistance in Federal Collection of Personal 
Electronic Data and Metadata 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am the policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine 
and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, We support LD 1056 in concept. 
Nearly a century ago, Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis characterized 
“the right to be left alone” as “the most comprehensive of rights and the right most 
valued by civilized [people]. ” Olmstead u. United States, 2'77 U.S. 488, 478 (1928). 
That right is guaranteed by the Fourth Amendment to the United States 
Constitution, which protects “persons, houses, papers, and effects” from 
“unreasonable search and seizure, ” and requires that search Warrants be supported 
by “probable cause.” The Maine Constitution also protects against “unreasonable 
searches and seizures ” and requires search Warrants based on probable cause. Me. 
Const. Art. I, Sec. 5. 
Though our constitutions continue to be vital sources of protection for 
individual liberty and human dignity, the interpretation of these documents often 
lags behind the needs of society. Courts do the best that the can to keep up with 
technological developments, but it can take many years for court cases to be 
decided, especially when they are appealed. The United States Supreme Court’s 
decision in Carpenter v. United States is one example. Although the Court updated 
Fourth Amendment law to apply to cellphones, it did so more than a decade after 
cellphones had become ubiquitous. See 585 U.S. ___, 138 S. Ct. 2206 (2017) (holding 
that government must have Warrant to obtain citizen’s cell phone location history). 
This is Why there is an important role for legislative bodies, particularly state 
legislatures, to play in ensuring that the protection of the right to privacy keeps 
pace with technological developments. This is a role that the Maine legislature has 
seized and exercised with admirable vigor, by passing legislation restricting the 
collection of cellphone content, location information, and metadata by law
enforcement. See l6 M.R.S.A. § 641 et seq. (Portable Electronic Device Content); 16 
M.R.S.A. § 647 et seq. (Electronic Device Location Information). Maine was one of 
the first states in the country to adopt protections of this kind, and these laws have 
become a model for other state legislators and privacy advocates. Maine’s actions 
also protected the privacy of its residents more than 4 years before the Supreme 
Court acted in Carpenter. 
We support the concept of LD 1056, to put strong guardrails around the 
Fourth Amendment. However, the bill’s language may need to be amended to 
ensure that the information covered by the bill is electronic data protected by the 
Fourth Amendment, and does not inadvertently include information that would 
prohibit the administrative functions of government unrelated to criminal or 
national security investigations. 
If amended properly, LD 1056 would help close a gap left by those privacy 
laws by ensuring that our law enforcement officials are not able to directly or 
indirectly violate our right to telecommunications privacy. The federal government 
has yet to adopt meaningful protections against unreasonable intrusions into our 
telecommunications privacy, but until they do, Maine law-enforcement officials need 
to know that Maine taxpayers pay their paychecks and the Maine legislature and 
courts set the rules for how and when they are allowed to intrude upon people’s 
privacy. 
Because this protection is necessary, and because Maine should continue to 
lead the nation in protecting individual privacy in the digital age, we support the 
intent of LD 1056, to ensure that Maine resources are not used to violate the 
Constitution.
