STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
MAINE STATE POLICE 
45 Commerce Drive - Suite 1 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
 
 
INTEGRITY                FAIRNESS           COMPASSION       EXCELLENCE 
 
 
         Janet T. Mills
Governor
  Michael J. Sauschuck
 Commissioner
      COL. Bill G. Ross
Chief
LTC. Brian P. Scott
Deputy Chief
Testimony of Major Scott A. Gosselin 
Maine State Police 
 
Opposed to LD 1056 
 
An Act Restricting State Assistance in Federal Collection of Personal Electronic Data and Metadata 
Sponsored by Senator Brakey 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and other distinguished members of the joint standing 
committee on Judiciary.  My name is Major Scott Gosselin and I am here representing the Maine State 
Police and the Department of Public Safety and to testify in opposition to LD 1056.   
 
This bill seeks to prevent collaboration between the State of Maine government and the United States 
federal government.  At first glance, the bill looks to affirm very basic tenets of criminal law such as those 
identified in the 4th Amendment of the US Constitution and subsequent and related case law.  The devil is 
in the details however with this proposed legislation.  Because this legislation is extremely broad and 
vague it is difficult to determine exactly how much information will be excluded from our collaboration 
with our federal partners, but I have identified a few items to consider: 
 
1. By federal statute, ESPs (electronic service providers) report child pornography transmissions to 
the NCMEC who in turn report those same transactions to state authorities such as the Computer 
Crimes Unit.  Those reports you know as Cyber-tips have sender/receiver information, sometimes 
locale information and some content data.  This bill would mean that the Maine State Police 
Computer Crimes Unit would not be able to share those tips in that same form with our federal 
partners who help us with these cases.  It should be noted that we do rely on collaboration from 
our federal partners with assistance on many of these case in terms of technology and manpower 
assistance. 
2. Reports of crime in the form of Screens shots from social media (Snapchat, Facebook, Twitter 
etc.) conversations as related to school threats, threats to others, hate crimes etc. would not be 
able to be shared with our federal partners since by their very essence they exist in digital form 
and would be included as items prohibited from federal collaboration. 
3. Reports of crime in the form of email threads would not be able to be shared with our federal 
partners also because by their very essence they exist in digital form and would thus be included 
as items prohibited from collaboration with our federal partners. 
 
In summation, as currently written, this proposed legislation would prevent us from sharing with our 
federal partners that criminal electronic or digital content which comes to us in the form of a criminal 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
MAINE STATE POLICE 
45 Commerce Drive - Suite 1 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
 
 
INTEGRITY                FAIRNESS           COMPASSION       EXCELLENCE 
 
 
         Janet T. Mills
Governor
  Michael J. Sauschuck
 Commissioner
      COL. Bill G. Ross
Chief
LTC. Brian P. Scott
Deputy Chief
report from others (a third party) who were privy to the data and might have been victims themselves, are 
reporting victimization of a third party or are reporting a potential threat of violence.   
 
There are three exceptions outlined in the bill that would allow us to cooperate with our federal partners:   
     A. The person has given informed consent.  
     B. The collection or use of the electronic data or metadata is pursuant to a warrant, based upon 
probable cause, that particularly describes the person, place or thing to be searched or seized.  
     C. The collection or use of electronic data or metadata is in accordance with a legally recognized 
exception to the federal warrant requirements.   
 
We don’t believe that any of these would eliminate our concerns as outlined above.     
 
It is for these reasons that we remain opposed to LD 1056.   
 
  
 
 
