 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
 
Testimony for LD 263: "An Act to Ensure Access to Health Care"  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee, my name is Dr. Deborah Hagler. I am a 
resident of Brunswick, a pediatrician, the mother of two young adults, and concerned 
citizen.  
 Only half of girls who become pregnant in adolescence will receive a high school diploma 
(versus 90% of those who do not become pregnant).   Children of adolescent mothers 
struggle as well. They are more likely to drop out of high school and struggle with health 
problems and unemployment as they age.
1  While rates of sexual activity have not 
changed among adolescents, the teen birth rate has been steadily dropping and contraception has played a significant role.
2  It cannot be overstated that access to 
essential reproductive services is critical for adolescents. Young people are impulsive and 
make careless decisions, often with no foresight into what consequences might result.   
 
LD 263 is very important for the care of adolescents in Maine. Most Catholic controlled  
health care facilities follow the Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church. This prohibits these institutions from offering contraception/ abortion/ condom distribution and the full spectrum of HIV care services, for example. It is a real possibility that a religiously 
controlled provider could become the only option for care in some of our rural 
communities. Teens would have no idea about other options for their reproductive care which could have profound impacts on the future of the young women and the ensu ing 
generation of that community.  
 
LD 263 prevents the loss of access to reproductive services if these situations occur and 
requires that they remain available when systems merge.   
 
The Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics strongly encourages passage of 
this bill for the health and well-being  of our adolescent population.  
 
 
 
