 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 1 , 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 263,  An Act to Ensure Access to Health Care (sponsor’s  amend ment )  
  LD 935, An Act to Remove Barriers to Abortion Coverage in Private Insurance  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and Members of the  HCIFS Committee,  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share the support of the Maine Department of Health and Human 
Services for two bills in front of you today: LD 263, An Act  to Ensure Access to Health Care (as 
proposed to be amended by the sponsor) and LD 935, An Act to Remove Barriers to Abortion 
Coverage in Private Insurance .  
 
LD 263 would require that any transfer of ownership or control, or the establishment of a new 
health care facility, may not reduce access to any sexual and reproductive health services including 
abortion care and provides the Department with the authority to review and enforce compliance 
with this provision beyond the existing timeframe of three years . As we have seen health care 
services centralize more and more into health systems, it is important to ensure that further mergers 
and acquisitions do not impede access to critical servic es like sexual and reproductive health care. 
This bill provides a s afeguard to prohibit a new or expanding entity from limiting such services in 
Maine. This is particularly important given the state’s rural geography and already -limited access to 
services in some regions.   
 
LD 935 would build on the Legislature’s progress  made on access in 2019 ( PL 2019, Ch. 274) by 
ensuring that private health plans (effective January 1, 2024  and later) may not charge any 
deductible, copay, coinsurance, or any other cost -sharing to individuals accessing abortion services. 
Access to the full spectrum of sexual and reproductive health care is integral to a person’s physical, 
mental, and economic  wellbeing. Prohibiting cost -sharing from th ese time-sensitive services  will 
improve  accessib ility to those who need it.  
 
Every person in Maine should have  the right to make their own personal medical decisions and 
access health care when and where they n eed it. Care should be affordable, high -quality , and free 
from undue barriers. These bills will strengthen the sexual and reproductive health care safety net in 
Maine and we encourage the Committee to support their passage.  
 
Sincerely,  
   
  Commissione r Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D  
  Maine Department of Health and Human Services  

