P.O. Box 2490 
Augusta, ME 04338  
Telephone: 1-800-965-7476 
Fax: 1-888-214-5233 
consumerhealth@mainecahc.org  
www.mainecahc.org 
 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers.
 
 
To the Joint Standing Committee On Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Testimony in Support of:  
LD 263, An Act to Ensure Access to Health Care  
May 1, 2023  
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these 
comments in support of LD 263, An Act to Ensure Access to Health Care.  
My name is Kate Ende and I am a policy director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care, a 
nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care 
for every person in Maine. As designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s 
Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP). which operates a toll-free HelpLine. Our 
HelpLine, fields approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who 
need help obtaining, keeping, using, or fixing problems with private health insurance or with 
accessing or affording health care services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for 
Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people apply for and navigate the enrollment 
process for MaineCare. It is with that background that we provide these comments.   
 
This committee has had several discussions related to the potential impact of mergers on 
health care costs and market dynamics, which are extremely important to consider when 
evaluating the appropriateness of a merger or acquisition of a health care facility or provider. 
However, it is critical to also consider potential changes to the availability of or access to health 
care services.  
 
Maine is considered the most rural state in the country, with forty percent of the state’s 
population living in one of Maine’s 11 rural counties.1 Living in rural areas is often associated 
with increased barriers to accessing care – due to lack of transportation, a need to travel 
farther distances to providers, or a lack of availability of certain types of providers. Many 
Mainers live in care deserts without adequate access to comprehensive health care services, 
and already must travel long distances or endure long waiting periods to receive care. We 
would have serious concerns about any changes to Maine’s health care landscape that would 
further limit Mainer’s access to care or reduce availability of health care services.  
 
Nationally, there is a growing trend of Catholic health systems merging with or acquiring non-
religious health care facilities. This trend has generated concerns, as mergers with or 
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/public-health-systems/rhpc/rural-health.shtml   
acquisitions of non-religious health care facilities by religious health systems, in many instances, 
have resulted in more limited or reduced access to comprehensive health care services, 
including reproductive health care.2  
 
Not all Mainers live in an area where they can choose between multiple providers or health 
care facilities from which they would prefer to receive services from that are reasonably 
accessible. In some situations, if a provider or facility were to limit or stop offering certain 
health care services following a merger or acquisition, communities could lose access to those 
services altogether.  
 
By preventing mergers and acquisitions that would otherwise limit or reduce the availability of 
reproductive health care services, this bill will help preserve access to comprehensive health 
care, protect patient autonomy, encourage competition, and will help to ensure Maine people 
can continue to get the care they need in their communities. For these reasons, we urge you to 
support this bill.  
 
Thank you.    
 
 
2 Uttley, L., & Khaikin, C. (2016). Growth of Catholic Hospitals and Health Systems: 2016 Update of the Miscarriage 
of Medicine Report. MergerWatch. Retrieved from 
http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/816571/27061007/1465224862580/MW_Update-2016-MiscarrOfMedicine-
report.pdf?token=7olnPjv7cxsyIkjf1HRnSTBytfQ%3D  
