Christiain Civic League of Maine 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Maine Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, l am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic 
League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is 
honored, religious freedom ﬂourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical 
approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 263 An Act to Ensure Access to Health Care -sponsored by 
Rep. Melanie Sachs ofFreeport. My immediate concern with LD 263 is that this bill was listed asa 
concept draft. Thus, there is little information for regular observers of the Mainer Legislative 
process let alone people who are not able to follow regularly. This legislation is an example of 
what is wrong with this process. While it may not be the intent, it would give the appearance of 
a process that is lacking in integrity. l also understand that an amendment was offered in the 
past few days, looking at maine.gov failed to share that vital information. 
in trying to learn what the sponsor intends with this bill, l am told it would have a negative affect on 
Catholic Hospitals...actually blocking them from expansion. if you are unaware, these Catholic Hospitals 
serve people in great need, women, children, minorities. People who are both in need of sen/ices and are 
in lower income levels of society. Catholic Hospitals serve a signiﬁcant place in the health care market and 
often are the only resource in rural areas. As we see this onslaught of abortion legislation thrusts on us 
thus session to support a large corporation eager to corner the market on proﬁt, exempt from health and 
safety inspections in Maine ~l understand why this bill is trying to sneak through. Your choice appears 
simple today, please vote to support women in Maine and oppose LD 263. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. 
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God bless. 
Mike 
70 Scwall Street, Au<rtist;.z, Maine 04330 Phonrs: (207 3296148 C”? t 
poli<:y@cclmai.nc.org WWW.c<:lmzi.ine.org;
