MAINE 3» "I" 
A TE 
C H Airy/I B ER 
if O.l‘\4ll\/IILRCE 
FM» t-‘oécu Qf‘ _sl»Z¢'r£rze Z>z..<,s'ima.s'.s" 
March 8"‘ , 2023 
Hon. Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Hon. Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: MS CC Testimony in Opposition to the proposed amendment to L.D. 699: An Act to Reduce Future 
Energy Costs 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee: 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in opposition to the proposed amendment to L.D. 
699. 
L.D. 699 is likely to be the first of potentially several pieces of legislation introduced this session as competing 
measures to a November initiated ballot question creating a governmental seizure of the State’s two largest 
transmission and distribution utilities. The State Chamber and the business community is strongly opposed to 
that proposal. Given the ﬂaws of that proposal, we are likely to see a number of pieces of legislation seeking to 
make improvements. 
We are opposed to L.D. 699 for several reasons, the first being this is looking to address a problem that does not 
exist yet. Currently in Maine We do not have any consumer owned utilities that serve more than 50,000 
customers. It is too early to be having this conversation and right now it is a hypothetical question until we 
know the outcome of the election in November. 
Secondly, the proposal before you highlight some of the flaws proposed within, “Pine Tree Power” . It adds 
another layer of bureaucracy and shows a lack of trust in the elected officials who would supposedly be running 
Pine Tree Power. L.D. 699 would make it more challenging to try and select a third-party operator to run the 
electric grid. Furthermore, what would happen if the commission cannot approve a contract for an operator 
because they cannot meet the demands put forward in the proposed legislation? Our electrical infrastructure is 
critical to Maine businesses. Our businesses rely on the transmission utilities every single day to bring 
l28StatcStrcel,S11itel0l ' 
Augusta, Maine 04330-5630 ' 
tcl (207) 6234560 *l' 
ax (Z07) 622-7023 '\l’€ll5il€I Www.111aincclia111l1er.org * <2-mail: info@11mi11ccha1i10a'.brg
electricity to their business so they can operate and the impact this could have on all businesses in Maine and 
the people they employ is deeply concerning if something like this were to happen. 
Thirdly, the proposed legislation seems to indicate that Pine Tree Power will automatically result in a 10% rate 
reduction, and we would question how that is possible. When you think about all the challenges that go into 
running a utility — the operations, maintenance, customer account management or customer service, 
modernizing the grid into the future, we would raise serious questions about that being realistic. 
Our last point, right now the business community in Maine has lots of challenges facing them when it comes to 
energy. The proposed legislation doesn’t address any of the urgent challenges that are currently facing the 
business community in Maine, and therefore we would advocate that this is not a policy conversation that 
should be taking place at this exact moment in time. 
We encourage the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 699. I am happy to answer any questions and 
we will be available to bring back additional information for the work session. Thank you. 
Sincerely, 
Benjamin R. Lucas 
Senior Government Relations Specialist 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org
