.., ‘i’ 
STATE or NIAINE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSIQN 
-. .-j“‘~i@.?_-1;." 
1s;?,\;;_=;-;¢=~.-'==- 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN " 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission
A 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 699, An Act To Reduce Future Energy Costs 
» 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 699, An Act To Reduce Future Energy Costs on behalf of the Public Utilities 
Commission. 
LD 699 applies to the review and approval of an initial contract for more than $10,000,000 between a 
large, consumer-owned transmission and distribution (T&D) utility and an entity to provide operations, 
maintenance, customer account management or customer service to that utility. It speciﬁes that the 
utility may not enter into an initial contract for these services without Commission approval, and the 
Commission may only approve such a contract if the Commission makes certain -ﬁndings, including 
that the contract is reasonably likely to reduce by at least 10% for the ﬁrst two years of the contract, 
the average, combined T&D rates paid by customers of the utility, or if the utility is a successor to an 
investor-owned T&D utility, its predecessor immediately prior to the start date of that contract. 
The calculations required by this bill to ascertain whether there will be a rate reduction of at least 10% 
may be difﬁcult to perform (for example, if the operating contract is ready for approval ahead of 
ﬁnalization of other rate components, particularly in the ﬁrst year of a transfer to a COU) and can be 
artiﬁcially manipulated in a manner that is adverse to ratepayers. For example, one can adjusta 
repayment schedule on debt or defer costs, so that rates in the ﬁrst two years are lower but lead to much 
higher rates in later years. Moreover, given our responsibility to ensure safe, reasonable and adequate 
service, there may a conflict between this cost reduction mandate and the imperative to ensure 
customers are receiving quality service. Deferred maintenance to lower rates as required under this 
legislation, for example, could lead to an unacceptable degradation of service., 
The Commission is also concerned that the bill is not sufficiently clear on What happens if the 
Commission does not approve the contract. A utility tasked with providing service to more than 50,000 
customers cannot be Without an entity to operate and maintain the distribution system. Ifthere is no 
entity that can contract with the utility to meet the requirements in statute, it would appear that the' 
utility is unable to fulﬁll its statutory duties as a public utility, but there is no remedy provided to the 
Commission to address this scenario under these particular and unique set of circumstances. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018
