VERSANT /,\ POWER 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 699 
An Act to Reduce Future Energy Costs 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the committee, my name is James 
Cote and I am here today on behalf of Versant Power in opposition to LD 699. 
LD 699 appears to be the first of what may be several bills that you will hear this session that4 
seek to modify, and/orjustify some of the many serious flaws contained within the upcoming 
initiated bill proposing a governmental seizure of the State’s two largest transmission and 
distribution utilities. 
Proponents of that seizure are likely to advocate in favor of this and other bills for the simple 
reason that what is contained in that initiated bill, and which, as you know, cannot be amended 
by the Legislature without creating a competing measure, remains poorly thought out, would 
mean billions of dollars of new debt on the backs of Maine electric ratepayers, will not lower 
rates or improve service, will stall our progress towards achieving Maine's climate and energy 
goals, requires years of costly litigation, and poses significant cost and risk to Maine people. 
Having twice failed to enact this policy through the legislative process during the last two 
legislative sessions, the proponents of the seizure have gathered enough signatures to present 
the question to voters this November. We believe that this is the appropriate next step in the 
process. 
In the case of LD 699, we wish to make two very important points: 
Competing Measure 
We believe that LD 699 qualifies as a competing measure to the initiated bill. Section 18 of the 
Maine Constitution reads: 
“The measure thus proposed, unless enacted without change by the Legislature at the 
session at which it is presented, shall be submitted to the electors together with mg amended form, substitute, or recommendation of the Legislature, and in such 
manner that the people can choose between the competing measures or reject both.” 
LD 699 would meet the threshold for a competing measure in part because of how it conflicts 
with the initiated bill's Section 4003. Powers and duties; acquisition of utility facilities and utility 
property, 3. Private sector, competitive, performance-based operations. That section reads: 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
VERSANT POWER 
3. Private sector, competitive,_performance-based operations. The company shall 
contract by means of a competitive public solicitation the services of at least one qualified 
nongovernmental entity, referred to in this chapter as "the operator" or "the operations 
team," to provide cost-effective, private sector operations, maintenance, customer 
accounts management and customer service and information and to assist as necessary 
in regulatory affairs, capital planning and administrative services. The company may not 
contract with an operator that has managed a company found to be unfit within the 
previous 10 years. The company may contract with separate operators for each of the 
sewice territories of the acquired utilities, or to meet discrete operations, maintenance or 
other requirements. In requesting and evaluating bids pursuant to this section, the board 
shall consider anticipated costs; professional, operational and managerial experience; 
familiarity with the systems to be administered; and ability to improve customer service 
and employee morale. The company may establish additional criteria for its solicitation 
and shall determine the period and the specific terms of each operations contract. The 
commission shall review and approve, reject or approve with conditions any 
contract between the company and an operator before it takes effect. A contract 
with an operations team must reward proven performance, not the provision of 
capital, and must provide for the efficient and effective fulfillment of the company's 
purposes under section 4002. 
LD 699 competes with the initiated bill in a number of ways. First, LD 699 suggests thata 
large, consumer-owned transmission and distribution utility (read Pine Tree Power) may not 
enter into an initial contract that exceeds $10,000,000 per year with an entity to provide 
operations, maintenance, customer account management or customer service (representing 
some, though not all of the specific tasks contemplated by the language of the initiated bill) for 
the utility without commission approval. 
The initiated bill, on the other hand, states that the commission shall review and approve, 
reject or approve with conditions any contract between the company and an operator before it 
takes effect, with no reference to contract price. 
Further, LD 699 clearly states that commission approval is conditioned on a theoretical rate- 
reduction and other benefits, which are clearly defined in section 2. 
The initiated bill does not define any of this, and simply states that a “contract with an 
operations team must reward proven performance, not the provision of capital, and must 
provide for the efficient and effective fulfillment of the company's purposes under section 
4002.” A quick review of section 2 of LD 699, and section 4002 of the initiated bill show two 
very distinct sets of benefits and purposes. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District —— PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
VERSANT /,\ POWER 
In our opinion, these conflicts would clearly constitute an “amended form, substitute, or 
recommendation of the Legislature ” as contemplated by the Maine Constitution. While the 
legislature certainly has the discretion to create a competing measure to be presented , 
alongside an initiated bill, we believe the Pine Tree Power proposal is already sufficiently 
convoluted and a competing measure would only further obfuscate the critical decision Maine 
voters will have before them in November. 
Mutually Exclusive Charges _, 
Subsection 2-A, Approval conditioned on rate reduction and other benefits, of LD 699 requires 
the commission to make a finding of an immediate rate reduction of at least 10% (note that the 
concept draft of this bill specified a 15% reduction which has since been reduced to 10% in the 
language circulated last night) before approving a contract for a third-party operator. We would 
question how a third-party operator would be in any position to guarantee a 10+% rate 
reduction given that they would be required, per the initiated bill, to provide for the efficient and 
effective fulfillment of Pine Tree Power's purposes described under section 4002, assume the 
safety, legal, property, environmental, and customer liabilities of a brand new utility structure, 
and offer 8% and 6% employee retention bonuses in the first two years, respectively, amonga 
variety of other responsibilities included in the initiated bill. 
Additionally, we would also bring your attention to §4012. initial 5-year plan of the initiated bill. 
ln this section, it clearly states that the operations team is not required to submit a plan to meet 
initial affordability, reliability, decarbonization, and connectivity goals until 18 months irthe 
date in which Pine Tree Power fully takes ownership and control of all utility facilities in the 
State. 
We would question how the commission could confidently approve a contract for a third-party 
operator of the State's two largest transmission and distribution utilities- and their hundreds of 
thousands of collective customers- and reasonably conclude that the operator can immediately 
reduce rates by 10% or more, improve reliability and customer sen/ice, all without any taxpayer 
funding, without having seen a plan to do so in advance of their decision. 
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, we ask what happens if the commission is unable to 
identify and subsequently approve a contract for a third-party operator of Maine's largest 
transmission and distribution utilities should the initiated bill come to pass? What happens in 
the event that no private operator comes forward to bid at all, given the many serious and often 
conflicting obligations, challenges and risks such a company would immediately face? Who 
would sewe the hundreds of thousands of Maine electric customers? Who would be 
responsible for keeping the lights on in our schools, businesses, hospitals, and homes? How 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
VERSANT POWER 
would the delay associated with trying to find an operator that could satisfy these requirements 
impact Maine people? 
Taxpayer Funding 
Proponents of the Pine Tree Power initiative continue to incorrectly insist that their proposal 
would not be paid for using tax dollars. A review of the actual initiative language, however, 
reveals that tax dollars would in fact be utilized to fund the campaign expenses for those 
seeking election to the Pine Tree Power C0. Board of Directors via Maine’s Clean Elections 
program. In the latest sponsor’s amendment to LD 699, circulated at 9:00AM this morning, we 
find another instance in which the proponents seek to fund their proposal using taxpayer 
dollars, this for a much larger expenditure, in addition to the billions of dollars that would be 
financed by debt and paid for on Mainers’ future electric bills. 
We believe the change made between 7:00PM last night and 9:00AM this morning could allow 
the Pine Tree Power Company to use tax dollars to pay for the sen/ices of an operating 
company, an expenditure which LD 699 explicitly recognizes could easily stretch into the tens- 
of-millions of dollars annually. If nothing else, this last-minute edit results in an inconsistency, 
not only with the remaining text of the initiative (again, raising the question of a competing 
measure) but with the repeated public statements of the initiative ’s leadership. 
The Pine Tree Power proposal has been accurately described a “a patchwork of political 
promises. ” Unfortunately, LD 699 appears to be another political promise made in an attempt 
to remedy one of the many fundamental flaws contained within the larger Pine Tree Power 
proposal. 
We would urge the committee to reject both measures, thus allowing the voters of Maine to 
vote on the merits of the initiated bill as a standalone measure in November. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l would be pleased to answer any questions or provide 
more information for the work session at your request. 
Bangor Hydro District -— PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
