Z 5* é. 
2; ..-11% 
CENTRAL MAINE 
POWER 
Kathleen Newman, Director of Government Affairs and Community Relations 
LD 699 An Act to Reduce Future Energy Costs 
March 8, 2023 
Testifying: In Opposition 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology, my name is Kathleen Newman, presenting testimony in opposition to 
LD 699 An Act to Reduce Future Energy Costs. 
This proposed legislation seeks to pre-empt the citizens-initiated bill that you will hear later this 
session, An Act To Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility. 
Maine people will be asked to vote on this question: 
Do you want to create a new quasi-governmental owned power company governed by an 
elected board to acquire and operate existing electricity transmission and distribution 
facilities in Maine? 
During a previous failed attempt to pass similar legislation, the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
was directed to undertake a study of the economics of a government takeover of Maine's electric 
utilities. The PUC engaged London Economics who determined that the third-party private 
management company hired to run the new quasi-government agency would charge $80 million 
per year as a management fee. This would be a new cost currently not paid by CMP and Versant 
customers who only pay the actual cost of operations without markup. 
This proposal would require the third-party, for-profit operator to charge less than current costs, 
which effectively means they would need to reduce operating costs, which most likely would 
mean cutting back on critical operations and staff— there is no other way to produce operational 
savings. 
Competing measure 
Maine's Constitution speaks to a competing measure as an "amended form, substitute, or 
recommendation of the Legislature." This legislation clearly meets that definition in relation to 
the Pine Tree Power referendum. 
Pine Tree Power referendum language: 
Private sector, competitive, performance-based operations. The company shall contract 
by means of a competitive public solicitation the services of at least one qualified
nongovernmental entity, referred to in this chapter as "the operator" or "the operations 
team," to provide cost-effective, private sector operations, maintenance, customer 
accounts management and customer service and information and to assist as necessary in 
regulatory affairs, capital planning and administrative services. The company may not 
contract with an operator that has managed a company found to be unfit within the 
previous 10 years. The company may contract with separate operators for each of the 
service territories of the acquired utilities, or to meet discrete operations, maintenance or 
other requirements. in requesting and evaluating bids pursuant to this section, the board 
shall consider anticipated costs; professional, operational and managerial experience; 
familiarity with the systems to be administered; and ability to improve customer service 
and employee morale. The company may establish additional criteria for its solicitation and 
shall determine the period and the specific terms of each operations contract. ]_'l3_e 
commission shall review and approve, reiect or approve with conditions any contract 
between the company and an operator before it takes effect. A contract with an operations 
team must reward proven Page 7 performance, not the provision of capital, and must 
provide for the efficient and effective fulfillment of the company's purposes under section 
4002 
LD 699 contradicts that language by adding conditions and requiring a different standard for the 
commission's review and approval: 
2. Approval conditioned on finding of rate reduction and other benefits. The 
commission may approve a contract under subsection 1, only if the commission finds that: 
A. Taking into account the utility's other anticipated or actual revenues and expenses, the 
contract is reasonably likely to reduce by at least 10% the averagg, combined transmission 
and distribution rates paid by customers of the utility or, if the utility is the successor in 
interest to an investor-owned transmission and distribution utility, its predecessor 
immediatelyprior to the start date of the contract, for at least the first two years of the 
contract; 
B. Taking into account the utility's other anticipated or actual revenues and expenses, the 
contract is reasonably likely to have a net positive impact on rates, reliability and customer 
service over the duration of the contract; and 
C. The utility's expenses are not paid for by state or local tax dollars, except to the extent 
that certain expenses may be tax-exempt or were tax-funded prior to the start of the initial 
contract. 
Further, LD 699 as amended applies only to a ”consumer-owned transmission and distribution 
utility" with more than 50,000 customers, and it relates to a "third party private operator." 
Currently, there are no COUs in Maine this large, and there are no electric utilities in I\/laine with 
a third-party operator. However, Pine Tree Power would be such an entity. LD 699 is coming 
forward primarily to amend a citizen initiative that has not been passed. This is the essence ofa 
competing measure.
While supporters of Pine Tree Power often highlight how their proposal would remove profit 
incentive from grid operators, many don't realize that Pine Tree Power is proposing that after the 
formation of the quasi-governmental board, that entity would need to go out and hire a for- 
profit company to operate the grid. 
If LD 699 were enacted and voters pass the Pine Tree Power referendum no operator could 
successfully operate the utility without drastic reductions in operations. Achieving a 10% savings 
could mean cuts to services like storm restoration and tree trimming, delays in new customer 
interconnections, and a halt to investments to increase reliability and meet Maine's climate 
goals. And that is assuming Pine Tree Power can even find an existing power company willing to 
come in to the run grid. What will happen to l\/laine if there are no companies willing to submita 
bid because the incentive to do so simply doesn't work?\ 
This legislation betrays a worry by supporters that Mainers won't buy Pine Tree Power as it's_ 
written. Passing a bill that says it will achieve 10% savings doesn't make it so — it merely provides 
a talking point for the upcoming campaign. The people of Maine will vote on the merits ofa 
government takeover of Central Maine Power Company and Versant in November and that 
decision should be made without an 11th hour amendment in the Legislature that promises 
savings that are unachievable. We urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 699. 
Thank you for your consideration.
