LOWER CD51‘ - LOQAI. - RELIABLE 
Testimony in Support of Sponsor’s Amendment 
to L.D. 699, An Act to Reduce Future Energy Costs 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology: my name is Seth Berry and I live 
in Bowdoinham. l am here today as a volunteer, unpaid representative of Our 
Power. 
Our Power is pleased to testify in strong support of the sponsor’s amendment to 
L.D. 699, An Act to Reduce Future Energy Costs. We are grateful to Rep. Geiger 
for providing us this opportunity. 
We are here today for two reasons. First, to share our absolute conﬁdence that 
by replacing CMP and Versant with a publicly-owned, privately-operated utility, 
together we can save Maine customers 10% per year, starting in year one, with 
improved service, and with no use of tax dollars. And second, we are here to ask 
that you hold us to it. 
To listen to ads funded by CMP and Versant’s corporate parents, one would think 
the risks of any transition of this kind are enormous. Taxpayers will be on the 
hook for thousands. Sen/ice will decline, rates will rise, and the sky may even fall. 
Most Mainers were not born yesterday. They know a multinational corporation 
would never spend tens of millions on ads, for the purpose of saving its distant 
and captive customers money. But if the thousands of IOU ads and dozens of 
IOU lobbyists have given you any doubt, with this bill you can ensure the best 
outcome for Maine people. Making it law will empower our PUC to protect us 
from any monster under the bed, real or imagined. Speciﬁcally, it will require that 
any new, large COU with a private operator must bring 10% savings and net 
benefits with no new taxes, and do it from day one. 
Our Public Utilities Commission takes a lot of heat, but we have all seen their 
ability to call the balls and strikes well, despite complex cases where utility 
lawyers are paid hundreds per hour by captive customers. Our Power fully trusts 
them to make this call. As a reminder, our referendum also trusts the PUCto
steward the transition, provides them ample resources to do it, and gives the 
PUC full ratemaking authority of the kind that today applies only to lOUs. 
We are all entitled to our opinions, but not our own facts. Based on conservative 
assumptions, Maine economists who were not paid by anyone for their opinions 
have predicted $9 billion in net savings by replacing CMP and Versant with the 
Pine Tree Power Company. These economists come from every party: Dr. 
Richard Silkman is a Republican and advises large industrial energy consumers, 
while Dr. Richard Woodbury is an independent and Dr. David Vail is a Democrat. 
Their prediction amounts to an average net savings of $375 per customer, per 
year, starting on day one. 
As the London Economics Report indicated, Maine's economic and legal case is 
far stronger than otherjurisdictions that have made or attempted this kind of 
transition. For example: Unlike Boulder CO, which pressed “pause," or Winter 
Park FL, which pressed "play” and succeeded on every count, Maine’s proposal 
requires no separation from a larger grid. This alone cuts the cost of a transition 
in half. 
Maine’s most rural utility, Eastern Maine Electric Cooperative, maintains 3 ‘/2 
times as many miles of line per customer as Central Maine Power, our largest 
utility. Yet instead of being 3 ‘/2 times as expensive, EMEC delivery rates are9 
cents per kilowatt-hour - the same rate charged by Central Maine Power. How is 
this? The answer is simple: it does not funnel its revenues to a distant landlord, 
but returns them to customers or reinvests them in the grid. 
The question will be asked: is this a competing measure? We hope not. lt applies 
to any new, large consumer-owned utility, and that Our Power does not see its 
specific content as a substantive deviation from our initiated bill. That said, if you 
are inclined to move ahead with the bill, we encourage you to seek input from the 
Attorney General. If uncertain, you always have the option to carry the bill over. 
lf any new, large utility that is publicly owned and privately operated can not save 
10%, will not improve reliability and customer service, or does use tax dollars, 
Our Power believes it should not be able to start operations. its board should 
either sharpen their pencils, or leave the grid to its previous owners. We are 
confident in our projections of 10% savings, net benefits, and no tax impact, and 
we ask today that you hold us to it. 
By passing this bill today, you can protect your constituents and the people of 
Maine against any perceived risk, and at the same time open the door to 
meaningful and lasting beneﬁts. 
Thank you. I am happy to try to answer any questions.
