Good afternoon. Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of 
the Committee On lnnovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business, I am Patrick Corey and l live in Windham. I'd like to thank 
Representative Collings for sponsoring LD 677, An Act to Ensure 
Consumer Protection from Resale Ticket Vendors and wish to speak in 
SUPPORT. 
Last September my wife an I purchased "resale" tickets to go see 
Aerosmith at Fenway. We bought these "fan to fan" tickets through a major 
ticket retailer. Tickets were delivered via their app in PDF form. When we 
went to scan the tickets on my phone at the gate, they came up as already 
scanned. We were directed to the Fenway box office where there wasa 
long line of people that had a similar experience. The box office refused to 
do anything, suggesting it was between me, the major ticket retailer, and 
my credit card company. 
The Fenway Box Office explained that my barcodes had already been 
scanned 20 minutes earlier. They then sold us two more tickets for $129a 
piece. We had booked a night at a hotel so we were going to see the show 
no matter what. This got us into -the venue. We went to our original seats, 
which were pretty good, and showed our tickets to the people sitting in 
them. The woman produced two crumpled up photocopies that her ”boss” 
had printed out. The tickets matched ours down to the original purchaser's 
name. Obviously the reseller had printed the tickets and then listed them 
with the major ticket retailer and hoped they or some other person they 
were scamming would beat us to the gate, which they did. They wouldn't 
move.
The major ticket retailer's general policy is not to refund resale tickets as 
they claim it is between the buyer and the reseller, yet the retailer would not 
provide me with the reseller ‘s details due to “privacy. ” l was told that my 
credit card company can access these details. The credit card company 
refunded the money and l believe the case has been closed. 
Scammers are trading on the names of major ticket retailers and those 
retailers know this, otherwise they would guarantee tickets sold on their 
platforms. Moreover, those ticket retailers are likely not innocent parties in 
these transactions. l'm sure they charge a transaction facilitation fee, 
otherwise why would they do it? 
When examining the "purchase policy" section on the retailer's website, I 
found that different refund provisions apply for tickets to events in New 
York and Illinois, which resulted in the bill before you today. 
This is a consumer protection bill and places the ultimate responsibility of 
the transaction with the entity who facilitated it. As I speak with people 
about this bill, everyone seems to have a similar story. Let's protect 
Mainers from fraudsters by making vendors ultimately responsible for 
providing a legitimate product. 
Thank you for your time and I'm very willing to work with the sponsor and 
committee to get to a vote in support of this bill.
