i 
*‘Niinanalrkiiééldnbn ’6f$6&iis1Wa'rIm§>- 
til:-._ 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
Cross Building, Room 214‘ 
l0O State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 _ 
Re: LD 278: An Act to Require Health Plans to Cover an Annual Mental Health 
Wellness Examination 
Dear Senator Donna Bailey, Representative Anne Perry, and other members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
I represent the National Association of Social Workers, Maine chapter (NASW-ME) in support 
of LD 278 submitted by Representative Osher and others. This bill is helpful in improving 
mental health care, breaking down barriers to treatment, reducing stigma, and acknowledging 
that mental health is as important to people’s overall health as their physical health. ~ 
The United 
States Preventive Task Force recommends that all adults and teens be screened for depression 
(ages 12 and above) and anxiety (ages 8 and above). If screened, then patients need access to 
appropriate treatment. Only 20% of persons experiencing a major depressive episode have been 
seen by‘ a psychiatrist or behavioral health provider in the preceding twelve months. Yet the 
majority have seen their primary care medical provider (CDC, 2020). 
Stigma is unhealthy and downright dangerous for persons with a mental health disorder, despite 
mental health’s common occmrence. Left untreated, mental health disorders contribute to poor 
treatment adherence, an accelerated trajectory for chronic health conditions and,'at the extreme, 
death. Insurers managing reimbursement for mental health care similar to physical health care is 
a step towards reducing that stigma and preventing illnesses from getting too far along so that 
treatment becomes more difficult to treat. For over thirty years I have worked as a clinical social 
worker in a primary care setting, accepting patients who I met through warm hand-offs or during 
evaluation appointments set up after being seen by their primary care provider. One of the 
routine questions during the initial meeting would be, “have you contacted your insurer? ” and, if 
not, “please do so after the visit to see if you need prior authorization for this visit.” The shame 
of sharing personal mental health struggles to unknown insurance people or the denial of 
authorizing. payment for the visit were contributing factors to some not following through with 
visits. I" 
This bill will contribute to early prevention and treatment of mental health disorders, which has 
been linked to reductions in length of time need to improve symptoms and functioning, 
decreased need for more intensive treatment, and reduced chances of developing problems with 
work, family, school and overall functioning.. 
L_£_ 
a:¢ . p. 
-$3..
MAINE CHAPTER 
NASW Maine urges you to vote “yes” on LD 278 to support the health of all Mainers. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW 
Chair, Policy Committee 
President, Board of Directors, 
NASW MB 
naswmechapterpres@gmail.com 
Terrizza, E., Zaboltsky, B. Mental Health Treatment Among Adults: United States, 2019 
NCHS Data Brief No. 380, Center for Disease Control, September 2020. 
https://WWW.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db38O.htn1
