 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial  
Services Committee  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
Cross Building, Room 214  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 278: An Act to Require Health Plans to Cover an Annual Mental Health  
Wellness Examinatio n 
 
Dear Senator Donna Bailey, Representative Anne Perry, and other members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services,  
 
I represent the National Association of Social Workers, Maine chapter (NASW -ME) in support 
of LD 278 submitted by Representative Osher and others. This bill is helpful in improving 
mental health care, breaking down barriers to treatment, reducing stigma, and acknowledging 
that men tal health is as important to people ’s overall health as their physical health.  The United 
States Preventive Task Force recommends that all adults and teens be screened for depression  
(ages 12 and above)  and anxiety  (ages 8 and above) . If screen ed, then patients need  access to 
appropriate treatment.  Only 20% of persons experiencing a major depressi ve episode have been  
seen by a  psychiatrist or behavioral health provider  in the preceding twelve months. Yet  the 
majority  have  seen their primary care med ical provider  (CDC, 2020).    
 
Stigma is unhealthy and downright dangerous for persons with a mental health disorder , despite 
mental health’s common occurrence . Left u ntreated, mental health disorders contribute to  poor 
treatment adherence, a n accelerated  trajectory for chronic health condition s and, at the extreme, 
death. Insurers managing  reimbursement for mental health care  similar to physical health  care is 
a step towards reducing that stigma and preventing illnesses from getting too far al ong so that 
treatment becomes more difficult  to treat. For over thirty years I have work ed as a clinical  social 
worker in a primary care setting, accepting patients who I met through  warm hand -offs or during  
evaluation appointments  set up after being  seen by their primary care provider .  One of the 
routine questions during the initial meeting  would be , “have you contacted your insurer?” and, if 
not, “please do so after the visit to see if you need prior authorization for this visit.”  The shame 
of sharing personal mental health struggles to unknown insurance people or the denial of 
authorizing payment for the visit were contributing  factors to some not following through with 
visits.  
 
This bill w ill contribute to  early prevention and treatment of mental health disorders, which has 
been linked to reduc tions in  length of time need to improve symptoms and functioning, 
decreased  need for more intensive treatment, and reduce d chances of developing problems with 
work, family, school and overall functioning . 
 
 
NASW Maine urges you to vote “yes” on LD 278  to support th e health of all Mainers .  
 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW  
Chair, Policy Committee  
President, Board of Directors,  
NASW ME  
naswmechapterpres@gmail.com  
 
 
Terrizza, E., Zaboltsky, B. Mental Health Treatment Among Adults: United States, 2019  
NCHS Data Brief No. 380,  Center for Disease Control,  September 2020 . 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db380.htm  
