Q 
A Maine Trial Lawyers Association 
E; 160 Capitol Street, P.O. Box 438, Augusta, Maine 04332-0438 
President 
Susan Faunce* 
President-Elect 
Jason M. Jabar 
Treasurer 
Lisa A. Lunn 
Secretary 
Walter McKee 
Past President 
Lauri Boxer-Macomber++ 
Board of Govemozs 
Taylor Asen . 
Michael Big0s**++ 
Alexis Garmey Chardon 
Thomas L. Douglas 
Anthony K. Ferguson- 
Christian Foster 
Benjamin R. Gideon 
Scott Hess 
Daniel G. Kagan*++ 
Timothy M. Kenlan 
Stephen W. Koerting 
David Kreisler 
Christopher R. Largay*++ 
Christian Lewis++ 
Scott J. Lynch 
Christiana E. Mann 
Jodi L. Nofsinger++ 
James E. 0’ConneIl HI 
Sebastian Okun 
Verne E. Paradie 
Richard R. Regan 
Ellsworth T. Rundlett, III+ 
Randall E. Sn1ith++ 
Daniel J. Stevens++ 
Heather Seasonwein 
Michael J. Welch++ 
Laura White‘ 
*AAJ Governor 
**AAJ' State Delegate 
++Past President 
Executive Director 
Steven Prince + - 
(207) 623-2661 - FAX (207) 621-0118A 
mtla@mtIa.org 
February 27, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney' 
Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 339 — An Act to Provide Electronic Access to Conﬁdential ]uror 
InformationI
V 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, 
On behalf of the Maine Trial Lawyers Association, I am writing in support of LD 
339. This law will allow lawyers to review information provided by prospective 
jurors electronically, thus making the process more efficient for lawyers and court 
clerks. With Maine’s jury selection system, each prospective juror must submit 
written responses on a form that includes the juror’s name, date of birth, address, 
and the employers of self and spouse. The prospective juror also must answer 
whether he or she has ever been disquali ﬁed from jury service, and answer other 
questions regarding self or family members’ role in law enforcement. 
The current system requires any lawyer preparing for a jury trial to appear 
personally in the court where jury selection is taking place to review the large stack 
of written responses submitted by jurors. Court clerks are responsible for 
organizing and keeping track of the large stack, and for arranging a viewing location 
where lawyers can view the documents. Since it is typical for several lawyers to 
simultaneously prepare for selection, clerks are often addressing several 
requests to view this information at the same time. The clerks must continue to 
accommodate a viewing area for lawyers, and to track and organize this large stack 
of documents. There is only one copy of the juror questionnaires available, and 
with several lawyers arriving at the clerk’s office review these on the same day, 
lawyers have to wait for their turn to do so. Lawyers are also forced to travel to the 
court where selection is taking place to view these documents, which can be 
several hours away from the 1awyer’s home or office. These inefficiencies are 
unnecessary and inconsistent with other advancements employed in Maine’s legal 
system. _ 
In response to Covid restrictions, Maine’s legal system made certain changes 
through use of technology that improved efﬁciency. Some of these changes, suchas
V 
use of Zoom for mediations and depositions,'have remained as normal practice even since Covid 
restrictions have lifted. Maine courts are also "on the verge of implementing electronic ﬁling as its 
standard practice. Allowing electronic access to juror information will provide a similar 
improvement in the efﬁciency of Maine’s court system. It is also important to consider that there 
is no downside to allowing such access. Access would be provided on a password-protected basis 
for attorneys only, and attorneys would only be permitted to access such information for purposes 
of preparing for selection. To the extent that jurors respond to speciﬁc questionnaires which 
are sometimes tailored to an individual case, that could also be provided in a similar password- 
protected fashion. 
For these reasons, I hope you will support LD 339. Thank you for the opportunity to address this 
bill. 
Sincerely, 
/s/ ]as0n M. Jabar 
]ason M. Jabar, Esq. 
President-Elect, MTLA
