160 Capitol Street, P.O. Box 438, Augusta, Maine 04332-0438 
(207) 623-2661 • FAX (207) 621-0118 
mtla@mtla.org 
President 
Susan Faunce*  
 
President-Elect 
Jason M. Jabar 
 
Treasurer 
Lisa A. Lunn 
 
Secretary 
Walter McKee 
 
Past President 
Lauri Boxer-Macomber++ 
 
Board of Governors 
Taylor Asen 
Michael Bigos**++ 
Alexis Garmey Chardon 
Thomas L. Douglas 
Anthony K. Ferguson 
Christian Foster 
Benjamin R. Gideon 
Scott Hess 
Daniel G. Kagan*++ 
Timothy M. Kenlan 
Stephen W. Koerting 
David Kreisler 
Christopher R. Largay*++ 
Christian Lewis++  
Scott J. Lynch 
Christiana E. Mann 
Jodi L. Nofsinger++ 
James E. O’Connell III 
Sebastian Okun 
Verne E. Paradie 
Richard R. Regan 
Ellsworth T. Rundlett, III ++ 
Randall E. Smith++ 
Daniel J. Stevens++ 
Heather Seasonwein 
Michael J. Welch++ 
Laura White 
 
 
*AAJ Governor 
**AAJ State Delegate 
++Past President 
 
Executive Director 
Steven Prince 
 February 27, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney 
Representative Matthew Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 339 – An Act to Provide Electronic Access to  Confidential Juror 
 Information 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Mem bers of  the Committee on 
Judiciary, 
On behalf  of  the Maine Trial Lawyers Association, I  am writing in support of  LD 
339. This law will allow lawyers to review informat ion provided by prospective 
jurors electronically, thus making the process more  efficient for lawyers and court 
clerks. With Maine’s jury selection system, each pr ospective juror must submit 
written responses on a form that includes the juror ’s name, date of  birth, address, 
and the employers of  self  and spouse. The prospecti ve juror also must answer 
whether he or she has ever been disqualified from j ury service, and answer other 
questions regarding self  or family members’ role in  law enforcement.  
The current system requires any lawyer preparing fo r a jury trial to appear 
personally in the court where jury selection is tak ing place to review the large stack 
of  written responses submitted by jurors. Court cle rks are responsible for 
organizing and keeping track of  the large stack, an d for arranging a viewing location 
where lawyers can view the documents. Since it is t ypical for several lawyers to 
simultaneously prepare for jury selection, clerks a re often addressing several 
requests to view this information at the same time.  The clerks must continue to 
accommodate a viewing area for lawyers, and to trac k and organize this large stack 
of  documents. There is only one copy of the juror q uestionnaires available, and 
with several lawyers arriving at the clerk’s office  review these on the same day, 
lawyers have to wait for their turn to do so. Lawye rs are also forced to travel to the 
court where jury selection is taking place to view these documents, which can be 
several hours away from the lawyer’s home or office . These inefficiencies are 
unnecessary and inconsistent with other advancement s employed in Maine’s legal 
system. 
In response to Covid restrictions, Maine’s legal sy stem made certain changes 
through use of  technology that improved efficiency.  Some of  these changes, such as 
use of  Zoom for mediations and depositions, have re mained as normal practice even since Covid 
restrictions have lifted. Maine courts are also on the verge of  implementing electronic filing as its 
standard practice. Allowing electronic access to ju ror information will provide a similar 
improvement in the efficiency of  Maine’s court syst em. It is also important to consider that there 
is no downside to allowing such access.  Access wou ld be provided on a password-protected basis 
for attorneys only, and attorneys would only be per mitted to access such information for purposes 
of  preparing for jury selection. To the extent that  jurors respond to specific questionnaires which 
are sometimes tailored to an individual case, that could also be provided in a similar password-
protected fashion.  
For these reasons, I hope you will support LD 339. Thank you for the opportunity to address this 
bill. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
/s/ Jason M. Jabar 
Jason M. Jabar, Esq. 
President-Elect, MTLA 
 
Jason Jabar
Maine Trial Lawyers Association
LD 339
This is the MTLA executive director, Jason has registered separately to testify via 
zoom. His written testimony is attached. 
