CLAC MEMORANDUM/TESTIMONY 
LD 339 (NFNA) 
TO: Senator Anne Camey 
Representative Matt Moonen _ 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC) 
c/o laura.yustak@maine.govi 
RE: LD 339, An Act to Provide Electronic Access to Conﬁdential Juror Information 
DA: February 28, 2023 
The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following 
testimony in neither for nor against LD 339.I 
LD 339 proposes changes to section 1254-A of Title l4 (Court Procedure-Civil). CLAC 
provides this testimony with the understanding that the general provisions in Title 14 regarding 
juries have been applied by the trial courts to both civil and criminal juries. 
Both sections 1254-A and 1254-B address the conﬁdentiality of juror information. In 
addition, the Superior Court’s Standing Order for Limited Access to Juror Information issued 
pursuant to sections 1254-A and 1254-B, addresses the manner in which this conﬁdential 
information can be accessed and how it should be protected. Under Maine’s current system, 
attorneys, their agents and investigators, and pro se parties must go to the courthouse to view 
conﬁdential information contained in written documents submitted by jurors prior to jury selection. 
LD 339 purports to authorize the court to make conﬁdential juror information available in electronic 
fonn to attorneys, their agents, investigators, and pro se parties 
Electronic dissemination is likely more convenient for most litigants. Some CLAC_ 
members have concerns that making conﬁdential juror information available electronically has the 
potential to invade jurors’ privacy or expose jurors to harassment. Maintaining the security of this 
infonnation is paramount in order to protect the safety of jurors and not disincentivize juror service. 
The manner in which courts make juror information available to litigants should remain a court 
decision, so that the court can balance convenience of the parties and the security of the 
infonnation. -
, 
Should the Legislature go forward with the proposal, CLAC respectfully suggests the 
following change to the proposed new language: “The court may pennit electronic transmission 
pursuant to rules or orders of the court.” - 
*CLAC is an advisory body established by the Legislature. 17-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357.I 
It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current . 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute,
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice -and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.'
