 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 339 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 339, An Act to Provide Electronic Access to Confidential Juror Information  
 
DA: February  28, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in neither for nor against LD 339.  
 
 LD 339 proposes changes to section 1254 -A of Title 14 (Court Procedure -Civil).  CLAC 
provides this testimony with the understanding that the general provisions in Title 14 regarding 
juries have been  applied by the trial court s to both civil and criminal juries.   
 
 Both sections 1254 -A and 1254 -B address  the confidentiality of juror information.   In 
addition, the Superior Court’s Standing Order for Limited Access to Juror Information issued 
pursuant to sec tions 1254 -A and 1254 -B, addresses the manner in which this confidential 
information can be accessed  and how it should be protected.  Under Maine’s current system, 
attorneys , their agents and investigators,  and pro se parties must go to the courthouse to view 
confidential information contained in written documents submitted by jurors prior to jury selection.  
LD 339 purports to authorize  the court to make confidential juror information available in electroni c 
form to attorneys, their agents, investigators, and pro se parties  
 
 Electronic dissemination is likely more convenient for most litigants .   Some CLAC 
members have concerns that making confidential juror information available electronically has the 
potential to invade jurors’ privacy or expose jurors to harassment.  Maintaining the security of this 
information is paramount in order to protect the safety of jurors and not disincentivize juror service.   
The manner in which courts make juror information av ailable to litigants should remain a court 
decision , so that the court can balance convenience of the parties and the security of the 
information.    
 
 Should the Legislature go forward with the proposal, CLAC respectfully suggests the 
following change to the proposed new language:   “The court may permit electronic transmission 
pursuant to rules or orders of the court.”  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attor ney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired  practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
 
 the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager s erves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
