1 
  
Janet T. Mills  
                Governor  
 
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL  
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION  
OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REGULATION  
35 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
04333- 0035 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anne L. Head  
Commissioner , DPFR  
Director, OPOR  
  
 
April 10, 2023  
 Senator Anne Carney , Senate Chair   
Representative Matt Moonen , House Chair   
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary     
100 State House Station   
Augusta, ME   04333- 0100  
 
Re: LD 1425 An Act to Strengthen Freedom of Access Protections by Allowing Remote Meetings to Be Recorded  
 Dear Senator Carney , Representative Moonen, and Members of the Committee:   
 I am writing  this letter on behalf of the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation’s  
Office of Professional and O ccupational Regulation (“OPOR ”), an umbrella agency that supports 
twenty -nine (29) licensing boards .  The bill would require that all OPOR boards allow for remote 
recording of a meeting on the same platform that is used to conduct the meeting as long as additional costs are not incurred by the public body. OPOR is opposed to LD 1425 An Act to 
Strengthen Freedom of Access Protections by Allowing Remote Meetings to Be Recorded  as it 
would place addit ional burdens on the agency without providing for additional staff needed for 
implementation.   
From the beginning of the COVID- 19 pandemic, OPOR boards have provided remote access to 
all meetings via the platform Zoom.  The agency has  committed to continu ing to provide such 
access going forward , regardless of  if a board meets in -person or remotely .  As drafted, LD 1425 
appears to require that when an  agency  provides remote access, that it  must  configure the settings 
on Zoom (or other streaming platform) to permit an individual to record the meeting in that 
software application.  
While ostensibly changing a setting on Zoom does not incur additional costs, as practically applied, 
the bill will require the agency to record and maintain recording files of all meeting s which OPOR 
does not currently do.  The agency would need to record and maintain files of all meetings since  a 
member of the public could manipulate or alter their copy of the recording.  The agency would, 
therefore,  need to   maintain an original, correct copy of the recording as the official record .   
Maintaining such records also means that the recordings are available to any individual making a Freedom of Access Act (“FOAA”) request.  Unless we had a separate retention schedule, General 
 
 
 
PHONE : (207)624- 8500  (VOICE )  
OFFICES: GARDINER ANNEX,  76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE  
 
TTY users:  call Maine Relay 711   
 
 
FAX : (207)624 -8690  
  
 WWW .MAINE .GOV/PFR/PROFESSIONALLICENSING / 
 
  
2 
 Schedule 8 of the Maine State General Record Retention Schedule would require that we maintain 
video recordings  for 5 years after approval of meeting minutes .  As the se digital  files are very large 
and take up a lot of storage space, we would need to be diligent about maintaining those files only 
for a time limited period.    
Furthermore, we would anticipate frequent FOAA requests for the recordings .  We would, 
therefore , need to post them on the board’s webpage .  The webpages would need to be reconf igured 
to support recordings and we anticipate significant staff time to keep the webpages current.   
We expect  that the practical effect of this bill would require at least one additional staff member 
with technical expertise to assist us with the technical aspects of streaming and recording, maintaining these files and posting them to the webpages, and destroying them in accordance with the retention schedule .  
Thank you for the opportunity to share our input and we would be happy to answer any questions prior to or at the work session.  
Sincerely,  
Joan  
Joan Cohen Deputy, D epartment of P rofessional and Financial Re gulation  
 
