February 6, 2023 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee, 
My name is Aaron Chadbourne and I am the Designated Broker and owner of Demetria’s Team 
-  The Real Estate Group based in Gorham, Maine and serving the Greater Portland market. I 
have been licensed by the Real Estate Commission for nearly 21 years and have been in charge 
of our company since 2019. 
I am pleased to be here to testify in support  of LD 170 - An Act to Clarify the Authority of the 
Director of the Real Estate Commission to Dismiss Certain Claims That Do Not Allege Violations 
of Law or Rules. 
The reason that I approached Rep. Arata about submitting this piece of legislation is to ensure 
that statute will help guide future staff of the Real Estate Commission in line with current 
practice. 
For context, in November of 2015, a complaint was filed with the Real Estate Commission 
against a licensee of our company. In the spirit of brevity, I won’t get into the details of the 
complaint other than to say that the complaint was investigated and dismissed.  
At the time, our licensee spoke with Commission staff about the nature of the complaint. In 
discussion, it seemed clear that both Commission staff and our company agreed that even if 
everything in the complaint were granted as true, none of the alleged actions would amount to 
a violation of any rule or license that the Commission had the power to enforce. Staff also made 
the comment that, while statute is clear about the director’s power to initiate an investigation 
into a complaint, statute is less clear about the ability of staff to dismiss a complaint. In fact, the 
only reference to dismissal of a complaint in the governing statute is “after an investigation,” 
creating ambiguity around when it is appropriate to dismiss or not pursue a complaint absent 
investigation.  
The goal of this bill is to address that ambiguity by making sure statute is clear that, if the 
Director believes no investigation is warranted, the current and all future Directors have clear 
statutory authority to dismiss or elect not to investigate a complaint. We agree that statute 
should – and does – provide the Director with the power to investigate any complaint, however 
with the growth of the number of licensees and the limited resources of the Department, we 
believe the Commission should have clear power defined in statute to dismiss complaints that 
do not warrant investigation. 
In closing, I’d like to thank Rep. Arata for submitting this bill and Director Pendergast and the 
staff of the Commission and the Department for their suggestions on improving the language of 
the bill.  
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions. 
