m 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
'l:gg§g|i"0N Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBUC EDUCAUON ADVOCATES websitﬁz lvlvli/'nzSma1veb'c0m MaincSchuoiSupcrinicndemsAssociation 
CORRECTED VERSION 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 515 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE SCHOOL BOARD APPROVAL OF SUPERINTENDENT 
RULES AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I am 
Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Superintendents Association and Maine School Boards Association in opposition 
to L.D. 515. 
This bill would require School Board approval of all rules and procedures, including hiring and the day-to-day 
operation of schools. That is counterintuitive to the process we have in place today, where School Boards adopt 
policy to establish the foundation on which to guide the school district, but do not prescribe how superintendents 
and other administrators develop procedures to run our schools. 
The number of policies adopted by the local School Board is quite extensive. Policy manuals are publicly 
available, with the majority posted on the district ’s website or available by request. Current statute requires Maine 
school boards to adopt policy; Title 20-A, §l0()1, 1-A Adoption of Policies. 
It is and has been the intent that administrative procedures, needed to outline and describe steps to implement the 
policy, would be craﬂed and designed at the superintendent level with assistance from school unit directors and 
administrators. While adopted policy may remain constant and not be necessary to change, the procedures needed 
to implement the policy may change frequently. For some of these it is best that they are left to be ﬂexible. 
The proposed requirement to have all procedures, subsequent to the adopted policy, also be approved by the school 
board is both unnecessary as well as a costly requirement. The public notice requirement in this bill is problematic. 
It would not allow school administrators to change procedures based on circumstances that require prompt 
attention until a notice is published in a local newspaper. That ties the hands of our administrators to react quickly 
to situations. 
Legal notices also cost money and should not be required for everything we do. 
There are times when procedures are embedded within a policy, and the school board would vote to consider the 
policy/procedure for approval. An example of this would be Policy BEDH on public participation. There are also 
other times when procedures are attached to a policy and also be considered for approval. An example of this 
would be Policy JICK that has the policy and four separate exhibits/procedures. 
Overall, this bill is extremely cumbersome and would not allow school administrators to change procedures when 
situations and circumstances change. That is not in the best interest of the students we serve and the people we 
employ. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
[NOTE: School Boards are required by current law to provide an opportunity for 
public comment, limited to school and education matters, at full meetings of the 
Board (20-A MRSA § 1001(20). Boards may impose reasonable time, place and 
manner restrictions on expressive activity during the public comment period to 
ensure that the Board’s business meeting is not disrupted and to ensure compliance 
with conﬁdentiality and privacy laws. 
Boards should check other related policies (such as those pertaining to agenda 
preparation, Board meetings, agenda format, etc.) to ensure that there are no 
inconsistencies with revisions to this policy, and update those policies and all cross 
references as necessary.] 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AT SCHOOL BOARD MEETINGS 
The primary purpose of School Board meetings is to conduct the business of the Board 
related to Board policies, programs, and operations. The Board encourages residents to 
attend Board meetings so that they may become acquainted with the operations and 
programs of the schools. 
The Board also recognizes the value of public comments on school and educational 
matters. To permit fair and orderly expression of public comments at Board business 
meetings while still allowing the Board to conduct its business efficiently, the Board has 
established the procedure below for regular business meetings. 
At special, emergency, or workshop meetings, public comments will be limited to the 
topic(s) of the particular meeting. 
[NOTE: The public comment law simply refers to “full meetings of the board,” 
without making a distinction between the various kinds of meetings that are 
typically held. MSMA/DWM believe that it is acceptable to limit public comment at 
special, emergency, and workshop meetings to the topic(s) for which the meeting is 
held. Boards may delete the above sentence if they wish to allow general comments. 
The law makes it clear that public comment is not required at subcommittee 
meetings.] 
In addition to speaking during the designated public comment portion of the agenda at 
Board meetings, members of the public are welcome to submit written comments on 
school and educational matters to the Board and Superintendent, or to submit requests to 
have items placed on a Board agenda, in accordance with applicable Board policies. 
[NOTE: The law does not specify where the public comment period should be 
placed on the agenda or how much public comment should be allowed. For 
efficiency, it may make sense to place the public comment early in the agenda. 
Page 1 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
1. The Board will include a public comment period, not to exceed 30 minutes [Or: ___ 
minutes] on the agenda of its regular business meetings. Comments by individuals are 
limited to a maximum of three (3) minutes [OR: ____ minutes] at a meeting. Individuals 
may not relinquish a portion of their allotted time to another speaker. The time limits in 
this paragraph may be modiﬁed at a particular meeting at the discretion of the Board. 
[NOTE: Boards have the option of prioritizing comments from residents of the 
school unit. There are two options below that Boards may wish to consider. 
MSMA/DW suggest having a sign-in form for individuals to speak, which includes 
the individual ’s name and town/city of residence. Boards may also choose not to 
have a sign-in form, or only to use one in circumstances where there are many 
individuals wishing to speak at a regular meeting.] 
2.[OPTION 1] Individuals who wish to speak during the public comment period are 
required to ﬁll out the sign-in form available at each Board meeting, prior to the 
beginning of the public comment period, and to review a copy of this policy. Each 
individual will be required to state their name and town/city of residence before 
beginning their remarks. 
[OPTION 2] The Board will hear public comments from residents of the school unit 
ﬁrst. If there is time remaining in the public comment period once all residents have had 
the opportunity to speak, the Board will permit comments from non-residents. Individuals 
who wish to speak are required to fill out the sign-in form available at each Board 
meeting, prior to the beginning of the public comment period, and review a copy of this 
policy Each individual will be required to state their name and town/city of residence 
before beginning their remarks. 
3.The Board Chair is responsible for ensuring the orderly conduct of Board meetings and 
for ensuring compliance with this policy, including the following rules of order: 
a. Speakers will be recognized by the Board Chair, and comments should be 
addressed to the Board Chair. Requests for information or concerns that require 
further research may be referred to the superintendent for further action, if 
necessary; 
b. Speakers are expected to follow rules of common etiquette and decorum, 
including refraining from using vulgar and/or obscene language, yelling, 
threatening others using words or by other actions, making defamatory 
comments, or otherwise engaging in any activity that disrupts orderly meeting 
progress. Examples of disruptive conduct include, but are not limited to, 
exceeding the allotted time limits, talking over or interrupting others, offering 
repetitive comments, and offering comment on matters unrelated to the school 
unit’s programs, policies, or operations. 
Page 2 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: BEDH 
c. Discussion of personnel matters is not permitted during the public comment 
period due to the privacy, conﬁdentiality and due process rights of school unit 
employees. For purposes of this policy, “discussion of a personnel matter” 
means any discussion of job performance or conduct of a school unit 
employee, including complaints about them. 
d. Discussion of matters involving individual students are also not permitted 
during the public comment period due to the privacy, conﬁdentiality, and due 
process rights of the school unit’s students. 
e. Any concerns about personnel matters and/or student matters should be 
directed to the Superintendent or another appropriate administrator outside of 
Board meetings so that they can be addressed through an alternative channel 
and in a manner consistent with privacy, conﬁdentiality, and due process rights 
of the individuals involved. 
f. The Board Chair will stop any public comment that is contrary to these rules. 
g. Individuals who disrupt a Board meeting may be asked to leave in order to 
allow the Board to conduct its business in an orderly manner. The Board Chair 
may request the assistance of law enforcement if necessary to address disruptions 
or safety concerns. 
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA § l00l(20) 
20-A MRSA § 6101 
l MRSA § 405 
Cross Reference: BE — School Board Meetings 
BEDB — Agenda 
BEDB-R — Agenda Format 
BEC — Executive Sessions 
KE — Public Concerns and Complaints 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect ofﬁcial Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point for a board's policy development on speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not intended asa substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 3 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
?"MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK 
BULLYING 
The Board believes that bullying, including cyberbullying, is detrimental to student well- 
being and to student learning and achievement. It interferes with the mission of the 
schools to educate their students and disrupts the operations of the schools. Bullying 
affects not only students who are targets but also those who participate in and witness 
such behavior. 
Bullying Prohibited 
Bullying, including “cyberbullying, ” harassment and sexual harassment are not 
acceptable conduct in [School unit name] and are prohibited. 
Retaliation for the reporting of incidents of such behavior is also prohibited. 
In adopting this policy, it is not the Board’s intent to prohibit students from expressing 
their ideas, including religious, political and philosophical views that may offend the 
sensibilities of others, or from engaging in civil debate. However, the Board does not 
condone and will take action in response to conduct that directly interferes with students ’ 
rights at school under applicable laws or with the educational mission, operations, 
discipline or general welfare of the schools. 
Deﬁnitions 
“Bullying ” and “cyberbullying ” have the same meaning in this policy as in Maine law: 
Bullying 
“Bullying ” includes, but is not limited to a written, oral or electronic expression or 
a physical act or gesture or any combination thereof directed at a student or 
students that: 
A. Has, or a reasonable person would expect it to have, the effect of: 
1. Physically harming a student or damaging a student’s property; or 
2. Placinga student in reasonable fear of physical harm or damage to 
his/her property; 
Page 1 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK 
B. Interferes with the rights of a student by: 
l. Creating an intimidating or hostile educational environment for the 
student; or 
2. Interfering with the student’s academic performance or ability to 
participate in or beneﬁt from the services, activities or privileges 
provided by the school; or 
C. Is based on: 
a. A student’s actual or perceived characteristics identiﬁed in5 
MRSA § 4602 or 4684-A (including race; color; ancestry; 
national origin; sex; sexual orientation; gender identity or 
expression; religion; physical or mental disability) or other 
distinguishing personal characteristics (such as socioeconomic 
status; age; physical appearance; weight; or family status); or 
b. A student’s association with a person with one or more of 
these actual or perceived characteristics or any other 
distinguishing characteristics; 
and that has the effect described in subparagraph A. or B. 
above. 
Under Maine law: 
“Sexual orientation ” means a person’s actual or perceived heterosexuality, 
bisexuality, homosexuality, or gender identity or expression. 
“Gender identity ” means gender-related identity, appearance, marmerisms, or 
other gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the individual ’s 
assigned sex at birth. 
Cyberbullying 
“Cyberbullying ” means bullying through the use of technology or any electronic 
communication, including but not limited to, a transfer of signs, signals, writing, 
images, sounds, data or intelligence of any nature transmitted by the use of any 
electronic device including, but not limited to, a computer, telephone, cellular 
telephone, text messaging device or personal digital assistant. 
Page 2 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK 
Retaliation 
Retaliation means an act or gesture against a student for asserting or alleging an 
act of bullying. Retaliation also includes reporting that is not made in good faith 
on an act of bullying. 
Application of Policy 
This policy applies to bullying that: 
A. Takes place at school or on school grounds, at any school-sponsored or 
school-related activity or event or while students are being transported to or 
from school or school-sponsored activities or events; or 
B. Takes place elsewhere or through the use of technology, but only if the 
bullying also infringes on the rights of the student at school as set forth in 
the deﬁnition of “bullying. ” 
Consequences for Policy Violations 
Students 
Students who violate this policy may be subject to disciplinary action which may 
include suspension, expulsion or a series of graduated consequences including 
alternative discipline or other behavioral interventions. 
The Board retains the right to impose disciplinary consequences for bullying and 
other conduct that occurs at any time or place that substantially disrupts the 
instructional program, operations of the schools or welfare of students. 
Any student violating this policy may also be subject to civil or criminal penalties. 
School Employees and Others 
Administrators, professional staff and all other employees who violate this policy 
may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal, and in 
accordance with any applicable collective bargaining agreements. 
Volunteers, contractors and visitors who violate this policy will be excluded [OR: 
barred] from school property until the Superintendent is satisﬁed that the person 
will comply with Maine’s bullying law and this policy. 
Page 3 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK 
Any person violating this policy may also be subject to civil or criminal penalties. 
Any school-af ﬁliated organization that authorizes or engages in bullying or 
retaliation is subject to forfeiture of Board approval/sanctioning and/or suspension 
or revocation of its permission to operate on school grounds. 
Staff Training 
|Sch00l unit name] will provide professional development and staff training 
in bullying prevention and response. 
[NOTE: The law requires “professional development and staff training in 
the best approaches [to implementing the bullying law].” The Maine 
Department of Education has posted on its Website a variety of resources to 
create bullying prevention education programing and for professional 
development and staff training around the best approaches to implementing 
the bullying law. These resources can be accessed at 
http://www.maine.gov/doe/bullying/resources/index.html]. 
Delegation of Responsibility 
The Superintendent/designee will be responsible for developing and implementing 
procedures in accordance with applicable law to implement this policy. 
The Superintendent will designate the school principal and/or other school 
personnel to be responsible for implementation/enforcement of this policy and 
associated procedures on the school level. 
A student or his/her parent/ guardian who is dissatis ﬁed with a decision of the 
Superintendent or designee related to the taking or not taking of disciplinary action 
in the course of implementing this policy may appeal, in writing, to the 
Superintendent Within 14 calendar days [OR: ____ days] of notice of the decision. 
[NOTE: The number of days should be should be consistent with timeframes 
in other board policies permitting appeals.] 
The Superintendent ’s decision shall be ﬁnal. 
Dissemination of Policy 
The Superintendent will be responsible for providing this policy, any associated 
administrative procedures and the names of the person(s) responsible for 
Page 4 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK 
implementing the policy/procedure at the school level in writing to students, 
parents, school employees and volunteers in handbooks, on the school unit’s 
website and by such other means (if any) as may be determined by the 
Superintendent. 
Legal Reference: 20-A M.R.S.A. § l00l(l5), 6554 
Cross Reference: AC - Nondiscrimination, Equal Opportunity 
ACAA — Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students 
ACAD — Hazing 
AD — Educational Philosophy/Mission 
ADAA - School System Commitment to Standards for Ethical and 
Responsible Behavior 
ADF - School District Commitment to Learning Results 
CHCAA - Student Handbooks 
GCI — Professional Staff Development 
IJNDB-R - Student Computer and Internet Use and Internet Safety 
JI - Student Rights and Responsibilities 
JIC - Student Code of Conduct 
JICC - Student Conduct on Buses 
JICIA - Weapons, Violence and School Safety 
JK - Student Discipline 
JKD - Suspension of Students 
IKE - Expulsion of Students 
KLG - Relations with Law Enforcement Authorities 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect oflicial Association policy. They 
are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point for a board's policy development on 
specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units, MSMA 
recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability 
to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not intended asa 
substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel. 
Page 5 of5 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE EXHIBIT* NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK-El 
[School unit name] BULLYIN G REPORT FORM 
Date the alleged bullying incident(s) is reported:g Name of complainant/reporter (by law, reports may be anonymous): 
Status of reporter: Student Parent School employee/coach/advisor Other 
Contact information for reporter (if reporter is student, contact information for 
parent/guardian): Phone: Cell phone: Email: 
Address: 
Name of alleged target(s): 
Name of alleged bully(ies): 
Relationship between alleged target/bully(ies): 
Date(s), time(s) and location(s) of alleged incident(s): 
Names of witnesses: 
Description of incident(s), including any supporting documentation (use additional pages 
if more space is needed): 
I agree that the information on this form is accurate and true to the best of my knowledge 
and belief. 
Date: 
Signature of complainant/reporter 
Received by: Date: 
Position/title: 
Copy to building principal: Date: 
Copy to Superintendent: Date: 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE EXHIBIT* NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK-E2 
[School unit name] BULLYING INVESTIGATION AND RESPONSE FORM 
Date the alleged incident of bullying was reported: 
Name of person investigating alleged incident(s): 
Position/title of investigator: 
Name of person reporting bullying incident(s): 
Person reporting is (circle one) Student Parent School employee 
Coach/advisor Volunteer Other 
Name(s) of alleged target: 
Name(s) of alleged bully (bullies): 
Name(s) of potential witnesses: 
Where did the alleged incident(s) occur (check one or more): 
on school property 
on school bus 
at a school sponsored activity 
through use of technology ___ at school __ off-campus 
- 
elsewhere (be speciﬁc) 
Time and location(s) of incident(s): 
Does targeted student have an IEP? Yes No (If yes, refer to plan.) 
Does targeted student have a 504 plan? Yes No (If yes, refer to plan.) 
Is the targeted student in the referral process for either? Yes N0 
(If yes, $P@¢if)/) _________ 
If the targeted student receives special services, when were Special Services Director 
and/or 504 Coordinator notiﬁed of the incident: 
Person notiﬁed: Date: 
Page l of6 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-E2 
Does alleged bully have an IEP? Yes No (If yes, refer to plan.) 
Does alleged bully have a 504 plan? Yes N0 (If yes, refer to plan.) 
Is the alleged bully in the referral process for either? Yes No 
(If yes, Specify) __i_ If the alleged bully receives special services, when were Special Services Director and/or 
5 O4 Coordinator notiﬁed of the incident: 
Person notiﬁed: Date: 
Do school unit’s records show prior reports of alleged or substantiated incidents of 
bullying involving the alleged target or alleged bully? If so, describe incident and 
outcome(s): 
Meeting/interview of student who believes he/she has been bullied, description of alleged 
incident(s) (dates and details): 
Communications with parents(s) of student who believes he/she has been bullied date(s) 
and details): 
Meeting/interview of alleged bully (bullies) (dates and details): 
Communications with parent(s) of alleged bully (bullies) (dates and details): 
Meeting/interview of persons identiﬁed as Witnesses (dates and summary of information 
provided): 
Page 2 of6 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK-E2 
Further evidence of bullying examined (videos, photos, email, letters, etc.): 
Measures taken pending conclusion of the investigation to ensure the safety of the student 
who believes he/she has been bullied: 
Safety measures communicated to parents) of student who believes he/she has been 
bullied (date and details): 
Is the alleged bullying substantiated, i.e., does the alleged conduct meet the definition 
of bullying as articulated in Board policy? Yes No 
Nature of harm incurred: 
___Physical harm to student or damage to student’s property 
__Student ’s reasonable fear of physical harm or damage to property 
__Hostile educational environment 
__Infringement of student’s rights at school 
Conduct resulting in harm (in item above) is on the basis of: 
__National origin/ancestry/ethnicity 
__Religion 
__Physical, mental, emotional or learning disability 
___Sex 
___Sexual orientation 
__Gender/gender identity/expression 
__Ag@ 
___Socioeconomic status 
___Family status 
___Physica1 appearance 
__Weight 
iOther distinguishing personal characteristics 
___Other (explain) 
Summary of investigation/Explanation of ﬁndings: 
Page3 of6 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-E2 
Recommended disposition: 
Disciplinary action - alternative discipline: 
Disciplinary action — suspension (in-school, out-of-school) 
Expulsion (recommended for expulsion 
Recommendations for support services: 
Counseling/referral to services (targeted student) 
Counseling/referral to services (bully) 
Recommendation to report to law enforcement? Yes 
Potential criminal violation Potential civil rights violation 
Recommendations in other substantiated bullying situations: 
If bully is school employee or administrator, recommendation for action to be 
taken by Superintendent (any action must be consistent with collective bargaining 
agreement or individual contract): 
If bullying is by another adult person associated with the school (e.g., volunteer, 
visitor, or contractor): 
If bullying involves a school-af ﬁliated organization: 
Signature of investigator: 
If investigator is not building principal, copy to principal on [Q] 
Copy to Superintendent on [dat _e] 
Page 4 of6 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK-E2 
ACTIONS TAKEN BY PRINCIPAL 
The student received/ will receive the following discipline actions (consequences): 
Alternative Discipline 
Detention 
Weekend Detention 
In-school suspension 
Out-of-school suspension 
Expulsion/ Recommended for expulsion 
Alternative discipline imposed for this student (if applicable): 
Meeting with the student and the student's parent(s) or guardian(s) 
Reﬂective activities, such as requiring the student to write an essay about the 
student's misbehavior 
Mediation, but only when there is mutual conﬂict between peers, rather than 
one-way negative behavior, and both parties voluntarily choose this option 
Counseling 
Anger management 
Health counseling or intervention 
Mental health counseling 
Participation in skills building and resolution activities, such as social/ 
emotional/ cognitive skills building, resolution circles and restorative 
conferencing 
Community service 
Referral to law enforcement? Yes No 
Written notice has been provided to parent(s)/guardian(s) of the student who has been 
found to have engaged in bullying, including the process for appeal. 
Notiﬁcation sent by principal: [Datel 
Copy to Superintendent: [Date] 
Page 5 of6 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK-E2 
APPEAL OF PRINCIPAL ’S DECISION 
Date appeal submitted:i 
All appeals to the Superintendent must be submitted, in writing, to the Central Ofﬁce 
within 14 [OR: __] calendar days of the building principal ’s decision. The 
Superintendent ’s decision shall be ﬁnal. 
Superintendent ’s decision: 
Date parent(s)/guardian(s) notiﬁed of Superintendent ’s decision: 
ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE SUPERINTENDENT 
Recommendation to Board for student expulsion 
Action on student/parent appeal of principal ’s decision 
Action taken against employee: (If conﬁdential employment action, in personnel 
ﬁle) 
Recommendation to Board for suspension/revocation of sanctioning/approval of 
school-af ﬁliated organization 
Other: 
Page 6 of6 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
*MSMA SAMPLE EXHIBIT* NEPN/N SBA Code: JICK-E3 
BULLYING: SUMMARY OF DISCIPLINARY AND REMEDIAL ACTIONS 
This page is for use when a substantiated incident of bullying is entered into the Report 
of Substantiated Incident of Bullying in the Maine Department of Education ’s NEO data 
reporting system. It is aligned with the NEO data categories. 
This documentation is in reference to the alleged incident of bullying reported on: 
[Date of incident] 
Name of student who was found to have bullied (name is for 
tracking in school unit ﬁles only; do not report name of student or any 
personally identifying information to the Maine Department of Education) 
Delineate the speciﬁc nature(s) of the incident: 
M Cyberbullying 
Electronic expression 
Physical act or gesture 
Retaliation 
Verbal / Oral 
Written 
Alternative discipline imposed for this student (actions taken): 
Meeting with the student and the student's parent(s) or guardian(s) 
Reﬂective activities, such as requiring the student to write an essay about the 
student's misbehavior 
Mediation, but only when there is mutual conﬂict between peers, rather than 
one-way negative behavior, and both parties voluntarily choose this option 
Counseling 
Anger management 
Health counseling or intervention 
Mental health counseling 
Participation in skills building and resolution activities, such as social/ 
emotional/ cognitive skills building, resolution circles and restorative 
conferencing 
Community service 
The student received/ will receive the following discipline actions (consequences): 
Alternative Discipline 
Detention 
Weekend Detention 
In-school suspension 
Out-of-school suspension 
EXpulsion/ Recommended for expulsion 
Page 1 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: JICK-E3 
The following serves as a record that a report of substantiated bullying has been 
submitted to the Maine Department of Education. 
Date: 
Signature and position of person completing this form 
Data reported to Maine DOE (NEO) on [Date] by 
Signature, Position of Reporter 
Copy to building principal on [Date] 
Copy to Superintendent on [Date] 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGED/[ENT ASSOCIATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
