	
	
         Maine	Mayors	Coalition	Testimony	in	Support	of	LD	1380	An	Act	to	Fund	Municipal	Administrative	Costs	Associated	with		the	Senior	Property	Tax	Stabilization	Program	 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, the Maine Mayors Coalition writes in support of LD 1380, An Act to Fund Municipal Administrative Costs Associated with the Senior Property Tax Stabilization Program.  The Maine Mayors Coalition is a nonpartisan group representing the mayors of ten Maine communities – Auburn, Augusta, Biddeford, Lewiston, Portland, Rockland, Saco, Sanford, South Portland and Westbrook, more than 260,000 residents. The Coalition advocates on behalf of our citizens and municipalities for policies that recognize the vital services Maine cities provide and the positive impact Maine cities have on our state. The Coalition seeks to work in partnership with state and federal elected officials to meet the needs of Maine people.   Maine’s housing crisis directly impacts each of our cities, and housing is top of mind for all of us. Increased property values and rising property taxes are among the economic consequences of the housing crisis, especially for our seniors. Every day we see them struggling to stay in their homes and in their communities among their families and friends.   The Legislature’s effort to address this critical and immediate need brought about the Property Tax Stabilization for Senior Citizens program. It’s a very popular program and our staffs have been overwhelmed with applications. We are committing a great deal of time to ensure this program is implemented properly so those who have already applied, and many who plan to, may count on property tax relief.   Compensating municipalities for 100% of the cost of administering the program, as proposed in LD 1380, would be most helpful as we, like you, seek to serve the interests of our citizens. We are working diligently to process applications along with accompanying tax bills, all of which is done manually as none of our software systems allow for this process to be automated. To provide you with a point of reference, the City of Westbrook is adjusting approximately 850 tax bills and is concerned that the extra work could impact due dates and cash flows.  We ask you to vote in favor of LD 1380. As you consider changes to the Property Tax Stabilization program, please continue to take into account the impacts any revisions could have on municipalities.   We would be happy to provide you with additional information as you move forward.	 Thank you for your time. 	
