Cari I- Lee
S 608 345 5377 
calee(gjsteptoe.corrr 
1330 Connecticut Avenue, NW 
Washington, D(‘ 20036-1795 
202 429 3000 main 
www.steptoe.com 
April 18, 2023 
Delivered via Electronic Mail 
Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Chair, Senator Donna Bailey 
c/o Legislative Information Ofﬁce 
I00 State House Station 
Augusta, ME ()4333 
RE: NAPHIA Support of LD 290 as Amended 
Dear Members of the Joint House Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial 
Services: 
The North American Pet Health Insurance Association (NAPHIA) appreciates the opportunity to 
submit comments in support of the amended version of LD 290. NAPHIA members make up 
over 95% of the pet insurance market in Maine and across the United States, and we look 
forward to sharing our support for this legislation, which is critical to the viability of the Maine 
pet insurance market. Speciﬁcally, this bill provides legislative clarity for insurers and 
consumers regarding pet insurance policy issuance in Maine. 
Background
l 
As you may know, Maine’s pet insurance law was enacted on January l, 2023. Last fall, 
insurers began ﬁling their new policy forms to comply with the new statute. However, shortly 
thereafter, Maine’s Bureau of Insurance (Bureau) began rejecting insurer ﬁlings because they 
were concemed that some policy filings included a delayed effectuation date. A delayed 
effectuation date means that a policy does not begin for a certain number of days, and no 
premium is charged. As a result, the Bureau issued bulletin 464, which prohibits art insurer from 
having a policy effectuation date for the sole purpose of delaying coverage? Alter the bulletin 
was issued, the industry met with the Bureau to share concerns regarding their bulletin. Soon 
aﬂer, the Bureau stated that policies must be issued by l2:0l a.rn. the day following acceptance 
of an application, with exceptions for underwriting and policies issued as part ofa groupqi 
1 
See 24-A M.R.S. ch. 44 (§§ 3151-3161), enacted by P.L. 2021, c. 562 (to. 482). 
2 
See Maine Insurance Bureau Bulletin 464: Other methods of achieving a waiting period, such as delaying the 
effective date of a policy for the sole purpose of delaying coverage, are not permitted 
3 
November 1, 2022 Bureau of Insurance letter stated the following; "However, when an insurer determines an 
applicant's eligibility for coverage and a payment mechanism is in place, coverage should begin promptly. As isa 
common practice, coverage can begin on 12:01 a.m. on the day following the acceptance of an application to allow 
insurers to calculate earned premium using whole days."
Steptoe 
LD 290 Amendments Create A Consumer-Friendly Compromise 
NAPHIA members remain committed to solving the Bureau’s wish that policies begin quickly. 
We want the same thing. NAPHIA thus supports the amended version of LD 290, which will 
allow the industry to offer the products it offers in other states to pet owners in Maine. The 
amended version of LD 290 states that policies must begin by 12:01 a.m. on the second calendar 
day after the insurer has detennined the pet’s eligibility. The amendment also provides four 
limited exceptions to this general mle, including that if a policy has no waiting periods of any 
kind (even though LD 290 permits a waiting period for illnesses of up to 30 days), the policy 
must begin within l5 days after purchase. The beneﬁts to Maine consumers from having this 
product as a choice in the market would allow pet owners to get full coverage from the day they 
begin paying premiums. The other exceptions deal with policy issues as part of a group (typically 
through an employer), which the Bureau already allows pursuant to Bulletin 464, and the rare instance 
where an insurer needs to conduct individualized underwriting on a speciﬁc pet. 
We appreciate the opportunity to express our strong support for this bill. We believe it strikes a 
fair balance between the Bureau’s concems relating to consumer access to coverage while 
protecting current policyholders and insurers against adverse selection and increased premiums. 
NAPHIA is happy to answer any questions or concems. 
Sincerely, 
Ca»/0 Lee 
Cari Lee 
Director Government Affairs 
Steptoe and Johnson, LLP 
On behalf of the North American Pet Health Insurance Association
