Good morning, I’m Dr. Steve Weinrauch. I’m a veterinarian and Trupanion’s Chief product 
Officer. My company provides medical insurance for cats and dogs across North America.  
 
We have an amazing product that we would love to offer in Maine. But Maine residents can’t have 
it. Current law in Maine states that: “…waiting periods…for illnesses…” are permitted but 
“Waiting periods for accidents are prohibited”. The product that we would like to make 
available in Maine has no waiting periods, therefore exceeds requirements. We accept no fee at 
all, until all coverage is effective on day 12 otherwise coverage kicks in immediately upon a 
veterinary exam. And we have no need to subjectively parse accident vs illness because both are 
covered immediately upon premium collection. In veterinary medicine there is often no clear line 
between accident and illness. What looks like an accident to a pet owner is often what veterinarians 
know to be a sudden event exacerbating an underlying illness. In the medical profession, we call 
this “acute on chronic”. 
 
In contrast, a “waiting period” only begins once full premium has been collected and further time 
has elapsed. But recent Bureau guidance says otherwise. Maine’s guidance confuses “waiting 
periods” with an “effective date”. This is bad for Maine consumers. This is also a serious issue for 
Trupanion. Our enrollments are down 50% since the new rule interpretation went into effect. 
 
We think this is unfair. With any waiting period, full premium is collected but only a fraction of 
the policy value is provided. At the end of 2022, accidents only made up <5% of claims. You 
wouldn’t buy a whole pizza with the expectation of only being given a slice. You wouldn’t accept 
that. But it’s exactly what’s happening. The consumer’s paying full fees for comprehensive 
coverage but is receiving less than 5% of the benefit. Our product solves this. But, the only way 
you can buy our policy in Maine under the bureaus immediate issuance rule is to have a 
veterinarian physically examine your pet within the 24 hours before signing up which delays 
access to insurance, adds costs to the consumer, and in today’s post COVID world, even getting 
an appointment is easier said than done.  
 
Of course with immediate issuance, pets with problems that started before being insured will 
disproportionately claim. That will cause costs to rise across other Maine consumers which will 
lead to insured’s dropping coverage. This is fundamentally unfair, but again our product solves 
this adverse selection.  
 
We’re motivated for coverage to begin as soon as possible because until our policy is effective we 
collect no fee, and no business occurs at all. But good business is fair business and that’s what we 
are after.  
 
As of today we can and will be able to sell this product in any state other than Maine, including in 
states that are adopting the model law beginning next year. I urge you to approve the proposed bill, 
which would enable all Maine consumers’ access to our product. Thank you for your time and 
consideration. I’d be happy to answer any questions.   
 
