19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony in Opposition of LD 887 (“An Act to Amend the Regulation of Mobile 
Home Parks”)
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 23, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government 
Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade 
association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow 
Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers 
involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also 
includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, 
building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National 
Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 887. The bill would drastically 
increase the time required for an owner of a mobile home park to provide notice of an 
eviction to tenants when the eviction is due to a change of the park’s intended use. 
This bill would cause significant delays involving real estate transactions and development.  
Property owners wanting to change the use of their property should not be held to a different 
standard than other businesses. The intent for reuse could benefit the community and 
excessively extending the notice period could cause significant delays in development or 
untimely holds on the transfer of real property. Increasing the notice for evictions in these 
circumstances would likely create more strain on Maine’s fragile housing supply. 
Furthermore, when a mobile home park is converted or developed for other land uses, in 
particular owner-occupied dwellings, then property taxes can be collected, adding to a 
community’s economic stability and growth.  
As stewards of protecting private property rights, we believe that real property ownership 
contributes to economic stability and self-sufficiency. Property owners should be able to use, 
dispose and transfer real property how they see fit, to include for investment or business use. 
We advocate for the adoption of local planning and zoning policies that encourage housing 
and economic development and availability of all housing types including factory-built 
housing, modular housing, manufactured housing, tiny homes, and other types of housing 
for ownership or tenancy. We do not agree that lengthening the timeframe from which one 
can change use of property is beneficial for Maine property owners and housing 
development.  
Page 2
12781773.1For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 887. Thank 
you for your time and consideration.
