1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
March 23, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 887 An Act to Amend the Regulation of Mobile Home Parks 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization that 
was established in Maine following the passage of the Older American’s Act 
in 1974. Since then, we have provided free legal assistance to our 
disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs are at stake. 
We support all the increases in the time for notices proposed in the 
Sponsor’s amendment. As we have suggested in two prior bills proposing 
increases in the statutory notice times for regular apartment and home rental 
situations, lower income older renters included in our client base are less 
able to sustain changes in their economic circumstances than most. Given 
the housing shortages and the loss of Pandemic Health Emergency 
assistance they need all the help they can get.
 
The one truly bright spot in the Sponsor’s amendment is found in Section 2.
It’s a forward-thinking proposal that introduces the idea of tenants buying a 
mobile home park. The only problem that is immediately evident is that the 
timetable in the proposal may be too short for the tenants to organize and 
finance the purchase of a park. This is not a completely novel idea but we 
are grateful that it is included. Several mobile home parks in Maine have 
been purchased by the tenants using the services of non-profit organizations 
in the business of helping with the details and financing of such purchases. 
ROC USA is one example. They are located in New Hampshire and their 
website may be viewed here: https://www.rocusa.org/whats-a-roc/
   
2They or individuals from a Maine mobile home park purchased by the 
tenants may be able to offer a realistic estimate of how long it takes to 
complete a purchase. Here is a link to an article on the ROC USA website 
that describes a congressional staff visit to 3 tenant purchased parks in 
Maine last December:  Maine ROCs illustrate potential impact of PRICE 
fund to congressional staffers - ROC USA® There are details in the story 
that identify the mobile home parks and some of the owners.  
    
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to share our thoughts with you 
today and we hope that you vote ought to pass on this bill.  
         
