ts"-‘:~. 
B. 
. '- 
..=:a,; 
+4 ) ~.: __\_ »
0 .... . 
.,_ _,. ,<,_-_... 
/‘I’ 
s :" 
L‘ -" 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 887 
An Act to Amend the Regulation of Mobile Home Parks 
Presented to the Ioint Standing Committee on ludiciary 
Thursday, March 23, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Ioint Standing Committee on 
Iudiciary, my name is Troy Iackson. I serve as President of the Maine Senate and proudly 
represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. l am here today to present LD 887, An Act 
to Amend the Regulation of Mobile Home Parks. 
An element of the current housing crisis that is often overlooked is the mobile home 
industry. Yet, mobile and modular homes are popular alternatives for those entering the 
housing market for the first time and for those with fixed or lower incomes. Approximately 
20 million people live in manufactured homes in the U.S., many of them veterans, senior 
citizens, and people with disabilities.1 Maine has the highest rate of mobile homes in New 
England and in the entire Northeastern United States? The cost of these homes in Maine is 
on the rise. Androscoggin, Aroostook, Cumberland, Kennebec, Penobscot, and York 
counties all saw significant increases in price from 2019 to 2022.3 ln my backyard, rural 
Aroostook County, we had some of the least expensive mobile homes pre-pandemic; but 
since then, the median sales price has nearly tripledﬂ These homes are a major component 
of the state's housing stock, but they are also under attack. 
Owners of manufactured homes in a park are required to rent the land on which their 
home sits. Unlike renters who may be evicted and have to move, an owner of a mobile 
home will have to sell the home or move it to another site. These homes are really not that 
mobile. They are difficult to move and costly to do so. The cost of moving a mobile home 
typically falls in the $5000 to $10,000 range according to the National Consumer Law 
Center. If the owner cannot afford to move the home, they may be forced to sell at fire-sale 
rates or abandon the home, in which the landowner can then take title. 
1https://www.newvorkercomlmaqazine/2021/O3/15/what-hap_pens-when-investment-firms-acquire-trai|er- 
parks 
2 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2022/06/14/business/mobile-homes-getting-expensive-joam40zk0w/ 
3 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2022/06/14/business/mobile-homes-getting-expensive-joam40zk0w/ 
4 httpss//mamanneiaanynewe.can/20122/.06/ammusmess/mumreasomes@geamg4esrpens1veqoaman;zR0w/ 
Senate/"Jackson!@gmai/.c0m * Web Sire: legislature.maine.gov/senate
Although manufactured homes cost less than stick built, they are a major investment for 
those they house. Most buyers aren't eligible for fifteen or thirty-year fixed rate mortgages. 
Many have to finance their homes with high-interest loans.5 And, whereas traditional 
homeownership can be a secure basis of wealth, mobile homes depreciate in value. These 
homeowners may have saved for years to put a down payment on a home, and while they 
are paying on this loan, they are also paying rent for the land upon which it sits. 
To make matters worse, large investment firms have been targeting mobile home 
communities to use them as passive income. These parks can generate steady returns and 
require little effort to maintain ﬁ The Mobile Home University Website states, “Mobile home 
parks are the hottest sector for real estate right now/'7 These firms come in, raise rents, 
change rules, adjust rental agreements, and leave the renters with little recourse. LD 887, 
as amended, is an attempt to give those who rent more protection for their investment. 
The reasons for the proposed amendment are as follows: Section 1 of the bill is 
unnecessary as written. This is because hidden deep within Title 10, Section 9097, 
subsection 1, paragraph F, is the following:" 
. . . in the case of change of use, one year's 
notice is given in writing, unless at the beginning of the tenancy the tenant is given notice of 
the scheduled change of use.” Additionally, to promote housing stability, I have included 
language that would allow homeowners an opportunity to purchase the mobile home park 
when the park's owner is considering a sale. I have also lengthened notice requirements for 
changes in fees and rules, temporary or permanent evictions, and removal of abandoned 
property. Moreover, the offered amendment increases the time a tenant has to come up 
with a late payment of rent. These changes will give tenants the much needed time to 
assess their options and plan alternatives if the need arises. 
I did keep the original Section 2 of the bill (Section 4 in the proposed amendment). Both 
binding arbitration and possessory liens are known to be predatory. They are two more 
ways to limit the rights of the owner of the mobile home. Maine is an aging state and many 
of the tenants in our mobile home parks are retirees living on fixed incomes. Any way we 
can help secure their right to housing is a pledge I will proudly take. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I will try to answer any questions you may 
have. 
5https://www.newy0rker.com/magazine/2021/O3/15/what-happens~when-investment-firms-acquire-trai|er- 
parks 
6 https://www. ﬁndlawcomllegalblogs/law-and-life/what-righis-do-mobile-home-park-tenants-have! 
7https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/O3/15/what-happens-when-investment~firms-acquire-trailer- 
parks
LD 887 “An Act to Amend the Regulation of Mobile Home Parks” 
President Troy Jackson - Proposed Amendment 
Replace LD 887 with the following: 
Sec. 1. 10 MRSA §9093(2) is amended to read: 
2. increases or changes. The park owner or operator must give at least 39 6_0 days’ written 
notice to all tenants before changing any rules or increasing any fees, charges or assessments 
Sec. 2. 10 MRSA §9094-A (1) is amended to read: 
1. Notice of offer to purchase the mobile home park. Except as provided in subsection 3, if 
the owner of a mobile home park receives an offer to purchase the mobile home park and the 
park owner intends to accept that offer, the owner shall give 45 §Q days‘ written notice to 
tenants of the mobile home park in order for -the homeowners to express interest in 
purchasing the property and another 60 days to close the purchase. The notice must 
indicate that the owner has received an offer to purchase the mobile home park and that the 
owner intends to accept that offer. During the 45- Q day notice period, the owner may not 
execute a contract for the purchase and sale of the mobile home park. The owner must mail by 
regular mail a separate notice to each park tenant. 
2. Option contract. Nothing in this subsection prohibits the owner of a mobile home park from 
obtaining at any time from a buyer an option to sell the mobile home park if: 
A. The option does not bind the owner who obtains the option to sell the park to the 
buyer; and 
B. The option of the owner may not be exercised prior to expiration of the 45-Q-day 
notice provided for in subsection 1. 
Sec. 3. 10 MRSA §9097(1)(G) is amended to read: 
G. Renovation or reconstruction of any portions of the park, if: 
(1) In the case of a temporary eviction, the park owner or operator: 
(a) Gives affected tenants 30 Q days‘ notice in writing, unless the temporary 
eviction is necessary to correct conditions posing an immediate threat to one or more 
tenants‘ health or safety; and 
(b) Pays the removal and relocation costs of tenants, except for those tenants 
who agree otherwise in a signed writing separate from the lease; or 
(2) In the case of a permanent eviction, other than an eviction due to reconstruction or 
renovation required by a federal, state or local governmental body, of one or more 
mobile homes currently located in the park, the park owner or operator: 
(a) Gives each tenant one year's notice in writing; or 
(b) To each tenant for whose home the park owner has found a reasonable 
alternative location acceptable to the tenant, gives 6 months‘ written notice and pays 
removal and relocation costs; 
Sec. 4. 10 MRSA §9097(1-B) is amended to read: 
1-B. Abandoned mobile home or manufactured housing. Manufactured housing that is 
abandoned or unclaimed by a tenant following the tenant's eviction in accordance with this 
section and section 9097-B must be disposed of by a mobile home park owner or operator as
LD 887 “An Act to Amend the Regulation of Mobile Home Parks” 
President Troy Jackson - Proposed Amendment 
follows. For purposes of this subsection, "manufactured housing" includes all housing described 
in section 9002, subsection 7 located in a land lease community or mobile home park. 
A. After a mobile home park owner or operator obtains a judgment for forcible entry and 
detainer, the mobile home park owner or operator shall send written notice by first-class mail, 
with proof of mailing, to the last known address of the tenant with a copy to the lienholder, if 
known. The notice must set forth the mobile home park owner's or operator ‘s intent to dispose 
of the manufactured housing. The notice must advise the tenant and lienholder, if known, that if 
the tenant or lienholder does not respond to the notice within 44 Q calendar days the mobile 
home park owner or operator may dispose of the property as set forth in this subsection. If the 
tenant or lienholder does respond to the notice, the tenant or lienholder shall take possession of 
the property within 24 Q calendar days. Subsection 2-B applies with respect to the rights and 
responsibilities of the lienholder. 
B. if a tenant or lienholder claims ownership of the manufactured housing within 4-4 Q1 
calendar days after the notice under paragraph A is sent, the tenant or lienholder shall take 
possession of the property within 2-1 §_Q calendar days of claiming ownership. If the tenant or 
lienholder timely claims the property but is not able to move the property within L4 §Q days due 
to weather or posted road conditions, the mobile home park owner or operator shall allow the 
tenant or lienholder to remove the property after the 24 gig-day period but the mobile home park 
owner or operator may charge for any additional costs incurred as a result of the delay. 
C. If a tenant or lienholder does not claim ownership of the property within 44 Q1 
calendar days after the notice under paragraph A is sent or fails to take possession of the 
property after claiming ownership pursuant to paragraph B, the mobile home park owner or 
operator may take one or more of the following actions: 
(1) Condition the release of the property to the tenant or lienholder upon payment 
of all rental arrearages, damages, costs of legal fees and costs of storage; 
(2) Sell any property for a reasonable fair market price and apply all proceeds to rental 
arrearages, damages, costs of storage, marketing expenses, legal fees and outstanding taxes. 
Any balance must be sent to the tenant's or lienholder ‘s last known mailing address and, if 
returned to the sender, the balance must be forwarded to the Treasurer of State; and 
(3) Dispose of any property that has no reasonable fair market value. 
2. Notice. A tenancy in a mobile home park may be terminated only by: 
A. The tenant giving at least 45 days‘ notice of termination to the park owner; or 
B. The park owner entitled under subsection 1 to the mobile home space giving at least 45 §_Q 
days‘ notice of termination in writing to the tenant. If the landlord or the landlord's agent has 
made at least 3 witnessed good faith efforts made on 3 separate days to serve the tenant, 
sen/ice may be accomplished by both mailing the notice by first class mail to the tenant's last 
known address and by leaving the notice at the tenant's space in the park. 
(1) In cases where the reason for eviction is nonpayment of rent, the tenancy may be 
terminated by 39 QQ days‘ notice given in the same manner provided that the notice for eviction 
contains notice of the amount owed and a statement indicating that the tenant can negate the 
effect of the notice of termination as it applies to rent arrearage if the tenant pays the full amount 
of rent due before the expiration of the notice. 
(2) In cases in which the reason for eviction is one listed in subsection 1, paragraph B, 
C, D, E, H or I, the 45 days‘ notice of termination must refer to relevant provisions of the 
lease or mobile home park rules and must state the reasons for the termination. 
Sec. 5. 10 MRSA §9097-A, sub-§2, is amended to read: 
2. Unenforceable provisions. The following rental agreement or rule provisions are 
specifically declared to be unenforceable and in violation of Title 5, section 207:
LD 887 “An Act to Amend the Regulation of Mobile Home Parks” 
President Troy Jackson - Proposed Amendment 
A. Any provision that absolves the park owner or operator from liability for the 
negligence of the park owner or operator or the agent of the park owner or operator; 
B. Any provision that requires the tenant to pay the legal fees of the park owner or 
operator in enforcing the rental agreement; 
C. Any provision that requires the tenant to give a lien upon the tenant's property, 
including a tenant's mobile home, for the amount of any rent or other sums due the park owner 
or operator; and 
D. Any provision that requires the tenant to acknowledge that the provisions of the rental 
agreement, including tenant rules, are fair and reasonablev; 
E. Anwprovision that binds the tenant to arbitration in lieu of a civil trial; and 
F. Any_provision that requires the tenant to aqree to a possessory lien. 
Sec. 5. 10 MRSA §9097-C, is amended to read: 
The owner of a mobile home park or the owner's agent may assess a penalty against a tenant 
for late payment of rent under this section. 
1. Late payment. A payment of rent is late if it is not made within 45 Q days from the 
time the payment is due. 
2. Maximum penalty. The owner of a mobile home park or the owner's agents may not 
assess a penalty for the late payment of rent that exceeds 4% of the amount due for one month. 
3. Notice in writing. The owner of a mobile home park or the owner's agents may not 
assess a penalty for the late payment of rent unless the owner of a mobile home park or the 
owner's agents gives the tenant written notice at the time the owner of a mobile home park or 
the owner's agents and tenant enter into the rental agreement that a penalty, up to 4% of one 
month's rent, may be charged for the late payment of rent. 
Summary: The proposed amendment increases the notice requirement period from 30 to 60 
days for any changes in park rules, fees, charges, or assessments. lt allows mobile home 
owners located in a park to collectively express interest and offer to purchase the park that is 
considering a sale. The amendment increases the notice a tenant is giveﬁmh gcase ofa 
temporary or permanent eviction. lt increases the calendar days a mobile home oWn€r“has to 
respond to claims of abandonment. The amendment disallows any provision in a rental 
agreement that binds a tenant to arbitration in lieu of a civil trial or requires a tenant to agree to 
a possessory lien. It also increases the amount of time considered for a late payment of rent.
