i A HOUSE GP REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
, (207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
David Boyer 
112 Verrill Road 
Poland, ME 04274 
Ofﬁce: (207) 287-1440 
Cell: (207)274-4633 
David.Boyer@legislature.maine.gov 
March 27, 2023 
Testimony of Representative David Boyer 
Presenting L.D. 544 An Act to Increase the Chance of Receiving a Moose 
Permit for Maine Service Members and Veterans 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is 
Representative David Boyer and I am here today presenting L.D. 544 An Act to 
Increase the Chance of Receiving a Moose Permit for Maine Service Members 
and Veterans. 
As many of you may know, Maine is home to many veterans, being number ﬁve 
in the country for veterans per capita. Serving our country takes a toll on our 
veterans and their families. As a society, we have granted special privileges for 
this sacriﬁce and that’s the aim of my bill.' 
As I was going door-to-door campaigning, I talked to multiple veterans that 
continuously put in for the moose lotto and still has not won a permit. 
My bill would simply award active-duty military and veterans to accumulate two 
points every year rather than one. A person’s accumulated points are eliminated, 
and that person begins to accumulate points anew if in any year that person is 
selected to receive a moose hunting permit or if that person fails to purchase a new 
chance in any 2 consecutive years. 
My understanding is that the Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife will be 
testifying against the bill. They have concerns that increasing the chances for 
veterans and current members of the armed services to receive a moose permit will 
reduce the likelihood that all other applicants will win a permit. Quite frankly, that 
is the point of this legislation! 
‘District 87 Mechanic Falls and Poland (part)
Perhaps, to address the department ’s concerns, the committee could amend my 
legislation so that once an active-duty member or veteran is awarded a moose 
permit, they go back to l point like everyone else. 
I appreciate the opportunity to present this bill and the committee ’s consideration, 
thank you. 
District 87 Mechanic Falls and Poland (part)
