TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 544 
"An Act to Increase the Chance of Receiving a Moose Permit for Maine Service 
Members and Veterans" 
Presented by Representative BOYER of Poland. 
Cosponsored by Senator FARRIN of Somerset and Representatives: BLIER of Buxton, 
CRAY of Palmyra, HYl\/I ES of Waldo, PERKINS of Dover—Foxcroft, RISEMAN of Harrison, 
RUDNICKI of Fairfield, STROUT of Harrington, and SUPICA of Bangor. 
DATE OF HEARING: March 27, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Director for the Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to LD. 544. 
This bill increases the number of points that a person accumulates each year that person 
applies for a moose hunting permit but is not successful if that person is a Maine resident 
and a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or Maine National Guard on active 
duty or is a veteran of either. 
Currently, moose permits are issued through a random lottery that includes a point system to 
increase the chances that hunters who have applied for multiple years will win a permit. Other 
than this preference for long-term applicants, the lottery does not provide an advantage to any 
other category of hunter over another. While the Department appreciates the intent of this bill, 
increasing the chances for veterans and current members of the armed services to receive a 
moose permit will reduce the likelihood that all other applicants will win a permit. Over time, 
this means that veterans and service members would win a higher percentage of moose permits 
and win permits more frequently than all other applicants. 
Wherever possible, the Department strives to allocate general hunting opportunities in a fair 
and equitable way that does not favor any one group over another. We do currently have 
special licensing provisions for service members and disabled veterans, and special hunting 
opportunities for moose and turkey that are designed for disabled veterans. The Department 
supports organizations that provide these opportunities and believes that is the appropriate way 
to support veterans in enjoying the outdoors while hunting and fishing.
This bill would also be extremely challenging to implement, and we would likely need to rely on 
the honor system rather than attempting to verify that applicants are truly veterans or current 
service members. This could lead to abuse from hunters who may try to increase their chances 
of winning a moose permit and may cause an unfair advantage in the moose lottery for 
applicants that are dishonest. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
