» " 
STATE OF MAINE an 1,4. 
DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY W-v_' .-.,~’; ' 
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
22 STATE HoUsE STATION 7‘ i 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GQVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
In Opposition to LD 1947 
An Act to Amend the Food Sovereignty Act 
May 22, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, I am Craig Lapine, Director of the Bureau of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources in the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry. I am here today to speak in Opposition to LD 1947, “An Act to Amend the Food 
Sovereignty Act.” 
The Department shares many of the food sovereignty principles articulated in LD 1947. We 
value those who grow, harvest, and process food. We support systems that bring food producers 
and consumers closer together. We recognize the importance of local knowledge and skills 
passed down over generations to safeguard traditional foodways and enhance sustainable food 
production. 
In ﬁirtherance of those values, the Department supports Maine’s current Food Sovereignty Act 
(FSA). Under the FSA, a municipality may adopt ordinances covering direct producer-to- 
consumer transactions. When a town adopts a food sovereignty ordinance, most food sales are 
not subject to state food laws requiring licensing or inspection. 
Central to the current FSA statute is the requirement that food-sovereign transactions involve a 
direct producer-to-consumer interaction, deﬁned as “a face-to-face transaction involving food or 
food products at the site of production of those food or food products. ” As noted in our testimony 
on LD 1873, this Committee worked diligently and intentionally in 2017 to craft language to 
allow for the direct producer-to-consumer sale of foods in communities electing food 
sovereignty. We think that language allows Maine people to value and support local producers 
while also being able to make informed decisions for themselves and their families regarding 
quality and the risks of foodborne illness. 
LD 1947 eliminates the requirement that transactions must happen face-to-face and that they 
must occur at the site of production. Instead, LD 1947 would require only that the “exchange of 
HARLOW BUILDING Z"";_"i‘;‘;’ml' 
re PHONE: (207) 287-3200 
18 Erms LANE cgnsemtion FAX: (207) 287-2400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 8: Forestry WEB: WWW.MAINE.GOV/DACF
food or food products ” happen “directly between a food producer and a consumer under 
mutually agreed-to terms.” From a food safety perspective, we ﬁnd this standard overly broad 
and troublingly vague. What does “exchange ” or “directly ” or “mutually agreed-to terms” mean 
in practice? Would an intemet purchase fulﬁlled by a producer in a food-sovereign municipality 
constitute a direct producer-to-consumer transaction? ‘ Would any payment from any location 
signal that the buyer and seller have reached “mutually agreed-to terms,” regardless of what 
information may or may not have been available to the consumer? A possible reading of LD 
1947 would suggest that anyone would be able to sell a food product anywhere a food 
sovereignty ordinance exists so long as the exchange takes place “under mutually agreed-to 
terms.” The lack of any check on these exchanges means that restaurants could be precluded 
from health inspections, or seafood processing facilities that ship nationally avoid inspection. 
These far-reaching consequences also impact traceability. The current FSA requires face-to-face 
transactions at the site of production. Hence, if someone does become ill from a foodborne 
illness, tracing the cause of the illness is more likely. This becomes more complicated when food 
exchanges can now occur under essentially any situation. 
Expanding the scope of the Maine Food Sovereignty Act so broadly that essentially anyone can 
sell almost any productz to anyone anywhere enhances the scale of risk to Maine residents as 
well as the tens of millions of visitors we Welcome each year. That has the potential to negatively 
impact Maine’s reputation for producing high-quality food and as a food destination, and 
devalues food licensing and regulation that has existed for decades to ensure safe products in our 
marketplace. 
To my testimony today, I have attached our Department overview of the Food Sovereignty Act. 
Among other things, it underscores why the current language as structured strikes the right 
balance between consumer choice and consumer protection. 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer your questions. I and other staff can also 
be available to answer questions during the work session. 
1 
Note that if a product is purchased and taken out of Maine, this is interstate commerce and would be subject to 
federal regulations. For instance, low acid canned foods sold in interstate commerce cannot be processed ina 
home-based kitchen (21 CFR Part 113 and 9 CFR Parts 318.300-.311 and 381.300~.311). 
2 Meat and poultry remain exempt, per federal preemption.
2
DEPARTMENT OF 
Agriculture 
Conservation 
8< Forestry 
Maine Food Sovereignty Act Overview 
What is the Maine Food Sovereignty Act? 
o The Maine Food Sovereignty Act (MFSA) became law in 2017. 7 MRS §§ 281-286 
~ Under the MFSA, municipalities can adopt local food sovereignty ordinances that 
supersede certain state food laws. The local ordinances apply only to “clirect producer- 
to-consumer transactions" that are “face-to-face transactions involving food or food 
products at the site of production." 
1 For example, if your municipality has a food sovereignty ordinance and you sell 
homemade jams or jellies at your farm, that activity would not be subject to state 
oversight. Normally, a Home Food license would be required. 
What Can l Sell ifl am a Producer in a Food Sovereign Municipality? 
0 You can sell any product from your site of production that normally would need a state 
license except for meat and poultry products. Meat and poultry products were 
speciﬁcally exempted from the MFSA, and you will still need to meet state and/or 
federal licensing and inspection requirements, as applicable. 
o You will still need to be licensed if you want to sell your products beyond your site of 
production (i.e., in other towns or at other off-premise locations). 
0 Please check with your insurance agent to make sure your liability insurance will cover 
claims relating to unlicensed products sold at your site of production. 
Does the MFSA Apply to Farmers’ Markets? 
o Sales of products requiring a license are not permitted at Farmers’ Markets, 
restaurants,, or other off-site locations (including online venues). The Department does 
not interpret such locations as consumer-to-producer transactions at the site of 
production under the MFSA.
1
What is Food Sovereignty? 
La Via Campesina, a global farmer advocacy movement, launched the concept of food 
sovereignty in 1996 at the World Food Summit, which is broadly seen as people’s right 
to deﬁne their agricultural and food policy. 
In 2003, La Via Campesina stated that food sovereignty includes: the right of peoples to 
define their own food and agriculture; to protect and regulate domestic agricultural 
production and trade in order to achieve sustainable development objectives; to 
determine the extent to which they want to be self-reliant; to restrict the dumping of 
products in their markets, and; to provide local fisheries-based communities the priority 
in managing the use of and the rights to aquatic resources. Food sovereignty does not 
negate trade, but rather, it promotes the formulation of trade policies and practices that 
serve the rights of peoples to safe, healthy, and ecologically sustainable production. 
Food safety was included within La Via Campesina ‘s food sovereignty concept, 
including “Estabiish[ing] national mechanisms for quality control of all food products so 
that they comply with high environmental, social and health quality standards; and, 
Ensur[ing] that all food inspection functions are performed by appropriate and 
independent government bodies, and not by private corporations or contractors. ” 
The DACF values these tenets of food sovereignty while simultaneously ensuring 
necessary and important food safety mechanisms. 
Why IS Food Safety Important? 
Consumers expect that the food that they are purchasing is safe to eat and that it was 
produced under sanitary conditions. Any contaminated products may affect the health 
of consumers and provides a potential liability for a business. 
o Following basic food safety and food handling practices ensure a safe final 
product. Examples of these practices include frequent hand washing and 
washing and sanitizing of food contact surfaces, among other activities. 
Certain food products can be potentially hazardous. ln particular, any food products that 
must be refrigerated or frozen to ensure product safety (such as dairy and meat 
products). 
o These foods must be kept at appropriate temperatures to prevent foodborne 
iﬂness. 
o Shelf stable, canned, dried, and other preserved products must be checked to 
ensure the proper pH or water activity are maintained, the products are properly 
processed to destroy microorganisms, and adequately packaged. 
o Improperly processed food products can lead to severe and sometimes deadly 
foodborne illness. 
lf you have questions or concerns about certain rules or inspection requirements, 
please give the Department a call. Staff would be happy to speak to you and provide
2
technical assistance and access to other educational resources. Call us at 287-3841 or 
visit us at https://www.maine.gov/dacf/qar/permits and licenses/index.shtml 
ls it Hard to Get Licensed? 
0 No. The Department strives to provide technical assistance that allows producers to 
become licensed. Staff will answer questions and even provide a free pre-inspection of 
an applicant's kitchen if desired to help ensure a smooth inspection process. The 
average home kitchen typically passes inspection. Stainless steel appliances and food 
contact surfaces are NOT required. 
~ Annual license fees are low ($20 or $30), and not all licenses require annual 
inspections. 
Where Can I Learn More About Licensing? 
v Department staff are available to answer any questions you may have about the various 
types of licenses available and are ready to work with you to successfully get licensed. 
Please call us at 287-3841 or visit us at 
https://www.maine.qov/dacf/qar/permits and licenses/index.shtml 
- For more information about growing your own home-based food business, the 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension is an excellent resource. Visit them online: 
0 https:[/extension.umaine.edu[publications/3101e[ 
Q https:[/extension.umaine.edu/food-health/food-safety/servicesl 
https:[/extension.umaine.edu/food-health/food-safet\Utraining[ 
https:[/extension.umaine.edu/businesslgpecialtv-foods[
3
