I am Treasurer of Bath Farmers Market, Bath, Maine. Bath Farmers Market supports the 
livelihoods of 28 farmers and small business owners. We require that all of our vendors 
are licensed and inspected, as required by state law. We firmly believe that this 
requirement maintains the integrity of the farmers’ market community in Maine. State 
health and safety regulations are not a barrier to entry for our market for vendors who 
follow minimum standards for sanitation and safe production practices.  
 
LD 1947 would harm the viability of our farmers’ market, and hundreds of other farmers’ 
market vendors across Maine for a number of reasons:  
• A damaged reputation for farmers’ markets as a place where unregulated, 
uninspected food is sold 
• Any food-poisoning incident would harm all markets 
• New markets would emerge because the existing farmers’ market community 
would not permit uninspected vendors of most products to attend. These new 
markets would create added, unfair competition, and further damage farmers’ 
markets reputations.  
 
Please do not undermine decades of strong growth at farmers’ markets. Farmers 
markets are small business incubators that result in jobs for Maine citizens. Please 
listen to the majority of farmers’ market organizers and vendors when we say that LD 
1947 should not pass as written. Please create a special exemption for farmers’ 
markets, so the farmers’ market community continues to grow and thrive by the same 
set of rules that we find to be fair, helpful, and accessible to small, start-up operations. 
 
Dan Sortwell, Treasurer, Bath Farmers Market 
Dan Sortwell
Bath Farmers Market
LD 1947
I am Treasurer of Bath Farmers Market, Bath, Maine. Bath Farmers Market supports 
the livelihoods of 28 farmers and small business owners. We require that all of our 
vendors are licensed and inspected, as required by state law. We firmly believe that 
this requirement maintains the integrity of the farmers’ market community in Maine. 
State health and safety regulations are not a barrier to entry for our market for vendors
who follow minimum standards for sanitation and safe production practices. 
LD 1947 would harm the viability of our farmers’ market, and hundreds of other 
farmers’ market vendors across Maine for a number of reasons: 
•A damaged reputation for farmers’ markets as a place where unregulated, 
uninspected food is sold
•Any food-poisoning incident would harm all markets
•New markets would emerge because the existing farmers’ market community 
would not permit uninspected vendors of most products to attend. These new markets 
would create added, unfair competition, and further damage farmers’ markets 
reputations. 
Please do not undermine decades of strong growth at farmers’ markets. Farmers 
markets are small business incubators that result in jobs for Maine citizens. Please 
listen to the majority of farmers’ market organizers and vendors when we say that LD 
1947 should not pass as written. Please create a special exemption for farmers’ 
markets, so the farmers’ market community continues to grow and thrive by the same 
set of rules that we find to be fair, helpful, and accessible to small, start-up operations.
Dan Sortwell, Treasurer, Bath Farmers Market

