Senator Ingwerson, Representative Pluecker, and members of the AFC Committee,  
 
I represent no enti ty or agency other than myself as a resident, taxpayer, and property owner in Maine, and am 
testifying in strong support of LD1823.  Apologies as I wa s unable to attend given the short notice provided on the 
review of this bill.  
 
• Since 2010, f ood sovereignty communities ( approximately 117 of them ) have swelled make up about a 
quarter of the entire State  of Maine , in terms of population and by political subdivision s.  Did the 
prophesy of impending wave s of chaos consisting of food -borne illnesses and lawsuits in the absence of 
the heavy hand of the State over the last 12  years  unfold ? Did scores of bodies crash onto  the streets of 
folks clutching their stomachs in agony over a bad whoopie pie or bowl of clam chowder? No to both . If 
someone says otherwise, they need to stand up and prove it publicly  at the podium in front of you , rather 
than slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine and gives hope to Mainers and across the nation.  
 
• The whole world is going to hell in a hand -basket and Maine has been  ravaged by  mental health , drug 
addiction, an d homelessness epidemic s for years , yet our  unelected and unaccountable agency operatives 
are targeting families that are  producing food  for their communities  in rural Maine ? Are you kidding me, 
this insanity is still going on?  If someone says that this ma kes sense, then they need to stand up and prove 
it publicly at the podium in front of you rather than slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine 
and gives hope to Mainers and across the nation.   
 
ALERT:  Guess what, food freedom helps to alleviate mental health issues, drug addiction, and 
homelessness .  
 
• Food freedom attracts needed in -migration, improves the socio -economic condition, assists in every facet 
of healthy local and regional planning , dissolves  the risks of racial and social inequality , and strengthens 
identity, cooperation, and ownership of the diverse peoples in our communities as we attempt to rebuild 
Maine.  If someone is against these benefits , they need to stand up and state it publicly at the podium in 
front of you rather than slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine and gives hope to Mainers and 
across the nation.  
 
• And less face it, Maine simply does not have the resources  or infrastructure  for sustainabili ty and security  
right now , and it’s at the end of the line in terms of national distribution and support. We really ha ve no 
choice but to decentralize food production and allow  local communities to become more resilient, secure, 
and healthy  and get us out of the mess we’re in . If some unelected unaccountable employee who gets a 
paycheck from me sees different, they can get a job in an authoritarian state elsewhere,  rather than 
slandering a healthy movement that defines Maine and gives hope to Mainers and across the nation.  
 
To me, given all of these factors, it seems quite numb to not to embrace food sovereignty.   
 
Each community in Maine has differen t constraints that warrant evalu ating farmer to producer exchanges that 
works best for feeding themselves a nd providing opportunity and healing. T o deny the existence of those 
constraints is illogical , and shows an indifference and aloofness in our State government that we do not need right 
now ( or eve r). 
 
When there are fearmongers  among us , which there al ways will be , I tend to apply the Socrates ‘’Triple -filter 
test’’ to any antagonist arguments against hope and opportunity:  
 
• Regarding the truth:  Does this person  know for a fact that this information is true? Is this person willing 
to bet on it? Will this person  be able to prove it to anyone? Are they  willing to compromise their 
reputation and employment over this?  
• Regarding the good:  Does it benefit the person  or all of Maine ? Will  their argument  make them or Maine  
better and evoke positive emotions? Will the situation in Maine  improve  by oppressing  hope and 
opportunity?  
• Regarding the necessary or useful:  By knowing this argument against hope and opportuni ty, will  life in 
Maine  improve? Should  Maine  take any practical action regarding this information or message? In what 
way does not knowing this information hurt or affect Maine ? 
• If what we are being told isn’t true, isn’t good, and isn’t even useful, why would we entertain it?”  
I am pleased with the deep thought , comprehension , and care  that went into this non -partisan bill, LD1947 , and 
wondered  for a moment why this oddly felt so  different from the day -to-day poorly crafted and incomplet e bills 
churned out in Augusta , you know, the ones  that offer  nothing less than a constant headache . 
 
What I do find most disappointing  about why LD1947  is needed,  is the lack of cohesion and communication 
identified between silos of unelected agencies throughout th is State . Unaccountable agencies who h arbor  random 
employees that impose their subjective and arbitrary will on the citizenry , use that power of the state to intimidate 
Mainers in a manner that frustrates State law and our constitution , and skulk and collud e behind closed doors to 
spread division, fear, anger, and resentment in the halls in Augusta . This is  completely unacceptable, by any 
standard.  
 
Besides  being just plain wrong, t hese disconnects within the State give the  public  perception of a general  lack of 
the leadership and functionality  in Augusta  (we desperately need  leadership and functionality ). This is what 
strains the public trust and paralyzes  the healing and strengthening timeline of this state .  
 
Legislating through rule-making , using the force of the State as a weapon against Mainers , and exhibiting an 
indifference to the State Constitution and our legal construct are all abhorrent practice s that needs to stop.  This 
should be  culled out at the agency level  and any power -tripping  rogue employees  or agencies  need to be held 
accountable for their damaging behaviors.  
 
In accordance with Article 1 Section 25 of the State of Maine Constitution , the legislature needs to affirm the 
will of the people through effective agency policy , accountability , and alignment  measures . These measures will  
assure the spirit of the constitutional amendment is being executed by all employees with the State , and reduce s 
rogue inter -agency actions  that create liability for Maine , damage s the public trust , and slow s healthy growth in 
our communities . 
 
We need to s tep aside , refrain from the heavy -handed and fruitless approach of the pas t, and allow our 
communities to figure out how to best address the food security and resiliency problem in Maine. Historically, 
whenever there was a problem facing us, it w as and will  always continue to be solved best at the local level.  
 
This reminds me of how  a recent law,  LD2003  (Public Law Chapter 672  in the 130th ), inadvertently stripped 
away rural municipal tools needed to protect our environment , doesn’t even begin to address the  statutory flaws 
that exacerbate conflicting local housing designs , state agencie s and legislators don’t even agree on what it does, 
the legislature  is already throwing a dozen bandaid  and bolt -on bills at it to try and plug blindspots  (environmenta l 
protection and reality ) that will hurt Mainers , and it isn’t even complete  yet rolls out just five (5) weeks  from 
now. State interference in local community decision -making often ends up being a hot mess , a dumpster fire , a 
certain t ype of show that appears crappy . I suppose w e’ll see how it all plays out,  but it probably won’t end well , 
or even near what w as envisioned by the drafters in Augusta .  
 
The correct place  to make decisions over concerns such as dwellings and food systems throughout communities in 
Maine is at the community level , as places such as Portland and Augusta have less variables , more infrastructure , 
more capacity, more capability,  and better access than our small rural towns.  
 
‘’When, in some obscure country town, the farmers come together to a special town meeting, to express their 
opinion on some subject which is vexing the land, that, I think, is the true Congress, and the most respectable one 
that is ever assembled in the United States .’’ ~Henry David Thoreau.  
 
I can ’t really see any entity  being against LD1947 , other than those seek ing control , seeking  a commanding 
market share over food , or being a shill for those that do .  
 
I urge the committee to vote OUGHT TO PASS on LD 1947 , a positive bill in an era of struggle that is filled to 
the brim with common sense, reason, and government accountability.  
