Janet Lynch
Pownal
LD 1947
22 May 2023
re: LD 1947, “An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act”
Action: Ought Not To pass
While I understand and support the overall goals of increasing Maine people’s access 
to wholesome, locally produced foods, I am deeply troubled by language in this bill 
which would allow towns and counties to pass ordinances which would negate 
regulation by expert state agencies, such as those responsible for the protection and 
management of wildlife and marine resources.
State agencies such as the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife have expertise 
and experience in matters of wildlife management and in the regulation of hunting. 
Hunting and trapping in particular are matters of state-wide interest, and should be 
regulated at the state level to ensure the survival and health of wildlife populations 
throughout the state.
Maine has state wildlife regulations, because wildlife protection is a state matter. 
Wildlife management also requires expertise and the ability to manage wildlife 
populations over large geographic areas. Maine town governments are volunteer, and 
their leadership are not necessarily experts in fields as diverse as wildlife ecology, 
marine resource management, and regulation of agricultural practices to protect health
and the environment. These bodies are not equipped to make important decisions 
regarding the regulation of hunting and trapping, and they must not be allowed to 
substitute their judgement for that of expert state agencies. Also, allowing a 
patchwork of localized regulations regarding hunting and trapping virtually ensures 
that state wildlife populations will suffer, with the state powerless to address the 
problem.
While this bill has admirable aims to encourage greater access to locally produced 
food, I am deeply concerned that it could be used as a means to evade state level 
enforcement of essential regulations on hunting and trapping under the guise of 
encouraging greater food sovereignty. The unfortunate result of this would be to 
undermine state regulations and to make enforcement of wildlife and environmental 
statutes and regulations virtually impossible at the state level. This in turn would 
erode protections for Maine’s wildlife and environment, resulting in decimation of 
local populations from virtually unregulated hunting and trapping due to local 
ordinances passed by persons without training in wildlife management.
While this bill is admirable in its aims, I am concerned that it would provide a shield 
to allow localities lacking in expertise in wildlife and environmental management or 
other relevant areas to undermine regulations of professional state agencies, and the 
ability of all Maine people to have a say in the protection and management of our 
shared marine and wildlife resources. In short, I believe this bill could easily be 
abused to undermine state regulation of the natural resources of this state, under the 
guise of “food sovereignty”.
Food sovereignty is an admirable goal, but it must not be used as a means to 
undermine the ability of expert state agencies to promulgate and enforce regulations 
which protect our state’s shared natural resources.While food sovereignty is a good 
idea, and we should encourage more local, sustainable food production, regulation of 
wildlife management should not devolve to towns and counties. I fear that this bill 
may be abused by those who want fewer restrictions on hunting and trapping. Having 
been unable to weaken wildlife management laws through traditional means, they 
could use the language of food sovereignty to undermine statewide regulations and 
laws pertaining to wildlife management. 
Maine must not allow individual towns and counties to undermine the authority of 
expert state agencies when it comes to the protection and management of our shared 
wildlife and marine resources. This bill as written OUGHT NOT TO PASS.
