 
 
Page 1 of 2 
 Testimony in OPPOSITION  
of LD 1 947, “An Act to Amend the Maine F ood Sovereignty Act”  
 
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry  
Jayne Winters, South China, ME  
 
May 22, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative  Pluecker , distinguished members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry  Committee, my name is Jayne Winters. I have 
lived in Maine all my life  and reside i n South China, as well as maintain a family 
summer home on Sebec Lake. I am submitting comments IN OPPOSI TION to LD 
1947, “An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act.”  
 
I’m not sure why this bill is being proposed as it’s almost word- for-word as t hat 
which was proposed in LD 1823, “An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to Food”, 
which was heard before t his Committee  a couple of weeks ago. I expect the 
testimony you receive today will be much the same as well.  These LD titles and that 
of the 2021 “Right to Food” Amendment are sadly misleading . 
 
In looking at the 40+ testimoni es submitted against LD 1823, I share many of the 
concerns expressed, including but certainly not limited to:     
 
 Animal welfare, hunting, fishing, trapping and  environmental laws will be 
readily challenged (or more likely, simply ignored) . As you are aware,  the 
law banning S unday hunting  - which the majority of Maine voters want to 
remain in place -  is already under  review in court following the November 
2021 passage of the “Right to Food” Constitutional Amendment.  Despite the 
assurance from Amendment  supporters that its passage  would not impact 
Maine hunting laws, it was only a matter of a few months before a lawsuit 
was filed claiming it supersedes the authority of the I nland Fisheries & 
Wildlife Commissioner.  I’m afraid this is only the tip of a huge iceberg.  
 These bil ls disrespect the authority of the Legislature and agencies whose 
members have care fully developed  statutes to assure protection of our 
resources, to benefit ALL the people of Maine, as well as our  visitors. To 
disregard their management role is insulting.  These bills would potentially set 
up a free -for-all, year ‘round open season on flora and fauna with no limits .  
 Impacts  on landowner property rights  will run the gamut, especially for those 
who feel it will be their right to  “forage  and gather” whenever and wherever 
they want.  Disregard and de struction of property in general , as well as  harm 
to sensitive ecosystems , angers and saddens me. It’s not difficult to envision 
verbal and physical altercations, especially in the  current divisive  atmosphe re 
that seems to be everywhere . 
 Poorly written definitions  and vague language will leave interpretation wide 
open for our already  strained and overburdened court system , which will 
have to expend multiple resources in an effort to clarify and address who -
knows -how-many unintended (or even intended) consequences.  “Food 
products other than for eating” is hardly a cut- and-dry phrase.  
 
 
Page 2 of 2 
  Municipalities will be able to  adopt ordinanc es upon which the state “ may not 
take an e nforcement action of any kind…if it interferes with local food 
ordinances.”  Why would we want to take away protections and have a mish-
mash of local ordinances to try to fi gure out?  If the state is unable to enforce 
its established regulations  and risks no ncompliance status , how will federal 
funding for fish and wildlife management , food safety, community health,  
interstate commerce , etc. be impacted?   
 Food safety and the likely increased c ommunity health risks  would severely 
impact not only our health, but also the associated industries and jobs. Maine 
is recognized and respected for its quality seafood and agricultural  products. 
Deregulation of safety and  licensing requ irements  could devastate personal, 
local and state economies. It’s hard and expensive to regain lost trust and 
confidence . It baffles me why we would even consider slacking on food and 
site inspections.  A “Right to Food” should be to food that is safe to eat.   
 Where will the liability fall in cas e of injury while “foraging” on someone 
else’s property? O r illness  from ingesting something “harvested” ? Maine is 
already looking at PF As and their long- lasting impact on the environment, 
wildlife, and consumers. What happens to these inspections /investigations  
and implementation of  safeguards?  The state is not in a position nor has the 
resources to address each municipality’s separately.  
 
I hope you value and seriously consider those groups that have expressed in detail 
their opposition to LD 1823 and subsequently, LD 1947: Maine Department of 
Agriculture, Maine Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife, Maine Department of 
Marine Resources, Maine Chapter -  Animal Wellness Action, Maine Woodland 
Owners, Discover Maine Food, Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association, Maine 
Federation of Farmers’ Markets, University of Maine Cooperative Extension,  and the 
Maine Cheese Guild.  
 
I noted in its support of LD 1823, the Sportsmen’s Alliance of Maine spokesman 
stated, “…wildlife, fish and fowl belong to all of us and must be managed appro -
priately.” I find it frustrating that in its never- ending quest to expand hunting and 
fishing that those  of “us” who value conservation and scientific management, who 
simply want one day a week for quiet appreciation and reflection in the woods,  are 
ignored.      
 
I don’t doubt that all  Maine citizens support the idea of respecting and protecting 
the right to food. Food insecurity is  indeed a serious issue that needs to be 
addressed locally, statewide and nationally. LD 1947 and LD 1823, however, do not 
provide practical solutions . If passed as written, the se bills  will weaken a wide 
range of  state laws and dismantle programs, enforc ement capabilities, and agency 
authority . Yes, we have an urgent need to assure access to food  in Maine, but it 
should be  accomplished in a safe, healthy, fair and lawful manner.  I respec tfully 
urge you to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1947. Thank you  for your 
consideration.  
 
