Below is my testimony to the Ag committee on April 6th 2021 on LD 574 
(An Act to Clarify the Maine Food Sovereignty Act) 
lt applies the same to LD 1823 or LD 1947 (An Act to Amend the Maine 
Food Sovereignty Act) (May 22, 2023). 
My name is Jean Koons and with my husband Peter, I own and operate 
Kennebec Cheesery- a farmstead goat dairy and cheese operation in 
Sidney Maine. 
We have been licensed since 2008 and sell our cheese and yoghurt by 
retail at Farmers Markets and wholesale through CSA's, stores and 
distributors. We strongly feel that licensing and product testing is a must for 
our expanding artisan cheese industry in Maine. y 
Milk is an incredibly nutritious substance, for both us and microbes. l have 
always been thankful when the state testing has detected an issue with our 
products before it develops into a larger problem. l am sure that mostg 
Maine dairies and cheesemakers have had microbial problems surface and 
see the state testing lab as a real help to our industry. 
Dairy animals produce a lot of manure and E.Coli, Listeria, Champylobactor 
and Salmonella are forever present. lnfants, pregnant women, the aged 
and immune compromised are at risk from these food-borne pathogens. 
ln 2017, 8 people in the North East were hospitalized and 2 died from 
Listeria tainted cheese from a small NY creamery. Two 10 month old 
infants were hospitalized in Tennessee in 2022 with kidney failure from 
E.Coli contamination of raw milk from a cow share program. 
https://www.cdc.qovimmwr/volumes/72/wr/mm7217a4.htm 
The costs of licensing and testing in Maine are minimal. The inspectors are 
informative and helpful. 
lt has taken years to gain the confidence of Maine consumers to trust 
buying local foods at either Farmers‘ Markets, farm stands and other retail 
outlets and our concern is that one incidence of a food-borne illness will 
destroy that hard-earned trust. This act removes all oversight of production- 
by both consumer and State and increases the probability that tainted dairy 
products will reach the public. Such an event would be catastrophic to our 
small business and the growing local food movement.
We urge this committee to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1947. 
Jean We object specifically to pg 1, Definition 1. Direct producer-to- _ 
consumer transaction- the removal of “at the site of production... ” 
Sec 6 283-A. Advancement of food sovereignty principles paragraph 
“The Legislature finds that advancing ....wi|l further the preservation 
of rural life... ls there any evidence for this statement? 
During the 2021 testimony against the Food Sovereignty expansion 
(LD 574) it was obvious that many of the representatives on the 
committee did not realize that there are no restrictions to selling 
vegetables, apples, foraged foods etc. 
The state is not going after bake sales and church suppers as folks 
understand where those have been produced and accept the risk. 
The Dept of Ag. Conservation and Forestry oversees the licensing for 
home kitchens and dairy processors, and we wish for more help with 
testing, not less! The public that is buying these foods has to trust 
that there has been basic food safety oversight. 
Our fear is that the FDA will come and shut us down if Maine is not 
going to be responsible for food safety regulations, just as they 
threatened to do when meat products were included in LD 574. 
and Peter Koons
