TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION and 
FORESTRY 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1947 
An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act 
SPONSORED BY: Representative FAULKINGHAM of Winter Harbor 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Senator HICKMAN of Kennebec 
And Representatives: BOYER of Poland, GRIFFIN of Levant, LANDRY of Farmington, 
POIRIER of Skowhegan, QUINT of Hodgon, SAMPSON of Alfred, WILLIAMS of Bar Harbor, 
Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin 
DATE OF HEARING: May 22, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee. I am Jim Connolly, Director of the Bureau of Resource 
Management, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to L.D. 1947. 
This bill makes many changes to Title 7 regarding food and food sovereignty. I will focus the 
Department's testimony on the areas that impact Title 12 Part 13 and thus affect the Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. This bill creates a new definition in Title 7 §282-4 for ”Traditi0nal 
Foodways" that includes "hunting, gathering, fishing, foraging, buying and selling of food” . The bill 
then gives municipalities, plantations, and county commissioners the right to adopt ordinances 
regarding traditional foodways and requires the State to recognize such ordinances. 
Giving municipalities, plantations and the Counties for unorganized towns the authority to adopt 
ordinances regulating hunting and fishing is directly contrary to current statutes found in Title 12 and 
Title 30. Currently in Title 12 §13201 there are clear prohibitions on municipalities or political 
subdivisions of the State from enacting any ordinance, law, or rule regulating or charging a fee for the 
hunting, trapping, or fishing for any species of fish or wildlife; or the possession or use of any 
equipment expressly permitted for use in hunting under Title 12. This prohibition on municipal 
regulation of hunting, trapping, and fishing is repeated in Title 30-A §3007 in paragraph 5. Firearms and 
hunting equipment. The authority for regulating hunting and fishing was retained by the state to 
ensure a consistent approach to the management of the wildlife and inland fisheries resources of the 
state. Under the North American Model of Wildlife Conservation these resources are held in trust for
the people of the state. These resources which make Maine such a special place to live are managed 
for the benefit of all the people ofthe state. Whether people are hunting or fishing to provide the 
basic food for their family; enjoying the challenge of the outdoors as anglers or hunters; watching 
wildlife through binoculars or at a bird feeder, or watching wildlife from the seat of a boat, 
snowmobile, or ATV; these resources are managed in a way that ensures the existence of all of the 
species and their availability to all of the users. The authority that would be granted to municipalities 
in LD 1947 if passed as is, could be used by local communities to directly regulate hunting and fishing in 
their town. Towns where the presence of deer is valued over the rights of hunters could pass laws 
limiting deer hunting. Lakes in towns where ice fishermen are viewed as intruders might find ice 
fishing season eliminated. Hunters and anglers would potentially be faced with a mix of regulations 
even on a single waterbody where town lines intersect out on the water. 
The portion of the bill within Title 7 §283-A-4. that promotes local control and specifically states, ”to 
have the control over and protects natural resources for the people of the State" directly conflicts with 
and is contrary to current State Law and the Legislature's previously codified intentions to have the fish 
and wildlife resources of the State managed centrally by the Department of lnland Fisheries and 
Wildlife for the benefit of all the people of Maine. Instead, it could be fractured into 913 plus entities 
each with their own potential ordinances that meet the simple majority test of enacting a local 
ordinance. Perhaps the most challenging part of the bill is that there aren't any limits on that 
municipal authority, the state must recognize all those ordinances regardless of their content and 
there is a mandate that all ordinances must be liberally construed. in fact, granting this authority 
worsens the problem that was identified within LD 491 concerning excessive and overreaching 
municipal regulation of hunting, fishing and other outdoor recreational activities. 
The Department of lnland Fisheries and Wildlife was established to preserve, protect, and enhance the 
inland fisheries and wildlife resources of the State; to encourage the wise use of these resources; to 
ensure coordinated planning for the future use and preservation of these resources; to provide for 
effective management of these resources; and to use regulated hunting, fishing, and trapping as the 
basis for the management of these resources whenever feasible. This mandate clearly establishes the 
importance of hunting, fishing, and trapping to the Department, its work managing the fish and wildlife 
resources and to the people ofthe State of Maine. This specific inclusion of hunting, fishing, and 
trapping into the clause establishing the Department was done by the Legislature in 2015. This was 
done at a time when there was a concern about citizen-initiated referendums on hunting and trapping 
affecting the continued ability to engage in these activities and serve as the basis for the management 
of these resources by the Department. 
The Department believes incorporating hunting, fishing, and trapping into a food sovereignty bill is 
problematic and will likely create lawsuits challenging the Department's authority to regulate these 
privileges in the State of l\/iaine. The clear direction to the Department contained in Title 12 §10051, 
the existing body of laws contained within Title 12 Part 13 on hunting, fishing, and trapping and the 
Legislature's own Standing Committee on lnland Fisheries and Wildlife clearly provide the necessary 
protection and oversight to ensure hunting, fishing, and trapping continue. For the above reasons the 
Department believes that hunting, fishing, and trapping should not be included in the bill as outlined 
above. l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
