Board of Directors 
Tom Allen 
President 
Seth Sprague 
1st Vice-President 
Jennifer Dann 
2nd Vice-President 
Mark Doty 
Treasurer 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Doug Baston 
Kyle Burdlck 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chagter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andy Shuitz 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8 Mulliken Court DEMZQ COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Karla Black 
Deputy Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
in Opposition to 
LD 1947 
"An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act" 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Karla 
Black, I am the Deputy Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking 
today in Opposition to LD 1947, " 
An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty 
Act." 
This bill is very similar to LD 1823, “An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to 
Food.” We recently offered testimony before this Committee in opposition to that bill 
and we share many of the same concerns regarding this legislation. It is unclear what 
impact this bill will have on landowners in Maine.' 
Like LD 1823, this bill adds the new term “traditional foodways ” to the Food 
Sovereignty Act and deﬁnes the term to include hunting, gathering, ﬁshing, and 
foraging. The bill goes on to provide that a municipality or county may adopt local 
ordinances regarding traditional foodways and that the state may not take any 
enforcement action regarding those ordinances. 
These provisions allow local ordinances to be enacted that regulate hunting, ﬁshing, 
gathering and foraging. What’s to stop a municipality under this authority from 
disregarding the State’s ban on Sunday hunting and enacting a local ordinance that 
allows Sunday hunting? Could a municipality enact an ordinance that allows 
gathering or foraging anywhere in the municipality, even on private land? Foraging or 
gathering on private land without permission would be theft. Could the municipality 
enact an ordinance that says you can’t be convicted for theft if you are foraging or 
gathering without pennission? What exactly are the municipalities ’ limits under the 
provisions of this bill? 
Under current law, adopting local ﬁshing and hunting ordinances would be in direct 
violation of Title 12 section 13201. Section 13201 provides that “a municipality or 
political subdivision of the State may not enact any ordinance, law or rule regulating 
or charging a fee for the hunting, trapping or ﬁshing for any species of ﬁsh or 
PO Box 836 e Augusta, ME 043320836 Telephone:207#626_O005 Email: info@rnainewoodlandowners.org e Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
wildlife[.] ” But if this bill is enacted, the state may be powerless to challenge local ordinances 
on the basis of section 13201 because of the bill’s provision that the state cannot take any 
enforcement action regarding local ordinances. 
As you know, the citizens of Maine passed the “Right to Food” constitutional amendment in 
November of 2021. Despite testimony that the amendment would not impact any hunting laws 
in Maine (the word hunting was actually removed from the amendment), the ﬁrst challenge to 
the amendment is a lawsuit claiming the amendment supersedes the Commissioner of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife ’s authority to enforce the Sunday hunting ban that has existed in Maine 
statute since 1883. While it is hard to imagine that anyone who voted for the Right to Food 
amendment thought it would overtum the Sunday hunting ban, that lawsuit is currently pending 
on appeal before the Maine Law Court. 
Like the Right to Food Amendment, What is certain about this bill (and LD 1823) is that if it 
passes, it will undoubtedly lead to litigation to determine what the bill means and how it relates 
to existing law. Traditional foodways is deﬁned broadly with varied meaning. What does the 
phrase “uses of food products other than for eating” mean in the context of a local ordinance? 
What is “food folklore ”? How does the new municipal authority to enact local food ordinances 
concerning traditional foodways interact with section 13201 ? All questions to be answered. 
While we appreciate the intent of the bill is to make it easier to provide more local food to 
Maine’s citizens, Maine Woodland Owners is concemed about the far-reaching implications this 
bill will have. It could create a patchwork of local hunting and ﬁshing regulations that would 
potentially conﬂict with state regulation of those resources. For these reasons, Maine Woodland 
Owners opposes LD 1947 and urges this Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass.
