Members of the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry,Please vote NO on LD 1947, “An Act to Amend the Maine food Sovereignty Act” As written the bill is unacceptable. Regarding Sec. 1. 7 MRSA  282 - # 4 Traditional Foodways, it undermines critical protection for our wildlife by including “uses of food products other than for eating”. Bile is NOT a food product and is not germane to this bill. It has been used for medicinal purposes in Asian cultures, demand is decreasing. The collection of bear bile is an extremely cruel, painful and inhumane practice. The harvesting of bear bile is unnecessary and unwarranted, an egregious abuse of animals under the misnomer of ‘right to food’. Cold-blooded abuse of an animal without any compassion for its suffering creates a culture of low moral integrity. As wise Elders you must not sanction or include this provision in this bill or any forthcoming bills.  Regarding 283-A Advancement of food sovereignty principles - Right to food Sec. 5 # 6 :”protect and respect, by not interfering with the individual right to food”.  I refer to - 2.  Require the State, instead of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, to support policies that encourage food self-sufficiency for its citizens and to further encourage self-reliance, personal responsibility   As written this is construed to mean no constraints or oversight whatsoever. Removing 
oversight by the Dpt. of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry and giving towns the right to declare no kill limits and year-round hunting, will not encourage “personal responsibility” but instead opens the door to a free for all with no personal accountability. Prohibiting enforcement of state regulations will lead to lack of protection for wildlife, the environment and individual property rights allowing those hunters who lack self-restraint or morals to act unethically. This must not be sanctioned. Sunday hunting in densely populated towns will shatter the peace and feeling of safety we are entitled to in our ﬁelds and forest this one sacred day of the week.Thank You,Louisa HartBrunswick, ME.
