Mark Guzzi
DIXMONT
LD 1947
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plueker , and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry: 
My name is Mark Guzzi, I own Peacemeal Farm in Dixmont, and I am the chair of the
Maine Federation of Farmers Markets.   I am also the market manager of the Orono 
Farmers’ Market where I have sold vegetables since 1997.  We are also long-time 
members of the Bangor, and Belfast markets, and have been members of other 
markets over the years.
The “site of production” requirement under the Maine Food Sovereignty Act was 
compromise language in the original bill.  The farmers' market community has serious
concerns about the sale of processed, prepared or potentially hazardous food produced
in unlicensed and uninspected facilities at farmers markets.    When this change to the 
law was proposed in 2021 a solid 75% plus of vendors surveyed were opposed to such
sales at farmers market. 
Why?  Many folks surveyed generally support the rights granted under the food 
sovereignty act but understand that a farmers' market is not an appropriate place for 
these types of transactions to occur due to their public and commercial nature.
Across the state vibrant farmers’ markets assemble on a weekly basis throughout the 
year.  Farmers and food producers from a wide geographic area gather to sell the 
fruits of their labor to their fellow citizens.  At their core, they serve as public markets
made up of individual businesses engaged in retail sales to the general public.  The 
customer base is a cross-section of people from local communities and many miles 
away.  Some have known each other for many years and some just met.  Over many 
decades the farmers’ market community has operated in a way that has fostered its 
growth across the state.
Over 115 summer and 35 winter farmers’ markets operate in Maine.  While each 
market is unique they also have much in common.  The vendors generally include 
fruit and vegetable farms, meat and poultry producers, cheese makers, bakers, and 
some processed and prepared foods.  Some may be local to the town where the market
is located, but many travel to the market from a distance.  Many are members of 
multiple markets across the state.  The markets are usually organized with a set of 
bylaws and/or rules that determine how it is managed.  These include elected officers 
and standards and procedures for eligibility and membership in the market.  
Managing a market with the cooperation of all of the independent small businesses is 
no easy task.  State licensing and inspection requirements provide a baseline set of 
rules for the market and its customers to ensure the food is produced in safe sanitary 
conditions.  This is essential because markets themselves do not have the capacity to 
determine what production practices meet food safety standards, or to train vendors 
accordingly.
Beyond producing food and managing the market there are many other challenges 
farmers’ markets face.  Securing a physical location with landlord and municipal 
agreements are forefront.  The large footprint, good access, and customer parking 
requirements along with the periodic nature of the event can make securing an 
appropriate location difficult.  Farmers’ markets rely on a delicate balance of 
community relations in order to operate.  Our reputation for good management allows
us the use of prime locations and valuable real estate at a minimal cost.  The markets 
must be promoted.  Reputation and word of mouth are the foundation of promoting 
markets across the state.  The better that each market is managed the more successful 
we all are.
Should food sovereignty be extended to markets, a new dynamic will be created with 
two competing visions for how to best serve our communities. To the extent that food 
sovereign markets prove viable, it will be on the coat tails of the proven track record 
of Maine's existing farmers’ market community.  This will create ambiguity and 
divisions that will threaten our continued success.  
 
There will be significant challenges to managing markets where members have 
differing views.  For prospective and new members there will be confusion about the 
rules.  
The general public will struggle to differentiate between types of markets and lose 
confidence. 
Markets will be under more scrutiny from municipalities and landlords who do not 
embrace food sovereignty.  
Brick and mortar businesses that are affected by markets will object to unlicensed 
vendors.  
State-wide promotion, nutrition incentive programs, and other supports will be 
challenged by considerations of how to include sovereign markets while at the same 
time differentiating from those who follow food safety laws. 
Please listen to what the majority of the farmers market community has been saying 
for years now regarding the importance of food safety laws for food sold at farmers' 
markets.
I can be available for further questions at the workshop.
Thank you for your consideration
Mark Guzzi

