Marybeth  Stocking
Sanford Farmers' Market/Berwick Winter Farmers' Market/Two Toad Farm
LD 1947
Honorable Committee Members,
My name is Marybeth Stocking and I am the manager of the Sanford Farmers’ Market
and the Berwick Winter Farmers’ Market, in their 15th and 10th years, respectively. I 
am also a full-time vegetable and dairy farmer, in my 14th year of farming.  I rely 
solely on my farming income that comes from the numerous farmers’ markets I attend
year-round. I am writing to express my support of LD 1947.  I urge the committee to 
vote “ought to pass” on this important piece of legislation.
One of the main motivations as a volunteer manager of two important community 
farmers’ markets is to help build and maintain a healthy, vibrant community by 
supporting small, local farmers and food producers.  The farmers’ markets play an 
important role in providing healthy foods for our neighbors, as well as maintaining a 
space where small businesses can grow and succeed.  
LD 1947 would bring benefits both to small food-producing businesses and local 
farmers’ markets.  It would increase access to these markets for new businesses, such 
as bakers, food preservers, and more.  It would increase options for farmers to market 
their fruits and vegetables by allowing growers to create value-added products from 
their crops.    It would bring increased participation to local farmers’ markets, making 
them more vibrant and attractive to consumers with their increased variety.  LD 1947 
would encourage new markets to emerge, helping to make shopping at farmers’ 
market a larger part of our consumer culture by increasing options and opportunity.
As a small farmer and a farmers’ market manager, I welcome the thought of new 
farmers’ markets emerging, and more local farmers and food producers succeeding.
Please support LD 1947.  Thank you for your time and consideration.
Kindly,
Marybeth Stocking
Two Toad Farm
Sanford Farmers’ Market/Berwick Winter Farmers’ Market
Springvale, ME
mbstocking@gmail.com

