Mary Throckmorton
Lincoln County
LD 1947
Dear Chairs and Committee members,
Please OPPOSE LD 1947 An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act.
This would be better titled, Anarchist Cookbook Vol 2.
Right to Food needs to be kicked out and begun anew. Very few people were aware 
this was a back door attempt by hunting fanatics to ensure a "Right to Hunt", and 
nothing at all to do with the right to grow a garden and save seeds.
Right to Hunt has been repeatedly killed in committee, and the Right to Food only 
gained approval when the word "hunting" was removed and substituted with 
"harvesting".
Would Mainers have passed the amendment if the word "hunting" was used?
Additionally, farmers have farm stands, farm markets, and someone on my road sells 
self service eggs out of a container at the end of their driveway-they all have a right to
produce and sell their product without the intervention of the Food Sovereignty Act.
This LD would put public health at risk by preventing many food safety 
regulations-yet it pushes "self sufficiency" in regards to food-how does this include a 
right to sell it? 
The State sets minimum guidelines and towns may enact equal or stricter ones-yet this
LD seeks to give town the ultimate authority in deciding how best to manage State 
and even Federally protected wildlife and food consumption.
 How about an ordinance that declares land in that town must be open to year round 
hunting? If 1947 passed, that would be perfectly legal under this broad reaching LD.
My town has passed ordinances in Special Meetings-one of which was attended by a 
whopping 20 people. 
20 signatures would not have even been enough to get a persons name on the ballot 
for selectman, yet it was enough to pass ordinances impacting the entire town.
Unless you have a degree in law and can foresee and justify where this LD would take
us all-it is in all Mainer's best interest to oppose An Act to Amend the Maine Food 
Sovereignty Act LD 1947 and give serious consideration to supporting a revocation of
the Food Sovereignty Act and its far reaching implications.
Thank You
