 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 22, 2023  
 
Sen. Henry Ingwersen, Chair  
Rep. Bill Pluecker, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Re: LD 1947,  An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act  
 
Dear Senator  Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and Members  of the  Joint Standing 
Committee on  Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to explain Maine CDC’s  opposition to  LD 1947, An Act to Amend 
the Maine Food Sovereignty Act . 
 
This bill amends the Maine Food Sovereignty Act to provide or amend definitions; requires the 
State instead of the Department of Agriculture, Conserv ation and Forestry (DACF) to support 
policies that encourage food self -sufficiency for its citizens by not interfering with the right to 
food; establishes food sovereignty principles; prohibits the State from enforcing any law or rule, 
taking enforcement a ction or interfering in any way with the activities authorized by a local food 
ordinance, except those state laws or rules that involve the State’s meat and poultry products 
inspection, registration and licensing program; applies the provisions of the Main e Food 
Sovereignty Act to all local food ordinances; and specifies that the Maine Food Sovereignty Act 
does not require the use of specific language or definitions in municipal food ordinances.  
 
The Maine CDC was recently made aware of the proposed legislation  and has concerns about the 
more obvious as well as the unintended consequences of LD 1947 , if enacted . The State ’s public 
health  agency offers  the following comments for your consideration.  
 
Across the U.S., every year, around 1 in 6 people exp erience foodborne illness, or 48 million 
cases, leading to 3,000 deaths and 128,000 hospitalizations and many days lost to illness. 
Common food sources associated with some of the common foodborne illnesses include raw 
meat, poultry, fish, vegetables, frui ts, unpasteurized milk, untreated water, and rice and root 
crops. In January 2022, the National Environmental Health Association, representing more than 
6,500 governmental, private, and other environmental health professionals in the U.S., its 
territories,  and internationally, adopted a policy statement on Food Freedom Operations. In this 
policy statement, it stated that uninspected home kitchens present a health risk to the public. All 
the same things that can go wrong in a restaurant kitchen can go wrong in a home kitchen.  
 
Ensuring food purchased by the general public is as safe as possible  is a major public health 
concern . In Maine, f ood establishments must be licensed  and health  inspectors visit licensed food 
 
 establishments to ensure that all food is pr epared, maintained, and served in sanitary conditions . 
Public health workers  identify and investigate cases and outbreaks of foodborne illness , make 
recommendations for improved food safety where lapses are identified, and conduct other 
activities to ensure the proper sourcing, handling, preparation, and serving of food in order to 
protect people in Maine from foodborne illnesses and maintain the public’s confidence in our 
food industry.  
 
LD 1947  proposes sweeping consequences by removing all public health protections under  22 
Maine Revised Statute ,  Health and Welfare , which includes provisions for  all agencies and 
programs under the Department o f Health and Human Services  (DHHS) . If this bill becomes 
law, Maine CDC will no  longer h ave the authority to conduct surveillance, investigate foodborne 
illness outbreaks, identify health hazards, causes of illness, provide education, deploy mitigation 
strategies, and identify and address imminent health hazards for the protection of public health  as 
it does now . The bill also hinders the Office of the Attorney General ’s authority to pursue  
enforcement, including  court action  for even egregiou s food safety violations.  
 
This bill provides municipalities with the authority to pass local ordinances without public health 
protections in place , and it  prohibit s State enforcement of any activity permitted under such 
ordinance , without providing  a clear , standard  process for resolving conflicts or addressing 
imminent hazards to public health. Municipalities may, essentially,  choose to “opt out” of any 
State enforcement within 7 MRS and 22 MRS, including HIP licensure and inspections, though 
the muni cipality may not have capacity to oversee an d ensure safe food and consumption . 
 
The public deserves and expects to be protected from illness coming from their food regardless 
of whether that food is from a market, a restaurant, or another source. Licensure and inspection 
are commonly accepted methods for ensuring the safety of prepare d foods. The Maine Food 
Code (MFC), which is the primary food safety rule applied in the State, requires that all food 
must come from an approved source. The MFC further provides a system of prevention and 
overlapping safeguards designed to minimize foodbo rne illness; ensure employee health; ensure 
employee knowledge of food safety measures; ensure nontoxic and cleanable equipment and 
surfaces; and ensure acceptable levels of sanitation in eating establishments. By removing the 
public health protections pro vided  by the M FC, this bill will have an adverse impact on 
consumer confidence and public health . The State would be left without the proper authority to 
intervene when a known foodborne illness outbreak is threatening lives . 
 
Additionally, this bill introduces terms and concepts that pose potential challenges for any 
regulator. LD 1947 eliminates face -to-face transactions in lieu of an “exchange” of food directly 
between a food producer and a consumer under mutually agreed terms, instead of at the site of 
production of those food or food products. The term “exchange” is not defined and could be 
interpreted as trade and not a sale, which may not have been the  intended result  of this language .. 
The consumer will be at a disadvantage by not havi ng access or awareness of the conditions 
under which the food was prepared.  “Traditional foodways” is extremely broad and includes 
another new term “food folklore” which is not defined in statute . Exploring  these concepts in 
terms of interplay with curren t food quality and safety  related regulations and commerce , in 
general , is necessary before provisions could be effectively implemented .   
 
 
 In summary, Maine CDC opposes this bill. It creates a special class of food that is not subject to 
the same protecti ons already in place for other food sold in the State, posing a risk to the public 
from foodborne illness from a variety of food types. There are significant ramifications that will 
impede Maine CDC’s and DHHS’s ability to protect public health , increas ing the risk of 
foodborne illnesses, and in extreme cases, deaths, and erode the public’s confidence in the safety 
of Maine’s food industry , overall .  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. Should the Committee have any questions, the Maine CDC will coordinate responses after 
conferring with subject matter experts and can be available to participate in the work session.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Nancy Beardsley  
Acting Director  
Maine CDC  

