Robert  Fisk, Jr. 
Maine Friends of Animals
LD 1947
The BDN Opinion section operates independently and does not set newsroom policies
or contribute to reporting or editing articles elsewhere in the newspaper or on 
bangordailynews.com. June 2, 2022
About the Editor
Robert Fisk Jr. is the founder and president of Maine Friends of Animals in Falmouth.
Before the ink has barely dried, an ill-conceived piece of legislation and referendum 
is being used to try and overturn Maine’s ban on Sunday hunting. The recent lawsuit 
to allow Sunday hunting is based on the new right-to-food constitutional amendment 
that voters passed last November. It is remarkable how this even came to pass.  
Although groups like the Maine Farm Bureau, the Maine Municipal Association and 
Maine  Veterinary Medical Association spoke against the referendum, only one 
national and three Maine-based animal-protection organizations sounded the alarms 
that the referendum was too broad and even deceptively vague, and what that could 
mean. How would “the unalienable constitutional right to harvest food” affect and 
restrict local ordinances, animal welfare laws, environment and food safety, and 
enforcement of wildlife limits? Was any serious thought given to the unintended 
consequences? The latter played out a lot faster and with more impact than expected. 
The supposed innocuous referendum could now be the vehicle to Sunday hunting 
with funding from out-of-state hunters like a group with ties to Ted Nugent. How did 
this happen?  
The amendment was very poorly crafted legislation. The conundrum with Question 3 
was its  vague language, which raised more questions than it answered. Generally, 
poorly written legislation can kill a bill before it gets started. Even so, if left to the 
Legislature, it could have been better defined and perhaps made workable, but our 
Legislature dropped the ball. Now, unfortunately, it seems only lawyers will benefit 
as the right-to-food amendment is defined as it makes its way through the court 
system.  
A similar bill failed twice before in the legislature, so why did over two-thirds of the 
Legislature — Democrats and Republicans alike — feel the need to pass it along to 
the public this time? Why the drastic measure? A constitutional amendment is serious 
legislative business, meant to address an important public issue. Where is the 
compelling issue? And it even begets “a solution looking for a problem.” The 
right-to-food amendment, well-meaning as it may be, is clearly not about hunger; and 
it is important to note that no other state in the country has felt a need for such an 
amendment. Our elected officials failed in their job by putting it on the November 
ballot instead of working it more through committee, where its weaknesses could 
have been corrected. Few expected the Legislature to vote the way it did. With only a 
few months before Election Day, it was impossible to build a campaign necessary to 
defeat it, especially in an off-year election when the voters are typically less engaged. 
The opposition simply did not have the time to amass the resources needed to conduct
a campaign to educate the public and deconstruct the amendment arguments. It was a 
feel  good measure, perfectly written as such as a referendum question. It was a 
perfect storm for an ill-conceived idea that will likely become a contentious Maine 
law for years to come. 
The right-to-food amendment was not only unnecessary, it was defective, vague, 
misleading even in its title, failed to consider the unintended consequences and 
provided no sense of real need, especially to amend our state Constitution. The 
Legislature, instead of executing its responsibility to pass thoughtful legislation, 
provided Maine voters little time or recourse to properly understand and defeat an 
extremely flawed referendum.
