Robert  Fisk, Jr.
Maine Friends of Animals
LD 1947
                                      Testimony of Robert Fisk, Jr. 
                   Founder and President of Maine Friends of Animals
In OPPOSITION to LD 1947 “An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act”
                  Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
                                                  May 22, 2023
Good morning Senator Ingwersen and Representative Pluecker and distinguished 
members of the committee. My name is Robert Fisk, Jr., I am founder and president 
of Maine Friends of Animals. 
Given the 3 minute requirement, I will read my testimony and would ask you to read 
the attached Bangor Dailey News Op-Ed published in June 2022. It is entitled Maine 
animal protection organizations warned ‘Right to Food’ referendum a mistake! The 
predictable fallout from Maine’s right to food constitutional amendment. I will briefly
summarize it for the committee in reference to LD 1947.
We warned that the referendum was too broad and even deceptively vague, and what 
that could mean. How would it affect and restrict local ordinances, animal welfare 
laws, environment and food safety, and the enforcement of wildlife limits and laws. 
As predicted, there is already a pending lawsuit regarding the “right to harvest” any 
day of the week, ie. Sunday hunting. 
The amendment was poorly crafted legislation without serious thought given to the 
unintended consequences. LD 1823 “An Act to Respect and Protect the Right to 
Food“ and now LD 1947 just exacerbate the amendment issues. The definition of 
‘traditional foodways’ in this bill means the cultural, social and economic practices 
related to the production and consumption of food. Add that language to a bill 
designed to further restrict state, county and local authorities, and it only increases the
likelihood of this becoming contentious law for years to come. Unfortunately, it 
seems lawyers will benefit the most as this constitutional amendment is defined as it 
makes its way through the court system.
No other state in the country has felt a need for a ‘Right to Food’ amendment. Why is 
it a compelling issue here in Maine? Well meaning as it may be, it was an 
ill-conceived idea that was not only unnecessary, it was defective, vague, misleading 
in its title, failed to consider the unintended consequences, and provided no sense of 
real need, especially to amend the state constitution. 
LD 1947 only makes a bad situation worse. We strongly urge the committee to vote 
“Ought NOT to pass” on LD 1947. I would be happy to respond to any questions the 
committee may have.     

