THE UNIVERSITY OF 
MAINE . Cooperative Extension 
Testimony of the University of Maine Cooperative Extension 
Presented by Extension Food Science Specialist Robson Machado, 
Regarding LD 1947, An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act, May 22, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Dr. Robson Machado, and I serve 
as a Food Science Specialist and a Food Safety Educator for the University of Maine Cooperative 
Extension. In that role, I help Maine farmers and food entrepreneurs develop safe foods and assist 
processors in adapting to changing regulations when commercializing local food and beverage 
products. It is with this expertise and experience that I am here today to inform your consideration of 
LD 1947. 
I want to recognize my UMaine Extension colleague with relevant expertise, Associate Dean Jason 
Bolton, whose input is also reﬂected in this testimony, which centers around our shared concerns with 
the potential impacts of this well-intended proposal, which mirror those we raised regarding LD 1823 
and include: 
0 Harm to human health from an increase in unsafe foods 
0 Decreased consumer conﬁdence in the safety of Maine food products, and thus negative 
impact on the Maine food brand 
0 Lack of food safety oversight and food safety education 
O Vague language that needs to be clariﬁed 
UMaine Extension believes that Mainers should have a right to food and that increased access to food 
will minimize food insecurity. However, it is critical that all food available to Mainers is of the 
highest quality and, most importantly, safe. We provide statewide education and other technical 
assistance to advance Maine’s food economy and promote healthy, safe food access, including 
through our food testing services, Recipe to Market course, sanitation course, produce safety training, 
Preventive Controls for Human Food training, and many others. Unfortunately, in our work, we have 
seen numerous examples in which well-intentioned people have unknowingly produced unsafe food 
products that can affect public health. 
Harm to human health from an increase in unsafe foods' 
Farmers and entrepreneurs in Maine are becoming more creative and seeking new ways to produce 
and preserve foods. Unfortunately, when creating new products, producers may unknowingly make 
potentially harmful foods that could contain high levels of bacteria or toxins. Some examples of 
potentially harmful, high-risk foods include improperly produced canned foods, adding toxic plant 
ingredients, lack of proper food handling practices, producing foods in unsanitary conditions, or not 
cooking, refrigerating, or freezing foods adequately. Small mistakes when preparing some types of 
food can have enormous consequences. Improper canning of low-acid foods is a good example, 
where intoxication by the deadly botulinum toxin, which causes botulism, is a real threat. Potatoes 
canned in boiling Water, instead of pressure canning, and used to make potato salad was likely the 
cause of an outbreak in Ohio in 2015 that affected 29 of 77 persons (38%) who consumed potluck ata 
social gathering. One person died. In another case, simply by forgetting to add some lemon juice to 
canned tomatoes, three out of eight persons at a family dinner got severe symptoms, with one person 
being hospitalized for weeks. 
If continued deregulation of our food system occurs, more of these products will be consumed by
Maine citizens. Without oversight from consumer food inspection, this possible increase in unsafe, 
high-risk foods may negatively impact public health. Foodborne illnesses can range from mild illness 
(ﬂu-like symptoms) to more prolonged severe hospitalizations or even death. 
Decreased consumer confidence in the safety of Maine food products, and thus negative impact 
on the Maine food brand 
Foods grown and produced in Maine are associated with being of the highest quality and safety. Food 
entrepreneurs and businesses here have worked tirelessly to maintain these virtues, which can be 
attributed partly to the success of the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
(DACF) inspection program and UMaine Extension educational, testing, and research programs. 
A foodbome illness outbreak can be devastating not only to the food business owner who sold the 
product(s) but can affect similar products and the perceived integrity of the entire Maine food system 
and thus cause a decrease in consumer conﬁdence in Maine's locally produced foods, with serious 
economic impacts. Foodborne illnesses are incredibly costly to the food industry, as noted by the 
CDC: “The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) estimates that foodborne illnesses cost the 
United States more than $15.6 billion each year. ” (CDC and Food Safety). 
Lack of food safety oversight and food safety education 
We are fortunate in Maine that many food products can be produced under a home food license, with 
a very reasonable licensing fee of $20. Other states do not even allow products to be produced ina 
home kitchen. If a food producer wants to scale up to a commercial food processor ’s license, which 
can be created within the business owner's home, it is only $50. 
As Extension Specialists, we work closely with Maine DACF’s Consumer Protection Inspectors, as 
they support food business owners by visiting their kitchens and observing their processes. They 
educate and assist food producers with proper food safety and sanitation practices to ensure safe food 
production. Without this contact with inspectors, and since most food producers are not educated on 
safe food practices, they may unknowingly produce unsafe foods. It is a requirement by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) and the Department) that all food producers must follow Good 
Manufacturing Practices (Current Good Manufacturing Practices). Food producers who are not 
inspected, for example, may not know about the FDA’s required food allergen labeling law (Guidance 
for Industry in Regards to Food Allergen Labeling) and may not adequately inform consumers of 
potential allergens in their foods. Undeclared allergens are the leading cause of food recalls (lncrease 
in Food Recalls). 
Deregulation of Maine food production will remove current food safety checks that inspection 
provides to protect consumer public health from unsafe food products. 
Not requiring Maine DACF licensing and inspection of food production may increase public health 
risks to Mainers and our valuable tourist industry. 
Vague language needs to be clariﬁed. 
Any food sovereignty-related legislation, including LD 1947, must clearly deﬁne food producers, 
consumers, regulators, and those of us who educate and assist new food producers. Bills should 
delineate where unregulated/unlicensed food products can be sold within food-sovereign towns; for 
example, does it pertain to F acebook Marketplace and local farmers markets in food-sovereign towns 
only? The language should include that no products can be sold outside food sovereign jurisdictions 
where they are produced, and online (internet) sales are prohibited, as most foods sold across Maine’s
lines would fall under the FDA’s jurisdiction, and producers must follow their rules and regulations. 
Clear deﬁnitions will assist regulatory agencies in detennining when unlicensed, unregulated food 
producers must comply with and follow State regulations. 
Some of the deﬁnitions under LD 1947, Sec. 1. 7 MRSA §282 are of special concern. Deﬁnitions. By 
removing the face-to-face transaction requirement (1.) and adding the vague mutually agreed-to tenns 
language, the bill would allow any food to be sold under any circumstances. The addition of the 
deﬁnition of Traditional Foodways (4.) makes it even easier for any food to be sold under any 
arrangement. These changes open the gates for the complete deregulation of all food commerce in the 
jurisdictions under the Food Sovereignty Act. It is also unclear if this covers food sold in food service 
establishments and retail. We view this as a step back that can potentially put the lives of Mainers at 
risk and possibly undermine the Maine brand and food businesses that are already licensed and 
inspected to ensure they are producing safe foods. 
Consumers should be properly informed if they want to purchase unlicensed, unregulated food 
products. It would be helpful if transactions would only be allowed to take place at the 
production site so that consumers can make more informed decisions about the cleanliness and 
practices of that food producer. A warning/label could be added on products not produced 
under inspection and be similar to that placed on unpasteurized cider or milk so consumers can 
properly assess the risk. 
In summary, we are fortunate in Maine to have a vibrant food economy and a safe, local food supply, 
which can be attributed to the shared commitment of Maine food producers, our state regulatory 
agencies, and partners like UMaine Extension. We strongly urge the Committee to take seriously the 
potential food safety risks that could threaten Maine public health if food production and sales are 
further deregulated in Maine. Please know that UMaine Extension stands ready as a resource for 
those looking to start or grow food-based businesses in the state and for policymakers seeking to 
reduce barriers while upholding consumer safety standards. 
Thank you for considering this important information, and please let me know 
(robson.machado@maine.edu) if there is any additional information I can provide in advance of your 
work session later this week. 5 
References for the outbreak cases mentioned if 
Luquez, C., Edwards, L., Grifﬁn, C., & Sobel, J. (2021). Foodbome Botulism Outbreaks in the 
United States, 2001-2017. Frontiers in Microbiology, 12. 
https://doi.org/l0.3389/fmicb.202l .713 l()l 
Loutfy, M. R., Austin, J. W., Blanchﬁeld, B., & Fong, I. W. (2003). An outbreak of foodborne 
botulism in Ontario. The Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases, 14(4), 206-209. 
https://doiorg/10.1 155/2003/601525
