 
Maine Cheese Guild Testimony on LD  1947 (May 22, 2023)  
IN OPPOSITION - LD 1947  ‘An Act to Amend the Mai ne Food S overeignty Act ’ 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , members of the Joint Legislative Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , and members of the public , thank you for the 
opportunity to speak to this proposed legislation.  My name is Ron Dyer , I am the Executive 
Director of the Maine Cheese Guild. The M aine Cheese Gu ild is a membership focused  
organization that has been servin g the interests  of artisan cheesemakers and cheese lovers since 
2003. We are celebrating  our 20th anniversary  this yea r.  
On behalf of the Guild, I testify  Against  LD 1947 An Act to Amend the Maine Food 
Sovereignty Act.   
 
This extreme bill proposes to greatly broaden the abil ity of unregulated food processors to sell 
their products in Maine and beyond  by eliminat ing current safeguards on point of sale and 
consumer transactions, and without educating consumers on potential risks of allergens, food 
borne pathogens, contaminants, etc.  
The Cheese Guild believes that reasonable food safety and quality guideline s protect and 
enhance the Maine brand , and that our creameries benefit from supportive state programs and 
policies  to imp lement the guidelines.  This bill creates much uncertainty for food p roducers and 
does not help us create better and more secure markets.  
 
Specifically, t he bill remov es important definitions related to the location of production and the 
sale of unlicensed and uninspected foods to consumers. We recommend language in existing law 
be maintained to ensure unlicen sed producers sell  only at the location of production and thereby 
ensure a consumer  can know  where  and how the food was produced.   
Additionally, the bill removes important safeguards in ou r statewide food safety and quality 
programs by removing authority from the agencies charged with implementing Maine’s food 
safety and quality laws.  It is important to note that the specific food safety measures that appear 
to be targeted by the propo nents  of this legislation are preventative in nature inc luding  clean 
water source, washing hands, using sanitary processes  and allergen labeling . We would ask 

proponents  of eliminating th ese basic hygiene  and he alth practices , which ones  are not 
appropriate  and how do they know  they are not necessary ?  
In summary, the Guild believes our food system in Maine is not broken ; it would likely benefit 
from a broader discussion on what we in Maine can do to support and promote all our 
agricultural an d food producers.   
I encourage the committee to vote ou ght-not-to pass LD 1947. I will be available for questions .    
