TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION  TO  
L.D. 1947, “An Act to Amend the Maine Food Sovereignty Act”  
Committee On Agricultur e, Conservation and Forestry  
May 22, 202 3 
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Since much of  the language in this bill mirro rs the language  in L.D. 1823,  my conce rns are largely the same . 
 
Sections of t his bill contain language which threaten Maine statutes that provide critical protections to our wildlife, our 
environment, and Maine landowners while disrespecting the legislature’s authority and agencies that create and enforce 
these vital safeguards .     
 
Our state is  already fighting  legal challenges to the ban on Sunday Hunting  and food safety production  standards  as the 
predicted  result  of the Right to Food constitutional amendment.  The language of L.D. 1947 (and L.D . 1823)  only works to 
further support court challenges  to regulations in place  to protect and create s a new vehicle  to override state laws . 
 
I support self -reliance and the concept of food sovereignty, but not when  it allows the potential  to disregard state regulation s 
in place to protect  wildlife,  landowners , animal  welfare, and our environment . If passed as written, that is exactly  what the 
language of L.D. 1947 would allow.  
 
Authority  to Adopt Ordinances  & “Traditional Foodways”   
 
The language in the “Authority” section of L.D. 1947 , allows municipalities and counties to adopt ordinances specific to 
newly defined  “traditional foodways”  and requires  that “ the State shall recognize such ordinances .”   By allowing 
municipalities to pass ordinances that ensure access to “traditional foodways” ( e.g., hunting, trapping, gathering, fishing, 
foraging ) that can supersede  state statutes, the language of L.D. 1947  presents  significant threats to existing wildlife 
regulations, animal welfare and environmental protection statutes.   
 
There is nothing in this bill to ensure that the ordinances considered in the pursuit of food sovereignty and preser vation of 
“traditional foodways”  abide by , or improve on , existing landowner, animal welfare, wildlife, and environmental protection 
statutes.   Therefore, the opposi te is all owed .  A town or county could pass ordinances that allow  citizens and businesses 
to bypass regulations this legislature has put in place to protect  our state.    
 
Enforcement & Interference Prohibited  
 
Apart from  meat and poultry products inspection, registration and licensing regulations under the Department  of Agriculture , 
this bill prohibits state agencies from enforcing statutes and rules  that conflict with town and county ordinances  
passed to protect "traditional foodways" (which include hunting, trapping, fishing, foraging, etc.)   
 
For example, u nder the proposed language  of this bill, a Maine town or county could pass  ordinances  that: 
• Legalize Sunday hunting  (already  under  challenge  in the Maine Supreme court under the Right to Food.)  
• Extend hunting/trapping seasons or eliminate closed seasons completely.  
• Walk back humane standard s for farm animals . 
• Enable  fishing  of species that are endangered or  at risk . 
• Permit f oraging on private  posted land.  
• Allow banned practices such as participation in the bear bile trade  under the definition of “traditional foodways” 
(“uses of food  products other than for eating .”) 
 
The possib le scenario s for abuse are endless.  
2 | LD 1947 Testimony ( S. Richer)   
The language in the E nforcement Prohibit ed section , along with the proposed definition of the Right to Food ( “Protect and 
respect, by not interfering  with, the right to food”) leave s authorities, as well as individuals, powerless to take action when 
state stat utes or property rights are violated.  
 
The section identifying the principles of Food Sovereignty, while full of beautiful concepts of sharing knowledge and working  
with nature - is not a sufficient substitute for actual laws that protect farm animals, wildlife, environment and landowners.  
 
So much in this bill confirms  my original fears  regarding the potential consequences of the Right to Food constitutional 
amendment. I hope t his committee will take the time necessary to  fully analyze the implications that the current language of 
L.D. 1947  will have on the protection  of Maine’s landowners , wildlife, and environment.  
 
There are many ways to ensure people have access to  nutritious  food without creating  the potential  for legalized chaos . 
 
Please vote “Ought not to  pass ” on L.D, 1947 .  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer   
Portland, ME  
 
 
