District 108: Gorham (part)
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry
9 Lombard Street
Gorham, ME 04038
Cell Phone: 712-9735
Maureen.Terry@legislature.maine.govHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
January 31, 2023
 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry in support of
LD 205, An Act to Update the Reimbursement for Travel-related Expenses
Incurred as a Result of the Performance of Legislative Duties
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government, I am Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in 
House District 108. I am happy to be here to speak in support of LD 205, An Act to Update the 
Reimbursement for Travel-related Expenses Incurred as a Result of the Performance of 
Legislative Duties.
The past three years have rocked the foundation of nearly every part of society. From fears about 
safety, loved ones, school, travel, work and more, we’ve all had to contend with lots of 
uncertainty and change in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Another major hurdle that every 
Mainer, including us sitting here today, have encountered is the historic spike in inflation. 
Hovering around 2% for years, we suddenly saw a jump in inflation that made gas, groceries, 
goods and services hit our wallets much harder than they ever have before.
Those of us who have to commute long distances to conduct this important business of 
representing our communities are keenly aware of these increases. You know all too well that 
whether you’re coming from Saco, Rangeley or Presque Isle, getting to the State House is no 
small feat. There have already been several days this session where we’ve had to stay in Augusta 
overnight to avoid driving back home late at night only to return early the next day or through 
dangerous winter weather. The late nights, icy conditions and strings of days in a row at the State 
House will only increase in number as we get further into session. 
We love this work and many of us go to extreme lengths in our personal and professional lives to 
be able to serve our communities, but elevated gas prices, costly vehicle repairs after thousands 
of miles on the road, hotel stays in Augusta and food away from home – it all adds up. And 8% 
inflation compared to the 2% it has been for years means that what we have relied on as 
appropriate compensation for travel and lodging just isn’t cutting it. That’s why I think this 
emergency legislation is so crucial. 
The financial pinch so many legislators are feeling right now is unsustainable. We live in 
different times than when these rates were set and they simply do not reflect our current 
economic reality. Without an adjustment, I fear that many legislators will not be able to continue 
to do this important work. 
Further, this change will also allow Legislative Council to adjust reimbursement for travel-
related expenses as circumstances outside of our control change. This is critical because we 
cannot predict what inflation will do next or what other extenuating circumstances may arise. 
Lastly, I would ask that the committee consider similarly giving Legislative Council the 
authority to adjust the constituent services reimbursement rates in the future. For the same 
reasons that our travel expenses have increased, inflation has also impacted constituent services-
related expenses such as printing and shipping. The constituent services rate has not been 
updated since 2001 and is now insufficient to support the important work of serving our 
constituencies.  
Thank you for your time and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.
