To: Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the 
Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
From: Becky Bartovics 
Date: March 30 2023 
Re: LD 965 An Act to Subsidize Hydroelectric Power 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the Committee, 
i am writing this testimony on my own behalf, though i also represent my children and 
grandchildren who will inherit the state of the world along with all the other living things that we 
leave them. While it is nice to think that hydroelectric generated power is “clean,” “green” and 
a resource we could use, those platitudes are erroneous. 
Hydropower is far from clean, green and environmentally sustainable. Copious international 
and national research has shown that impounded water imposes serious methane emissions 
on an already stressed planet. 1 Dams also increase temperature gradients in both the 
upstream bodies of impounded water, downstream by being out of sync with normal flow times 
and rates, such as the spring freshet. In addition they contribute significantly to evaporative 
heating which has caused such damage in the tundra that there are vast permafrost areas that 
are thawing? The Arctic Ocean, once a large expanse of sea ice impenetrable most. of the year, 
has been dramatically warmed partially by the water vapor released by the vast areas of 
dammed water in the Canadian Arctic James Bay.3 
There are so many reasons not to incentivize hydro-electric generation, because the impact 
locally is also significant. Algal blooms, loss of fish passage, loss of diatom and phytoplankton 
populations which are the basis for the food feeding anything in the ocean are among the most 
significant problems with hydroelectric generation. Two thirds of the worlds rivers are dammed 
at least once. The crisis caused by the impact of these dams is exacerbating climate change/1 
l have included a number of resources for your information regarding hydro electric dams.l 
have met people living in the Canadian boreal forests who describe the impact of dams on 
their lives. They tell of total loss of sustenance food sources that have been available to them 
for thousands of years. Hearing an lnnu grandmother talk about not being able to find the 
herbs that have cured them, nor find other food sources always previously available because 
the impounded water flooding is heart breaking. And they are the canaries in the coal mine for 
our progeny. Please inform yourselves and vote ought not to pass on LD 965. 
Thank you for your consideration 
Becky Bartovics 
273 North Shore Rd 
North Haven, Me 04853 
207-867-4938 
1 https://wwwiheenergymix.com/2022/O5/01/new-research-shows-higher-methane-emissions- 
from-hydropower/ 
2 https://www.epa.gov/climate-indicators/climate-change-indicators-permafrost 
3 https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/vapor-storms-are-threatening-peopIe-and- 
propertyl 
4 https://www.arcticbluedeserts.com/
