clifford  Krolick
Parsonsfield
LD 965
Testimony on LD965: Bill to Support and Subsidize The development of Hydroelectric In 
Maine
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of EUT 
committee: My Name is Clifford Krolick, a resident of Parsonsfield, Maine. I hold 
memberships in various organizations, with years of research in a hydroelectric group 
focusing on the Arctic. https://www.cleanhydrodamlies.com
I also have extensive experience with clean, renewable power and have been an early 
adopter of solar energy.
Today I speak as a senior citizen and longtime supporter of truly clean and renewable 
energies. At present, Maine regulations managing hydroelectric energy lag behind 
current scientific research. Hydroelectric energy has been determined to contribute a 
substantial amount of greenhouse gases to not only the planet but Maine’s carbon 
budget. According to numerous sources, including U.S. EPA, NASA, and numerous 
Scientific journals, we can no longer consider hydroelectric as clean and renewable 
energy.
“Building dams comes with a significant carbon footprint. It comes from one of two 
key sources: their energy intensive construction and the flooding and drawdown of 
water on carbon-rich lands.
Replumbing landscapes to create hydropower requires lots of heavy machinery and 
tons of concrete. The energy Intensity of a medium-sized dam can produce the same 
amount of emissions as 46,000 vehicles a year. Cement, the second most consumed 
product on Earth, accounts for a whopping five percent of global Co2 emissions. But 
dams also make climate change worse by turning carbon sinks into methane bombs. 
The mechanism is complex and has only recently been detailed. When engineers fill a
dam, the flooding releases carbon that was tied up in trees and other plants as they rot.
But that's just the beginning.
After vegetation settles on the oxygen-deprived reservoir bottom, it decomposes and pulses 
dissolved methane into the water column. Once that methane-rich water passes through a 
turbine, the methane is released into the atmosphere. The methane also spits into the 
atmosphere at spillways, downstream of the dam, and can bubble up from the bottom.” Gale 
Environmental Studies : 
https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=GRNR&u=maine&id=GALE|A469848953&v=2.1&it=r&sid=book
mark- GRNR&asid=256a5582
"
To our knowledge, the U.S. is the first country to include estimates of methane
emissions from flooded lands in their greenhouse gas inventory,” the EPA press
office told ,“The U.S. helps set climate policy across the planet and helps fund
various development projects through the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, 
United States Agency for International Development, and others,” says Wockner, “Accounting
and reporting the greenhouse gas emissions from dams and reservoirs is a critical step 
forward in climate policy.”
The Relevator Journal: https://therevelator.org/dam-emissions-reporting
Maine has a substantial amount of inland bodies of water and it is well documented that we 
have experienced numerous periods of drought. Waters contained behind dams and in larger 
reservoirs under drought conditions lead to larger increases in evaporation particularly during 
these dry periods. When the cold air in the fall meets the warmer inland waters of lakes, 
reservoirs, and the waters flowing thru dam turbines down stream, it is no surprise to see fog/ 
humidity rising from these waters. Steamy Relationships: How
Atmospheric Water Vapor Supercharges Earth!s Greenhouse Effect by Alan Buis, NASA!s 
Jet
Propulsion Laboratory February 8,2022 https://climate.nasa.gov/ask-nasa- 
climate/3143/steamy-relationships-how-atmospheric-water-vapor-supercharges-earths- 
greenhouse-effect/
If our aim here is to reduce the negative effects leading to climate change we need to 
reject this short sighted LD 965. I would urge a no vote on this and in addition would 
suggest rule changes made to Maine’s EPA or legislation to move the 
decommissioning of existing dams in Maine that no longer offer economic, social, or 
recreational benefit. Let waters flow freely. Moving water remains cooler, supports 
healthy fish populations, and increases abundant oxygen levels.
