LOCATION :  26 Kath erine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347     MAIL:  18 State Ho use Station, Augus ta, ME 04 333-0018                    
PHONE:  ( 207) 287 -3831 (VOICE)                                  TTY users  call Maine Relay 711    FAX: (207) 287 -1039 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMIS SION 
 
 
       
    Philip L. Bartlett, II                      Harry Lanphear  
           CHAIRMAN                 ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR  
 
     Randall D.  Davis  
     Patrick J. Scully  
       COMMISSIONE RS                                                                                     
   
 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission  
Neither for Nor Against  
LD 965, An Act to Subsidize Hydroelectric Power  
 
March 30, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Represent ative Zeigler , and Distinguished  Members of the Joint Standing Comm ittee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  (Committee) , the Maine Public Utilities Commission  (Commission) 
testifies  neither for nor against  LD 965, An Act to Subsidize Hydroelectric Power .  
 
LD 965 is a concept draft that  propose s to establish a program to subsidize and ince ntivize 
hydroelectric power. While  the Commission is unclear on what kind of program the sponsor envisions 
for this, we wanted to take this opportunity to provide information on how hydro electric power is 
currently incentivized or subsidized.  
 
As stated in our testimony on LD 43, resource portfolio requirement  is a market mechanism used to 
encourage the development and operation of legislativ ely designated types of generating facilities .  
Generally, the purpose of a renewable resource portfolio requirement  is to promote renewable 
resources and resource diversity in a competitive generation market. It does so by creating an 
additional source of  revenue over electricity wholesale ma rket prices for resources that might not 
otherwise be developed or operated. The mechanism works by creating a mandatory demand for 
designated resources by mandating that pre -specified percentages of a retail electrici ty provider ’s load 
must be served by th e designated resources. The result of the portfolio requirement mechanism is that a 
premium over wholesale electricity market prices is created for the designated renewa ble resources. 
This premium is paid for by elect ricity ratepayers through th e supply portion of their bills. The specific 
amount of the premium varies over time depending on the supply/demand balance for the Maine RPS 
as well as RPSs in other New England s tates.  
 
Under Maine ’s renewable p ortfolio standa rd (RPS)  law, h ydroelectric power qualifies as a Class I , 
Class I A and Class II resource. As shown in our recen t RPS report to the Committee, hydroelectric 
powe r accounts for 12.30% of the mix of resources used to satisfy Maine ’s Class I p ortfolio 
requirem ent.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PUC Testimony  – LD 965                                                                                                                                        March 30, 2023   
2 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hydroelectric power accounts for 12.44% of the mix of resources used to satisfy Maine ’s Class I A 
portfolio requirement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PUC Testimony  – LD 965                                                                                                                                        March 30, 2023   
3 
 
 
For Maine ’s Class II  portfolio requirement, hydroelectric  power accounts for 81% of the r esource 
mix to satisfy  this portfolio requirement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission will be available  for the work session if the C ommittee has any questions on this 
bill.  
 
Sincerely , 
 
  
 
       Deirdre Schn eider 
       Legislative Lia ison 
       Maine Publi c Uti lities C ommission  
 

