1 https://www.mecep.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/State-of-Working-Maine-2022-Summary-One-Sheet.pdfMAINE AFL-CIO 
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330
Tel. (207) 622-9  
(207) 622-9675
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org
President
Cynthia PhinneyVice President
Pat CarletonSecretary Treasurer
Doug Born
Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Opposition to LD 841 
“An Act to Permit a Short-term Waiver from the Minimum Wage for Chronically Unemployed 
Individuals”
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of Joint Standing Committee on Labor & Housing, my 
name is Adam Goode. I am the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 
working people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of our members 
and all working people. 
We testify in opposition to LD 841. The bill is an attempt to have workers employed at a rate of pay that is less 
than the minimum wage. In 2016 voters passed by referendum an increase in the minimum wage that has 
steadily raised wages, lifted working Mainers out of poverty and raised expectations of the working class. We 
are opposed to this bill and will be opposed to any efforts to lower, weaken, slow or in any way undermine the 
Minimum Wage.
Since working families earned wage increases at the ballot box in November of 2016, wage increases have 
helped with basic “food on the table” survival issues. Prior to the COVID pandemic, it was clear the increases 
in wages gave the economy a boost through increased consumer spending. This has been good for all working 
people, whether black, brown or white, has helped small businesses and everyone in Maine.
This committee has seen many proposals since 2016 to allow employers to pay less than the minimum wage. 
We would reiterate that the minimum wage is just that – a minimum. Maine’s current minimum wage of $13.80 
is the floor and lower wages for people based on their age, where they live, their level of job training or the 
nature of their work should be opposed.
This bill is particularly misaligned with the state of Maine’s economy and the current bargaining power of 
workers in our state. There are currently 2.4 open jobs for every unemployed Mainer.1 The pandemic and the 
subsequent rise of workers reevaluating their options for work, combined with a nationwide precipitous drop in 
the labor market participation rate due to workers age 55 and over exiting the workforce has resulted in workers 
maximizing their leverage to find work with improved pay and working conditions. 
These factors mean that workers have more leverage than they have seen in a generation. Workers are regularly 
changing jobs for better pay and better working conditions. We fail to see a scenario where a worker, in this 
labor marker, would entertain the idea of working for less than minimum wage, regardless of how long they 
have been without work. 
We are opposed to any efforts to lower, weaken, slow or in any way undermine the Minimum Wage and ask 
that you vote against LD 841.
Printed In House with Union Labor

