Ma l ne Center for 
Economic Policy '°' 
..“.iiZi.‘iZ 
Testimony in Opposition to l.D 841, ”An Act to Permit a Short-term Waiver from the Minimum Wage 
for Chronically Unemployed lndividuals" 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst 
March 16, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. My name is James Myall; l'm an Economic Policy Analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I'm here before you today to testify in opposition to l.D 841, "An Act to Permit a Short- 
term Waiver from the Minimum Wage for Chronically Unemployed lndividuals." MECEP opposes LD 841 
because it would effectively impose hardships on out-of-work Mainers when they are already struggling, 
and, what's more, it would not address the root cause of long-term joblessness. 
The minimum wage should set a standard that allows all workers a basic level of dignity and the ability 
to meet their most fundamental needs. Any proposal to lower the wage from its current level undercuts 
this fundamental concept and imposes hardship on workers. 
By creating a lower minimum wage for individuals who are out of work for an extended period of time, 
this bill implicitly devalues of the work of those individuals. it says that if you have been unable to finda 
job for two years, you deserve to be paid less. The underlying assumption is that there's something 
wrong with the unemployed person that justifies paying them lower wages. But the reality is quite 
different. We know that all kinds of things can cause people to find it hard to get a job. In July 2021, the 
Maine Department of Labor asked 2,600 people on Unemployment insurance to identify the major 
barriers to work.‘ Their responses included ”a lack of opportunities that meet my skillset;" ”no relevant 
jobs in my local area;" and ”l don't have reliable child care." importantly, 29 percent of respondents said 
they couldn't find jobs that paid enough to cover their expenses. If some people are kept out of work 
because wages aren't high enough to pay for gas, car repairs, and child care, how is making them eligible 
for lower wages going to help? 
Long term joblessness is undoubtedly a problem for Mainers who find themselves in that situation. lt 
becomes harder to find a job the longer you are unemployed. Employers are reluctant to hire people 
with big gaps in their resume,’ and workers find themselves increasingly disconnected from the labor 
market, as their experience and skills become less relevant, causing them to drop out entirely? 
it's also worth noting that while the number of people who have been unemployed for at least two 
years is currently relatively low, that number could be much higher during a recession. “ Under those 
conditions, this bill would have the potential to undermine wages more broadly, by creating a large pool 
of workers who aren't protected by the state's minimum wage law. 
The solution to long term unemployment is not to undervalue these disadvantaged Mainers. It's to give 
them access to more supports to make it easier to find work and less likely to be unemployed for so 
long. That means investing in health care so that people are fit to work. It means making affordable care 
available to people who need it for children and older people. It means extending free college education 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
so that Mainers who need to learn a new skill can do so without accumulating crushing debt. As 
legislators have many tools available to address the problem of long-term joblessness. This bill is not one 
of them. 
l urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 841. 
Thank you for your time. I'm happy to answer any questions. 
Notes 
1 
Maine Department of Labor, "Barriers to employment: Key findings from recent survey effort." Sept 13, 2021. 
httpszﬂwww.maine.gov/labor/docs/2021/Barrierstoemplovment Findings%2Oand%20Analysis O91321.pclf 
2 
Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, and Matthew Notowigdo, "Duration Dependence And Labor Market 
Conditions: Evidence From A Field Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 128, no. 3, 2013, pp. 1123- 
1167. https:[/www.aeaweb.org/conference/2014/retrieve.php?pdfid=1049 
3 
Alan B. Krueger, Judd Cramer, and David Cho, "Are the long-term unemployed on the margins of the labor 
market?" Brookings papers on economic activity (Washington, DC: Brookings institution Press, Spring 2014), pp. 
229-300, https:[/www.brookings.edu/wpcontent/uploads/2016/O7/2014a Krueger.pdf. 
“ lt is difficult to accurately measure the number of Mainers who might be covered by this bill, due to some 
limitations with the surveys that measure unemployment. According to the US Census Bureau's Current Population 
Survey, an average of 1,600 Mainers reported being unemployed and looking for work continuously for more than 
104 weeks on average each month in 2022. At the bottom of the Great Recession in 2012 that number was around 
8,000 per month.
