1‘ Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
is3M»"'=e* “=**‘""**§"¢' “*'°f§* Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
‘<<,‘4a._Y 
Testimony 
In Opposition 
LD 841: An Act to Permit a Short-term Waiver from the Minimum Wage for Chronically 
Unemployed individuals 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
March 16,2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and lam proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and 
other professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
l am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 841, An Act to Permit a Short-term Waiver 
from the Minimum Wage for Chronically Unemployed Individuals. 
We fully expect a number of bills this session to water-down or weaken the state's voter-approved 
minimum wage law. 
And we fully expect we will oppose any effort to water-down or weaken the state's voter-approved 
minimum wage law. 
And we are opposed to LD 841 because it is clearly an attempt to water-down and weaken the state's 
voter-approved minimum wage law. 
LD 841 is perhaps the most harmful proposal this Committee may see this year regarding the state's 
minimum wage law. Some people may be chronically unemployed, however that is defined, because 
they are trapped in low wage jobs and live with constant financial instability. Financial instability can 
often lead to housing instability, lack of transportation and other impediments to work. The solution 
for the chronically unemployed is not lower wages — its higher wages! Higher wages will help people 
address their impediments to work. 
LD 841 would allow someone to "negotiate with prospective employers terms and conditions of 
employment, including compensation less than the minimum wage" but the bill doesn't say how much 
less than the minimum wage. Can someone negotiate to work for $1 per hour? 50 cents? Luckily, the 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I l3A9 Broadway, Bangor, ME 041:0] 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 014106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
e “”““’""‘"“°”“*°"*“°“ 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
13"‘ Amendment to the United States Constitution declares "Neither slavery nor involuntary 
servitude,..., shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to theirjurisdiction. ” 
The kids of some ”chronically unemployed" individuals attend public schools. They may be the kids 
that need a backpack of food for the weekends. They may be the kid behind the Facebook post of the 
parent group looking for winter coat, a pair of shoes, or money for a summer camp. The solution is to 
help parents find work, but it is also about making sure they have enough to raise their children when 
they do work. LD 841 does the opposite. It could allow some to work for below the statewide 
minimum. lt could lock some already financially unstable families into even lower wages. 
l hope we all recognize the impact of low wage work on children and their parents. LD 841 will likely 
have a limited impact today or tomorrow with the significant labor shortages we are seeing, but we 
know our economy and employment trends are cyclical and there will be a time when the tide turns 
and unemployment creeps up. Let's not perpetuate a race to the bottom whenever that happens. 
Please oppose LD 841. 
Thank you for your time, your attention and your service to the people of l\/laine. l will do my best to 
answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME OM06 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
