 
 
 
 
 
160 Capitol Street , Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
March 1 5, 2023  
 
 
Senator Michael Tipping , Chair  
Representative Amy Roeder , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
Cross Building, Room 202 
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
 
 Re:   Testimony in Opposi tion of  LD 841, An Act to Permit a Short -term Waiver 
from  the Minimum Wage for  Chronically Unemployed Individuals  
 
 
Dear Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing : 
 
My name is Lauren Wille and I am a  managing  attorney at Disability Rights Maine.   
DRM is Maine ’s designated Protection and Advocacy Agency , and our mission is to 
advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding opportunities for people 
with disabilit ies in Maine.   Thank you for the opportunity for Disability Rights Maine 
(DRM) to provide testimony  strongly opposing LD 841.  
 
Minimum wage laws  protect  employees against unfairly low pay, create incentives to 
work, and increase autonomy of workers .  In doing so, minimum wage  laws 
communicate the message that  labor, and the people  connected to it , are valued.  This 
bill, in allowing workers to be paid less than what has been determined minimally fair, 
creates disincentives to work, devalues workers, and g uarantees poverty.  
 
This bill would also disproportionately affect populations that already experience 
“chronic unemployment,” including people with disabilities, who often face 
discrimination, bias, and low expectations, which often leads to unemployment.   The 
“solution” to chronic unemployment is not to pay the chronically unemployed less than 
is fair.  The message this bill conveys is that some individuals who have experienced 
chronic unemployment, regardless of the reason, and simply worth less.  This i s not the 
message that Maine should be sending to its citizens.  
 
Prior to 2020, Maine law permitted employers to obtain certificates to pay people with 
disabilities less than the minimum wage.  This law was discriminatory and demeaning to 
people with disab ilities, and it was rightly prohibited by legislation passed in 2020.  This 
bill would take us back in the wrong direction.  Unfair pay should not be memorialized 
in the law.  
 
Chronic unemployment , as defined in this bill,  is a complex problem  in need of a  
complex solution.  This bill not only oversimplifies the issue, but the solution i t proposes 
disenfranchises individuals who experience unemploy ment , devalues their labor, 
guarantees poverty, and provides a perverse incentive to hire people at less than fair 
wages .  The bill will also disproportionally affect  individuals who are already at risk for 
employment discrimination, including individuals with disabilities.  
 
For the foregoing reasons, DRM strongly opposes LD 841.  
 
Thank you for your time and consid eration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Lauren Wille, Esq.  
Managing  Attorney  
Disability Rights Maine  

