526 Western Ave, Augusta Me 04330                                     207 480 1478                       www.maineddc.orgApril 24, 2019
19 March 2023
Senator Tipping, Rep Sylvester and the distinguished members of the Labor and Housing Committee:
My name is Rachel Dyer, and I am the associate director of the Maine Developmental Disabilities Council. Councils on 
Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD 
Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating for individuals with Developmental Disabilities (DD) for over 50 
years.  The DD Council is a federally-funded, independent organization with members from across the state, including 
persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public and private agencies which provide services 
and/or funding for services for individuals with developmental disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in 
advocacy, capacity building and systemic change activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other 
disabilities of all ages are fully included, integrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their 
lives.  
Please accept this testimony in opposition to 841, An Act to Permit a Short-term Waiver from the Minimum Wage for 
Chronically Unemployed Individuals.  
In the Council’s position statement on employment, we state that we “believe all working age people should have the 
opportunity to be employed.  All people should be treated fairly, without regard to disability, ethnicity, gender, religion, 
sexual orientation, or income level…. People with disabilities must receive the same wages, benefits, and workplace 
opportunities as other employees. The Council does not condone subminimum wage, enclave, and/or other 
employment models that serve to segregate or otherwise support disparate treatment of people with 
disabilities…Workplaces should include people with and without disabilities working together and should reflect the 
diversity of their communities.” 
In 2019, the 129th Legislature passed LD 1874, An Act To Amend the Laws Governing the Subminimum Wage 120-18.  
Maine eliminated its subminimum wage for workers with disabilities, an important step
toward addressing employment inequality and mistreatment. For example, before the elimination of
this subminimum wage, we saw workers being paid as low as 76 cents per hour.  We believe, and research supports, the 
individual and societal benefits of integrated employment of persons with disabilities, from improved health to 
decreased reliance upon services. Current wage policy supports people with disabilities truly having rights to exercise 
self-determination, be independent, be productive and be integrated and included in all facets of community life.  
  Thank you for this opportunity to testify.
Maine  Developmental  Disabilities  
Council

