  
Manufacturers Association of Maine  
16 March 2023 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing.  We offer this testimony in 
support of LD 841, An Act to Permit a Short-term Waiver from the Minimum 
Wage for Chronically Unemployed Individuals.  
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a non-partisan 501(c)6 
non-profit grounded in service to its membership, providing a network of 
resources designed to support the strategic business growth needs of Maine 
manufacturing entrepreneurs.  Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, 
employing almost 60,000 individuals in military and defense, aerospace, metal 
fabrication, paper, boat building, semi-conductor, wood products, 
aquaculture and biotech, medical device, composites and bioplastics, as well 
as the food and beverage industries.  These businesses represent almost 10% 
of Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all the wages paid in the state on a 
weekly basis.  MAME’s mission is to help manufacturing grow and succeed 
and supports Maine’s development of future manufacturing through a variety 
of programs. 
MAME’s advocacy efforts focus on four (4) key areas: workforce development, 
taxation, human resources/wage and hour and energy.  We believe this bill 
attempts to address 2 of those areas, workforce and human resources and 
therefore MAME supports the sponsor’s efforts.  
There can be many reasons for chronic unemployment. Downturns in the 
economy, skills gaps or educational deficiencies, extreme poverty, 
homelessness, substance use issues, mental illness, chronic illness, language 
barriers and criminal history can all pose a challenge for potential job seekers. 
And the longer an individual goes without a job the less likely they are to find 
gainful employment. This bill seeks to address that situation by allowing 
someone defined as “chronically unemployed” to receive a special certificate 
allowing them to negotiate with a prospective employer the terms and 
conditions of their employment which may include compensation at a rate 
less than minimum wage and prohibits the reduction or discontinuance of any 
public assistance that individual may be receiving.  
Allowing an employer to pay someone less than minimum wage or not confer 
certain benefits, may prove enough of an enticement to get a business to hire 
an individual they may not otherwise.  Some prospective employers may see 
hiring a “chronically unemployed” individual as risky but allowing them to 
negotiate with that person may take some of that apprehension away.   2023 Executive BOARD  
 
Chair of the Board  
Judith Borelli 
Texas Instruments 
 
Vice Chair of the Board, & 
Legislative Chair  
Dave Fortin  
Kennebec Technologies 
 
Treasurer & Investment Chair 
Samantha Pedersen 
Albin, Randall & Bennett 
 
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair 
Neal Prescott 
Prescott Associates 
 
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair 
Alan LaPoint 
The Strainrite Companies  
 
Executive Director 
Mike Roughton 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Document1 
Page 2 We believe this legislation has the potential to positively impact both those 
who’ve long been out of the workforce, and employers looking to fill job 
vacancies.  It is for those reasons MAME supports this bill and asks the 
committee to do the same.  
 
  
 
