Testimony of Adam Nordell, Defend Our Health, Portland, ME 
ln SUPPORT of LD 1488, ‘An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl & Polyfluoroalkyl Substances to 
Private Drinking Water Wells’ 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
April 28th, 2023 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. My name is Adam Nordell. l am a campaign manager for Defend Our Health and a PFAS 
impacted farmer. Please accept this testimony in support of LD 1214, which would help protect renters 
and home buyers from PFAS exposure.‘ 
PFAS exposure has been linked with a host of troubling illnesses including cancers, autoimmune 
disorders and diseases of the thyroid and liver. Once inside the human body, the chemicals can linger 
for decades. PFAS contaminated wells have been identified across the state of Maine, suggesting a long 
term health risk to well owners, farmers and farm adjacent communities and school children. Many of 
these wells have been discovered in connection with Maine DEP's ongoing sludge investigation. Many 
others show no connection to historic sludge spreading records. These wells. may be contaminated by 
the nearby use of sludge-based compost sold by Casella Waste Systems, AFFF fire-fighting foam or 
perhaps the use of the many PFAS-laden consumer products currently not tracked by Maine DEP. 
Troublingly, some property owners on DEP's highest concern ‘tier one’ sludge sites have denied access 
to the State's sludge investigation, potentially leaving anyone who uses the groundwater wells onsite 
vulnerable to these chemicals 
My family and many of my farmer friends and rural neighbors have been heavily impacted by 
PFAS exposure. Our businesses have been shut down or seriously disrupted and our health has been 
put in jeopardy. it's a trauma to my community that is difficult to describe. And yet we are lucky to 
have assistance from the state. importantly, our well water has been ﬁltered to protect our families 
going forward. But thousands of Mainers remain at risk and outside of the reach of DEP's sludge 
investigation, because their contamination may stem from Casella's commercially composted sludge 
instead of the sludge land application program. Many Mainers who rent their homes are even further at 
risk, because they don't have the authority to get a well water test from DEP. Many of these renters 
may not be able to afford the $300 cost of the test. 
l have a friend whose landlords failed to disclose the known, toxic levels of arsenic in her water 
leaving her health deeply impacted. l have another friend who lives near a severely impacted sludge 
spreading site, and whose repeated requests that her landlord test her drinking water well have been 
ignored. it's not hard to imagine the financial disincentives for landlords to uncover a contamination 
issue on their rental properties. And yet the health of thousands of Mainers is at stake. Fortunately, we 
now have a landlord disclosure law for arsenic and other contaminants. lt’s time to add PFAS to that list. 
l urge you to vote ”Ought to Pass" on LD 1488. Thank you for your time, 
Adam Nordell 
Defend Our HeaIth_
