Testimony of Gail L. Carlson, Ph.D.  
 
In Support of  LD 1 488 An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl  
Substances to Private Drinking Water Wells  
 
Before the Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature, Augusta, ME  
April 28 , 202 3 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and m embers of the Committee , thank you for reading my 
testimony . My name is Gail Car lson, and I live in Waterville. I hold a Ph.D. in biochemistry,  I teach 
public  health course s at Colby College , and I conduct research on local PFAS contamination in surface 
water, groundwater, snow and soil.  I wish I could deliver this testimony in person, b ut at the very time  of 
this public hearing , I am teaching my course  Pollution and Human Health , so I am submitting written 
testimony instead.  
 
I am testifying in support  of LD 1 488 because , regrettably, PFAS contamination is  extremely  wides pread 
in Maine , and PFAS are highly persistent and mobile in the enviro nment, leading to a significant long -
term risk of exposure via the consu mption of drinking water. We must  do everything we can to protect 
Mainers from  exposure  to these ha rmful chemicals . Those  least likely to have the knowledge , means or 
power to test their water  include  renters using a private well , so requiring landlords to test well water for 
PFAS makes abundant public health sense  and is t he right thing to do.  
 
It is important t o think of PFAS not as a highly localized pollution problem  affecting only a few , but 
rather a widespread one. Contaminated sludge sprea ding in my area led to destruction of farms and wells 
in nearby Fairfield  and Unity , but PFAS is also running off into waterways and spreading widely in the 
environment , including impacting Waterville ’s surface water  (Messalonskee Stream and Kennebec River) 
and China Lake, the sour ce of Waterville ’s drinking water.  Also, PFAS are such common components of 
consumer products and industrial processes that other routes of environmental contamination are likely . 
All sources of contamination pose a threat to human health because PFAS build up readily in the tissues 
of humans , animals and plants, and are linked to many extremely serious adverse health i mpacts , 
including several forms of cancer, immu nosuppression, metabolic disorders and birth defects. People 
need to know if their drinking water has been affected by this major  hazard.  
 
The seriousne ss of PFAS harm  cannot be overstated. The En vironmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
recently  proposed legally -binding limits  on five PFAS in  drinking water , each  at or below 10 p arts per 
trillion ( ppt). These are very low levels and sign al the gravity of PFAS health effects . In fac t, for two of 
the most common PFAS , EPA proposed  health a dvisor ies (non-binding standard s based solely o n the 
latest research on human health impacts ) in the low parts per quadrillion range. This is so low as to be 
nearly unheard of in drink ing water regulation.  
 
For one of the new binding  standards, Waterville ’s public  drinking water will be in violation  and the 
supplier will have to take action.  And these standards apply only to public water sys tems. There is no 
equivalent protection for private well users , which is all the more reason that universal well water testing 
is needed , so that people find out what ’s in their water and can take steps to filter their water if need be . 
Another provision of this bill would require that the state include PFAS in its uniform list of contaminants 
to be tested in private well water, which I support b ecause it  will have a  beneficial  impact on public health  
as testing increases.  
 
Please vote ought  to pas s on LD 1 488. Thank you.  
