Lawrence and Penelope Higgins  
4 Currier Road  
Fairfield, Me. 04937  
My name is Lawrence Higgins and live in Fairfield Maine with my wife Penny, and I am one of the 
leaders of the community group Fairfield Water Concerned Citizens. We have lived here going on 29 
years where we raised our kids and grandchildren. We built a barn for our alpacas, mini horse, mini mule 
and mini donkey. We have always had chickens to supply our whole family and neighbors with eggs 
which now we were told are full of PFAS from the water and soil, which is why I am supporting the LD 
1488 bill.  
October of 2020, we found out that our well water was contamination from the sludge that had been 
spread in the fields across the road from our house. DEP came out and took samples of our water. Three 
weeks later we got a phone call from the DEP saying to stop drinking, cooking, bathing or giving your 
water to your animals. This phone call knocked the wind right out of us and made us sick to our stomach. 
We have worked our whole lives raising our family, providing for them and trying our best to protect 
them in every way possible. We have invested over $200,000.00 over the past ten years building our new 
retirement house and a new barn for all of our animals so that we could enjoy our golden retirement years. 
Now we find out that all of us including our animals have been poisoned with the PFAS chemicals in our 
water, soil and chicken eggs from the sludge that the State of Maine allowed to be spread. We never even 
thought that one water test would change our lives forever.  We still have a mortgage on our new house 
so if we wanted to sell our home right now, we couldn’t even give it away. We are living in limbo and 
just waiting to see which one of our organs are going to shut down from this PFAS through no fault of 
our own. Nobody can even imagine what it is like setting here knowing that these forever chemicals will 
one day kills us.   
Every landlord and sellers of any property with residential well water must be required to have the water 
tested for PFAS and disclosure of any contamination. This is why I support the LD 1488 bill.  
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
