 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                                                          54 State Street, #304 | Albany, NY 12207 | (518) 432 -7835  
 
 
Honorable Joe Baldacci and Honorable Michele Meyer     Electronic Delivery  
Co-Chair s, Joint Committee on Health and Human Services  
Maine Legislature  
State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
          
RE: Oppose Maine  LD 1488   An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances to Private Drinking Water Wells  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the J oint Committee on Health and 
Human Services,  
 
 
The American Chemistry Council (ACC) appreciates the opportunity to submit the following comments 
regarding LD 1488/ HP 493 , legislation that would require the testing of well water for PFAS by a 
landlord of a building supplied by a private drinking water well; would require sellers of property  to 
disclose a water test indicating PFAS; and would require DHHS to add PFAS to the list of contaminants 
in the uniform testing recommendations for private drinking water wells.  
 
ACC respectfully opposes this bill for the following reasons:  
 
• PFAS are a large class of substances with a wide variety of physical and chemicals properties.   Not all 
PFAS have been found to accumulate in the body and only a few have been evaluated for potential 
impacts on human health.  
 
• It is not appropriate to treat all PFAS the same for the purposes of health assessment and reporting.  
 
• Levels in private wells may be found to exceed the state interim MCL; however those standards have 
been set to ensure an adequate safety margin.   It is not accurate to suggest that the levels of these 
substances that have been detected in wells are unhealthy.  
 
• In March 2023, the federal EPA announced the proposed National Primary D rinking Water Regulation 
(NPDWR) for six PFAS with the public comment period closing on May 30, 2023.  If adopted, this MCL 
will be a legally enforceable MCL. Maine DEP states it will review the use of Maine’s legally 
enforceable interim drinking water standard as it relates to the HAs and the development of Maine’s 
and the draft national MCLs.  
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment s. If you have questions, please feel free to contact me 
at 518 -432-7835 or Margaret_gorman@americanchemistry.com.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Margaret Gorman  
Senior Director, Northeast Region  
American Chemistry Council  
Margaret_Gorman@americanchemistry.com   

