 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on  Health  and Human Services   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1488 - An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances to Private 
Drinking Water Wells  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Committee  on Health and Human 
Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1488 , An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances to Private Drinking Water Wells , and the potential impact of the proposed 
legislation , if enacted.  
 
LD 1488 requires testing of well water for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) by a 
landlord of a residential building supplied by a private drinking water well. Under the bill, for residential 
property that uses a private water  supply, the seller of that property is required to disclose a water test 
that indicates the presence PFAS . The bill also adds PFAS  to the list of contaminants in the Department 
of Health and Human Services  (the Department ) uniform testing recommendations for private drinking 
water wells.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) is neither for nor against this bill 
and offers the following comments for your consideration.  
 
Adding PFAS to the list of contaminants in the Department’s un iform testing recommendations for 
private drinking water wells implies that all private wells should be tested for PFAS at a cost of $225 to 
$500. At this time , we do not have a reliable estimate of the occurrence of PFAS in private well water 
wells that are not subject to targeted testing due to the potential presence of a source of PFAS . About 18 
percent of regulated community water supplies, schools, and child care facilities have been found to have 
either PFOS or PFOA water levels above  four parts per trillion (the recently proposed national drinking 
water standard) . Whether this occurrence is a reasonable estimate for private residential wells is not 
known. New national drinking water standards for PFAS anticipated in the coming year will determine 
how test results are reported back to private well owners . Wells can experience variation in their PFAS  
levels over time , and recommendations  have yet to be develope d for the appropriate testing frequency of 
private wells in consideration of this variation .  
 
Rather than add PFAS to the uniform testing recommendations at this time, the Maine CDC suggests 
continu ing the current practices of extensive testing of thousan ds of private wells located in close 
 
 proximity to known o r suspected sources of PFAS , including biosolids and septage land application sites  
as well as certain remediation type sites ; educating private well owners on how to self -test for PFAS 
should they s o desire ; and continuing  to build laboratory analytical capacity to measure PFAS in private 
well water samples . Maine’s  Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)  is providing leadership on 
these fronts, and links to their website information for private well owners are provided below . The DEP 
also may provide varying levels of assistance when private well owners self -test and find PFAS levels of 
90 parts per trillion  or higher , and a link to this program is include d below as well.   
 
Testing r equirements for landlord s in this bill are similar to the recently added requirement that 
landlords test well water for arsenic ( Public Law 2021, c. 483 ). No additional  resources  were provided 
to Maine CDC to implement this statutory requirement, which has delayed  rulemaking  specific to  this 
testing requirement  (22 MRS §2660 -Y.) Obligations regarding education and outreach to landlords  are 
also affected by limited capacity . If LD 1488 is to be enacte d, additional resource s are needed to 
effectively  implement the existing statutory mandate and the expansion to include PFAS testing . Of 
note, neither the existing language under recently amended 22 MRS §2660 -Y, nor the proposed 
language under LD 1488 authorizes the Department to administer fines if a landlord does not  comply 
with the  statutory requirement to test their wells for PFAS . The Committee may consider adding 
language to authorize administrative fines  as an enforcement measure . The date for completing the 
testing  of wells by landlords stipulated in Sec. 5 of the bill (no later than January 1, 2024)  does not 
provide for a reasonable timeframe  that may be needed to implement  this requirement .     
 
In summary, the Maine CDC  is neither for nor against LD 1488 . The Maine CDC  anticipate s that in the 
coming year or two, we will have the testing capacity , national drinking water standards, and better 
information on the occurrence of PFAS in private well water to inform a decision on whether to add 
PFAS to the uniform testing requirements.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is  available to provide additional 
details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
 
PFAS Sampling for Private Homeowners: https://www.maine.gov/dep/spills/topics/pfas/PFAS -
homeowner -sampling_revised.pdf   
 
Information for PFAS Self-testers of well water: 
https://www.maine.gov/dep/spills/topics/pfas/PFAS%20Selftest%20unk%20source%20DEP%20Guidan
ce%205.23.2022_FINAL.pdf   

