Noami  Brautigam
Second Frost Farm
LD 1488
Testimony of Noami Brautigam, Second Frost Farm, Monroe, ME 
In SUPPORT of LD 1488,  ‘An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl & 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances to Private Drinking Water Wells’
Before the Health and Human Services Committee
April 28th, 2023
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human
Services Committee.  My name is Noami Brautigam. I am a resident of Monroe. My 
partner, James Gagne, and I own and operate Second Frost Farm, where we grow 
diversified vegetables and have raised cattle for the past eight years.  Please accept 
this testimony in support of LD 1214, which would help protect renters and property 
buyers from PFAS exposure.
As we understand more and more about the severe health implications of PFAS and 
as so many wells in Maine remain untested, one’s tenant status should not be a barrier
to knowing whether well water is safe to drink and/or produce food with.  Just as 
landlords  are required to test (and share results) for arsenic in wells, tenants should 
have the right to know about PFAS (as well as lead, radon, and uranium) 
contamination.
I support LD 1214 to protect all renters and future property buyers, and as a farmer, I 
am keenly aware of the number of farm properties currently being transferred to the 
next generation of producers.  While these properties change hands, access to PFAS 
water testing is critical not only to keep our community members safe, but also to 
reduce the amount of PFAS in our local food system.  Furthermore, many of my 
beginning farmer peers lease land as they work toward affording property ownership. 
Just as my partner and I were able to test our wells for PFAS as property owners, 
farmers leasing land need this same access to PFAS testing to ensure the property is a 
safe place to produce food.
 
LD 1006 should become law because all individuals regardless of land ownership 
status have a right to know what’s in their well water so they can protect themselves, 
their families and the community they feed from exposure to any contaminants.
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1488.
Thank you for your time,
Noami Brautigam
Second Frost Farm
Monroe, ME
