w||_n B L u E a E n n Y _‘.£q§§ 
c 0 M M 1 s s | o N oF 
-1.2 
Eric Venturini, Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
Testifying in Support of 
LD 285, An Act to Remove the Requirement for Wild Blueberry Transportation Permits 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and esteemed members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, my name is Eric Venturini and l am the Executive Director of the Wild 
Blueberry Commission of Maine. On behalf of the Wild Blueberry Commission (the ”Commission), I 
strive to represent the voices of Maine's 485 wild blueberry producers. 
We are greatly appreciative that Representative Perry agreed to sponsor this bill and to work with us on 
its drafting, and thank her as well as Cosponsors Senator Moore, and Representatives Dana, Davis, and 
Strout. Thank you. 
Transportation Permits 
Each year, the Commission sends blank transportation permits to wild blueberry producers upon 
request. As required by law, producers must fill out and carry these uniquely numbered permits when 
transporting wild blueberries. Producers must send copies of issued permits to the Commission within3 
business days of the date of issuance. The Commission is required to keep and maintain these records. 
Permits carry information such as the identity of the field that berries were harvested from and 
identification information about the driver. 
The requirement for wild blueberry transportation permits first appeared in statute in 1989. Before 
transportation permits were required, unscrupulous individuals harvested wilcl blueberries from fields 
that were not their own, then took them to a receiving station and sold them. At the time, a Canadian 
company had set up a temporary receiving station and was accepting truckloads of wild blueberries that 
had been stolen. To solve this problem, the industry asked for transportation permits to identify the 
source of any wild blueberries sold to a processor or receiving station, and field theft stopped. 
Public Process 
The Wild Blueberry Commission, as representative of the broader industry, discussed removal of the 
permit requirement, and considered various versions of the bill before you over the course of three 
public meetings. Through these discussions and public input, the Commission determined that field theft 
is not likely to become a problem again and that transportation permits are no longer worth the time 
they take either for producers to fill out and file, or for Commission staff to administer. 
Reguest 
The intent of this bill is to remove this requirement, saving our producers and the Commission valuable 
-&:
time and resources that are better spent elsewhere. I urge you to vote, Ought To Pass. 
I would be happy to try and answer any questions that you may have. Thank you for granting me this 
time. 
rrrrr 11./~\Ql( 
mun: $1‘ 
5784 York ComplexSuite 52 - 
Orono, i'\/IE 04469-5784 ' 
207-S81-1475 - 
Wbcrn@mair\e.edu
