 
 
 
 
 
February 14, 2023  
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski , Chair  
Representative Joseph Perry , Chair  
Members of the Taxation  Committee  
 
RE: Testimony  in OPPOSITI ON to LD 191, An Act to Ame nd the Laws Regarding Certain 
Business Equipment Tax B enefits  
Dear Senator Groh oski, Representative Perry  and members of the Taxation  Committee : 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO  of the Retail Association of Maine. I 
am a resident of Topsham.  We have more than 350  members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes.  Maine’s retailers employ more than 80,000 Mainers.  I am here today in opposit ion 
to LD 191.  
 
LD 191 would exclude a business from Maine ’s BETR and BETE prog rams if a business chooses 
to ban, boycott or otherwise restrict the sale of a product that is produced , harvested or gr own 
in the State  based on a 3rd party certification . We understand the gene sis of this  bill, and let me 
be cl ear that the Retail Associa tion of Maine stands with Maine Lobstermen. Retail Maine  looks 
at all bills and puts a  lot of energy into positions, whether they be popular or not.   In this case, 
the unintended consequences of putting this type of law on the books tips the scales towards 
our opposition.   
 
First, w e do not  think the State should dictate to businesses wh at they can or cannot sell. In the 
case of LD 191, wouldn ’t a business simply be able to say that a p articular product was not 
selling we ll, and it was disco ntinued? Additionally, which 3rd party certifications are  included in 
this bill? We know this is referring specifically to the Ma rine St ewardship C ouncil and their 
misguided designation of Maine lob ster, but we cannot be gin to understand the breadth of 3rd 
party certifications that  current ly exist.  Consumer s and retailers do appreciate certain 
certif ications , and often the se products c omm and a pre mium price. If a Maine organic producer 
lost their certification , for example, why should the retailer be punished  and lose their tax 
incentives  for no l onger selling  products  that are no longer cert ified? It is clear m any 
certifications  serve an important function . They  are important for the business brand , 
consumer choice,  and this bill will cause  unintended consequences.  
 

Ultimately, we believe that the best ar biter of situations like this is the consumer. They choose 
where to spend thei r money . They will support businesses that pro vide the pro ducts, selection 
and pricing that meets their need s, and they will  choose to av oid businesses  that do not meet 
their needs or value s. 
 
While we understand why this bill was submitted, we feel that it is unneeded. We urge  the 
committee to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 191.  
 
Thank you for the consideration of our comments . 
 
Curtis Picard, CAE  
President and CEO  
