TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 2/14/23 
LD 191 - An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Certain Business Equipment Tax 
Beneﬁts 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against LD 191 - An Act 
to Amend the Laws Regarding Certain Business Equipment Tax Beneﬁts. 
The bill proposes to exclude from eligibility for the business equipment tax 
exemption (BETE) and the business equipment tax reimbursement (BETR) 
programs a person that, based on 3rd-party certiﬁcations, bans, boycotts, or 
otherwise restricts or prevents the sale or distribution of any product legally 
produced, harvested, or grown in Maine. 
BETE affords a property tax exemption for eligible business property that 
would otherwise be subject to property tax in Maine. BETR, on the other hand, 
reimburses taxpayers for property taxes paid on eligible business property. BETE 
is largely administered locally by municipal assessors, while BETR is administered 
by the State (MRS). Both property tax relief programs are designed to encourage 
capital investment in the State. 
This bill contains several references to a certiﬁcation process and criteria 
that would trigger the new exclusion from BETE or BETR, but fails to elaborate on
1
the details of these terms. For this reason, language referencing the certiﬁcation 
process should be deﬁned to clarify the intent of the legislation and facilitate the 
administration of the BETE and BETR programs. In particular, further 
clariﬁcation regarding a “third-party certiﬁcation” would be needed for MRS and 
local assessors to effectively monitor certiﬁcations and ultimately determine which 
taxpayers are subject to the exclusion. 
In addition, it is unclear the process by which municipal assessors (for 
BETE) and MRS (for BETR and the unorganized territory) would determine 
whether an applicant is excluded from program eligibility. Regardless, this type of 
review would require additional time and work for the assessors. Consequently, 
the 90% reimbursement mandate under the Maine Constitution, article IX, section 
21 for administration costs to a municipality would likely be triggered. 
Beyond clariﬁcation, the eligibility exclusion in the bill does not appear to 
be limited to bans and restrictions in Maine ~ this may raise constitutional concerns 
with a possible conﬂict with the Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitution that 
would require further research. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions. I would 
be happy to respond to any questions you may have now.
2
