I 
a; ,4. .’ 
‘t'
I 
/“gt- 
.. 
Ar,‘- .
1 
é‘ 
Harold “Trey” Stewart III 131$’ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 2 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Harold “Trey” Stewart 
Presenting L.D. 191, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding 
Certain Business Equipment Tax Beneﬁts 
Before the Taxation Committee 
February 14, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee: I am Trey 
Stewart and I have the honor of representing the people of Senate District 2, which includes 
communities in Aroostook and Penobscot counties. I am before you today to present L.D. 191, 
An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Certain Business Equipment Tax Beneﬁts. Another, 
possibly more appropriate name for this bill could be “An Act to Make Whole Foods Wake Up!” 
As we all should be aware of, Maine’s lobster industry is one of the cornerstones of Maine’s 
economy. Therefore, to intentionally choose to prevent or hinder the sales of legally and locally 
produced, grown, or harvested products such as lobsters here in Maine would stack the odds 
even further against an industry that is already under siege by dark money groups. Unfortunately, 
this is currently happening in our state, with the most glaring example being VVhole Foods recent 
outright ban on the sale of Maine lobsters. 
When distributors act against local production and sales, we should react accordingly. In 
instances similar to and including the example I just mentioned, this legislation would make 
anyone acting in this way across all industries ineligible for the Business Equipment Tax 
Exemptions or Reimbursements. We shouldn’t be giving tax breaks and using Maine’s tax 
system to aid any organization attempting to undercut any key industry in Maine—and yet, that’s 
exactly what we’re doing right now. It has to stop. 
Before she passed, my mother was a stern man on a lobster boat Downeast. I saw how hard 
these men and women work ﬁrst-hand when I got to ﬁsh on the boat with her. It made me 
incredibly proud to know the kind of gritty and honest work my mother was doing and I know 
she would want me to stand up for this industry and ﬁght for what is right. I recognize that this 
is a new approach for Maine to take, but when we our lobstermen are up. against strong forces 
trying to shut them down through unelected and unaccountable groups with secret donors, we 
need to stand up for what’s right. 
I would note that this bill would protect the interest of many Maine-based industries that help 
make up this great state. In cases such as the forestry products industry, there is a protection in
place and this legislation would not apply to products or commodities where a certiﬁcation 
system is at the consent or request of the producer, manufacturer, or grower. 
Today, it’s Maine lobster, but if these same special interest groups decide to go after Maine 
blueberries, or Aroostook potatoes, or Maine’s forest products sector next, we will all know we 
should have done more—and Wish that we had. We have a long, storied tradition here of 
Maine’s Govemors and congressional delegation standing strong for our lobster industry- 
crossing party lines and ﬁghting from the Blaine House to the White House and from Augusta to 
D.C. It’s now our turn to take bold action in the Maine legislature and stand with our lobstennen 
and women and push back against these dark forces attacking a heritage Maine industry. 
Thank you.
