295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 931 
An Act to Expand the State's Workforce by Supporting the 
Transition from Incarceration to Employment 
Sponsored by Representative Sayre 
5.9.2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and 
esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety. I am Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident, and the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the statewide association representing over 35 of Maine’s 
safety net community-based mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 931,  
An Act to Expand the State's Workforce by Supporting the Transition from 
Incarceration to Employment.” This bill is a critical step towards addressing 
the challenges faced by individuals who have been incarcerated and are 
struggling to reintegrate into the community. As we are all aware, we are 
facing a critical workforce shortage.  
 
The transition from incarceration to employment is one of the biggest 
obstacles facing formerly incarcerated individuals. Without access to 
employment opportunities, these individuals often find themselves trapped in 
a cycle of poverty, homelessness, and recidivism. By investing in the 
successful reentry of formerly incarcerated individuals into the workforce, we 
are not only helping to reduce recidivism and improve public safety, but we 
are also supporting economic growth and development. Studies have shown 
that providing employment opportunities to individuals with criminal records 
can boost the economy by billions of dollars each year. 
 
Furthermore, this bill is not only beneficial for formerly incarcerated 
individuals but also for employers who are struggling to find qualified workers 
to fill their open positions. By expanding the pool of eligible workers, 
employers can tap into a new and diverse talent pool, helping to address the 
current labor shortage and bolster the state's economy. 
 
I urge committee members to support this critical piece of legislation. By 
investing in the successful transition of formerly incarcerated individuals into 
the workforce, we can help to create a brighter future for all Maine residents. 
I am happy to answer any questions you have for me. Thank you. ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

