1 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
Ought to Pass - LD 931 
An Act to Expand the State's Workforce by Supporting 
the Transition from Incarceration to Employment  
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
May 9 , 2023  
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety,  greetings .  My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organi zation committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to support this bill.  
Almost all people in Maine’s jails and prisons will return to their co mmunities. About 
one third of them will return to prison within a few years.1 Joblessness is a major predictor of 
recidivism.  Across the country, “ formerly incarcerated people are unemployed at a rate of over 
27% — higher than the total U.S. unemployment rate during any historical period, including the 
Great Depression .”2 Federal, state, and local legal restrictions block people with arrest and 
conviction records from getting jobs, housing and educational opportunities. These restrictions 
drive re -arrest and significantly contribute to high rates of re -incarceration.  Ignoring reentry 
disregards the challenges people will face when they leave incarceration or supervision. Some of 
these challenges brought them into the criminal legal system in t he first place: poverty, substance 
use disorders, mental health challenges, and co -occurring disorders.3 
1 Phil Hirschkorn, Maine corrections officials tout wholistic approach to addiction treatment after prison 
renovation , WMTW, Sep. 21, 2022, https://www.wmtw.com/article/maine-corrections-officials-tout-wholistic-
approach-t o-addiction-treatment-after-prison-renovation/41302529 # (“30% of Maine inmates return to custody after 
their release”). 
2 Lucius Couloute and Daniel Kopf, Out of Prison & Out of Work: Unemployment among formerly incarcerated 
people, Prison Policy Institute, July 2018, available at https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/outofwork.html 
3 Hirschkorn, supra, at 1 (“61% of Maine prison inmates . . . suffer from substance abuse disorder, 45% from opioid 
addiction.”) 
 
 
  
 
 
 2 If enacted, this bill would direct the State Workforce Board to prepare a plan to  expand 
workforce development programming for incarcerated people in Maine. This bill would also 
ensure that jails adopt seven recommendations of the Jail Navigator Focus Group on 
Transition/Reentry. Each of these recommendations would make jails more rehabilitative, more 
responsive to any mental health challenges that led to incarceration, and better stitch correctional 
facilities together with the Department of Health and Human Services. This bill will ensure that 
more formerly incarcerated people obtain gainful employment, suitable housing, and educational 
opportunities t o build stability and find success after incarceration.  
We urge you to vote ought to pass .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
