 
 
 
May 16th, 2023  
 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony  neither for nor against  L.D. 1850, An Act Relating to Energy 
Storage and the State’s Energy Goals  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portlan d, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of 
Commerce. The Chamber is the voice of Maine business, speaking for approximately 5,000 
Maine businesses of all sizes throughout the State. The Maine State Chamber of Commerce is 
testifying neither for nor against L.D. 1850. We appreciate the sponsor, Senator Vitelli, for 
bringing this legislation forward and her continued leadership on the conversation of energy 
storage.  
 
The Chamber believes energy storage is an important policy conversation. Over the recent 
years, we ha ve seen these policy conversations evolve at a federal level. Here in Maine, we 
have had great leadership from both of our U.S Senators on this issue. Back in 2020, Senator 
Collins led a bipartisan effort in the Senate to pass a new law to accelerate the d evelopment of 
next generation energy storage. Just recently, Senator King urged the Biden Administration to 
invest in a broad variety of energy storage technologies. This is why we are happy to see L.D. 
1850 introduced and we appreciate the efforts of the Maine Legislature to follow the work of 
our Congressional Delegation to make progress here in Maine.   
 
 
 
 At a high level, the Chamber supports energy storage because it will help our efforts to combat 
climate change  as it will help integrate more renewable energy which will help reduce 
emissions. We believe it offers good promise for our businesses and will help the state’s ability 
to cost -effectively meet our clean energy goals. For example, if prices are high on a certain day 
and we have wind, solar, or hydro stored – there may be an opportunity to use those resources at 
a cheaper price. The Chamber has confidence in both our utilities and the Maine PUC to 
establish a process for this first procurement of energy sto rage. In the future, we believe that 
there will be enough demand for both utility owned storage and non -utility owned storage.  
 
We believe that L.D. 1850 is a generally a positive step forward as we work to develop more 
energy storage .   
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
