Page 1 of 2 
   
 
 
TESTIMONY OF CLEARWAY ENERGY GROUP  ON LD 1850   
COMMITTEE ON ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHOLOGY  
May 16, 202 3 
  
Dear Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler  and members of the Committee:  
My name is Dan Hendrick, and I am head of External Affairs  – East Region,  for Clearway Energy Group 
(“Clearway”). I’d like to thank the Committee  for the opportunity to offer Clearway’s perspective on LD 1850 , An 
Act Relating to Energy Storage and the State’s Energy Goals.  
Clearway supports LD 1850 , which will  jump -start  the e nergy storage industry in Maine and facilitate 
the transition to a cleaner grid  and help meet the state’s climate goals. This legislation is also timely; the 
costs of energy storage systems continue to decline and the federal Inflation Redu ction Act will make 
such systems more affordable than ever , thanks to a  ten-year Investment Tax Credit for both standalone 
storage and wind -plus-storage facilities.  
About Clearway  
Clearway is one of the largest developers and operators of clean energy in t he United States with nearly  7 
gigawatts of wind, solar, and energy storage in operation operating in 28 states. Clearway differs from other 
renewable energy providers because our company is the long -term owne r/operator of our assets; therefore, 
our focus is on markets , projects  and product offerings that are stable and sustainable for the long term.  
Clearway operates  battery energy storage systems across geographies and markets, from  Hawaii to 
Massachusetts, and from smaller systems paired with dist ributed solar to stand -alone, transmission -scale units.  
 
Clearway offers the following  recommendations that draw on our company’s nationwide experience in 
energy storage and will help realize the potential of this important legislation : 
1) While it is good to learn from  other state’s experiences , Maine should craft its own energy storage 
policy mechanisms to meet its unique needs.  LD 1850 requires the PUC to consider  an index storage 
credit mechanism  but this model has not bee n proven. In Ne w York, for example, stakeholders and the 
Public Service Commission are still actively investigating this model . Meanwhile, California leads the 
nation in scaling energy storage deployment  and has done so through the state’s Resource Adequacy 
(RA) Program. Clearway  thus recommends Maine consider a full spectrum of program  design and 

Page 2 of 2 
 contracting mechanisms, including long-term contracts for utility dispatch rights , and make specific 
reference to such options in the bill language .  
2) Utility ownership of energy storage systems  may not be the most cost -effective solution; however , 
utilities best understand the  needs of the grid and may be best positioned to dispatch  energy storage . 
It may be wiser to keep Central Maine Power and Versant focused  on improving the ir core  functions, 
which only they can provide, and allowing the PUC to consider utility ownership only when absolutely 
necessary, on a case -by-case basis.  Energy storage developers bring national experience and can rally 
private capital t o ensure Maine builds the best and most cost -effective energy storage network for its 
needs , and to own, operate, and maintain these assets over their useful life. Utilities are best positioned 
to understand the needs of the system in real time . By ‘giving the keys over’ of an energy storage 
system to the utility  under a tolling agreement or equivalent , utilities can dispatch energy storage to 
meet those needs . The utilities also have unique information about where storage may be most easily 
intercon nected  to provide the greatest benefits to the system . This information should be shared with 
renewable energy and energy storage developers to inform strategic siting.   
 
3) Consider setting a maximum project  size of 100 megawatts  in the initial  300-megawatt tranche . As 
proposed, Maine’s energy storage targets are relatively modest. Setting a project size cap will allow the 
state to test a number of use cases in different locations, and avoid creating reliability concerns if any 
single unit were  to experience an unscheduled outage.  
 
Clearway appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments  and we are excited about the possibility of 
working with policy makers to build Maine’s energy system of the future .  Please feel free to contact me with 
any additional questions.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
/s/ Dan Hendrick  
Head  of External Affairs  - East 
Clearway Energy Group  
dan.hendrick@clearwayenergy.com  
(917) 207 -8715  
