 
 
 
116 HUNTINGTON AVENUE • SUITE 601 • BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 02116  
BLUEWAVE .ENERGY    T: 617.209.3122      
VIA ELECTRONIC FILING  
 
May 16, 2023  
 
The Honorable Mark Lawrence     The Honorable Stanley Paige Zeigler   
Chair, Energy, Utilities, & Technology Committee  Chair, Energy, Utilities, & Technology Committee  
Senate Democratic Office     Senate Democratic Office  
3 State House Station      3 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333      Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
re: BlueWave Testimony on LD1850, An Act Relating to Energy Storage and the State's Energy 
Goals   
 
Dear Chair Lawrence, Chair Z eigler, and Members of the Committee : 
 
BlueWave  appreciates the opportunity to provide this written testimony in support of  LD1850  – An Act 
Relating to Energy Storage and the State's Energy Goals  – being heard before the Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (“Committee”) today.   
 
BlueWave's vision is to protect our planet by transforming access to clean  energy. As a pioneering clean 
energy developer, BlueWave has developed and built more than 150 megawatts  of sola r projects to 
date. As built, these projects collectively generate enough solar energy to avoid more than 144,000 
metric tons of carbon emissions annually. BlueWave is also actively developing energy storage projects 
to ensure our grid is reliable and effi cient in a clean energy future. BlueWave is proud to be a certified B 
Corp, scoring in the top 5% of companies assessed towards certification in Governance, and named Best 
for the World for Governance.  
 
Energy storage is an essential technology to achievin g Maine’s clean energy goals and climate mandates . 
Energy storage is a key enabler of Maine’s clean energy transition. Storage can charge when renewable 
energy is plentiful and discharge when and where electricity is needed most. It can facilitate and 
integrate high levels of distributed solar, offshore wind, electrified buildings, and decarbonized  
transportation, even as Maine is building out a more resilient, reliable electricity system. Importantly, 
energy storage is technically and economically ready to deliver these benefits today. However, state 
policy leadership is needed to overcome market a nd regulatory barriers and ensure that the benefits of 
energy storage are fully captured and equitably delivered.  
 
Procurements   
 
Section 3 of LD1850 would go a long way towards providing the state policy leadership needed to 
kickstart the energy storage industry in Maine by setting in motion a process  to consider  procur ing 
energy storage connected to the distribution or transmission system. Such a procurement has the 
potential to deliver significant benefits to the State, including integrating large -scale  renewable energy 
purchases like  onshore wind in Northern Maine , improving grid reliability, and mitigating peak demand. 
Procurement through long -term contracts is a proven tool to deploy clean  energy at scale that is 
increasingly being used in the region for energy storage. Procurements ensure that energy storage 
projects have access to contracted  revenue, significantly reducing capital costs.  Procurements also 
leverage competition to ensure the best and most cost effective projects are chosen.  New York is  
 
2 
 currently considering  the procurement of  an additional  3,000  MW of bulk (i.e., >5 megawatt) energy 
storage to achieve its goal of 6,000  MW by 20 30, and Connecticut ’s Department of Energy and 
Environmental Protection is legislatively authorized and  has beg un a process to procure  transmission -
connected energy storage  to help achieve the state’s goal of 1,000 MW by 2030. The procurement 
provisions would put Maine  on a parallel track with its peers, would advance the industry, and would 
ensure that Maine  meets the targets set forth in this bill.  BlueWave support the optionality provided to 
the Governor’s Energy Office to choose the right procurement mechanism that fits Maine’s unique 
needs.  
 
Utility Ownership  
 
Section 6 of LD1850 directs the Public Utilities Commission (the “Commission”) to consider  the prudence 
of an d conditions for utility ownership of energy storage. While it makes sense for the Commission to 
examine whether ut ility ownership of energy storage should be permitted in any circumstance, we are 
concerned that this section presupposes that utility ownership of energy storage is prudent.  Utility 
ownership of energy storage may have a chilling effect on the development  of the competitive market 
that this bill intends to spur. Further, rather than expending utility resources competing with the private 
market, we suggest that allocation of those utility resources towards improving the interconnection 
process for clean ene rgy resources would have the effect of lowering the cost to interconnect clean 
energy and, thus, the cost of clean energy policy.  As such, w e encourage amendment of this section to 
require the Commission  to conduct an  inquiry into utility ownership of ener gy storage and that said 
inquiry may find that utility ownership of energy storage is not permissible.  
 
Rate Design   
 
One issue for energy storage that is not addressed in LD1850 is that of rate design, specifically how 
front -of-the-meter (i.e., storage co nnected directly to electric grid, not at an electric customer 
premises) , distribution -connected energy storage will be charged for its use of the distribution system. 
Rate design  for charging load  is a significant barrier to the deployment of  FTM  energy s torage on the 
utility distribution system. Currently, energy storage systems are assigned electric rates designed for 
commercial and industrial customers , which do not reflect the unique and flexible operating profiles of 
energy storage, nor the fact that storage is not consuming energy but rather engaging in a sale for 
resale . As a result, misapplied rate design can lead to distribution charges that make otherwise 
beneficial energy projects uneconomic  and inhibit deployment. Both Massachusetts and Connecti cut are 
in the midst of considering energy storage -specific rates .  
 
The Commission also has an open docket, 2021 -00273, considering a Central Maine Power (“CMP”) rate 
for energy storage.1 CMP’s energy storage rate is largely the same as its commercial and industrial rate, 
with the only difference being the removal of transmission charges for energy storage as required by the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. This rate is a missed oppor tunity to consider the actual costs 
that energy storage imposes on the distribution system when charging. We urge the Legislature to 
address rate design for energy storage in this legislation and require the utilities to file energy storage -
specific rates that account for the unique operating characteristics and benefits of storage on the 
distribution system.  
 
 
 
1 https://mpuc -cms.maine.gov/CQM.Public.WebUI/Common/CaseMaster.aspx?CaseNumber=2021 -00273   
 
3 
 Distributed Storage Benefits  
 
The procurement authority granted in LD1850 will support the development of larger scale energy 
storage, but additional  consideration is necessary to support the deployment of distribution -connected 
energy storage. Distribution -scale energy storage can provide substantial benefits to ratepayers by 
improving grid efficiency, integrating renewable generation, and reducing ut ility costs. Connecticut 
Green Bank performed a cost -benefit analysis of a program to compensate standalone front -of-the-
meter energy storage for performing in response to utility -called events. This analysis found that front -
of-the-meter  energy storage ha d a 2.8:1 benefit:cost ratio when only looking at the ratepayer impacts 
(i.e., not including any societal or economic development benefits).2 Clearly, t he benefits of distributed 
energy storage are substantial, and we urge  Maine to capitalize on this oppo rtunity  by including 
authorization for the Governor’s Energy Office to design programs that would support the deployment 
of distribution -scale energy storage to provide grid and ratepayer benefits.  
 
Conclusion   
 
LD1850  opens the door for the dynamic storage industry to participate in solving the cost, reliability, and 
emissions challenges facing Maine today and in the future. Energy storage, as a standalone resource or 
paired with a clean energy resource, can be program med to capture a number of value streams. The 
flexibility and authority provided through this bill will allow for the design of programs and 
procurements that compensate storage for operating in the ways that most benefit the State.  I look 
forward to worki ng with the Legislature as this bill progresses. Please do not hesitate to contact me with 
any questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Sean Burke  
Sean Burke  
Policy Manager  
sburke@bluewave.energy  
 
2 CT PURA Docket 21 -08-05, Co nnecticut Green Bank Order 19 Compliance, pp. 57. Available at: 
https://www.dpuc.state.ct.us/dockcurr.nsf/8e6fc37a54110e3e852576190052b64d/434aa27c309ed0838525885d0
0643350/$FILE/FTM%20Energy%20Storage%20Projects%20in%20CT%20 -%20BCA%2006102022.pdf   
