 
 
Any questions about this testimony should be directed to Hilary Schneider at hilary.schneider@cancer.org  or 207 -888-9826  
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Maine Director of Government Relations  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  
 
In Opposition to LD 1253 “An Act to Maintain the Integrity of the Individual and Small Group  
Health Insurance Markets ” 
 
April 20, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and members of the  Health Coverage,  Insurance and Financial Services 
Committee , my name is Hilary Schneider,  and I am the Government Relations Director for Maine for the 
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN). ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy 
affiliate of the American Cancer Society, supports evidence -based policy and legislative sol utions designed to 
eliminate cancer as a major health problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public policies that are 
helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice in 
public policy matters  at all levels of government.  
 
On behalf of ACS CAN, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to submit the following testimony in 
opposition to LD 1253. This bill repeals the provisions of law that pertain to the merger of Maine ’s individual 
and small group health insurance markets . In 2020, the “Made for Maine Health Coverage Act ” was passed by 
the Legislature and enacted into law.  The bill ( LD 2007 ) was a Governor ’s bill , sponsored by Senate President 
Jackson and then -Speaker Gideon . The intent of the bill was in tended to make policy changes to reduce the 
struggles that individuals and small bus inesses face when trying to  find a ffordable health coverage.  The bill 
included a number of provisions including the establishment of processes to set up a state -based health 
insurance m arketpl ace and to combine the individual and  small group mar kets into one risk pool . ACS CAN 
supported these provisions of the bill, among others. An amended version of the bill received unanimous 
support from this committee , was passed by the Legisla ture “under the hammer, ” and signed into law by 
Governor Mills on M arch 1 8, 2020.  
 
Concept ually, health  insurance works b est when health  risks and health cos ts are spread across the largest 
group possible. In order for comprehensive health coverage to be affor dable and available to thos e who are 
faced with h igh cost health  conditions  like cancer, insur ance risk p ools need to include a large numbe r of 
healthy, low -cost individuals relat ive to t he high er cost claimants. Risk pools that are relatively less he althy 
result in higher premium costs, making coverage less affordable.  
 
As stated in our testimony on LD 2007, ACS CAN supporte d the provision related to merging the individual  and 
small gr oup mark ets because  this action  would spread health insuranc e risks across a larger group. Savings 
would be invested in reinsurance that would apply to the small group market, in order to protect health 
insurance carriers from high -cost claims. The goal of this is to reduce premiums in both the individual and 
small  group markets, making coverage more affordable . 
 
As described in more d etail in a 2021 Commonwealth Fund issue brief , prior to the passage of the A ffordable 
Care A ct (ACA) , in most st ates,  there were significant  differ ences in coverage available in the individual and  
 
 
Any questions about this testimony should be directed to Hilary Schneider at hilary.schneider@cancer.org  or 207 -888-9826  small group markets  – these differences included who could be excluded from coverage and for what r eason , 
the factors  insurers could use to vary p remium rates, and the types o f coverage  required in each mar ket. As a 
result of reforms included in the Affo rdable Care Act that reduced the ability of insurers to seg ment risk and , in 
many cases, exclude those with high -cost health con ditions, the differences between the two markets  is 
limited.  In addition , expanding Medicaid also likely has helped miti gate against higher risks in Maine ’s priva te 
health insuranc e market as low-income individuals, on average, report having worse health than those with 
higher incomes . A Kaiser Family Foundation  sum mary of research  studies  examining the impact of Medicaid 
expansion points to a number of studies that show that marketp lace pr emiums are lower and marketplace risk 
pools are healthier  in expansion states.  Finally,  Maine sought and rec eived approval for a 1332 waiver that 
allow ed the state ’s reins urance program to be extended to the small group market after the ma rkets were 
merged. Reinsurance is an important mechan ism t hat helps  insurance companies cover the claims of very high -
cost enrollees, which in turn keeps premiu ms affordable for other individuals buying insurance in that market. 
The consumer prote ction reforms implemented as part of the A CA, Medica id expan sion, and reinsurance are 
all important  components that help stab ilize Maine ’s private insurance market  and establish important 
conditions that supp ort merging Maine ’s indi vidual and small group markets in order to establish the largest  
state -regulated private insurance market possible  to spread risk.  
 
The Commonwe alth issue brief cited above  included the follow ing exhibit that shows that  based on the 
experience in  the two states that have the longe st his tory of merged markets (Massachusetts and Vermont) , 
combining of risk pools has not resulted in small -group claims increasing at a noticeably different rate than the 
national average . 
 
 
 
Given th e policy evidence that supports the potential  positive impacts of merging mar kets especially in terms 
of market stabilization and affordability for those with health con dition  and the fact that  Maine ’s merged 
market was implemented just this year, we believe  separating the markets would  be short -sighted  and that 
more time is needed to deter mine the impact of the mer ged market. As such, ACS CAN urges you to vote 
“ought not to pass” on LD 1253. 
 

