 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 20 , 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 125 3, An Act to Maintain the Integrity of the Individual and Small Group Health 
Insurance Markets  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services , 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this input in opposition to LD 1253, An Act to Maintain 
the Integrity of the Individual and Small Group Health Insurance Markets . LD 125 3 would 
repeal the merger of the individual and small group markets.  
 
As you k now, in February 2020, this committee unanimously endorsed the Made for Maine 
Health Coverage Act, LD 2007  and later Public Law 2019, Ch. 653. This bill established  the 
state insurance marketplace, CoverME.gov, and directed the State to merge the individua l and 
small group markets to strengthen the size and stability of the risk pool for Maine plans , making 
premiums more predictable and affordable.  
 
The merge r of the individual and small group health insurance markets has three important 
benefits for Maine  residents , businesses,  and insurance markets. First, it stabilizes both markets 
by increasing the size of the pool. This spreads out the risk and cost of a few individuals with 
high health -care needs over a broader base, lowering the extra amount  built into premiums to pay 
for those rare cases. This also makes the yearly change in health insurance premiums less volatile 
in both markets.   
 
Second, it simplifies health insurance choices by having  similar plans for individuals buying on 
their own and getting it through a small business.  Maine’s share of small business owners or self -
employed workers purchasing health insurance through its individual health insurance 
Marketplace, CoverME.gov, is  28 percent , among the highest in the nation. Alignment of 
product design improves price shopping fo r small businesses  and improves consumer 
protections.  
 
Third, Maine’s merged market enabled it to secure a first -of-its kind State Innovation Waiver. 
This waiver enables Federal funding for “reinsurance” to extend to both the individual and small 
group mar kets through the merger. In 2023, as a result of this waiver, average small group 
premiums  decreased for the first time since at least 2001 when such rates began to be 
 
consistently tracked . Improving the affordability of small group insurance lowers the likelihood 
of small businesses drop ping coverage, especially when workers have high costs, and sending  
them to the individual market  through CoverME.gov .  
 
Given these concerns, we urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 125 3 and maintain access to 
Clear Choice plans for all consumers. Please feel free to reach out to the Department if you have 
additional questions.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
    
   Commissioner Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D  
   Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
 

