foﬂl 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: Wednesday, April 26, 2023 
RE: LD 1698, ”An Act to Eliminate Private Contributions to the Maine Clean Election Fund 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. 
i\/Iy name is Anna Kellar. l'm a resident of Portland. I am here today as the Executive Director of Maine 
Citizens for Clean Elections. I am testifying in opposition to LD1698. 
For over 25 years l\/ICCE has advocated for Maine's Clean Election Act public funding system. We were 
there at the start to advocate for its enactment in 1996, during the early years when participation was 
ramping up, when budget challenges and court decisions threatened to weaken the program, and up to 
today where it is well-established and continues to enjoy broad support among the candidates and the 
general public. 
LD 1698 is completely without merit. lt solves no identifiable problem, and it would seriously undermine 
the purpose and operation of Clean Elections. This bill eliminates all streams of revenue to the Maine 
Clean Election Fund (MCEF) except for the General Fund distributions called for in the Maine Clean 
Election Act. Between this bill and LD 1466, Clean Elections would be completely defunded. 
The seed money provision in the MCEA allows candidates to raise very limited private contributions to 
get their campaigns off the ground. LD 1698 would disallow ALL contributions to prospective Clean 
Election candidates, leaving only the option of self~funding in the early days. 
The other revenue streams are voluntary donations that go directly to the MCEF. They are not 
contributions to any candidate. All are important vehicles for l\/laine people to express their support for 
the Clean Election system. 
Qualifying contributions are made by voters in support of candidates they favor who are running to 
represent them in the House, Senate, or as Governor. Only candidates who demonstrate this grassroots 
support may receive Clean Election funding. This qualifying process is essential to ensure that public 
funds only go to well-supported candidates. 
ivlaine people created the first-in-the-nation Clean Election system, and it has proven itself to be popular 
with voters and candidates alike in the decades it has been in use. LD 1698 disrespects the hundreds of 
thousands of Mainers who voted in 1996 and/or in 2015 to pass and then strengthen the law. It 
disrespects the hundreds of thousands who have checked "yes" on their tax forms. it disrespects the 
hundreds of thousands who make qualifying contributions. 
PO Box 18187, Portland, Maine 04112 | Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
www.mainecleanelectionsbrg l i12l' {}({!]§.iii21liili ﬁifliiii£i_Cl&)Cfli}i2 ﬁ.()!'g
MCCE Action to VLA 
LD 1698 April 26, 202 
Maine people have repeatedly spoken loud and clear in support of our citi2en—initiated Clean Elections 
program. lt’s a voluntary system, so we don't expect 100% of candidates to use it or even to like it. But 
we do expect ALL legislators to respect the will of Maine people. 
Please vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1698. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee2
3
