70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I 
am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic 
League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom 
flourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and 
including in governance. 
I am testifying late in opposition to LD 1629 RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine to Recognize the Right to Personal Privacy which is sponsored by Senator 
Brakey. In preparing for this public hearing, this is the information the public was given: This 
resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to recognize the people's natural, 
inherent and unalienable right to personal privacy. This is not enough information to prepare 
for such a discussion and after listening to the short public hearing, it is even more concerning 
how this seems to be a proposed grab bag that policy makers could latch onto to push their 
agendas. How sad the excitement raised by the thought this could affirm abortion. 
 
I have written before about the disservice a concept draft is in terms of integrity of the 
legislative process. In the 125th – 127th Legislature, I remember concept drafts being a tool to 
create discussions on Department bills. A rare tool that today seems to be used too often and 
again, as a disservice to the Maine Legislative process.  
 
A Constitutional Amendment is a serious event, a process made with a high level of work to 
succeed. This bill idea did not prepare us for the long  journey and should be defeated in the 
committee level. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.  
   
Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your families. God 
bless. 
 
 
 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
  
 
