 
 Senators and Representatives of the Judiciary Committee, 
As you decide whether or not you thing LD 1629 should or should not be 
passed to be considered by the voters, I would like to address the 
handful of questions and comments which arose during its public 
hearing but which nobody asked the person who wrote it. 
Senator Brakey: 
I placed the right to privacy in Section 1 of Article I to include it 
among the unalienable rights enjoyed on an individual basis by 
natural people. Corporations, partnerships, and limited-liability 
companies are statutorily-constructed “persons” which don’t even 
have an unalienable right to exist. 
I use the term “personal privacy” to reiterate that difference to the 
many people who forget that the natural rights enumerated in 
Section1 don’t automatically extend to businesses, organizations or 
other forms of artificial people. To the best of my knowledge, there 
is no hidden meaning to that term, which would explain Ms. Sway’s 
lack of success in finding any pre-existing legal significance for 
“personal privacy” versus privacy. 
Representative Moonan: 
As I indicated in my oral testimony, the right to privacy applies to 
medical choices. It does not confer a right to any particular medical 
procedure, just as it doesn’t confer a right to own a particular piece 
of ugly furniture. As Representative Lee noted, every one of my 
examples are subject to limits, most especially when they intrude 
on another person’s rights – e.g., my right to take a pain killer for a 
back injury doesn’t give me a right to steal your CBD chewables.  
Representative Reckit: 
I first began publicly advocating for adding this right to the Maine 
Constitution over three years ago, as a fundamental right we all 
share. From the beginning, I have asked people to recognize it as 
common ground, not as a “just for me” or “just for us” pseudo-
right. That is I included no call-out for any particular demographic. 
When deciding your position on LD 1629, consider these questions: 
1. Are you willing to do something which benefits everyone equally? 
 
 2. Do you trust your opponents to recognize a common right and 
apply it fairly, without loading everything with caveats and call-
outs? 
3. Can your opponents trust you, and your political allies, to do the 
same? 
If the answer to any one of those is “no,” then LD 1629 is an idea whose 
time has not come. That would be a sad but honorable reason for not 
supporting it. 
But if the answer to all three is “yes,” maybe Maine can be a nation-
leader in explicitly recognizing this common right which we have been 
taking for granted for so long. 
Sincerely, 
William Clardy 
Augusta, Maine  
