 
 
Senator Grohoski Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: my name is Adam Zuckerman and I am the lobbyist for the Maine 
People’s Alliance. Our 32,000 members stretch from Kittery to Fort Kent. We are committed to 
creating a state of Maine where everyone has what they need, everyone contributes what they 
can, and no one is left behind. 
 
I am pleased today to strongly testify in favor of Representative Collings’ LD 1338, An Act to 
Amend the Maine Exclusion Amount in the Estate Tax. 
 
Before I begin, I’d like to help answer some of Representative Carmichael’s questions. First, 
Maine has no inheritance tax, so there would be no risk of double taxation. Additionally, as of 
2011 the estate tax threshold was $1 million, not $2 million. So the threshold that 
Representative Collings suggests, is actually double what it was last decade. That feels like a 
fair compromise. 
 
Over the years, Maine’s estate tax has been watered down again and again, allowing more and 
more wealth to accumulate at the top, tax-free. Wealth inequality is growing fast and is even far 
more concentrated than income inequality. 
 
As of 2019 the top 10% of families owned 76% of the wealth. That’s while the bottom 50% of 
families in our nation owned just 1% of the wealth. That’s just 1% of our nation’s wealth for 64 
million families.1 That is because more than half of all wealth is inherited, not earned. The status 
quo perpetuates inequality across generations, as the wealthiest families leverage their 
abundant resources to increase their share of the economic pie and pass their wealth on to their 
heirs.  
 
As Representative Collings mentioned, there are wealthy Mainers who are literally begging to 
pay their fair share. The late Richard Rockefeller of Falmouth wrote: “The first reason I support 
keeping the estate tax is a personal one and has to do with my own children and grandchildren. 
I care about their inheritance, of course, but I don’t look upon that inheritance as a purely 
material thing. The quality of the world they grow up in will contribute as much or more to their 
well-being as any amount of money and possessions that I could bequeath. That is to say: If the 
 
1Kent, Hernández Ana and Lowell Ricketts. “Has Wealth Inequality in America Changed over Time? Here 
Are Key Statistics.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 2 December 2020. 
https://www.stlouisfed.org/open-vault/2020/december/has-wealth-inequality-changed-over-time-key-
statistics 

world I leave them is one of gated communities and growing inequality, downward mobility for 
the middle class, a degraded environment and a rotting social and physical infrastructure, then 
their inheritance will be a shabby one, no matter how much money they get.”2 
 
Representative Collings’ bill will help to create a fairer, more prosperous state where everyone 
can thrive. We wholeheartedly support his proposal and would be glad to answer any questions. 
Thank you. 
 
2 Lambert, Michael. “Maine Voices: Democrats in Augusta shouldn’t let fear stop them from pursuing tax 
justice.” Portland Press Herald.  https://www.pressherald.com/2019/06/11/maine-voices-democrats-
shouldnt-let-fear-stop-them-from-pursuing-tax-justice/ 
