 19 Community Drive • Augusta, Maine 04330 • (207) 622-7501 • Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORSâ   12781773.1 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1338 (“An Act to Amend the Maine Exclusion Amount in the Estate Tax”) J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS® May 17, 2023 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is Andy Cashman.  I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations, and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 1338. The bill would decrease the Maine estate tax exclusion amount thereby subjecting more estates to taxes. This only exacerbates the current misalignment between Maine’s lower exclusion amount and federal law.  Differing tax thresholds can lead to confusion and unexpected tax obligations. The current Maine threshold is low given the high rate of inflation and increasing property values. Moreover, the transfer of certain generational properties could easily exceed the threshold and should not be subject to tax obligation due to market changes and inflation.    The estate tax exclusion amount should be at a level to aid in preservation of Maine property owner’s legacies, and encourage properties to remain in the hands of families who wish to keep them. Estate tax impacts people during an already difficult time in their life and aligning with the federal standard would help in countering Maine’s reputation as having one of the highest income taxes in the country. Our high tax rates can deter people and businesses from settling or staying in Maine and could negatively impact Maine’s economic sustainability.  For these reasons, we urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1338. Thank you for your time and consideration.       
