Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation: my name is Patricia Kidder and I am a 
resident of Springvale, part of the city of Sanford. I am here today to testify in 
favor of LD 1338: An Act to Amend the Maine Exclusion Amount in the Estate 
Tax.. 
I have watched my friends, family and neighbors suffer for years. We are 
suffering from under-employment, housing insecurity, hunger, stress and health 
issues. We are unable to pay for our basic living expenses because wages 
haven’t kept up with the increase in housing costs. We are suffering the effects 
of the pandemic, inflation and chronic poverty on our mental, physical and 
financial health. 
I tried to help a homeless couple get an apartment and we looked for two years 
and we never found a place in the Sanford area that was inexpensive enough 
and pass the inspection for the voucher. I don’t know where they are now but 
the last I had heard they were still homeless. 
It breaks my heart because I know that everyone needs stable housing first, 
before they can work on anything else. No one can get and keep a job without 
an address, a place to keep your clean clothes, take a shower and get the rest 
they need sleeping in the same bed every night. Not having stable housing 
makes recovery from SUD (Substance Use Disorder) even more difficult. 
Homeless people can’t access health care for major health conditions before 
they need the emergency department. No one can do anything without stable 
housing except SURVIVE.
We need Maine to invest more in affordable housing desperately and in order to 
do so, we need a new revenue stream earmarked to directly help solve our 
affordable housing crisis. We need the new source of revenue to come from 
sources that can afford to help. Returning the estate tax exclusion amount to 2 
million dollars and using the new revenue to support affordable housing will 
accomplish that goal. With one quarter of the new revenue, LD 1338 will help 
our homeless veterans get affordable housing, too.
In the past, you haven’t passed any reduction in the estate tax exclusion amount
because of its affect on Maine family farms, so LD 1338 addresses that concern.
It excludes up to 3.8 million dollars from the estate tax for family farms, 
aquaculture, fishing and wood harvesting businesses so they can continue the 
families’ way of life for the next generation.
I feel LD 1338: An Act to Amend the Maine Exclusion Amount in the Estate Tax 
is needed to help fund the solutions for Maine’s Affordable Housing Crisis. It 
asks our wealthiest estates to help fund affordable housing for Maine’s most 
vulnerable residents and veterans. I am asking you to please vote in favor of LD 
1338.
Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, t hank you for 
your time and I will try to answer any questions.
Patricia E. Kidder
4 Carpenter Street
Springvale, ME 04083-1109
pattykidderd19@gmail.com
207-977-3325 (C)
