 
 
May 9, 2023  
 
LD 1129  An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act  
LD 1199  An Act to Provide Transparency in Public School Curricul a 
LD 1196  An Act to Require Public Schools to Allow Parents and Guardians to Opt Out Their Children with Respect 
to Portions of the Curriculum  
LD 1518  An Act Regardin g the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their Children from Public School Classes or 
Activities That I nclude Certain Controversial Viewpoints  
LD 1589  Resolve, Directing the Department of Ed ucation to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools 
from Engaging in Political, Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom  
LD 1643  An Act Regardin g Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations and Events at Public Schools  
LD 1800  An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide  comment s in opposition to the above -named slate of proposed legislati on. My 
name is Chris McLaughlin, and I am a licensed clinical social worker with over 2 2 years of experience providing 
behavioral health services to children and families across a variety of treatment settings  here in Maine . I am also humb led 
to be  the Executive Director of the Maine Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers (NASW -ME). A large 
part of my job at NASW -ME is to represent the interests of Maine’s social workers as they endeavor to meet the behavioral 
health needs of Maine people across all settings and ages from Fort Kent to York and all places in between . On behalf of 
our over 1 ,000 members here in Maine, I’m honored to share thoughts on this important proposed legislation.   
 
NASW has been following similar pieces of legis lation such as the above -named LD’s that have been prop osed in othe r 
states across the country. Sadly, we have watched as communities all over the United States have been further divided and 
conflicted as these bills have perpetuated the narrative of “schools bad, parents good ”. While on the surface , the tit les of 
these bill s appear to support parent s and their rights  (implying that parents do not already possess nu merous legal 
protections in our state), critics  of these sorts of bills have  argue d that the se "Parental Bill of Rights" bills could be harmful 
for several reason s, such as: 
 
1. Undermining the autonomy of schools: These bills may give parents excessive influence over educational content and 
teaching methods, undermining the expertis e and training of educators and administrators.  
 
2. Limiting diversity and inclusiveness: These bills could be used to suppress the teaching of topics related to race, gender, 
and LGBTQ+ issues, which will result in a less inclusive educational envi ronment and hinder students' understanding of 
diverse perspectives.  By limiting discussions of diversity and in clusion, t hese bills  will al so negatively impact the concept 
of representation with in the school en vironment , which disprop ortionately effects students from histor ically marginalized 
communities.  
 
3. Eroding privacy rights: Often times, these bills include provisions that allow parents to access their children's records 
without their consent, potentially violating privacy rights and cau sing harm to students, especially in cases of abuse or 
neglect  in the home . 
 
4. Interference with evidence -based education: The bills may enable parents to object to or opt their children out of 
evidence -based curricula, such as comprehensive sex education or climate change education, which could lead to a less 
informed and less prepared student population.  
 
5. Infringing on the rights of LGBTQ+ students: In ma ny states, we have seen  that these bills allow parents to prevent their 
children from accessing resources, support, or counseling related to LGBTQ+ issues, potentially exacerbating mental 
health challenges and contributing to a hostile school environment.  
 
6. Reducing access to healthcare: Some bills give parents the right to withhold consent for their children to rece ive certain 
medical treatments or counseling services at school, potentially limiting access to crucial healthcare and mental health 
resources.  
 
NASW -ME believes that, whenever po ssible, parents , families, and guardians should be involved at all lev els with their 
child( ren)’s education. Good communication and collaboration between schools and fam ilies are essential for student 
success and outco mes. With  that said , NASW -ME further believes that we must allow school teachers, administrators, 
librarians, curriculum  coordinators, and social workers and school cou nselo rs to do w hat they have been trained to do, 
which  is to educate yout h. Sadly, bills such as the ones presented before you tod ay have only served to undermin e public 
faith and con fidence in our country ’s education al system and have contri buted to the rhetoric that is further dividing 
communi ties a cross the natio n. All one needs to do is look at com munities such as Woodland Park, Colorado, Newburg, 
Oregon, Lafayette, Indiana, and in states suc h as Ut ah, Wyoming, Texas, Florida, Kansas, and Georgia. We cannot allow 
this same pattern to take root in Maine . It’s time that we stand with our education al system and pr ovide it with  the to ols it 
need s to continue its commit ment to Maine ’s students. If parents are intereste d in becom ing more in volved in th eir child ’s 
education, we suggest sendi ng a courteous email or pic king up the phone to simply ask their child ’s teachers o r building 
administrators for more information and, equally as important, how they a s parents can get m ore engaged in the activities 
of the school. These bills proposed before you today are both un necessary and, frankly, offensive to the highly comp etent 
and dedicated educators of Maine. Parents already have mu ltiple opportunities to provide feedback in a more formal 
manner to their local school distr icts through public co mment at School Board mee tings and “open door” policies 
employed at most schools in Maine. NASW -ME supports legislation intended to bring groups of people together in 
productive  conversation and to work towards common ground solutions , as opposed to legislation , such as these bills  
before you today,  which seek to f urther div ide, fuel  conflict, and seed doubt and discontent in those institutions we need to 
trust most right now.  
 
I would urge this committee to vote “ought not to pass ” on these above -named  bills. I want to  thank you all for your wor k 
on this issue . Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW -ME for any support we can offer , including any social work  
representation and participation in any future work sessions for  these bills . 
Thank you again,  
 
 
Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW  
Executive Director  
Maine Chapter – NASW  
 
For additional information:  
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us -news/woodland -park-colorado -school -board -conservatives -rcna83311   
 
https://www.koin.com/news/education/newberg -school -board -fires-superintendent -joe-morelock/?ipid=promo -link-block2   
 
https://19thnews.org/2022/03/parental -rights -bills-teachers/   

