LD 1800 " An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education" 
 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my 
testimony in support of LD 1800 “An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education.” 
       Parents and guardians are the primary stakeholders in their child or children’s education regardless 
of race, religion, or ethnicity.  
It is no secret that classrooms and schools have become political battle grounds where a small 
fraction of “educators” are more activists and recruiters for their ideology than educators. Reviewing of 
the states NWEA scores would also confirm this. By enforcing this policy, our classrooms would once 
again be “neutral” ground where a child can learn “how to think,” instead of being taught “what to 
think.” 
Parents and guardians should be able to review without opposition all material their child or 
children will be exposed to within a classroom or school. This is called transparency and it also builds 
trust. A trust that has been violated in recent years by a very small fraction of activists posing as 
educators. 
All surveys should be reviewed by the parent or guardian prior to them being assigned. This will also 
enable parents and guardians to assist the educator in answering any sensitive questions, trauma 
related issues or outright opt out. This is called transparency and it will build trust with all parties 
involved. 
Parents and guardians should be allowed to opt out on any curriculum, or events they deemed unfit, 
go against their beliefs or religious views. 
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1800 “An Act Regarding Parental Rights in 
Education.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1800
LD 1800 " An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education"
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of LD 1800 “An Act 
Regarding Parental Rights in Education.”
       Parents and guardians are the primary stakeholders in their child or children’s 
education regardless of race, religion, or ethnicity. We have seen this right slowly 
being taken away at the local, state and federal level.
It is no secret that classrooms and schools have become political battle grounds where
a small fraction of “educators” are more activists and recruiters for their ideology than
educators. Reviewing of the states NWEA scores would also confirm this. By 
enforcing this policy, our classrooms would once again be “neutral” ground where a 
child can learn “how to think,” instead of being taught “what to think.”
Parents and guardians should be able to review without opposition all material their 
child or children will be exposed to within a classroom or school. This is called 
transparency and it also builds trust. A trust that has been violated in recent years by a
very small fraction of activists posing as educators.
All surveys should be reviewed by the parent or guardian prior to them being 
assigned. This will also enable parents and guardians to assist the educator in 
answering any sensitive questions, trauma related issues or outright opt out. This is 
called transparency and it will build trust with all parties involved.
Parents and guardians should be allowed to opt out on any curriculum, or events they 
deemed unfit, go against their beliefs or religious views.
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1800 “An Act Regarding 
Parental Rights in Education.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 

