)”’§7~i”’/» ’ / ““~ 
EQUM/MAi~E !€l’Ef1ﬂ1rl1,1|Zrl\i\ ‘! 
SUBMITTED TO THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION 
AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
LD 1800 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Gia Drew, andl am the 
Executive Director of EqualityMaine, which has been advocating on behalf of Maine’s 
LGBTQ+ community since 1984. 
I’1n here today along with Maine Transgender Network to speak in strong opposition to 
LD 1800, An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education. This bill tries to upend the 
unique and special relationship educators and school personnel have with their students. 
The role and sen/ice public education plays in creating a fair and equitable society is 
immeasurable, but central to its mission is creating a safe and welcoming environment, 
everyday, so students can learn and thrive and eventually become engaged citizens and 
adults. 
School officials stand in loco parentis (“in the place of a parent”) while supervising 
students and are afforded the right and responsibility to look after students ’ health and 
wellbeing while under their care. Asking school personnel to seek approval from every 
parent for every action related to the wellbeing of their child is not in the best interest of 
public education, is in fact counter productive, and is at times potentially dangerous to 
kids. 
Kids rely on school personnel for a variety of support and services when they are away 
from home and at school for more than 1400 hours each year. Some of these services are 
related to providing the basics, like food, nourishment, a Band-Aid, or bag of ice, or items 
of clothing, such as a coat, hat, pair of socks, shorts, or even a sports bra from time to 
time. Some supports are emotional, like being a good listener and offering common sense
advice, Unfortunately, some students deal with more intense situations and complex 
emotions, and conﬁding in a trusted school professional like a guidance counselor or 
nurse is often in the best interest of the child. 
Parents have numerous opportunities to engage with school ofﬁcials to offer parameters 
related to health and participation in school programs for the children. But what this bill is 
asking of public schools, and school personnel, is a drastic overreach and if passed, will 
do more harm than good. 
We urge you to oppose this bill and vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 1800. Let’s afﬁrm 
the professionalism of educators and support personnel, so they can continue to offer 
the care young people need through their school years. 
Thank you, 
Gia Drew (she/her) 
Executive Director, EqualityMaine 
MaineTransNet
