Episcopal Diocese of Maine, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), 
Religious Society of Friends, Unitarian Universalist Association, United Church of Christ, United Methodist Church  
 
Testimony before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
 
LD 1196: An Act to Require Public Schools to Allow Parents and Guardians to Opt Out Their Children with Respect to Portions of the Curriculum 
LD 1199: An Act to Provide Transparency in Public School Curricula 
LD 1589: Resolve, Directing the Dept of Education to Adopt Rules Prohibiting Teachers from Engaging in Political, Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom 
LD 1129: An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act 
LD 1518: An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their Children from Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain Controversial Viewpoints 
LD 1643: An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, Evaluations and Events at Public Schools 
LD 1800: An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education 
 
May 11, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Committee: 
 
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The Council has seven mainline 
Protestant member-denominations and two associate member congregations who represent 437 local churches 
in Maine with 55,000 parishioners in their care. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in OPPOSITION to 
the seven bills listed above.   
 
All of the MCC churches have roots in Hebrew and Christian scripture, where the foundation of morality is love 
of neighbor as self and where covenant with God includes caring for the most vulnerable and marginalized of 
our neighbors, including and especially our LGBTQ+ siblings who are beloved children of God, created in the 
divine image. We believe sexual orientation and gender identity are a gift from God—not a condition that needs 
treatment, not a choice that needs conversion, not something broken that needs repair, not a sin that needs 
forgiveness, and certainly not a category of neighbors that others are permitted to discriminate against, silence, 
or claim that their children need to be “protected” or “shielded” from. 
 
Among us on the Council’s Board of Directors are three members of the LGBTQ community and several 
parents of LGBTQ sons and daughters; in the pulpits and pews of our 437 congregations are cherished 
colleagues and parishioners who are LGBTQ. 
 
We focus on the LGBTQ community in our testimony in opposition to these bills because, despite some of the 
bill titles, it is clear they are not really about parents’ rights or education. They are about surveillance and 
dismantling public education. They are about attacking transgender people and other marginalized groups and 
using hatred and bigotry to exploit a vulnerable population in a quest for winning political points. They are 
about denying students’ rights, including the right to privacy and safety.  
 
As people of faith, we are impelled by the example of Jesus to treat all persons with love and dignity and 
especially to care for those who are marginalized by society.  The Maine Council of Churches stands opposed to 
these bills and urges you to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS. 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 1800
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Committee:
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The 
Council has seven mainline Protestant member-denominations and two associate 
member congregations who represent 437 local churches in Maine with 55,000 
parishioners in their care. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in OPPOSITION to
the seven bills listed above.  
All of the MCC churches have roots in Hebrew and Christian scripture, where the 
foundation of morality is love of neighbor as self and where covenant with God 
includes caring for the most vulnerable and marginalized of our neighbors, including 
and especially our LGBTQ+ siblings who are beloved children of God, created in the 
divine image. We believe sexual orientation and gender identity are a gift from 
God—not a condition that needs treatment, not a choice that needs conversion, not 
something broken that needs repair, not a sin that needs forgiveness, and certainly not 
a category of neighbors that others are permitted to discriminate against, silence, or 
claim that their children need to be “protected” or “shielded” from.
Among us on the Council’s Board of Directors are three members of the LGBTQ 
community and several parents of LGBTQ sons and daughters; in the pulpits and 
pews of our 437 congregations are cherished colleagues and parishioners who are 
LGBTQ.
We focus on the LGBTQ community in our testimony in opposition to these bills 
because, despite some of the bill titles, it is clear they are not really about parents’ 
rights or education. They are about surveillance and dismantling public education. 
They are about attacking transgender people and other marginalized groups and using 
hatred and bigotry to exploit a vulnerable population in a quest for winning political 
points. They are about denying students’ rights, including the right to privacy and 
safety. 
As people of faith, we are impelled by the example of Jesus to treat all persons with 
love and dignity and especially to care for those who are marginalized by society.  
The Maine Council of Churches stands opposed to these bills and urges you to vote 
OUGHT NOT TO PASS.

