Testimony of Mary L. Bonauto, GLAD Attorney, for GLAD, ACLU of Maine, OUT Maine 
In Opposition to LD 1643, An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, 
Evaluations, and Events at Public Schools -ONTP, and 
LD 1800, An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education -ONTP 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
_ May 11, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
Good afternoon. I am Mary Bonauto, a Maine-based attorney who works for GLBTQ 
Legal Advocates & Defenders. GLAD is a legal organization advocating for the full range of 
LGBTQ people and people living with HIV/AIDS in New England and nationally. Together 
with the ACLU of Maine and OUT Maine, we oppose LD 1643 and LD 1800. 
LD 1643 
We oppose LD 1643, An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, Analyses, 
Evaluations and Events at Public Schools because it is unnecessary. Its provisions repeat 
nearly verbatim, but with some re-ordering and rephrasing, the federal Protection of Pupils 
Act, 20 USC § 1232h (“PPRA”).‘ Maine public schools are already obliged to follow the 
PPRA as a condition of federal funding. If there is an issue with respect to a local educational 
agency’s adherence to this law, the PPRA provides for enforcement and the regulations establish 
a process for making complaints. 34 CFR 98.7-10.2 
LD 1800 
While LD 1643 does not appear to change the governing law in Maine, LD 1800, An Act 
Regarding Parental Rights in Education would have far-reaching effects. 
First, LD 1800 reaches deeply into and changes bedrock family law prioritizing the 
best interests of children. By way of background, existing law provides that parents are “jointly 
entitled to the care, custody, control, services, and earnings of their children ” and together can 
meet the safety needs and best interests of their children. But when parents separate or when 
‘ Available at: https://www.law.come1l.edu/uscode/text/20/1232h 
The bill appears to make a few changes with unknown but possible signiﬁcance. For example, 
item 2 in the proposed bill also requires schools to provide instructional materials with respect to any 
“survey, analysis or evaluation as part of any program administered by the department ” rather than only 
for surveys etc. administered by the school administrative unit. (emphasis added). We lack the necessary 
background to discern what impact, if any, this would have on state assessments like the Maine 
Comprehensive Assessment System, available at: 
https1//www.maine.gov/doe/Testing_Accountability/MECA.J 
2 Available at: https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-34/subtitle —A/part-98
1
they can no longer cooperate under the terms of an existing court order, courts look to a wide- 
ranging list of factors geared to the Welfare of children in allocating parental rights and 
responsibilities between the parents. Under Tit. 19-A MRS §1653,3 after a thorough examination 
of these factors, the court may invest the parents with shared or sole responsibilities as warranted 
by the evidence.4 
The very different framework proposed here, asserting that “each parent has the 
fundamental right to make decisions regarding the upbringing education and well-being of 
that parent’s children ” would create confusion. To be sure, parents have a fundamental 
right “to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of their children, ”5 but 
that liberty interest “does not reside there exclusively, ” nor is it beyond regulation “in the 
public interest. ”‘ We should not introduce doubt into whether courts would retain the 
authority to allocate sole parental rights when warranted for safety reasons, because they 
have abused children, or because of the public interest in the welfare of children.7 This bill 
is not the right choice for Maine’s children. 
Emblematic of the point above, section 2 of the bill would expand a parent’s rights to 
educational records of their children even when, based on all of the relevant circumstances, it is 
not in the interests of the child to do so. Current law provides for the Judge to provide a 
statement that “each parent must have access to records and information pertaining to a minor child” 
including “medical, dental and school records and other information on school activities, whether or not 
the child resides with the parent.” However, current law differs from the proposal because the court is 
authorized to deny access, in whole or in part, if “that access is found not to be in the best interest of the 
child or that access is found to be sought for the purpose of causing detriment to the other parent. Ifthat 
access is not ordered, the court shall state in the order its reasons for denying that access.” 19-A MRS 
3 
Available at: https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/19-A/titlel9-Asec1653.html 
4 
See 19-A Me. Rev. Stat. §1653, available at: https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/19-A/titlel9- 
Asec1653.html0 
5 
Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 66 (2000) (plurality opinion). 
6 Parents for Privacy v. Barr, 949 F.3d 1210, 1231 (9"‘ Cir. 2020). See aiso Hodge v. Jones, 31 
F.3d 15?, 163-64 (4th Cir. 1994) (“The maxim of familial privacy is neither absolute nor unqualiﬁed, and 
may be outweighed by a legitimate governmental interest ”). 
7 
Among the many factors a court must review in allocating parental rights are those that implicate 
the welfare of the child, and which the proposed bill would effectively disregard. These include: 
P. Ifthe child is under one year of age, whether the child is being breast-fed; 
Q. The existence of a parent's conviction for a sex offense or a sexually violent oﬁense as those terms are defned 
in Title 34-A section 1 1203' 
R. Ifthere is a person residing with a parent, whether that person: 
(1) Has been convicted of a crime under Title 17-A, chapter 11 or Q or a comparable crime in another jurisdiction; 
(2) Has been adjudicated of a juvenileoffense that, if the person had been an adult at the time of the offense, would 
have been a violation of Title 17-A, chapter 11 or 12; or 
(3) Has been adjudicated in a proceeding, in which the person was a party, under Title 22, chapter 1071 as having 
committed a sexual offense; and 
S. Whether allocation of some or all parental rights and responsibilities would best support the child's safety and well- 
being.
2
§1653 (2)(D)(4). The current rule is based on a holistic view of the parenting of the child 
and the parent—child relationships. We urge this Committee to reject the proposal and retain 
the child-centered rules. 
Second, LD 1800 would create a new section of Title 20-A with multiple concerning 
provisions, including a statement of “parental rights regarding student health and welfare. ” To 
this end, the bill would insert into the education code: “A parent has the fundamental right 
to make decisions regarding the upbring, education and well-being of that parent’s child.” 
This tells us nothing about the respective “rights” of parents vis-a-vis the rights and 
responsibilities of schools and of students with respect to any particular dispute. It would 
also fuel unnecessary conﬂict by falsely suggesting that a parent’s decision about their 
child’s education or well-being is automatically binding on school staff and administration. 
To arrive at the right solution in any disagreement about parental rights requires more 
context and information that this mere statement, including consideration of the school’s 
obligations to students and student’s rights. 
To be clear, parents have the recognized fundamental right to decide whether their 
child should attend public or private school or be home schooled. However, parental 
preferences cannot be imposed (and under current Maine law, are not) on how public 
schools operate their day-to-day activities. Parents “do not have a due process right to 
interfere with the curriculum, discipline, hours of instruction, or the nature of any other 
curricular or extracurricular activities, ” and parental rights are “substantially diminished ” 
once they elect to send their children to public school.8 Parents who disagree with school 
policies “have the right to remove their children from” public schools, but that right does 
not extend to requiring particular policies? Notably, in the infrequent parental rights cases in 
the education context, many courts ﬁnd that a school has not violated parents’ rights, or even that 
“parents’ rights” is inapplicable in that context. ” 
Inserting the proposed language into the education code, devoid of context, and Without a 
judge or other “decider” to determine when rights do and don’t exist, only serves to put schools 
8 Hodge v. Jones, 31 F.3d 157, 163-64 (4th Cir. 1994) 
9 Parents for Privacy v. Barr, 949 F.3d 1210, 1230 n.l6 (9th Cir. 2020) 
‘° Barr, at 1231-33 (no fundamental right to object to school policy allowing transgender students to 
use single-sex facilities consistent with their gender identity); Thomas v. Evansville- Vanderburgh Sch. 
Corp, 258 F. App’x 50, 54 (7th Cir. 2007) (private conversation between school counselor and student 
regarding school performance did not violate parent’s right to direct chi1d’s upbringing); Leebaert v. 
Harrington, 332 F.3d 134, 141 (2d Cir. 2003) (upholding schoo1’s mandatory health classes against 
father’s claim of violation of fundamental rights); Parents United for Better Sch, Inc. v. Sch. Dist. of 
Phila. Bd. of Ea'uc., 148 F.3d 260, 277 (3d Cir. 1998) (upholding school’s consensual condom 
distribution program); Brown v. Hot, Sexy & Safer Prods, Inc., 68 F.3d 525, 533-34 (lst Cir. 1995) 
(upholding compulsory high school sex education assembly program), abrogated on other grounds by 
Martinez v. Cui, 608 F.3d 54 (lst Cir. 2010); Fleischfresser v. Dirs. of Sch. Dist. 200, 15 F.3d 680, 690 
(7th Cir. 1994) (parents lacked constitutional right to exempt child from reading program).
3
and some parents on a collision course. This change is not necessary, as local advocacy and 
judicial review remain available as recourse. 
Parental Consent to Services. Student Monitoring and Parental Notiﬁcation“ 
Theﬁrst subsection of LD 1800 seeks to limit the available supports for students at 
school by requiring parents to opt-into “health care services ” at the beginning of the school 
year. Right off the bat, this would reverse long-standing Maine law that allows minors to 
obtain certain counseling without their parents’ consent. 22 MRS §1502. Moreover, 
“health care services ” is an undefined term that might or might not be construed broadly by 
some and creates challenges for adults who talk to students at school. If a school nurse gives 
someone a tampon, would that be a “health care service”? Or a coach, teacher or front 
office personnel who ask, , “you’re not smiling today, what’s up?” and that staff member 
supports the student as the student shares details about why they are having a hard time, is 
that a “health care service”? 
Setting aside the vagueness of the term and confusion that would be generated for staff about 
how to interact with students, the bill also requires schools to notify parents about a “change 
in the student’s health care services or monitoring, ” and “change in the student’s mental, 
emotional or physical health or well-being, ” among other things. §3 (1), (1)(A). What 
constitutes a “change” in health and well-being is unclear; nor is it clear who is responsible 
for noticing and reporting on it. Even if there were a baseline from which “change” could 
be measured, should such surveillance and reporting come to pass, however, it is likely to 
shut -down student engagement with adults who care about them and could makea 
difference for them. Adults, too, are put in the position where talking with students could 
be considered a “health care service” to which a parent had not consented. If this were to 
materialize, school staff would have to come together regularly to attempt to assess who 
observed what and whether that observation indicates a change in various aspects of health 
or well-being. Then staff would have to spend additional hours they don’t have to make 
calls or send notes home to parents based on slight changes in student behavior instead of 
focusing on engaging students in learning. 
One other very impoitant point bears mention. The bill addresses staff notiﬁcation of parents 
about a range of student health concerns, and says staff shall not be prohibited or discouraged 
from sharing except when disclosure could result in abuse, neglect or abandonment of the child 
(such as requiring the child to leave the home). What is lost in the current discussion is that 
school staff and teachers are often the first ones to encourage a student to share health 
concerns with a parent. It is widely accepted, and for good reason, that a strong parent- 
child relationship helps a young person throughout their lives. Young people care about 
their families, too, and are often very invested in ﬁnding a way, with some time and 
support, to share concerning matters and important parts of themselves with their parents. 
There has to be a better balance to provide care and support as young people mature without 
“ Much of this section is drawn verbatim from 2022 Fla. HB 1557, available at: 
https://legiscan.com/FL/text/H15 57/2022
4
blunt instruments. But putting schools in the position of surveilling and reporting to the parents 
is bad for the student at school and the student at home. No one wants that. 
This bill also requires school administrative units to to establish a procedure by whicha 
parent may “notify” the principal about a “concern” about “the health care services for or 
the mental, emotional or physical health or well-being of a student. ” §(l)(B). It is' 
decidedly unclear as to what is meant by these “concerns, ” and also why these concerns 
would necessarily be the school’s issue to resolve. There are obviously many stresses young 
people experience in and out of school, including social, social media, and schoolwork. 
Nonetheless, the school administrative unit would be obliged to create a system by 
which a parent could notify the principal (or designee) of their concerns, with a process for 
“resolving those concerns ” within 7 days, and a further process to require the school 
administrative unit to resolve the issue in 30 days or to provide a statement of reasons for 
not resolving the concern. §(1)(B). 
If the parent does not receive a timely response to their concern, or if the “concern . .. 
remains unresolved ” §(6) (even if it is insoluble), a dissatis ﬁed parent can bring the matter 
to the attention of the Department of Education, whose Commissioner is to appoint a 
“magistrate ” from within the bar, at the school administrative unit’s expense, to rendera 
recommended decision to the Board of Education. 
The Board of Education would then be required to accept or reject the 
recommendation promptly. 
Alternatively, a parent with an “unresolved ” concern would be able to bypass the part 
of the process involving the magistrate and Board of Education by going directly to the 
local District Court or Superior Court. The Court could “remedy the effects of conduct 
that it ﬁnds to exist and is prohibited under this section, ” although it remains unclear as to 
what conduct is required and what is the scope of “health care service” or “mental, 
emotional, or physical health or well-being. ” If the parent obtains any relief, the court may 
award attorney ’s fees and costs, at school expense. 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass on all of LD 1800. 
0 It is an extreme measure that would surely keep schools occupied with guessing at what 
matters require parent notiﬁcation, responding to parental concerns about a student’s 
health and well-being that may have no known nexus to school, and defending their' 
prerogatives to provide speciﬁc supports to students as authorized under current law. 
I It negates the longstanding and carefully tailored system for allocating parental rights and 
responsibilities between parents based on the best interests of the child. LD 1800 §3 
(referencing subsections 1-2). 
0 It will generate conﬂict by misleadingly suggesting that a parent has “the fundamental 
right to make decisions regarding the upbringing, education and Well-being of that 
parent’s child” while at school. It forgets that parents and schools share common goals 
and interests vis-a-vis students, and parents can and do raise concerns directly with
5
administration and school boards. In addition, the law is clear that schools have the right 
to manage their curriculum and, among other things, to create a learning environment that 
allows a_ll students to grasp their equal educational opportunities, whatever their race, 
Tribal membership, national origin or ethnicity, whatever their sex or gender, including 
LGBTQ status, whatever disabilities require accommodation. LD 1800 §3 (referencing 
subsections 3)., 
It imposes administrative, personnel, and ﬁscal burdens on schools arising from 
“fundamental rights” arguments about how schools should and should not manage the 
“education ” and “Well-being ” of students during the school day. It includes a requirement 
to ascertain and report on a change in student health and well-being, but with no objective 
standards to guide that inquiry, no baseline measurement, and leaving schools with the 
impossible task of ﬁnding ways to collect, share, and sift through that information to 
determine what is or what might be a required notiﬁcation. We support communication 
between parents and schools, but parents have unique access and inﬂuence over their 
children, and are in the position to determine their child’s Well being. Compare LD 1800 
§3 (referencing subsections 3 (1)(A), (B), (6). 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass as well on LD 1643 since it largely restates 
binding federal law as to the subjects it addresses. Thank you. 
Attorney Mary Bonauto 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
257 Deering Ave., #203 
Portland, ME 04103 
For GLAD, ACLU of Maine, OUTMaine
6
