May 11, 2023 
Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, I 
am Penny Morrell of Belgrade, Maine. 
I support all these bills before you this afternoon and thank the sponsors for common sense 
rights we have taken for granted in the past, but can no longer.  Parents must be vigilant today 
and know what their children are being taught and exposed to in schools.  Our kids must be 
protected by their parents who have the ultimate responsibility for and outcome of their 
welfare. 
LD 1129, HP0714 An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency 
Act - Rep. Heidi Sampson of Alfred 
LD 1196, HP0756 An Act to Require Public Schools to Allow Parents and 
Guardians to Opt Out Their Children with Respect to Portions of the 
Curriculum - Rep. Nathan Carlow of Buxton 
LD 1199, HP0759 An Act to Provide Transparency in Public School 
Curricula - Rep. Rachel Henderson of Rumford 
LD 1518, HP0973 An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw Their 
Children from Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain 
Controversial Viewpoints - Rep. Jim Thorne of Carmel 
LD 1589, HP1034 Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Adopt 
Rules Prohibiting Teachers in Public Schools from Engaging in Political, 
Ideological and Religious Advocacy in the Classroom - Rep. Katrina Smith of 
Palermo 
LD 1643, HP1053 An Act Regarding Instructional Materials, Surveys, 
Analyses, Evaluations and Events at Public Schools - Rep. Heidi Sampson of Alfred 
LD 1800, SP0725 An Act Regarding Parental Rights in 
Education - Sen. Lisa Keim of Oxford 
These bills would protect parents’ rights, protect the well-being of students, and provide more 
transparency for voters and taxpayers. 
Parental inclusion in conversations that impact children is pressing in our state.  School officials 
and Democrat lawmakers should not, and must not, withhold information from parents that 
impacts the physical and mental health of their children. 
Chapter 117 is a controversial rule recently approved by the Education Committee that would 
expand the role of social workers in Maine’s public schools.  When a student has a chronic drug 
problem, or gender dysphoria, or other private personal issue, Maine citizens are told that the 
student will be able to keep that problem confidential.  That is wrong, and we must stand up 
against it.  Parents should and must be notified first of any issue of the like before treatment is 
administered to their student in school or elsewhere. 
We have all heard and read about the Amber Lavigne , case.  A Newcastle mom  discovered that 
the Great Salt Bay Community School in Damariscotta secretly provided her 13-year-old 
daughter with a breast binder and sex-change counseling, and she has filed a lawsuit  against 
that school.  Rightfully so, for violating her constitutional rights. 
When a school cannot administer an aspirin without parental permission, this other treatment 
is absurd without parents knowing!  LD 1800, would require schools to include parents in 
medical decisions that affect their children. 
LD 1129, would impose transparency requirements on Maine’s public schools.  It codifies the 
fact that parents have a right to request any information being given to their children.  Parents 
are often shocked when they find that important information is being hidden from them and 
can often encounter hostility from school officials when they request information. 
LD 1643, requires school systems to make all instructional materials available for inspection by 
the parents or guardians of the children enrolled. It prohibits students from being required to 
submit to a survey, analysis or evaluation that reveals certain information and requires school 
systems to adopt certain policies and notify parents or guardians of those policies. It also 
requires school systems to notify parents or guardians of events and provide an opportunity to 
opt out students.  
The other LDs before you today work in tandem with the above testimony and I’m thankful for 
the sponsors for introducing them.  I ask this committee to vote “ought to pass” on all seven. 
 
