 
Stacey K. Guerin                                                                                                         3 State House Station  
Senator, District 4                                                                                                   Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
1 Parental Involvement in Your Child’s Education, Annie E. Casey Foundation, December 2022. 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Stacey Guerin 
In Support of L.D. 1800, An Act Regarding Parental Rights in Education 
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
May 11, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: I am Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent 
District 4, which includes all of Piscataquis County and 11 communities in Penobscot County. 
I’m pleased to present testimony in support of L.D. 1800, “An Act Regarding Parental Rights in 
Education.” 
 
An article by the Annie E. Casey Foundation states, “For decades, researchers have pointed to one 
key success factor that transcends nearly all others, such as socioeconomic status, student back-
ground or the kind of school a student attends: parental involvement.”1 
 
While we can all agree that things such as reading, writing, mathematics, and science should be 
taught in schools, I believe there are some subject areas that may be more appropriately taught or 
discussed at home – and if not at home, with the knowledge and consent of a child’s parents. 
Children often hear things at school, on the playground or bus that result in questions; parents 
should be informed on what their child is being taught and entitled to review course materials 
being used. This keeps them up to date on what their child is learning and can better prepare 
them to answer follow up questions their child may ask.  
 
In addition to their education, if the school has concerns related to a child’s mental, emotional or 
physical health, the parents need to know. While the school may feel one type of service is best-
suited to address a child’s needs, that is not always the case. If a school notices changes in a 
child’s emotional, mental, or physical well-being, parents should be informed as they may not 
see these changes when the child is at home. By informing the parents of such changes, they can 
better support their child. 
 
L.D. 1800 provides for greater parental involvement in the education, health and overall well-
being of a child and does so in a way that sets parameters for situations where a school 
administrative unit can withhold information if they feel disclosure of information to a parent 
would result in abuse or neglect of the child. I believe this legislation has the best interest of 
students and parents in mind. Please join me in supporting this timely legislation.  
