Maine Chapter
1N(.{l}ry{)iirll-lrl) l N ivlAlNtl
American Acaderary of Pediatries
lrrDt{,.lTF.D t{) THs IrltAt.T}t o,: Al.l. cE!t,DIlnNn
," Testimony against LD 1800 --
Sydney R. Servall, Mn UPH Hallowell
Sen. Rafferty. Rep
Committee --Brennan and member of the Education and Cultural Atfairs
I ani writing as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of
Pediatrics, an organization ofover 300 health care practitioners distributed
throughout the state who focus on the care of infbnts, children, teens and young
adults. I am NOT a specialist in adolescent medicine, but have 40 years
experience dealing with teens in the Central Maine area.
While the bulk of this bill focuses on parental assent to educational curricula, it
also eliminates any confidentiality provided to teens in school health and
counseling settings. As a consequence, it is unlikely that a teen who is hiding his
or her struggles with substarlce use, mental health, or sexuality issues will seek
help.
The majority of pathology confronting teens today relates to social pathology -
toxic stress, emotional disorders, risky behaviors - often in combination.
Some teens live in supportive families.that encourage disclosure -- and have
parents that can empathize w-ith their issnes, even if their behaviors clash with
parental expectations. When we adults look back on our teen years, how many of
us can say this was rue for us? How common is this today?
The American Academy of Pediatrics believes that confidentiality is an essential
component of'adolescent health care - especiallv concerning sexuality, substance
use, and unmet mental health needs. Research supports the conclusion that
u'ithout the provision of confidential health care, teens will not seek out
appropriate care despite being sexually active, may not get treated for STD's, &
w-ill not disclose substance use. fl Adolesc Hlth 201 8:62;36-43)
While school nurses and counselors are much more comfortable when they can
involve parents in all aspects of their child's care, we do not live in a perfect world.
Up to this point, Maine law has supported the principle that providers should
maintain confidentiality at the teen's request, LINLESS the patient is at risk of
harming his/herself or someone else.
Even with this backdrop, obtaining sensitive infbrmation fiom teen patients and
initiating appropriate interventions is a challenge. With the passage of LD 1800
it would be close to impossible in the school setting" with unfortunate
consequences to adolescent health.
The other portions of this proposed bill, and the content of the associated proposals
being heard this session (LD 1518, 1129,1199,1589,1643) do not relate directl,v to
health issues, but insert a great deal ofstate interference over educational decisions.
The implication is that local administrators, librarians. and teachers can't be trustecl
to challenge kids with new ideas, and should avoid any controversial areas.,'6.:
Executive Committee
President
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP
Vice President
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP
Treasu rer
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP
Secreta ry
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP
lmmediate Past President
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP
Board of Directors
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP
Riley Heroux**
lenniferJewell, MD, MS, FAAP
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP
Emily Keller, IV1D, FAAP
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP
Maria Libertin, MD*
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP
Austin Wheeler Steward* *
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP
Aaron Wallace, MD*
* Resident Boa rd Representatives
* *Medical Student Representatives
Staff
Dee Kerry, BS Ed
Executive Director
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN
Admin & Project Coordinator
30 Association Drive, Box 190
lVlanchester, tvlE 04351
office:207-480-4185
ww!v.!oa1nea,apg-rg
Teachers in public schools are already stressed, overworked and underpaid. These bills would
create an atmosphere of disrespect that, unforlunately, could lead to a mass exodus of the
brightest from the profession and degrade the'quality ot-public education.
The Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics opposes LD 1 800 due to its eftect on
patient confidentiality. We also fear that the other bills being presented might have non-medical
consequences that would negatively impact the quality of life of our patients who attend public
school.
Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH
Instructor of Pediatrics - Maine-Dafimouth Family Medicine Residency!
