.l\/.l/\1NF. A.35QClATl()N 
. 
OF 
l*ll~3AL ’1‘H PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 4/24/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition To LD 1105 
An Act to Ensure Lower Costs and Consumer Protections 
for Patients by Prohibiting Certain Billing Practices 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-proﬁt insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about. 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. _ 
Merriam-Webster deﬁnes the idiom “penny-wise but pound-foolish" as describing something 
that is done to save a small amount of money now, but that will cost a large amotmt of money in 
the future. It is an apt warning for any health plan enrollee choosing to act as a “self-paying ” 
consumer at the point of care. 
The federal No Surprise Act is providing consumers With new tools and rights to comparison 
shop for healthcare services. These tools include good faith estimates from providers ‘ and, upon 
completion of federal rulemaking, consumers will be entitled to advanced explanations of 
beneﬁts from their health plans? 
Given the rights afforded to consumers by the No Surprises Act, §4303, sub-§25 of the bill 
prohibiting carriers from prohibiting providers from accepting cash payments may not be 
necessary. Plans currently do not have that restriction in place. 
My testimony includes a CMS Frequently Asked Questions document on the No Surprises Rules 
for providers published last April. I have highlighted this reference on page 9:p 
“Generally, the No Surprises protections apply to individuals enrolled in a health care plan, 
through an employer (whether self-funded or insured, including coverage offered by ﬁederal, 
1 lgjtos://vvww.<:ms.gov/nosurprises/consumers/understanding-costs-in-advance 
2 ijgps://www.federairegistehgov/documents/2022/O9/16/2022-19798/request-for —informatiowadvanced-~ 
ggpjanation~of~bene ﬁts~and—,~2ood-faith~estimate-for-covered' 
P.O. Box l93, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
state, or local governments, or a multiemployer plan), or through the federal Marketplaces, 
state-based Marketplaces, or directly through an individual market health insurance issuer. ”3 
The same FAQ document explicitly refers to providers ’ obligations when consumers do not 
intend to submit a claim to their plan or coverage. I have highlighted that for you on page 6. 
The federal guidance suggests lines 15-20 of the proposed bill are duplicative. 
Now for what is not in the guidance.p 
CMS guidance to providers does not require any notiﬁcation or disclaimer to consumers on how 
the decision to forgo ﬁling an insurance claim impacts their standing regarding their insurance 
deductible, co-insurance requirements, or out-of-pocket maximum. An example disclaimer from 
CMS is provided with my testimony.4 
I did not bring pennies or pounds to talk about the wisdom of not ﬁling an insurance claim, but 
Maine’s Silver $3000 HSA plan under clear choice design provides a good illustration. 
Enrollees who self-pay and do not ﬁle a claim Will not get credit for the healthcare expense When 
it comes to meeting their $3,000 or their $7,000 maximum out-of-pocket for the year. 
Given the expense and complications of health care, it might be Wise for the committee to 
require providers to wam patients forgoing a health insurance claim that today’s cash payment at 
the point of service could increase their overall cost of care for the year. 
3 
httoszj/www.emsgovifiles/document/ ’faq;providers-no-sumrises-rules-aprii-2022.pdf 
4 
https:/iwww.cms.gow ’CC§lO,!ResouIces/Regulations-and-Guldan<:e; ’Downloads,/Guidanee-Go0d —Faith-Estimate 
Pat2ent-wovider-Dispute-Resolutior:-Process-tor-Providers-Facélities-CMS-9908 —i¥C.odt 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS FOR 
PROVIDERS ABOUT THE NO SURPRISES RULES 
April 6, 2022» 
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2021 established several new requirements to protect 
consumers from surprise medical bills. These requirements are collectively referred to as “No 
Surprises ” rules. These requirements generally apply to items and services provided to 
consumers enrolled in group health plans, group or individual health insurance coverage, and 
Federal Employees Health Benefits plans. This document contains information on frequently 
asked questions from providers and facilities regarding No Surprises rules, independent dispute 
resolution, and exceptions to the new rules and requirements. 
l. What are the new requirements and prohibitions of the N0 Surprises Act? 
Patients now have new billing protections when getting emergency care, certain non- 
emergency care from out-of-network providers during visits to certain in-network facilities, 
and air ambulance services from out-of-network providers. 
New Surprise Billing Requirements and Prohibitions 
0 No balance billing for out-of-network emergency services 
0 No balance billing for non-emergency services by out-of-network providers during 
patient visits to certain in-network health care facilities, unless notice and consent 
requirements are met for certain items and services. 
0 Providers and health caret facilities must publicly disclose patient protections against 
balance billing 
0 N0 balance billing for covered air ambulance services by out-of-network air 
ambulance providers 
0 In instances where balance billing is prohibited, cost sharing for insured patients is 
limited to in-network levels or amounts 
0 Providers must give a good faith estimate of expected charges to uninsured and self- 
pay patients at least 3 business days before a scheduled service, or upon request 
0 Plans and issuers and providers and facilities must ensure continuity of care whena 
pr0vider ’s network status changes in certain circumstances 
0 Plans and issuers and providers and facilities must implement certain measures to 
improve the accuracy of provider" directory information
1
2. I want more information on provider and facility requirements. Are there any 
exceptions? 
Requirement: No balance billing for out-of-network emergency services 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
0 Out-of-network providers and out-of- 
network emergency facilities cannot bill 
or hold liable participants, beneﬁciaries, 
or enrollees who received emergency 
services for a payment amount greater 
than the in-network cost-sharing 
requirement. 
1 For these protections to apply, 
emergency services must be received at 
a hospital or an independent freestanding 
emergency department. 
0 The patient must be enrolled in a group 
health plan or group or individual health 
insurance coverage. For this purpose, a 
Federal Employees Health Benefits plan 
is included as a group health plan. 
0 Cost-sharing is generally based on the 
median of contracted rates payable to in- 
network providers or in-network 
facilities. 
I Certain post-stabilization services are 
considered emergency services, and are 
therefore subject to this prohibition, 
unless notice and consent and certain 
other requirements are met (see next 
column). Out-of-network providers and out-of- 
network emergency facilities may balance 
bill for post-stabilization services only if all 
of the following conditions have been met: 
The attending emergency physician or 
treating provider determines that the 
participant, beneﬁciary, or enrollee: 
¢ Can travel using non-medical or non- 
emergency medical transportation to an 
available in-network provider or facility 
located within a reasonable travel 
distance, taking into account the 
individual ’s medical condition; and 
0 ls in a condition to receive notice and 
provide informed consent; 
0 The out-of-network provider or out-of- 
network emergency facility provides the 
participant, beneﬁciary, or enrollee with 
a written notice including certain 
information during a specific timeframe 
(as provided in regulations and 
guidance) and obtains consent to waive 
surprise billing protections; and 
0 The provider or facility satisﬁes any 
additional state law requirements.
2
Requirement: No balance billing for certain non-emergency services by out-of-network 
providers during patient visits to in-network health care facilities, unless notice and consent 
requirements are met. Review aiid ___<iownioairl Stamiarri Notice and Consent Documents. 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
0 Out-of-network providers cannot bill or 
hold liable participants, beneﬁciaries, or 
enrollees in group health plans or group or 
individual health insurance coverage who 
received covered non-emergency services 
at an in-network health care facility for an 
amount greater than the in-network cost- 
sharing requirement for those services, 
unless notice and consent requirements 
are met. 
0 Cost-sharing is generally based on the 
median of amounts that would have been 
charged by in-network providers or in- 
network facilities. 
For purposes of these protections, health care 
facilities include: hospitals, hospital 
outpatient departments, critical access 
hospitals, and ambulatory surgical centers. 
These protections do not apply to other types 
of health care facilities, such as urgent care 
centers. ’ The notice and consent exception does not 
apply to the following list of ancillary 
S ervices, meaning a provider is always 
prohibited from balance billing for these 
S ervices: 
Items and services related to 
emergency medicine, anesthesiology, 
pathology, radiology, and neonatology 
Items and services provided by 
assistant surgeons, hospitalists, and 
intensivists 
0 Diagnostic services, including 
radiology and laboratory services 
0 Items and services provided by an out- 
of-network provider if there is no in- 
network provider who can provide the 
item or service at the facility.
Requirement: Disclosure of patient protections against balance billing. Review and download 
the ‘\/iodel Disclosure Notice. 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
A provider or facility must disclose to any 
participant, beneﬁciary, or enrollee ina 
group health plan or group or individual 
health insurance coverage to Whom the 
provider or facility furnishes items and 
services information regarding federal and 
state (if applicable) balance billing 
protections and how to report violations. 
Providers or facilities must post this 
information prominently at the location of 
the facility if the location is publicly 
accessible, post it on a public website (if 
applicable), and provide it to the 
participant, beneﬁciary or enrollee no 
later than the date and time on which the 
provider or facility requests payment from 
the individual or, with respect to an 
individual from whom the provider or 
facility does not request payment, no later 
than the date on which the provider or 
facility submits a claim to the group 
health plan or health insurance issuer. A provider isn’t required to make disclosures 
if the provider doesn’t furnish items or 
services at a health care facility at which the 
balance billing protections apply, or in 
connection with a visit to such a health care 
facility. 
A provider is not required to make the> 
disclosure to individuals to whom the 
provider furnishes items or services, if such 
items and services are Q furnished in 
connection with a visit at a health care 
facility. 
A provider isn’t required to make the 
disclosure to individuals if there is a written 
agreement where the facility agrees to make 
the disclosure instead of the provider.
Requirement: No balance billing for air ambulance services by out-of-network providers of air 
ambulance services 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
0 Out-of-network providers of air 
ambulance services cannot bill or hold' 
liable participants, beneﬁciaries, or 
enrollees in group health plans or group or 
individual health insurance coverage who 
received covered air ambulance services, 
for an amount greater than the in-network 
cost-sharing requirement for those 
services. 
0 The cost-sharing requirement is generally 
based on the lesser of the median of 
contracted rates payable to in-network 
providers of air ambulance services or the 
billed amount for the services. None.
‘I
Requirement: Providing a good faith estimate in advance of scheduled services, or upon 
request, to an uninsured or self-pay individual. 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
When a health care provider or facility 
schedules an item or service, it must 
inquire if the individual who schedules an 
item or service is enrolled in a group 
health plan, group or individual health 
insurance coverage offered by a health 
insurance issuer, a federal health care 
program, or a Federal Employees Health 
Beneﬁts plan. If so, the provider or 
facility must inquire if the individual is 
seeking to have their claims for the item 
or service submitted to the individual ’s 
plan or coverage. 
If the patient has no such plan or 
coverage, or doesn’t intend to submita 
claim to the plan or coverage, the provider 
or facility must provide notification to the 
patient (in clear and understandable 
language) of the good faith estimate of the 
expected charges, expected service, and 
diagnostic codes of scheduled services. 
The good faith estimate must include 
expected charges for the items or services 
that are reasonably expected to be 
provided in conjunction with the primary 
item or service, including items or 
services that may be provided by other 
providers and facilities. 
For more information regarding the good 
faith estimate for uninsured (or self-pay) 
individuals, see Guidance on Good Faith 
lisrimates and the Patient-P.1"ovidez' 
Disptlte Res0lut_i_o,11,(_PP,DR) Prfocess for 
Providers and Facilities i 
If the patient is enrolled in such plan or 
coverage, and intends to have a claim 
submitted for the scheduled items or 
service, the provider or facility must 
submit a good faith estimate to the plan or 
issuer, which in turn must send an 
advance explanation of benefits to the 
patient. From January 1, 2022 through December 
31, 2022, the Department of Health& 
Human Services (HHS) will exercise its 
enforcement discretion in situations where 
a good faith estimate provided to an 
uninsured (or self-pay) individual doesn’t 
include expected charges from other 
providers and facilities that are involved 
in the individual ’s care. 
Until rulemaking is issued regarding the 
requirement to provide a good faith 
estimate to an individual ’s plan or 
coverage, HHS will defer enforcement of 
the requirement that providers and 
facilities provide good faith estimate 
information for individuals enrolled ina 
plan or coverage and seeking to submita 
claim for scheduled items or services to 
their plan or coverage. 
Requirement: Continuity of care when a provider ’s network status changes 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
0 When the contractual relationship 
between a plan or issuer and a provider or 
facility ends and results in a change in the 
provider or facility ’s network status, if the 
health care provider or facility hasa 
continuing care patient, they must: 
0 Accept payment from the plan or 
issuer (and cost-sharing payments 
from the individual) for the course of 
treatment of a continuing care patient 
at the previously agreed-upon 
payment amount for up to 90 days 
after the date the patient was notiﬁed 
of the change in the provider ’s 
network status. 
0 Continue to adhere to all policies, 
procedures, and quality standards 
imposed by the plan or issuer for such 
items or services as if the contract 
were still in place. None.
7
Requirement: Implement measures to improve the accuracy of provider directories 
Requirement Details Exceptions to Requirement 
0 Any health care provider or health care 
facility that has or has had a contractual 
relationship with a plan or issuer to 
provide items or services under the 
coverage must submit provider directory 
information to the plan or issuer, ata 
minimum: 
0 At the beginning of the network 
agreement with the plan or issuer, 
0 At the time of termination of the 
network agreement with the plan or 
issuer, 
I When there are material changes to the 
content of the provider directory 
information of the provider or facility, 
0 Upon request by the plan or issuer, and 
0 At any other time determined 
appropriate by the provider, facility, or 
HHS 
0 Any health care provider or health care 
facility that has or has hada 
contractual relationship with a plan or 
issuer to provide items or services 
under the plan or insurance coverage 
must: 
¢ Reimburse participants, 
beneﬁciaries, or enrollees who in 
reliance on an incorrect provider 
directory, paid a provider bill in 
excess of the in-network cost- 
sharing amount. Reimbursement 
must be for the full amount paid in 
excess of the in-network cost- 
sharing amount, plus interest. None.
3 Do No Surprises protections apply to patients in all types of insurance?_ 
0 Generally, the No Surprises protections apply to individuals enrolled in a health care 
plan, through an employer (Whether self-funded or insured, including coverage offered by 
federal, state, or local governments, or a multiemployer plan), or through the federal 
Marketplaces, state-based Marketplaces, or directly through an individual market health 
insurance issuer. 
0 The rules don’t apply to people with coverage through programs like Medicare, 
Medicaid, Indian Health Services, Veterans Affairs Health Care, or TRICARE. Each of 
these programs already has other protections against surprise medical bills. The 
protections also don’t apply to individuals enrolled in short-term limited duration 
insurance, excepted benefits (such as stand-alone dental or vision-only coverage), or 
retiree-only plans. 
0 Uninsured and self-pay individuals are also entitled to a good faith estimate, upon request 
or scheduling of an item or service, through the No Surprises billing protections. 
Where can I send questions I have about these new provider and facility requirements? 
You can send any questions about the provider requirements to 
providerWenforcement@cms. hhsgov. 
What types of providers do the No Surprises requirements apply to? 
When assessing whether a No Surprises requirement applies to a particular provider, it is 
important to look at how the provider practices, rather than the provider ’s specialty type, license, 
or certiﬁcation. The rules apply broadly to any physician or other health care provider who is 
acting within the scope of practice of that provider ’s license or certiﬁcation under applicable 
"state law. However, some providers may not practice in a setting or manner that triggers certain 
requirements. For example, a provider who never furnishes services in connection with a visit to 
a health care facility or emergency facility wouldn’t furnish items or services that fall within the 
balance billing protections. However, that same provider would, for example, need to provide a 
good faith estimate of expected charges to uninsured or self-pay individuals, when applicable, 
and comply with the continuity of care and provider directory requirements. 
Providers and facilities are generally required to provide participants, beneﬁciaries, and 
enrollees with a written disclosure about their balance billing protections. Does the patient 
need to sign an acknowledgement that the patient has received the new disclosure notice 
regarding patient protections against surprise billing disclosure? 
No. Under the No Surprises Act, health care providers and facilities must make publicly 
available, post on a public website of the provider or facility (if applicable), and provide a one- 
page notice that includes information in clear and understandable language regarding patient 
protections against surprise billing. Patients don’t need to sign to acknowledge that they have 
received the disclosure notice regarding patient protections against surprise billing. Review and 
download the model disclosure notice for patient protections against surprise billing, which 
providers and_facilities may use. 
Note, providers and facilities may also provide patients with a notice and consent form if they are 
asking the patient to waive their balance billing protections. This is a different notice, and 
different requirements apply to the use of this notice.
The No Surprises rules allow patients to give consent to waive surprise billing protections in 
certain circumstances. Is a patient required to sign the notice and consent form in order to 
waive their protections? 
Under the N0 Surprises Act, if a provider or facility plans to balance bill a patient in 
circumstances in which that would otherwise be prohibited, the out-of-network provider or an 
out-of-network emergency facility must provide the patient (or an authorized representative) with 
a notice detailing the patient’s protections and providing information about the potential costs if 
the patient waives their surprise billing protections. 
A patient (or an authorized representative) isn’t required to, nor should the patient (or their 
authorized representative), sign the consent form unless the patient is willing to waive these 
protections and understands or agrees they will be paying out of pocket for balance bills on out- 
of-network services. However, the patient’s (or an authorized representative ’s) signature 
(physically or digitally) on the consent form is necessary for a waiver of the balance billing 
protections to be effective. The standard notice and consent forms, which providers and facilities 
must use in instances where the provider or facility seeks to balance bill the patient, must be 
provided in accordance with the regulations and guidance issued by HHS. Providers and 
facilities must retain signed documents for at least 7 years.V 
Note that notice and consent is only allowed for post-stabilization services, if certain conditions 
are met, and for certain non-emergency services. For non-emergency care (not post-stabilization 
services) provided by out-of-network providers related to a visit to an in-network facility, 
surprise billing prohibitions always apply to ancillary services including diagnostic services like 
radiology and laboratory services, anesthesiology, pathology, and neonatology, regardless of 
whether provided by a physician or nonphysician practitioner, and a patient is not permitted to 
waive surprise billing protections for these services. Thus, in surprise billing situations, providers 
are not allowed to seek notice and consent for these services. 
When using the standard notice and consent Documents, can a provider or facility 
complete the form by listing a physician or provider group instead of an individual 
physician or provider ’s name? For example, could the form list XYZ Physician Group if 
the individual scheduling the visit doesn’t know who will see the patient on the day of the 
visit? 
The notice and consent form must explicitly identify the individual provider who is expected to 
provide a given service; listing a provider group is not permitted. 
If a patient is having elective services (that is, non-emergency services) and the facility is 
out-of-network, may the facility, or the provider balance bill the patient? 
The federal balance billing prohibitions don’t apply to non-emergency services provided by out- 
of-network providers during patient visits to out-of-network facilities. In this setting, the provider 
does not need to obtain the patient’s consent to bill them directly, or balance bill them. 
. How many types of fees are there for the Federal Independent Dispute Resolution (IDR) 
process?' 
There are 2 fees for independent dispute resolution: 
1. The administrative fee for use of the process 
2. The certified IDR entity fee, which is payment for review
10
What is the IDR administrative fee? How much is it? 
¢ Each party is required to pay an administrative fee per single or batched determination. The 
administrative fee is intended to cover the cost to the Federal government of the Federal 
IDR Process. For calendar year 2022, the administrative fee due from each party (i.e., the 
provider or facility, and the insurance company or plan) for participating in the Federal IDR 
process is $50. 
What is the certiﬁed IDR entity fee? 
Each party (i.e., the provider or facility and the insurance company or plan) must pay the entire 
certiﬁed IDR entity fee. The certified IDR entity fees are due when each party submits their 
offer. Following the payment determination, generally, the certiﬁed IDR entity fee paid by the 
prevailing party will be refunded to that party; in some cases, the refund of the fee may be split. 
For more information, See https:/'/WWW.ornagov/(lT €'ITll ,_Q/Resourecs/Regulations-arid- 
Qt:igginor:/Downloards/Toelznical-(Euidzmcc-CY2022~Fcc-Guidance~Fc~cicral-lndependcnb 
_{}_jsm1te-Resolution ﬁrocess-NS./\.pdf. 
How much is the certiﬁed IDR entity fee? 
Single Determination 
For calendar year 2022, certified IDR entities must charge a ﬁxed certiﬁed IDR entity fee for 
single determinations within the range of $200-$500, unless the certiﬁed IDR entity has received 
approval from the Departments to charge a fee outside that range. 
Batched DeterminationF 
A batched determination involves multiple qualiﬁed IDR items or services that are considered 
jointly as part of one payment determination by a certiﬁed IDR entity for purposes of the Federal 
IDR process. The administrative fees will not be refunded, even if the parties reach an agreement 
before the certified IDR entity makes a determination. If a certiﬁed IDR entity chooses to charge 
a different ﬁxed certiﬁed IDR entity fee for batched detenninations, for calendar year 2022, that 
fee must be within the range of $268-$670, unless the certiﬁed IDR entity has received approval 
from the Departments to charge a fee outside that range.i 
I am a provider or facility and have questions about the IDR Administrative Fee and/or the 
Certiﬁed IDR Entity Fees that will be charged. 
For further questions about the Federal IDR process or fee guidance, please contact us at 
iiQ_{ji _%3l'Etli E)ROucstiorrs(Z_1Licms.hhsgov.' 
This communication was printed, published, or produced and disseminated at U.S taxpayer 
expense. The information provided in this guidance is intended only to be a general informal 
summary of technical legal standards. It is not intended to take the place of the statutes, 
regulations, orformal policy guidance upon which it is based. This guidance summarizes current 
policy and operations as of the date it was presented. We encourage readers to refer to the 
applicable statutes, regulations, and other interpretive materials for complete and current 
information.-
11
Disclaimer (example) 
This Good Faith Estimate shows the costs of items and services that are reasonably 
expected for your health care needs for an item or service. The estimate is based on 
information known at the time the estimate was created. 
The Good Faith Estimate does not include any unknown or unexpected costs that 
may arise during treatment. You could be charged more if complications or special 
circumstances occur. If this happens, federal law allows you to dispute (appeal) the 
bill.T 
If you are billed for more than this Good Faith Estimate, you have the right to 
dispute the bill.‘ 
You may contact the health care provider or facility listed to let them know the 
billed charges are higher than the Good Faith Estimate. You can ask them to 
update the bill to match the Good Faith Estimate, ask to negotiate the bill, or ask if 
there is ﬁnancial assistance available. 
You may also start a dispute resolution process with the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS). If you choose to use the dispute resolution process, 
you must start the dispute process within 120 calendar days (about 4 months) of 
the date on the original bill.A 
There is a $25 fee to use the dispute process. If the agency reviewing your dispute 
agrees with you, you will have to pay the price on this Good Faith Estimate. If the 
agency disagrees with you and agrees with the health care provider or facility, you 
will have to pay the higher amount. 
To leam more and get a form to start the process, go to 
ijgttivs1/fwww.cms.g_ov/nosurprises/con:;ume1's or call 1-800-985-3059. 
For questions or more information about your right to a Good Faith Estimate or 
the dispute process, visit https://i.ww.>v.cinsgovfnosurprises./ ‘consumers or call 1- 
800-985-3059. 
Keep a copy of this Good Faith Estimate in a safe place or take pictures of it. You 
may need it if you are billed a higher amount.
11
