1 ,. 
V APTA 
Maine A Chapter of the American " Physical Therapy Association 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 1105, An Act to Ensure Lower Costs and 
Consumer Protections for Patients by Prohibiting Certain Billing Practices 
HCIFS Committee, April 24, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HClFS Committee: 
My name is Gwen Simons. l am the lobbyist for the Maine Chapter of the American Physical 
Therapy Association (”MEAPTA"). l am a physical therapist myself and a healthcare lawyer in 
Scarborough. The Maine APTA represents over 2500 physical therapists (PTs) and physical 
therapist assistants (PTAs) in Maine. 
I am testifying for the PTs in private practice today. Private practitioners are neither for nor 
against LD 1105. They are not opposed to offering their cash price to patients who choose not 
to use their health insurance. However, we have some questions about the intent of the bill 
and some provider-carrier network contract concerns. 
Patients sometimes think they can pay the cash price and submit a claim to their insurer so 
their payment will be counted toward their deductible. lt is our understanding that carriers 
currently do not allow such out of pocket payments to go to the patient's deductible even if the 
patient would have had to pay a higher out of pocket amount if the claim were submitted to 
their health insurer. This is a barrier to patients choosing to pay lower cash options. lf the 
intent of LD 1105 is to allow and encourage patients to choose lower cost cash payment 
options, perhaps a provision could be added to allow the cash payment to go toward the 
patient's deductible. 
We are also concerned that LD 1105 sets up conditions for whether the provider is protected 
when the patient chooses the cash option. Providers need assurances that they won't be 
putting their network agreements at risk if they allow patients to pay privately for any or no 
reason. 
Thank you for your consideration. I can be reached at gwen@simonsassocjates|aw.com or 
207.883.7225 if there are any questions.
