MHA Maine Hospital Association 
MAlNE'S LEADING 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
COMMENTS OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
Neither For Nor Against 
L.D. 1105 - An Act to Ensure Lower Costs and Consumer Protections for Patients by 
Prohibiting Certain Billing Practices 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Heath Care, Insurance and Financial 
Services Committee, my name is Jeffrey Austin and I am here on behalf of the Maine Hospital 
Association to testify neither for nor against LD 1105. 
We don’t object to the concept of the bill, but the drafting might take some work. 
Here are some of our draﬁing issues: 
1. Line 6: “the manner in which the patient intends to pay”. 
The caption says “method” and we prefer that tenn and would appreciate some clariﬁcation. 
A health care provider or a health care practitioner may not deny health care services or 
treatment or refuse to continue to provide health care services or treatment based on the manner 
method in which the patient intends to pavfor that health care service or treatment. 
For pigposes of this section, the method oﬁpavment must be widelv accepted in commerce, such 
as cash or credit card, and does not include the timing of the pavment. If there is a problem with 
the method oﬁoavment that was accepted bv the provider or practitioner, the provider or 
practitioner mav submit a claim for the service to anv insurance carrier available to the person. 
2. Lines 12-13: Definition of “cash price” 
The bill deﬁnes cash price as“ . . .the charge that applies to a patient who is pavingfor a service 
withoutﬁling any insurance claim.” 
The problem here is that there are three such prices that ﬁt this deﬁnition.
i. Free Care — Under Maine law, hospitals must provide free care to some individuals based 
upon their income. 
ii. Amounts Generally Billed (AGB) — Under Federal law, hospitals must have ﬁnancial 
assistance policies (FAPs) and those FAPs must limit charges to individuals eligible under the FAP 
to no more than the amount generally billed (AGB). The AGB is essentially the average 
commercial insurance amount. This essentially outlawed billing low-income, uninsured 
individuals the “chargemaster ” rate. 
iii. Discounted Cash Price (DCP) — I think this is what you want for this bill. Hospitals don’t 
have to have discounted cash prices, but many do. The federal transparency rule we spoke of 
earlier requires hospitals to post the DCP along with other prices. We believe the language in the 
bill should be stricken and replaced with:
“ . . .the ‘discounted cash price ’ as that term is deﬁned in 45 CFR section 180.20 ifthe hospital 
has a discounted cash price and does not mean the amount charged to individuals who are eligible 
_forﬁ'ee care or are eligiblefor the amounts charged pursuant to a hospital ﬁnancial assistance 
policy.” 
I know it is unusual to say what terms do not mean in law, but given the many different cash prices 
we think it is necessary. 
3. Lines 8 -11: Trigger for When Providers Offer the Cash Price 
2. Disclosure of cash price. A health care provider or health care practitioner shall disclose 
the cash price when the patient's cash price is less than the patient's cost sharing under the 
patient's health insurance.” 
This is too complicated a fonnula for when providers must give the discounted cash price toa 
patient. Providers don’t know when the patient’s cash price is less than their cost sharing. Also, 
as drafted, we would have to provide the cash price automatically, whether the patient wants the 
information or not. 
I really think this language is about when an insured person should be able to take advantage of 
the law, not when providers should disclose the information. 
We would simplify this to say that the discounted cash price shall be provided “upon reguegt” to 
commercially insured individuals. t 
This also has the beneﬁt of allowing us to direct individuals to the materials we are now posting 
to comply with the federal transparency law. 
1 Page2|2 
THEMHA. ORG {(207) 622-4794 [33 FULLER ROAD IAUGUSTA, ME 04330
