‘ll l 
y ml HEALTHCARE 
F» PURCHASER vi ALUANCE OF MAINE 
Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
In Support of 
LD 1105, An Act to Ensure Lower Costs and Consumer Protections for Patients by Prohibiting Certain 
Billing Practices 
April 24, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. . 
My name is Peter Hayes. l’m the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine, and I'm 
here today to testify in support of LD 1105. The HPA is a nonprofit that represents the purchasers of 
healthcare in Maine. Our mission is to advance healthcare value and to support and incentivize high- 
quality, affordable care. We have over 60 members, including some of the largest public and private 
employers and health trusts in Maine. Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually 
providing health care for nearly one quarter of the commercially insured population in the state. 
As price information becomes increasingly available in the healthcare sector, we are seeing instances where 
the cash price for a service is sometimes less than the amount that a patient would have to pay under their 
health plan——particularly for patients with high deductible plans who are responsible for covering 100 
percent oftheir healthcare costs until they hit their deductible. ln fact, a study published this month in 
Health Affairs found that ”cash prices were lower than the median commercial negotiated rates in 47 
percent of instances. “ 
In order to ensure that patients have access to the lowest prices available, we support the provisions in LD 
1105 which would require providers to disclose the cash price of a service to the patient and allow the 
patient to pay that cash price if they so choose—even if they have insurance. Unfortunately, absent these 
proposed protections, the cash price is not always disclosed to patients, and even if that price is shared, 
insured patients are sometimes not allowed to pay that lower price. 
1 
Yang Wang, Mark Katz Meiselbach, John S. Cox, Gerard F. Anderson, and Ge Bai, "The Relationships Among Cash Prices, Negotiated 
Rates, and Chargemaster Prices For Shoppable Hospital Services, ” Health Affairs, April 2023. Available at: 
httos://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/abs/10.1377/hlthaff.2022.00977?iournalCode=hlthaff&iournalCode=hlthaff. 
H lllll iiil,,1'.;<:?l\:illl:%iiiC&*.OFg 366 US Route 1, Suite 3, Falmouth, Maine 04105 phone: 207.844.8106
5, HEALTHCARE 
pg PURCHASER 
Ht ALUANCE OF MAINE 
Today, Mainers have the highest average individual deductible in the entire country, and the fourth highest 
average family deductible? Many Mainers on high deductible plans will never hit their deductible, and until 
they do, they will have to cover all of their healthcare costs out of pocket. When the cash price for services 
is below the rate negotiated by their health plan, why wouldn't we want them to be able to pay that lower 
price? Healthcare prices are high enough, let’s not force patients to pay a higher price in those instance 
where a more affordable cash price is available. 
The Legislature enacted similar legislation a few years ago regarding pharmacy pricing. And today, when 
patients reach the pharmacy counter, they are able to ask for and pay the cash price, which is often less 
than what they would pay under their plan. And that isn't just the case for patients who haven't hit their 
deductible; sometimes the cash price is less than member's copay! Since enactment, that change has 
enabled Mainers across the state to save considerable amounts on prescriptions. We would urge the 
committee to put the same policy in place for medical services. 
Our understanding is that payments made under this new authority would not be applied to a patient's 
deductible or out-of-pocket maximum. To that end, we would urge the committee to add a notification 
provision to LD 1105 that would require the billing provider to notify the patient prior to payment that cash 
payments would not apply to either their deductible or out-of-pocket maximum. it would then be up to the 
patient to decide whether they want to take advantage of-a lower cash price. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share HPA’s feedback on LD 1105 and thank you to Representative Morris 
for bringing this important reform before the committee. We believe it will help lower costs for many 
Mainers struggling to afford care, particularly those with high deductible plans who are responsible for 
covering all of their healthcare costs until they hit those highest-in-the-nation deductibles. l'd be happy to 
answer any questions and will be available for the work session. 
2l<aiser Family Foundation, Average Annual Deductible per Enrolled Employee in Employer-Based Health Insurance for Single and 
Family Coverage, 2021. Available at: https://www.l<ff.0rg/other/state-indicator/average~annual-deductib|e-per-enrollecl-employee 
in~emplover-based-health-insurance-for —single—and-familxt 
coverage/?currentTimeframe=0&sortl\/lodel=%7B%22colld%22:%22Average%2OSingle%2ODeductible%22,%22sort%22:%22desc%2 
2%7D. 
\ 1 rill:tlll,l ‘l<§§i.!lli¢ili1< ..¢‘f.Oi§ 366 US Route 1, Suite 3, Falmouth, Maine 04105 phone: 207.844.8106
