Richard Livingston
Bremen
LD 1917
Chairman Calazzo, Ranking Member Farrin, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs:
A bedrock principal of representative democracy is that of majority rule.  Many 
contests that do not achieve a majority on election day are forced into runoff elections
days or weeks after election day, when it is more difficult for citizens to participate; 
early voting, absentee voting, extended polling hours are often not available in 
runoffs, which also are burdened by extra logistical challenges and un-budgeted 
expense.  When the runoff model incoporates eliminating all but the top two 
vote-getters from the ballot, the preferences of those who chose those candidates in 
the first round are discarded as well.
Yet where majorities are required to certify election results, few, there is little, if any, 
opposition to the runoff process.  How fortunate are we in Maine to be among the 
nation's leaders in having at a least limited opportunity to resolve majority shortfalls 
by the use of ranked-choice voting.  The technique has proven its utility on a number 
of occasions.  It is not, as was feared by some originally, difficult for voters to 
understand, nor has it been burdensome to tabulate.  The majority of voters who have 
participated in ranked choice decisions have fully accepted the outcomes.  
The ranked choice model has also encouraged more people to come forward and stand
for election, facilitated a wider and more robust discussion of issues and principles, 
and led to decisions in which a larger percentage of the total electorate has 
participated than would have been the case with a runoff.  And decisions are certified 
days, weeks or even months sooner than they might have been had runoff elections 
been required.
What's not to like?  While there has been some organized opposition to the process 
since it was first proposed, once concerns about possible complexity were disproven 
I've failed to understand any potential downside.  Ranked choice voting provides 
Mainers with the ability to reach majority decisions quickly, inexpensively, decisively
and in a manner which respects the rights, preferences and choice of all voters.  My 
preference is that the technique be expanded to every possible contest both in Maine 
and, as Maine goes, so goes the nation.
Thank you for your consideration
