Ann Sweeney
Hope for Homeless
LD 1909
May 12, 2023
Senator Stacy Brenner
Representative Lori Gramlich
Members of the Joint Standing Environment and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE:  Support of LD 1909: “An Act to Modernize Maine's Beverage Container 
Redemption Law”
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources my name is Ann 
Sweeney and I serve as the President of Hope for Homeless based in Bangor.
Hope for Homeless is a 501 (c)(3) founded in June 2020 by my husband and me with 
the purpose of serving unmet needs of our homeless neighbors.  Our mission is to 
improve the lives of those experiencing homelessness by filling resource gaps and 
bolstering existing efforts.  We began by distributing supplies and gift cards around 
the holidays to people in need.  Since that time, because of the generosity of other 
individuals and businesses, the organization has grown substantially.
Local homeless shelters do the best that they can with the resources they have to 
provide safe, stable housing for those in need.  It is the extra stuff, like new coats, 
socks, or snacks, they sometimes have difficulty providing.  Through the Hope for 
Homeless Facebook page, I can reach out to followers with specific requests, and, 
because of the generosity of our communities, the need is almost always met.  For 
example, when the warming shelter opened in Bangor, there were concerns about 
having enough coffee.  I was able to utilize the Hope for Homeless network to 
organize an effort ensuring there was enough coffee, creamer, and sugar for everyone.
Homelessness could befall anyone, so it is important those in need are treated with 
dignity and respect.  When we assist those most vulnerable and help them to succeed, 
the entire community benefits.      
Besides direct donation of goods, many people donate financially to Hope for 
Homeless, and others utilize the CLYNK to Give Partners program.  Every month 
Hope for Homeless receives a check from CLYNK so long as the account has a 
balance of at least $50.00.  So far, through the CLYNK program, Hope for Homeless 
has raised over $15,000.  That money has been invaluable to our efforts, during the 
last two years the funding from CLYNK went 100% to a homeless warming center in 
Bangor. 
This is why I support LD 1909.  CLYNK has been a tremendous resource in our 
efforts to help the homeless here in Maine.  LD 1909 will recognize their unique 
redemption system and allow them to continue to operate successfully, thereby 
helping my organization continue to grow.
Thank you for your time, I urge you to pass LD 1909.  

