 
616 Main Street, Gorham, ME 04038 | www.sebagobrewing.com | 207-856-2537 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the joint standing 
committee of Environment and Natural Resources, 
I am sending this testimony in favor of LD 1910 and strongly oppose LD 1909.  We are still calculating 
the impact of recent passage the legislature enacted and the Governor signed LD 134 “An Act to 
Increase the Handling Fee for Beverage Containers Reimbursed to Dealers and Redemption Centers.” 
This adds an additional $.01 to every can we sell.  Currently that is 3,600,000 cans we typically use 
which is now increasing to $36,000 or $396,000.  This isn’t a line item that we charge, it is part of the 
laid in cost to our distributors.  It comes out of the margin of our beer that we sell.  This differs from 
the $.05 deposit that retailers charge consumers and get back at redemption.  We essentially pay the 
wholesalers for picking up the bottles and cans.  We are willing to help maintain the bottle and 
redemption system but we cannot bare the burden of the costs and we need to reform the system to 
be fair for everyone while being as efficient as possible.  The emergency passage of LD 134 forced 
legislators to pick the winners of this problem and this time they picked the redemption centers of 
which there are too many. 
Increased handling fees have exponential effects on beer prices. Unlike the 5 cent container deposit 
which is passed through as exactly 5 cents at each level of the transaction, the handling fee has to be 
baked into the pricing model and distributors and retailers expect to receive their respective margin of 
28% to 32% on the increased cost of  handling the product. Accordingly, the 36 cents a case increase 
that has already been signed into law will result in a 50 cents to $1 per four pack increase in the shelf 
price for my beers. A $1 increase in a 4 pack of beer is a tremendous increase. It will lead to reduced 
sales and smaller profit margins for small businesses already operating on fragile margins. Imposing an 
additional handling fee increase (on top of the one just passed) is simply unsustainable and unfair. It 
will lead to catastrophic cost increases on the shelf that will reduce Maine craft beer sales. 
Additionally, clawing back unclaimed deposits will lead to exponentially higher costs to the system. 
Unclaimed deposits go to distributors who use this money to offset the costs associated with pick up 
and transportation of redeemable containers that they are responsible for. This use of unclaimed 
deposits is part of the fundamental economics of the program and has been for two decades. 
Distributors and craft brewers alike rely on it in our pricing models. Without that money – the system 
collapses or the money comes again from brewers and consumers. 
LD 1909 also proposes an automatic cost of living increase to the handling fee. That concept – 
considered and rejected in LD 134 – is deeply unfair. Additionally, it disincentivizes all parties from 
engaging in discussions around structural reform. Heaping on additional costs year after year creates 
an unpredictable and precarious business model for my brewery.  
Maine breweries and distributors are very much in favor of improving the redemption process and 
reducing the amount of sorts needed. We have been advocating for years that the current system is 
broken. LD 1910 provides a smart reform model that we believe would make important and impactful 
changes to the system. Reforms to the system are critical to its long term survival – we cannot simply 
rely on raising the handling fee and put off desperately needed restructuring. 
The financial impact of LD 1909 severely threatens Maine breweries. LD 1910 provides a reform 
framework that will provide real modernization of the system. I urge you to reject LD 1909 and the 
additional financial burdens on the beverage redemption system, and ask you to support LD 1910. 
Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely, 
Kai Adams 
Sebago Brewing Co 
616 Main Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
 
 
 
