 
 
 
May 12, 2023  
Senator Stacy Brenner  
Representative Lori Gramlich  
Members of the Joint Standing Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: Support  of LD 1909 : “An Act to Modernize Maine's Beverage Container Redemption Law ” 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources my name  is Lori Voornas  and starting  
Monday,  May  15th I will be cohosting  a morning  show  with  my long -time  radio  partner  Jeff 
Parsons  on WHOM .  For over  20 years  I hosted  a morning  show  on the Q 97.9  where  the Cans  
for a Cure  fund  raiser  became  near  and dear  to my heart.   
Last year,  Cans  for a Cure  celebrated  its 20th year, something  I am extremely  proud  of.  All the 
money raised goes to the  Maine Cancer Foundation . They are dedicated to reducing cancer 
incidence and mortality rates in Main e by leading a statewide endeavor to foster and grow the 
most promising and effective cancer -fighting efforts available.   Here in Maine our cancer rates 
are higher than the national average with  approximately 8,600 newly diagnosed cancer patients 
each year.  
In the past twenty years , Cans for a Cure has raised over half a million dollars  for the Maine 
Cancer Foundation . Each year more and more people become involved  and join our cause.  By 
partnering with local businesses, like Oxford Casino, holding the ann ual bottle drive , and 
accepting monetary donations  our fundraising goal has increased dramatically since we began.  
One relatively new funding source has been CLYNK donations.  CLYNK offers a program called 
“CLYNK to Give” which allows customers to directly  donate their bottle money to Cans for a 
Cure.  Since becoming a partner, Cans for a Cure has raised $103,511.95 ! The ability to donate 
cans and bottles year -round , and not have to wait for the yearly bottle drive has clearly 
contributed significantly to our fundraising efforts.  Without CLYNK, there is NO Cans for a Cure.  
LD 1909 will add helpful definitions into Maine law  that recognize CLYNK’s unique recycling 
system . I urge you to support this legislation so this Maine -based business can continue to assist 

 
the fundraising efforts of Cans for a Cure and the countless other causes that receive donations 
through their easy -to-use program.  
Thank you for your time and service to the State of Maine.  
     
 
