0 
5.15.23 
Chair: Senator Brenner 
Chair: Representative Gramlich 
Members: Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
RE: LD 1909 & LD 1910 
My name is Peter Welch, and I am the manager/owner of Gaia, LLC; 
d/b/a Forest Avenue Redemption Center at 897 Forest Avenue in 
Portland, ME. I have been engaged with the Maine Bottle Bill for 43 
years since I established our original redemption center at RSVP 
Discount Beverage in 1981. We sold our beverage business to our 
management in 2004. Additionally, I owned a redemption center and 
Discount Beverage in Westbrook for many years. During that time, I also 
operated two Maine State Liquor Agency stores under BABLO on behalf 
of the State. 
Currently, I am an employer and business owner and taxpayer in 
Portland. I employ 3 staff. We operate 7 days a week. We have from 1 to 
3 staff working at any 1 time. Most usually we have 1-2 staff and 
commonly we have 2 staff on duty. 
I supported LD 1909 an Act to Modernize & Evolve Maine's Bottle bill! 
We support reducing the sorts and removing bag fees. We support 
providing assistance to utilize technology like the Tomra RVM's. We 
support consolidating and commingling the “Tomra" manual empties. 
While they are only about 15% to 20% of the total volume, they make 
up the VAST majority of sorts. Streamline sorts have beneﬁts for both 
redemption and distributors. Also, eliminating boxes will save 
distributors greathg
0 
The key and challenging issue here is "HOW TO GET AN ACCURATE 
AND FAIR COUNT FOR" EVERYONE! 
I do not support LD 1910 which seeks to bring Maine backwards intoa 
model like Oregon's which is a distributor CONTROLLED and operated 
system. Just in the last 4 years or so Oregon was forced to double the 
deposit on containers TO THE PUBLIC, as the system was sinking: 
Coincidentally, that "DOUBLED OVERNIGHT THE AMOUNT OF ESCHEAT 
THE DISTRIBUTOR RUN SYSTEM HAD IN THEIR POCKET!" 
So much so that I saw an article that the Oregon AG was looking at the 
large amount of funds. 
Oregon return rates were dropping_precipitously, to the point, asI 
recall that glass had shrunk to under 60%, or near that number. Also, 
the bill is nowhere as comprehensive as Maine's Bottle bill. Oregon 
has also had to resort to signiﬁcant ﬁnes to get participation. 
Oregon does not include wine or spirits. Therefore, it does not include 
all that glass which we all want out of the waste stream and should be 
a priorityllll 
Oregon does not include anything over 3 liters like the big_gal|on jugg 
Maine includes. 
Oregon has 3x the population of Maine, but its redemption system 
only has roughly 2x the amount of containers reported as sold. Oregon 
gystem has roughly 2.5 billion containers and Maine roughly 1.17 
billion. Oregon recentlygot it is overall return rate close to 80% which
‘ I 
is where Maine's rate has fallen to. The annual Escheat in Oregon is 
now up to 50 million dollars per year. 
Oregon has many many retailers taking back empties along with a bag 
drop program like Clynk and a small amount, but growing amount of 
redemption centers set up by the distributors. The retailers ina 
complicated system take back anywhere from 24 containers per 
customer to a few hundred as I recall. Roughly 50% of Oregon's 
empties come thru retail. 
Maine several years ago at the request of retailers and lOD’s and the 
beverage industry focused on a Redemption Center system along with 
only the largest retailers of over 5000 square feet. This was to 
streamline the pickup system for lOD's as well as getting empties out 
of small mom & Pops and convenience stores and pharmacies etc. 
The beverage industry would have you believe that redemption 
centers are overpaid and inefficient and not well run. 
For clarity sake- there is nothing in Maine's bottle bill that prohibits 
beverage distributors from getting into the redemption business, in 
the past, today or tomorrow! 
The beverage industry contends that RC's efﬁciency need to be 
studied. I would contend that the Beverage industry should be looked 
at simultaneously if we are going down that route. The consolidation 
and franchise exclusivity that has evolved in the Maine marketplace 
contributes to a complete lack of competition in the market and the 
accompanying higher prices.
