 
 
        
 
 
 
  
1 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
May 8, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Chair  
Representative Gramlich, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Maine Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
RE:  Testimony in Support of LD 1909 – An act to Modernize Maine’s Beverage  
Container Redemption Law.  
 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Joint 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 1909, An Act to 
Modernize Maine’s Beverage Container Redemption Law. Just Zero supports this 
bill.  
 
Just Zero is a national environmental non-profit advocacy organization that works 
alongside communities, policy makers, scientists, educators, organizers, and 
others to implement just and equitable solutions to climate-damaging and toxic 
production, consumption, and waste disposal practices. We believe that all people 
deserve Zero Waste solutions with zero climate-damaging emissions and zero 
toxic exposures.  
 
Maine’s Beverage Container Redemption Law – more commonly known as the 
“Bottle Bill” – has been a critical part of the state’s recycling system for almost five 
decades. The program has consistently produced recycling rates of 70% or 
greater for included beverage containers, even when national recycling rates have 
plummeted. As a result, the program has reduced pressure on landfills, increased 
participation in recycling efforts, and significantly reduced the amount of bottle 
littering Maine’s beaches, rivers, lakes, parks, and communities.  
 
While Maine’s Bottle Bill program has been incredibly successful, it needs several 
long-overdue improvements that will make the program more efficient and 
effective. LD 1909 will modernize key aspects of the Bottle Bill in a way that sets 
the program up for continued success without the need for constant legislative 
intervention.  
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
  
2 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
I. A Dynamic and Just Handling Fee 
 
First, LD 1909 will establish a dynamic handling fee by tying the fee to the 
Consumer Price Index. This automatic increase will protect Maine’s redemption 
service providers from rising costs, like rent, electric, heat, and labor, that 
currently undermine their ability to remain economically viable. The handling fee is 
the only method of compensation for redemption centers. A static, statutorily set 
handling fee significantly threatens the sustainability of these small businesses 
that provide essential services to communities across the state and safeguard the 
success of the Bottle Bill system. Tying the handling fee to the Consumer Price 
Index will ensure redemption service providers are fairly compensated for the 
good work they provide.   
 
II. Continued Investment into Maine’s Most Successful Recycling Program 
 
Second, the bill will ensure continued investment into Maine’s Bottle Bill program 
by requiring the unclaimed deposits be used to maintain and improve the 
program. The bill establishes clear requirements for how the unclaimed deposits 
shall be used to benefit and improve the program.  
 
While Just Zero supports the decision to utilize the unclaimed deposits to support 
and improve the Bottle Bill, unrestricted payment of unclaimed deposits to the 
Commingling Cooperative creates an incentive for the newly created Commingling 
Cooperative to work to keep the redemption rate low. A low redemption rate will 
increase the amount of unclaimed deposits and therefore allow the Commingling 
Cooperative to profit from a poorly performing system. Given that the bill 
specifically allows the Commingling Cooperative to utilize a portion of the 
unclaimed deposits to offset any future increase in the handling fee, this concern 
is both real and significant.  
 
Therefore, Just Zero urges the committee to consider amendments to LD 1909 
that will remove this incentive. Instead, the bill should divide the unclaimed 
deposits between the Commingling Cooperative and the Department. The portion 
given to the Department should be earmarked to fund efforts that aim to increase 
the redemption rate, such as providing additional points of redemption across the 
state. Most importantly, the bill should also set a minimum redemption rate of 
85%.  The Commingling Cooperative should only receive a portion of the 
unclaimed deposits in the years in which the minimum redemption rate is 
achieved.  
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
  
3 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
III. Creating a Pathway to Reusable and Refillable Beverage Containers. 
 
LD 1909 will also create a pathway to reusable and refillable beverage containers. 
Bottle Bill programs can and should be focused on more than recycling. These 
programs create both the infrastructure and consumer culture needed to develop 
strong reusable beverage systems.  
 
In fact, before the introduction of one-way disposable containers, beverage 
companies relied on consumers to return bottles to be refilled. To incentivize 
refilling, beverage companies utilized deposit-return programs to ensure that 
glass containers were brought back and refilled. LD 1909 will help calibrate 
Maine’s Bottle Bill program to reintegrate this approach.  
 
The bill calls for the Commingling Cooperative to utilize a portion of the unclaimed 
deposits to support activities to increase the use of reusable and refillable 
beverage containers. This includes performing research, developing pilot projects, 
and purchasing necessary materials such as bottle washing equipment. This 
approach will help reduce beverage container waste in Maine.  
 
Oregon has already begun integrating reuse into its Bottle Bill program. In 2018, 
Oregon launched a statewide refillable bottle program.1 The system utilizes 
approximately 245,000 refillable beer and wine bottles.2 Each bottle can be 
refilled about 40 times and are made primarily from recycled glass.3 The program 
functions identical to how all other non-refillable containers are processed 
through the Bottle Bill program. The refillable bottles are designed and labeled to 
be easily separated from the rest of the glass collected through the state’s Bottle 
Bill program. When a customer returns the refillable bottles to their local point of 
redemption, the containers are separated out and sent to a cleaning facility. From 
there they are sent back to participating breweries and wineries where they are 
refilled and placed back into circulation. For consumers, nothing has changed. 
Since launching in 2018, 617,805 bottles have been diverted from recycling for 
reuse.4 Currently 95 beer, cider, and wine brands are available through the reuse 
system.5 
 
 
1  Jared Pablen, Oregon Group to Launch Refillable Bottle Program , Resource Recycling. (Feb. 7, 2017). 
2 Id.  
3 Cassandra Profita, Oregon Launches First Statewide Refillable Bottle System in U.S. , NPR, (Sept. 17, 2018) 
4 Oregon Redemption Center, Bottle Drop – Refillable Bottles .  
5 Id.  
 
 
        
 
 
 
  
4 
ADVANCING  COMMUNITY -CENTERED  ZERO WASTE SOLUTIONS  
While Oregon’s program has been successful, it is limited due to the lack of 
consistent investment and has not continued to expand past its initial launch. 
LD 1909 will provide a steady stream funding to help develop and expand 
reusable beverage containers. Thereby ensuring that Maine becomes a 
national leader in beverage container reuse.  
 
IV. The Legislature Should Support LD 1909 
 
In many ways, LD 1909 is thoughtfully borrowing the best elements of Bottle Bill 
programs from across both the country and the world to uniquely tailor them to 
Maine’s existing program. The changes proposed by this bill will allow Maine’s 
most proven, reliable, and effective recycling system to develop and run more 
efficiently and effectively. Thank you for your time and consideration of this 
testimony. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Peter Blair 
Policy Director  
Just Zero  
