Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Abigail Hilton and I am 16 years old, from Litchﬁeld Maine. 
I am here to testify against LD1619. 
Allowing full-term abortion is allowing babies that could live outside the womb to be 
killed. That is murder of a child that is almost self-suf ﬁcient. 
My mom had tumors growing up, leaving her with only a quarter of her ovaries. Which 
means she shouldn't have been able to get pregnant. She was okay with that, and started 
building a life with my dad. They built a one and a half bedroom apartment over a four car 
garage. 
When my mom found out she was pregnant with my oldest brother, they continued to 
build and then move into the unﬁnished house. Life was difﬁcult, but not impossible. She was 
doing dishes in the bathroom tub because they hadn't installed a sink, but she was happy she 
had a child. 
My parents decided to try for a second kid, and soon my other brother was conceived. 
They transformed the spare bedroom (that had really been an ofﬁce) into the kids room. 
After that, my mom was done having kids. She was happy with what she had. But soon 
she found out she was pregnant again. And this time it was a girl. 
That girl was me. I was an incredible inconvenience, because my birth would mean that 
my parents would have to add onto the house to make another bedroom for me when I was 
older. I wasn't wanted, wasn't needed, and wasn’t convenient. Should I have been killed? 
Since being alive I’ve cost a lot of money, because I was diagnosed with a chronic 
digestive disease when I was eleven. But I'm still worth it. Because I am a human life that has 
the potential to be great. Even if I don’t go on to become the next president, or the next Mother 
Theresa, I have made a big impact on the people l interact with every day. I saved my friend's 
life, when she called me crying because she was suicidal and almost attempted again. I’ve 
helped another friend, who was struggling with depression and self-harm. 
The passing of the full-term abortion bill is going to kill children that are a step away from 
breathing on their own. Fully developed babies, the same ones taken from the hospital wrapped 
in cloth, are going to be murdered. That’s a life that will never live. Never experience love, or 
hate, never experience the joys of friendship, or a loving relationship. Never be able to help 
people, or know what it feels like to wake up with a new opportunity every day. Please vote 
against this bill. Have a great day.
