Pardon me for dispensing with the platitudes. l want to pose some very important 
questions that I pray you will ponder in your heart and give thoughtful consideration. 
Do you believe in life or death? Are your decisions and policies supporting life and all 
its potential, or are they expanding an ever increasing culture of death, that is killing and 
robbing Americans of all ages and backgrounds as the sanctity of life is constantly 
being eroded. 
Do you have ears to hear, the will of the people? Or are you so fixated on the 
directions you have been given from your political bosses to ignore the testimonies you 
are hearing today and by extension the cries of the innocent and most vulnerable of all, 
the unborn. 
l know how this game is played. Today, you all are going to listen politely and give the 
appearance of hearing, but come the Work Session, you are going to ignore most of 
what you hear today and you are going to vote how the party dictates. Symbolism over 
substance. Please, please prove me wrong! You are supposed to be the bulwark of 
liberty and freedom as the Legislative body closest to the people. So if you're not going 
to listen to the cries of your fellow Mainers; then maybe you may listen to a 2022 Pew 
Research Poll which found that over 80% of Americans do not support abortion without 
restriction. 
Not since the Russian Politburo or Germany’s National Socialists Party has a Legislative 
body functioned in such “lock-step ” with their political bosses, completely disregarding 
the will of the people and their own individual conscience. Kill a 39 week unborn baby! 
We’re any of you born prematurely? Do you know people who were born prematurely? 
Would it have been better for society if they had been aborted’? 
So l end with this, are you so callous to ignore the testimony you are hearing today? Or, 
is there something that may be tugging on your conscience. Do you have the courage 
to give life a chance? Or are you, through the policies you support, going to snuff out life 
before it even has a chance? Maybe, most important of all, do you possess the 
leadership to vote your conscience, or will you submit to the tyranny of the 
dictate? 
l implore you to hear the cries of these testimonies and vote “ought not to pass” on LD 
1619. This is an unnecessary and evil bill! 
Al Fereshetian, Turner, ME
