Alexander Mastrian
Harpswell
LD 1619
Reasonable men and women, those above me, entrusted with authority and power, 
thank you for your time. In the name of God and the lord Jesus Christ I would like to 
appeal to you not to pass this act LD1619. There is a God to whom we all must 
answer, we rail against this, we fight it in our conscience, we wave away his presence.
But the miracle of creation and the complexity and design of life bears witness to our 
conscience that there is a God and that there is a maker. It is not to the people of the 
United States to whom you have to answer, but to God, and to his son the Lord Jesus 
Christ. Therefore, on behalf of Christ, who died to pay for our transgressions, which 
can only be forgiven in whom, on behalf of him, I ask you not to proceed. You will 
answer on the day you stand before God, you will answer him and him only as to why
you chose what you did. It is before him that you will answer. For the sake of 
conscience therefore, do not proceed. Abortion is nothing short of murder, it is the 
ending of a human life. Your conscience knows this, it isn't necessary to drag on in 
detail about what is understood already about heart beats and brain activity. So for the
sake of your own conscience and your own life and your own soul, do not proceed. 
We have all done evil things, this is an evil thing, there is no one who is exempt. We 
have all fallen short of the standard which God has called us to. Your conscience 
knows this, the thoughts and deeds no one else knows but you, do not add this, and 
don’t harden your hearts against justice. Jesus, the son of God, died so that we might 
be forgiven, and rose from the dead to justify before God those who turn from evil 
and believe in him. Turn to him and receive life, and do not take life, with a word, or 
a pen, for their blood will be charged to you, and their blood will be on your own 
head. I submit this then as to reasonable men and women with consciences. I have 
prayed for you, for your salvation, there are others praying for you, not only that you 
will spare the lives of children and do what’s right, but that you might be reconciled 
to God. Thank you for your time, turn to Christ and live, turn from the evil desires of 
the people of this nation who are without God and perishing. Thank you.
Alexander Mastrian

