May 1, 2023 
LD1619 
State of Maine  
Judiciary Committee 
 
 
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,  
 
My name is Amanda Coleman, and I am a resident in the town of China, ME. I am a parent to 3 
children. I am testifying today in opposition of LD1619.  
 
A few years ago, I met a young girl with an unwanted pregnancy. I begged and pleaded with this 
young girl to not have an abortion. I told this young girl that there are resources to help her 
raise this child. I told her I would adopt her baby and love and raise this child as my own.  If only 
she had listened to my advice there would be a beautiful 3-year-old child here today. Abortion 
at ANY time, for ANY reason is not the answer for unwanted pregnancy.  
 
LD1619 is an extreme law and one we don’t need here in Maine. Medical necessity is already 
covered by current Maine laws. Over 65% of Mainers don’t want late term abortion.  
 
Please oppose this unnecessary, drastic bill, that the majority of Mainers do not want to see 
pass in Maine.  
 
Thank you,  
Amanda Coleman  
 
  
Amanda Coleman
China, Maine
LD 1619
May 1, 2023
LD1619
State of Maine 
Judiciary Committee
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Amanda Coleman, and I am a resident in the town of China, ME. I am a 
parent to 3 children. I am testifying today in opposition of LD1619. 
A few years ago, I met a young girl with an unwanted pregnancy. I begged and 
pleaded with this young girl to not have an abortion. I told this young girl that there 
are resources to help her raise this child. I told her I would adopt her baby and love 
and raise this child as my own.  If only she had listened to my advice there would be a
beautiful 3-year-old child here today. Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason is not 
the answer for unwanted pregnancy. 
LD1619 is an extreme law and one we don’t need here in Maine. Medical necessity is 
already covered by current Maine laws. Over 65% of Mainers don’t want late term 
abortion. 
Please oppose this unnecessary, drastic bill, that the majority of Mainers do not want 
to see pass in Maine. 
Thank you, 
Amanda Coleman 
 

