Amanda Mank
Rockland, Maine
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:  
My name is Amanda Mank, and I’m a resident of Rockland, Maine. I’m here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619.
We live in a country that values freedom of choice and opportunities. These are noble 
and worthwhile values that I trust you, as legislators, hold closely. As a Christian and 
as a teacher in the public schools here in Maine, I too value freedom and opportunity. 
I see the benefit of providing it for all people, adults and children, regardless of age, 
gender, or race. This belief extends to the unborn, future students that I will one day 
have the privilege of teaching and nurturing. The freedom of choice and opportunity 
should extend to all children, even those not yet born. LD 1619, if passed, will in 
actuality harm the important freedoms of choice and opportunity for what could be an
entire generation of future Mainers. These Mainers deserve the right to life. I do not 
support abortion, or laws that would legalize abortion to a greater extent.
The science behind the beginning of life is well known and is no longer something 
that many people argue. By now, I’m sure you’ve read many, probably hundreds of 
letters sharing similar information about the scientific facts: life begins at conception 
(cell replication), heartbeats can be detected within a matter of days, and there is a 
fetal ability to feel pain. You’ve probably heard the science that supports these truths: 
the baby has its own blood, DNA, fingerprints, and bodily organs. It is in fact in the 
woman’s body, but is not the woman’s body. I’m sure you’ve read how fetuses at 24 
weeks’ gestation are old enough to survive outside of the womb, with little medical 
intervention, so the idea of aborting pregnancies up to term is not only unsupported by
science, but in all intents and purposes, is murder. These facts should be enough to 
sway us to reconsider the ramifications of what this bill actually legalizes: terminating
self-sustainable life in the womb.
I believe many others, both Christians and those who share a similar view of the 
sanctity of life, have shared with you how God values life in the womb, that all life 
should be treated with care and protected, and the moral heartbreak of abortion being 
murder. There have doubtless been heart wrenching stories and cries of the evil that 
abortion allows, perhaps so much so, that you’ve become a bit numb to it.
Rather than be just one more letter that says the same things in the same way, I want 
to appeal to your professional roles as lawmakers in our state. You have a 
responsibility to make decisions based upon the will of Mainers, but you also have the
opportunity to exercise judgment in what is good for all Mainers: those who write to 
you, those who don’t, and those who are not yet old enough to vote and plead their 
case. My hope is that you would read this letter and see that LD 1619 would deny 
those values of freedom of choice and opportunity to a population of future voters, 
taxpayers, business owners, mothers, fathers, workers, and citizens.
As lawmakers, please do not support bill LD 1619. Allow our next generation to be 
born in a state where they can thrive with the same freedoms and opportunities we 
who were born and are now old enough to speak out have been given.
Please vote ought not to pass.
