Amber Hathaway
Orono
LD 1619
Members of the Judiciary Committee,
Thank you for providing me with the opportunity to give testimony regarding the 
proposed LD 1619 Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Act. My name is 
Amber Hathaway, I use she/her pronouns, and I'm a Mainer currently residing in 
Orono. Although my doctorate is in physics, as an undergraduate I completed a minor
in Ethics and Social and Political Philosophy as well as a second major in Women's 
Studies. Abortion is an issue I have studied extensively both inside and outside the 
classroom, and I hope that my perspective will be useful to you when considering the 
proposed legislation.
The decision to obtain an abortion, like the choice to obtain any other medical 
procedure, is a deeply personal one. There are myriad reasons why someone may 
need an abortion later in pregnancy, such as discovering a change in fetal 
development that is incompatible with life. Other common reasons include lack of 
awareness of the pregnancy until later, a controlling partner who won't permit an 
abortion, and lack of access to resources to obtain an abortion earlier during the 
pregnancy. Ultimately, though, individual motives aren't what matters. What matters 
is that some Mainers are being denied access to necessary medical care in state, 
treated as less than full persons under the law as it stands.
While the original Reproductive Privacy Act provided a much-needed foundation to 
help ensure that Mainers are able to receive the reproductive healthcare they need, 
current law relies on the concept of viability, an ambiguous and unscientific notion. 
By imposing gestational limits, the State of Maine has divided pregnant people into 
categories: those who are worthy of reproductive autonomy and those who are not. A 
person does not lose their humanity when they pass a certain gestational stage, and it 
is time we update our laws to ensure that all Mainers are afforded the same respect 
and dignity, regardless of their pregnancy status.
This is doubly important because, outside of pregnancy, bodily autonomy is a right 
held sacred by the United States legal system at-large as well as the state of Maine. 
For example, legal precedent (e.g., McFall v. Shrimp) has established that one person 
cannot be compelled to donate bone marrow to another, even if the second person will
die without the transplant. Bone marrow donation is an invasive procedure, but 
pregnancy is even more invasive. Yet, under current Maine law, a person who is 
farther along in their pregnancy must continue to endure all of the physical and 
emotional burdens of pregnancy unless they can find the means to travel to one of the 
few out-of-state clinics in which later abortions are performed.
Governor Mills's proposal would align Maine's reproductive healthcare laws with 
legal precedent around other healthcare procedures. It would help to ensure that 
pregnant people are treated as full persons, with the same rights to autonomy and 
self-determination as everyone else. It places the decisionmaking where it belongs, in 
the hands of the pregnant person, with guidance from their medical team. This is why 
I ask that you support LD 1619 Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Act.
Thank you for your time and consideration. 

