Andrade Susan
Town of Benton and East Machias as well as Machias Christian Fellowship 
LD 1619
WHY ABORTION IS WRONG
Abortion has divided our society like few other topics in recent history. The Bible 
places the highest importance on human life. God treats it as sacred and 
invaluable—and that’s because He created us “in His own image.” This is why the 
Bible identifies an unborn baby as being fully human.
God created all life and He sustains it. He has given each of us the breath of life and 
it’s our responsibility to protect what was given by Our Father in heaven. This is why 
the question about whether abortion is right or wrong is so significant. No man or 
woman has the right to steal from God or destroy the creation of life that belongs 
solely to Him.
In God’s great love, He gives life that bears His image. Determining if abortion is 
good or bad goes well beyond the question of whether people have the right to 
terminate the life of a child. The real issue is whether people will insist on living 
according to worldly standards that oppose God’s law. True peace comes when 
people surrender to God and allow Him to guide their lives according to His loving 
righteousness.
People who oppose God’s law often think it’s unnecessarily restrictive and difficult, 
but it is actually there because He loves us and wants to protect us, just like these 
children.
The Bible clearly teaches that abortion is wrong. This teaching comes across in many 
ways and for many reasons. Some people point out that the word "abortion" is not in 
the Bible, and that is true. Nevertheless, the teaching about abortion is there. This is 
the case with many teachings. The word "Trinity" is not in the Bible, but the teaching 
about the Trinity is there. In any case, a person who wants to deny the teaching about 
abortion would deny it even if the word were there.
Let’s look at some of the Biblical reasons why abortion, the deliberate destruction of a
child in the womb, is very wrong.
-The Bible teaches that human life is different from other types of life, because human
beings are made in the very image of God.
-The accounts of the creation of man and woman in Genesis (Genesis 1:26-31; 2:7) 
tell us this: "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he 
him; male and female created he them" (Genesis 1:27).
-The image of God! This is what it means to be human! We are not just a bunch of 
cells randomly thrown together by some impersonal forces. Rather, we really reflect 
an eternal God who knew us from before we were made, and purposely called us into 
being.
-There is the key. Not only did God make us, but He values us. The Bible tells us of a 
God who is in love with us, so much so that He became one of us and even died for us
while we were still offending Him (see Romans 5:6-8). In the face of all this, can we 
say that human beings are disposable, like a car that becomes more trouble than it is 
worth? "God doesn’t make junk." If you believe the Bible, you have to believe that 
human life is sacred, more sacred than we have ever imagined!
The Bible teaches that children are a blessing.
God commanded our first parents to "Be fruitful and multiply" (Genesis 1:28). Why? 
God Himself is fruitful.  Love always overflows into life. When the first mother 
brought forth the first child, she exclaimed, "I have gotten a man from the Lord" 
(Genesis 4:1). The help of the Lord is essential, for He has dominion over human life 
and is its origin. Parents cooperate with God in bringing forth life. Because this whole
process is under God’s dominion, it is sinful to interrupt it. 
"Children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward" (Psalm 
127:3).
The Bible teaches that the child in the womb is truly a human child, who even has a 
relationship with the Lord.
God knows the preborn child. "Thou hast covered me in my mother’s womb " (Psalm 
139:13). God also helps and calls the preborn child. "I was fast upon thee from the 
womb: thou art my God from my mother’s belly.” “Be not far from me; for trouble is 
near; for there is none to help.” (Psalm 22:10-11).
Scripture repeatedly condemns the killing of the innocent.
This flows from everything that has been seen so far. God’s own finger writes in 
stone the commandment "Thou shalt not kill" (Exodus 20:13, Deuteronomy 5:17) and
Christ reaffirms it (Matthew 19:18 - notice that He mentions this commandment first).
The Book of Revelation affirms that (unrepentant) murderers cannot enter the 
kingdom of heaven (Revelation 22:15).
The Bible teaches that God is a God of justice.
An act of justice is an act of intervention for the helpless, an act of defense for those 
who are too weak to defend themselves. In foretelling the Messiah, Psalm 72 says, 
"For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no 
helper” (Psalms 72:12).
If God does justice for His people, He expects His people to do justice for one 
another. "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful" (Luke 6:36). 
"Whatsoever ye would that men should fo to you, do ye even so to them" (Matthew 
7:12). "Love one another" (John 15:17).
Abortion is the opposite of these teachings. It is a reversal of justice. It is a destruction
of the helpless rather than a rescue of them. If God’s people do not intervene to save 
those whose lives are attacked, then the people are not pleasing or worshiping Him.
We can likewise say, "There is neither born nor unborn." Using this distinction as a 
basis for the value of life or the protection one deserves is meaningless and offensive 
to all that Scripture teaches. The unborn are the segment of our society which is most 
neglected and discriminated against. Christ Himself surely has a special love for 
them.
Abortion is death. Christ came to conquer death, and therefore abortion. "I have come
that they may have life, and that they might have it more abundantly" (John 10:10).
 
Life begins at conception! Abortion is murder and the sixth commandment forbids 
direct and intentional killing as gravely sinful. The murderer and those who cooperate
voluntarily in murder commit a sin that cries out to heaven for vengeance.
We should be funding pro life education, support and assistance to women who are in 
a difficult situation by providing options for the life of their unborn child. We should 
also support those who have made a decision to have an abortion in the past. Our God
is an all forgiving God and all are forgiven who repent and believe in Him and His 
unending love and forgiveness. 
There are many who would love and raise a child as their own and please take this 
into consideration over the death of a precious child. Murder should not be considered
an option. We punish those who murder through our judicial system and the same 
consideration should be taken as well for abortion. There should be no options for the 
termination of a precious life. This includes and surgical or oral methods. 
I respectfully submit this testimony and it is with much gratitude to have a voice that 
will hopefully stop this bill. 

