(L.D. 1619)    Bill "An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws" 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary: 
 
I am the product of a rape.  Because of this, I have no father.  My mother did the best she could to raise 
me on her own.  At no point did she ever consider abortion as an option, and I am forever grateful for 
that.  I’m now happily married with two children of my own.  Here is why I believe that LD 1619 ought 
not to be passed in my home state of Maine: 
It is irrefutable that the “clump of cells” created after conception has his/her own separate DNA—the 
unique code that dictates what we will look like, what type of personality we will have, etc. He/she is a 
completely different human.  Therefore, it is an act of killing to prevent this life from continuing on its 
natural course.  It is dehumanizing to look at life as expendable waste and this culture of death is already 
trickling into other forms of assisted suicide for healthy people—it will be the singular downfall of 
humanity worldwide if we do not change the attitudes about the importance of all life and all lives. 
I am living proof that the argument to abort because the baby will be living in less than desirable 
circumstances is a fraudulent one.  Although we were poor, I was not unhappy.  I went to public school, 
made friends, connected with people in the local churches, etc.  I may not have had the best clothes or 
the best food, but I had more important things, like relationships.  You cannot pretend to be able to tell 
the future of a person based on circumstances, who will rise above and who will not.  It is better to put 
resources into the life of the baby and not the death of the baby.   
There are countless moral and scientific arguments against abortion in general, but I just wanted to 
highlight two that are personal to me.  I’m grateful that I was not aborted, even though my life was not 
easy growing up.  I had and still have the right to life.  I’m glad I was given the chance to grow, become 
educated, have a productive career, and now raise a family of my own.  I will always choose life, every 
time.  I urge you to vote “Ought not to pass” on LD1619.  Please give these children the same chance 
that I had.  Thank you for considering this testimony.   
Angela Hurd 
 Morrill, ME 
Angela Hurd
Morrill
LD 1619
(L.D. 1619)    Bill "An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws"
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary:
I am the product of a rape.  Because of this, I have no father.  My mother did the best 
she could to raise me on her own.  At no point did she ever consider abortion as an 
option, and I am forever grateful for that.  I’m now happily married with two children 
of my own.  Here is why I believe that LD 1619 ought not to be passed in my home 
state of Maine:
It is irrefutable that the “clump of cells” created after conception has his/her own 
separate DNA—the unique code that dictates what we will look like, what type of 
personality we will have, etc. He/she is a completely different human.  Therefore, it is
an act of killing to prevent this life from continuing on its natural course.  It is 
dehumanizing to look at life as expendable waste and this culture of death is already 
trickling into other forms of assisted suicide for healthy people—it will be the 
singular downfall of humanity worldwide if we do not change the attitudes about the 
importance of all life and all lives.
I am living proof that the argument to abort because the baby will be living in less 
than desirable circumstances is a fraudulent one.  Although we were poor, I was not 
unhappy.  I went to public school, made friends, connected with people in the local 
churches, etc.  I may not have had the best clothes or the best food, but I had more 
important things, like relationships.  You cannot pretend to be able to tell the future of
a person based on circumstances, who will rise above and who will not.  It is better to 
put resources into the life of the baby and not the death of the baby.  
There are countless moral and scientific arguments against abortion in general, but I 
just wanted to highlight two that are personal to me.  I’m grateful that I was not 
aborted, even though my life was not easy growing up.  I had and still have the right 
to life.  I’m glad I was given the chance to grow, become educated, have a productive 
career, and now raise a family of my own.  I will always choose life, every time.  I 
urge you to vote “Ought not to pass” on LD1619.  Please give these children the same
chance that I had.  Thank you for considering this testimony.  
Angela Hurd
 Morrill, ME

