Testimony for LD1619  OPOSSED 
  Honorable members of the joint standing committee on Judiciary, I am submitting my written 
testimony in opposition of LD 1619. My name is Anne Amadon and I am a resident of Skowhegan.  I 
appreciate the opportunity to present my testimony.  I am a wife, mom and a grandmother of twin 
toddler girls born via the miracle of IVF.   I have been a registered nurse for nearly 39 years. I retired 
from this years ago, but still work to stay current in many areas of healthcare. My husband is also an RN 
working fulltime in an operating room. 
  I am asking all of you to please take the time to earnestly consider my concerns. First concern is 
removing some vital the safety measures in regards to needing licensed physicians, physicians assistants 
or advance practice nurses to perform abortion in our state. This simply is not safe for any medical 
procedure. Would you want someone who is not licensed operating on your knee? or giving 
chemotherapy to your mom? or any surgery on your child? It is simply unacceptable that we would 
decrease safety nets in healthcare anywhere. 
      Second, I would like to address the expansion of abortion from age of viability to all the way until 
birth.   In the third trimester, if a woman develops a serious health issue that requires a treatment to 
begin immediately that is not compatible with pregnancy , a caesarean section can be performed very 
quickly, often in just minutes. We have come leaps and bounds in recent years at saving premature 
babies. Those born even at 25 weeks have an astounding 64-76% survival rate. You must understand 
that it will take much longer, sometimes days, to perform an abortion this late in pregnancy. A woman 
will need to be induced and full labor and delivery must occur even if abortion is chosen. The added 
physical stresses of labor are far more detrimental to someone facing a serious health concern than a c- 
section.  Once the baby is born via c-section the mother can go on with whatever therapy she needs and 
the baby can be cared for in a NICU. There simply is not a valid reason in third trimester to not choose a 
lifesaving c-section over abortion. Maine people clearly do not support this. 
     I again ask that each of you take a moment to really understand all of this before voting. I can be 
reached at 207-249-1400 for any questions or clarifications.  - Anne Amadon 
