Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary,  
 
 
My name is Anne Porr; and I am a resident of Woolwich. My testimony opposes LD1619. If I 
did not have a prior unbreakable commitment, I would be delivering my testimony in person 
today. 
 
 
Abortion for any reason at any time is too extreme for Maine. All children who can live outside 
their mother’s womb should be given the chance to do so. Every human being is unique with 
unique contributions to make to our great state. This bill would prevent children who could 
survive outside the womb and thrive in life from doing so. 
 
 
Furthermore, abortion often leaves a painful legacy. When my husband was in graduate school 
and our first child was two, we became good friends with another couple. During the subsequent 
two-year period, I had two babies die in my womb. When I shared that news with my friend, 
though I didn’t see or know it right away, it changed her. For years she had suppressed in her 
mind that she had had two abortions in high school. Up until that time she and her husband had 
been happily married and devoted to each other. In the weeks and months after our conversation, 
her husband became concerned that she had begun flirting with other men and became distant 
emotionally from him. Eventually, he caught her in an affair, and she left him though he loved 
her every way he could. When I spoke with her, she had little to say other than telling me she had 
had the two abortions. She feared being condemned, and she didn’t expect people to understand 
her leaving her husband. They subsequently divorced. 
 
 
Years later she contacted my husband and me and told us she had felt such terrible guilt over her 
abortions and hated herself such that she had embarked on self-destructive behavior. She had 
since gotten help and got back to a healthier place. 
 
 
Please don't multiply the possibility of this kind of pain, sadness, and relationship destruction for 
residents of Maine. Let’s welcome into this world and love and support every future 
Mainer.  Please vote ought not to pass. Thank you! 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Anne Porr 
 
