Annique Milite
Freeport
LD 1619
My name is Annique Milite of Freeport, Maine.
I write to urge the House Judiciary Committee that LD 1619, as well as LD 776 and 
LD 1343, ought NOT to pass.
To hear talk by this bill's proponents, one would think that abortion must be 
unrestricted in totality lest it be unavailable altogether. We are not debating the 
elimination of abortion in Maine, only that the [arguably] reasonable limits already in 
place ought remain as such - as foresworn before The People in campaign.
So why has this suddenly and now become a point of urgency?
"Safe, legal and rare" is no longer an uneasy ideal for [arguably] a necessary evil. 
Instead, the snipping of spines and sucking of brains is something to be celebrated, 
shouted, even pursued as a mark of pride or street cred. The instilling of virtue, 
delayed gratification, of valuing oneself and their partners and children - all precepts 
that would otherwise reduce abortion, unplanned pregnancy, and emotional fallout at 
every stage thereabouts - have long since been disregarded, even mocked.
While the Pro-Life Movement has tried to address past criticisms with crisis 
pregnancy centers and early childhood programs (when they aren't being bombed out,
the perpetrators not prosecuted), pro-abortionists dissuade even post-abortive 
counseling. Do proponents want fewer unplanned pregnancies, or more abortions?
Concerned practitioners cite few, if any, medical events necessitating a late-term 
abortion, that could not otherwise go the route of induced delivery or adoption. Other 
citations of fetal stem cell research and use of fetal cell lines in testing fall short when 
the only positive advancements have resulted from targeted therapies from an adult's 
own stem cells. Furthermore, the reduction and/or elimination of even reasonable 
health, safety, licensure, and hospital-admitting standards - as LD 1619 does - belie 
pro-abortion lectures about "the back-alley". Do proponents want safe abortions, or 
more abortions?
Of late, elite worldwide voices are growing louder and bolder that the human 
population ought be significantly reduced in the name of ecological harmony, or 
something (notice how they are never first in line, always other people to make or be 
made the sacrifice). It is incongruous to condemn forced sterilization and ethnic 
cleansing, et al, and celebrate abortion-through-birth when the end results are in 
parallel. And it should cause concern, at least, that while these same forces make life 
on earth more miserable and less free, abortion is a rare liberty they afford their 
people, even actively encourage.
I am agnostic on early abortion, as perhaps the last vestige of my former liberalism. 
However, more than any of the usual emotional appeals, through everything I see 
lining up, the discourse hews ever more toward abortion for its own sake, and for the 
benefit of its profiteers more than even for the welfare of its supposed patients. 
Planned Parenthood, et al, paying off their supporters with literal blood money. 
Biomedical firms creating counterproductive and even dangerous medical products 
from aborted fetal tissues and cell lines. Pimps and their clients scraping out their sex 
slaves before sending them back out for more.
I hope that for Maine, our nation, our world, that these are not inevitabilities.
