/_ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary: 
My name is Anthony Rea, Pastor of The First Baptist Church in Mexico. l'm also a resident of Mexico 
and here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
There are those who believe that there is a separation between Church and State and that the line 
must never be crossed. Yet, our president Joseph Biden has declared that we are in a "battle for the 
soul of America" . Morality is not a government issue, but rather a spiritual matter. To this, l am here to 
refute the testimony of the Maine Council of Churches who have lent their support to this bill that 
brings us closer to abortion —on-demand. 
The sanctity of human life is a fundamental doctrine found in our Declaration of Independence: 
"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by 
their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of 
Happiness. To secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just 
powers from the consent of the governed."4 
The job of government is to secure the rights of Men. Being a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ, l 
believe in the authority of God's Holy Word. Numbers 12112 tells us that a still-born baby is born 
"dead" . The very definition of dead is "no longer alive" . God's Word also does not make a distinction 
between John the Baptist in the womb in Luke; 1141, and baby Jesus lying in the manger in Luke 2112. 
Both are called brephos in Koine, Greek. To God, the unborn baby has a soul and is alive. Homicide is 
the killing of one human being by another. Brephos can also mean infant, toddler, small child, or child 
of any age still requiring help with feeding, clothing, bathing, transportation, and many other things. 
A child at any age may die if not given the guidance and care that is required. Absence of an umbilical 
cord does not confirm whether the baby is alive. lt is a slippery slope that leads to the killing of all 
Downe Syndrome babies in Iceland, or the euthanizing of our elderly or disabled when they becomea 
strain on society. 
In a day when the definition of "woman" needs to be debated, we must acknowledge that a fetus is of 
human origin. A fetus in the eyes of God, our creator, is a baby. A baby -even in the womb- is alive. 
We must stop this madness. 
Isaiah 49115 says, "Can a woman forget her nursing child and have no compassion on the son of her 
womb? Even these may forget, but l will not forget you." 
God loves the unborn babies and so should we. 
Please vote ought not to pass.
