         Barbara Howell  
         455 Island Ave.  
         Spruce Head, ME 04859  
         May 1, 2023  
Ann Matlack  
130 Scraggle Point Rd.  
Spruce Head, ME 04859  
 
Dear Ann,  
 
It is incredibly disheartening to every person in our family that the State of Maine, which we so dearly 
love, is considering permitting  the ending of  lives of healthy preborn and even ready to be born infants 
who are capable of surviving outside the womb.  
 
There are so many families who would dearly love to parent such children.  
 
My husband  is a School Psychologist, and I  have been a teacher and department head in public schools, a 
private school, and several graduate schools.  We founded a state certified  private school for average, 
above average and gifted students as well as bright students with language -based learning disabilities. 
We served those students and their families for nearly 40 years  and were able to help ma ny children, 
including both non -disabled and bright  learning -disabled students . They have  become  successful , 
effective  contributors . Many of the “disabled” students have earned master’s degrees in a wide variety of 
areas.  
 
We have  also had the privilege of parenting two wonderful children w ho came to us as infants via 
adoption.  Our children came to us with both amazing gifts and with challenges as do we all.  It has been 
and continues to be our joy to help them develop their gifts and grow stronger as they have learned to 
manage their chall enges  effectively and to serve others generously .   
 
We have two wonderful grandchildren who never would have been born had their birth grand mother 
had an abortion. They are both  extremely  bright children who entered college with many college credits 
earne d before they had even graduated from high school. Our gifted language -disabled granddaughter 
will graduate from the University of Maine at Orono this Saturday.  She will have earned her bachelor’s 
degree in three years.  Her goal is to become a PhD Child Psychologist and employ hippotherapy as one 
of the tools to help children.  
 
 We will soon have a great grandchild.  None of these people would have graced this earth had the  
original  birth mothers not cared about their own preborn infants.  
 
Please know tha t this kind of end to a ny life is not only criminal, but if Legislative Document No. 1619 is 
passed into Maine law, the legislature will have removed all criminal penalties.  This document even 
removes all criminal penalties for those people who  are unlicensed and  perform abortions, despite the 
fact that they are medically unauthorized  to perform or assist in such procedures.  Medical practice has 
standards in place to protect anyone under a physician’s care.  Furthermore,  to move outside the 
med ical practice regulations  also invites the possibility of harm to the women who are seeking abortion.  
 
The termination of a pregnancy simply for convenience is a horrific practice. It is hard to comprehend 
that LD No. 1619 would use our precious, hard -earn ed tax dollars to accomplish destroying  a life and the 
undeniably precious mother -child bond . 
 
Please consider these issues as you listen, debate , and decide the fate of so many  lives . 
It’s in your hands.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Barbara A. Howell , MST  

