Beedy Parker
Camden. ME
LD 1619
Testimony in support of the Bills in the Maine Legislature, May 1 hearings, 2023, ·to 
protect Abortion in Maine     
*****************************
To the Maine Legislative Committee on Judiciary, Senator Anne Carney and 
Representative  Matt Mooney, Chairs, and members of the Committee.
My name is Beedy Parker.   I have lived in Camden Maine since 1975.    I am sending
testimony here in support of LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive 
Privacy Laws . I am a member of Grandmothers for Reproductive Rights, an 
organization founded here in Maine to advocate for reproductive rights, including 
abortion,   here and in the rest of the USA. 
We come, many of us, from  personal experience of the time  before Roe vs Wade,   
when many women and girls could not access birth control, and abortion was 
prohibited and often dangerous if obtained illegally. 
We know from experience, what is happening to women who need abortions now, 
where it is banned again, We know how difficult and frightening it can be to get help. 
We come from a time when we were ashamed (or supposed to be), and afraid,   if we 
needed an abortion,  because we were not in a position to want a child. 
I come from experience, experience of what life is like where abortion is prohibited, 
of knowing women in Third World countries (dictatorships, actually), where they 
could not choose to have the small families that they could afford and take care of 
adequately. 
I come from experience of being a teenager in this country, who fell in love, was 
pressured to have sex, and had no birth control. This happens all the time, and it 
always will, unless we can help each other.
I come from experience of being a single parent with two young children and getting 
pregnant while using an IUD, and being denied an abortion because it was still  
illegal. 
I come from experience of knowing the doctor who inserted the IUD could not 
remove it without causing what would be interpreted as an abortion, which would 
have endangered his hospital's service of giving IUDs to  low income women who 
needed them (this was in Massachusetts in 1969).
And I learned, when I started to bleed and he agreed to give me a D&C, that the IUD 
was embedding in the wall of the uterus and had almost perforated that wall, which 
would have resulted in sepsis,  and even death.
This is how much we valued the lives of women in the years before Roe vs Wade.    Is
this the country we must live in again?
We live in a land where sex is constantly advertised and used for marketing 
everywhere, where men are still expected to triumph in sex, where girls are 
encouraged to be sexy and to have sex, and women who love,  married or not,  want 
to have sex in a close relationship,   
But now they are not to be allowed to refuse, to have a child?    
What kind of a trap is that?     
We need to protect the right to abortion, make birth control and reproductive care 
easily available, inexpensive,  and normal,   not shameful. We need to protect the PR 
actioners who give us the care we need,  and teach ourselves not to be ashamed of our
reproductive lives.
I urge  you to vote in support of LD 1619   and the other bills being heard today, 
which will  protect our reproductive rights as  women and as the  living human beings
with human rights, that we are.
Thank you for your attention.  I will try  to answer any questions you ask.
Beedy Parker, Camden, Maine.
  
      

