Testimony for 5/1/2023 
Madam Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Ben Clark and l reside in Winslow. Thank you for hearing my testimony. I am testifying 
today in opposition to LD #1619. 
As a public school music teacher, community youth choir director, youth sports coach, and father of 
seven children, l have seen the unique God-given talents of children up close and personal. Children 
are a gift from God, and each individual is loved and appreciated by our Heavenly Father. While 
earthly mothers and fathers are sinful creatures, continuously falling short, the sins of the mother 
and father should not be taken out on the child in the womb. 
Pre—born children can feel pain as young as seven weeks gestation, and there is nothing humane or 
"healthcare" related about dismembering a child. I have had the privilege of holding each of my 
seven precious babies in my arms when they were barely minutes old. This bill will be used to justify 
sacrificing children all the way up to the moments before birth, and I do not understand how any 
woman who carries a child to full term could make that choice at the last moment! We already have 
laws protecting the mother in cases of "extreme risk" , yet if the Governor's unnecessary bill passes, 
it would make our state one of the most pro-abortion states in the nation. 
This bill is evil! It is not a step in the right direction for our state and it is definitely not the way to 
heal the divide in our country! I pray for repentance for the leaders of the abortion industry who 
perpetuate this evil lie being sold to young and old alike. I pray for those who believe they have no 
other option but to kill their unborn child. And I pray for those who, like me, have sat on the 
sidelines for far too long believing they ought not to share their conservative opinion opposing a 
woman's "right" to kill her own flesh and blood. For me, that ends today! As Jesus said "Father, 
forgive them. They do not know what they are doing!" 
Which one of you will be the first to have the courage to break Democratic party lines and vote No? 
I urge the members of this committee to vote "ought not to pass" on this bill! Thank you.
