Bethany Groves
Etna
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Bethany Groves, and I am a resident of
Etna.  I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
I am the mother of two young ladies that were born prematurely and that are now in 
their early twenties.  Early in my pregnancy, I was told that there was a very severe 
blood flow issue that one of my babies could not survive; consequently, we were 
given several options.  We could try an experimental surgery that did not guarantee 
good odds, we could abort, or we could leave things as they were and get as far along 
in the pregnancy as possible.  We chose to leave things alone and monitor the babies 
until delivery could no longer be avoided. Because I had a twin pregnancy, if I lost 
one of my babies in utero, the other baby would likely not make it, either.  At 
thirty-one weeks, I had an emergency c section and delivered two little, healthy babies
that simply had to feed and grow. Today, they are smart, funny, wonderful human 
beings. Our lives are incredibly rich because they are a part. Not only do I have two 
daughters that I love very much, but also I now have a grandson that is an absolute 
joy, born to the daughter that was given no hope of surviving.
I am testifying because someone who has not gone through an experience like this, 
might not be aware that children born six weeks early can survive and live a very 
healthy, happy, and productive life. It is inconceivable that we could have taken it 
upon ourselves to snuff out their lives even before they had a chance to live them. It is
simply not our choice to make. 
This bill that is being proposed is extreme, allowing abortion up to birth.  A baby that 
could easily survive outside of the womb could be killed for any reason.  Over 65% of
Mainers do not want late-term abortion.  There are laws that already make provision 
for medical situations in case of stillbirth, ectopic pregnancy, etc.  I am also very 
concerned for the welfare of moms that are at risk for many complications, both 
physically and emotionally.  
Beyond this, we must consider the moral aspect of what is being proposed.  What if 
there is a Creator that cherishes the life of every person?  If this is passed, we would 
put ourselves in the very uncomfortable position of having to answer for what we 
have allowed on our watch.  Abortion is a violent act that is preformed against 
humans that are too small to defend themselves.     
Please oppose this unnecessary, drastic bill that the majority of Mainers do not want 
to see pass.  Thank you. 
