Bob  Roemmich
Bangor
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Bob Roemmich, and I am a resident of Bangor. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619.
First of all, I would like to raise a question for all to think about.  How is it that, due 
to medical progress from the 1960’s to now, doctors can actually operate on a human 
life inside the womb of the mother and yet when it comes to canceling that life, which
many say is only a fetus, doctors can deny that life any chance of survival?
My story is that when my birth mother was carrying me, she underwent a couple of 
surgeries that were medically needed.  She was also advised that I would be stillborn. 
I assure you that I was not stillborn. My wife would not have me as her husband and 
my children would not have me for their father. This bill, if it were in place at the 
time of my birth, would have ended my life before I ever saw the light of day.
This bill is wrong for Maine.  All life should and must be considered sacred.  
According to the many people that I have talked to in the medical field, this decision 
to have an abortion to help the health of the mother is a very lame excuse to end a life.
If there are any complications, it usually comes after the baby is born and can be 
addressed medically in a very quick manner.
When considering an unlicensed person performing any abortion procedure as a result
of this bill, the accountability factor would be none.  All people must be responsible 
for their actions in regards to taking lives, whether it be in a doctor office, hospital, or 
the street.
If the baby should survive the abortion attempt, this bill allows the life of the baby to 
be terminated AFTER it was born.  That process is considered to be infanticide and 
Maine does not need to go down that road.  Please go back to my earlier comments. 
My mother was informed that I would be stillborn.  If my mother had made up her 
mind not to have me, I could have been killed right after I was born and proved to not 
be stillborn.
Thank you for your time and please strongly consider a “ought to not to pass” vote on 
LD 1619.
