Brian Wilson
Lewiston
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Brian Wilson and I am a resident of 
Lewiston Maine. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619.
I am a father of seven children. Four adult children and 3 more children I was unable 
to meet in this life, after experiencing two definite miscarriages and a probable 
miscarriage. The unexpected loss of an infant human being in the womb was 
devastating for me and their mother. The loss of children in the womb or outside the 
womb is life-altering and remains with you forever- whether you are male, meaning 
the father, or female, meaning the mother. I find it best to clarify the meaning of a 
word and the truth in these deceptive days. The killing of a human child cannot be 
termed as any kind of improvement, as it continues to lead our citizens and children, 
down a negative path for a moral society, as noted by: “Improve Maine's 
Reproductive Privacy Laws”.  We might “improve” our roads, bridges, and 
infrastructure on the State level of governance and law-making, but to say we 
improve the well-oiled abortion system?
A vote for LD 1619  is and will be a tragedy for many families,  girls, expectant 
moms, dads, grandparents, and so many unborn children. I pray for the day when 
every human life may be cherished from conception to natural death. This is when our
society will change for the better, when life is respected and cherished at all its stages,
until then there can be no true advances in social justice. Abortion at ANY time, for 
ANY reason is too extreme for Maine This bill would allow a baby that could survive 
outside the womb to be killed!
The course of our lives is not always planned and does always follow our own 
expectations and desires. Life at times can be difficult and challenging. Virtue is 
found in the choices we make in this life, especially during difficult experiences, in 
choosing the good of others, and in the protection and assistance we give to our 
families and our neighbors, especially the most vulnerable unborn children. It is not 
generally found on the easy path of life but is practiced in difficult moments and 
situations in choosing what is good, true, and honorable. 
 I am now a grandfather of two toddlers and two daughters are pregnant again for 
their second children. I am a praying Catholic and I pray for their access to caring 
medical providers, the health and safety of the mothers (my daughters), and for the 
well-being of my future grandchildren. It is through responsible parenthood and 
family life,  that I have found great joy and purpose in life, outside of my own 
capacity to be selfish.  It is the family unit that forms our society; local communities 
and makes up the State of Maine.  What future will this generation choose for the 
next? 
Thank you for your time and God Bless,
Brian M. Wilson 

