Brittney  Dunphy
Skowhegan 
LD 1619
Good Afternoon,
My name is Brittney Dunphy and I am a resident of Skowhegan. I am submitting a 
written testimony in opposition to LD 1619. 
As someone who strongly opposes abortion even from the early stages of pregnancy, I
feel that abortion in any stage of pregnancy is absolutely horrific and unacceptable. 
However, late-term abortion is beyond disgusting and horrific. 2/3 of Mainer's don't 
agree with late-term abortion. The argument of "abortion can be used to save a 
mother's life" is such a sad attempt at justifying the ability for a mother to kill her 
child in late-term pregnancy. 
In December of 2020, my husband and I lost our son at 38 weeks. Our precious and 
perfect baby boy was stillborn due to a knot in his cord. I think about how perfect and 
uniquely God made him in my womb. I can't fathom any mother choosing to take the 
life of their child at full-term. In the event that a mother is told her child may not live 
long on the outside of her womb, who are we as humans to decide when and where 
that child dies? In addition, how often do we hear from mother's who were advised by
their doctors to abort their babies because of developmental delays? Someone very 
close to me was informed that her child would have Down Syndrome and was offered
to terminate her pregnancy. That child does not have Down Syndrome and is a very 
healthy young man. God is the only one in charge of human life. There is no reason 
for a child to be aborted to medically save a mother's life. We have enough medical 
advancements to help the mother deliver her child early and spend the time she has 
with her child. We are a nation that values bacterial "life" on other planets but we 
don't even value our own humanity.
I pray that Mills' goal for LD 1619 does not pass. My whole life I have been proud to 
be a Mainer. If LD1619 passes, I can say with wholehearted certainty that I will no 
longer be proud to say I am from Maine. I can speak on behalf of many others that I 
am not the only one who feels this way. 
Respectfully,
--
Brittney Dunphy

