Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary... 
Committee, I am Brittany Lee, I live in Ben/vick Maine, and I'm here today to 
testify in support of LD 1343 and LD 1619. 
I was 22 weeks along when I decided to get an abortion. At the time, I was 
very depressed and in a dark place. I had just been honorably discharged 
from the military after serving for seven years. During that time, I was 
sexually harassed, assaulted and raped multiple times, including having my 
first sexual experience be rape by a fellow service member. 
My time in the service was plagued by sexual assault, and once I left, it all 
hit me at once because I didn't have the work and surroundings to distract 
me. I was now home with our young children while my husband remained 
on active duty. All these memories created a perfect storm to feed my 
depression. I was aware of my mental, physical, and emotional state and 
realized I couldn’t safely get through my pregnancy and delivery. All of the 
events l’d experienced had caused my mental health to plummet. I already 
had two children, and we only had one income. My husband and I knew 
that if the pregnancy continued, it would’ve pushed me over the edge;I 
knew I couldn’t stay pregnant. 
We were stationed in South Carolina at this time. We were both distant with 
our families, and I hadn't made any friends in the area. So when it came 
time to look for an abortion clinic, I used Google. I found a place near me 
and made an appointment to go in and see what could be done. That's 
when I learned I was at 22 weeks. The clinic said they couldn't help me 
because of how far along I was. So my husband and I started making 
phone calls to South Carolina clinics. In the end, we found one in Georgia. 
We had to pack up our van with the children and dogs, drive hundreds of 
miles, and find a pet-friendly hotel where we could stay overnight because 
of the 24-hour waiting period required bylaw. 
The procedure went smoothly, the doctors, nurses and staff were very kind 
and compassionate the entire time. My abortion was the best and most 
compassionate health care I have ever received. Once I was back home,I
struggled with my decision and the shame that is heaped on pregnant people by different religious groups and personal beliefs. But once l was able to get the help I needed and had my husband by my side, I pushed through the shame and became empowered by my choice. Knowing that 
me and only me, knew what the right decision was, helped me see the love and compassion that came with the decision to get an abortion. 
Mental health needs to be recognized as a factor when it comes to 
abortion. The time around that pregnancy, I was struggling severely with my mental health, specifically MST (Military Sexual Trauma) from sexual 
assault and rape while serving in the military, and wasn't getting any help.l 
knew l would have ended my life if l had continued with that pregnancy. 
Abortion is healthcare, plain and simple. The decision to get an abortion is 
an extremely personal decision that should be made only by that person, not by politicians that only wish to push their extreme beliefs on others. 
There are many reasons why a pregnant person wants or needs an abortion, each unique with their circumstances, and politicians, regardless of their own personal religious beliefs, have no place in anyone’s private 
medical decisions. As a Mainer, an American and a veteran, l value 
freedom for all, and this bill will protect our reproductive freedoms here in 
Maine. 
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD 1619. Thank you.
