Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Caleb Pippin and I live in Princeton. l am testifying today in opposition of LD 1619, An Act to 
Change Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws as well as LD776 and LD 1343. 
I'm testifying because these proposed changes to expand end encourage artiﬁcial abortion in the state of 
Maine are evil, because they are contrary to God's law. 
Each one of us has a standard, or set of standards that we live by. The God of Bible, who created our 
world and us on it, established a true standard that each of us are to live by. He prohibited the killing of 
human beings except in the most egregious circumstances, such as in response to murder and other 
serious crimes. 
He also prohibited partiality in the making and application of laws. 
LD1619 and these other proposed pieces of legislation expand Maine's already diabolical laws that 
break God's law by permitting the murder of innocent unborn children without consequence. They also 
contradict God's laws in that they show partiality, giving some the right to take the lives of others based 
upon arbitrary factors like size, development, dependence, or location. 
Life begins at fertilization. A unique human being with distinct DNA is created at that instant. After 
fertilization, there is no other comparable fundamental milestone until a person's death. Fertilization 
and death are the 2 primary milestones in each of our lives. This proposed legislation, which does not 
appear to recognize the humanity of a person until after their birth, is evil. Birth does not change the 
nature of a person, it is merely a change in their location and environment. Please, put a stop to this 
legislation. instead, develop legislation that will abolish abortion and extend equal protection to all 
Mainers, no matter their age or stage of development. 
To be consistent, and moral in God's eyes, our laws must afford equal protection to babies in the womb 
as it does to those outside the womb. 
One day, at the end of our lives, each of us will have to answer to God for how we use the resources, 
authority and position that He has entrusted to us. For those who reject God, there will be Hell to pay. 
Please, consider your personal state before our Creator before you make a decision on how you will vote. 
Please oppose this evil legislation. Thank you.
