Carl Welch
Mexico
LD 1619
Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee
Carl Welch, a resident of Mexico, Oxford County, Maine
Adequate Privacy-After reading the text of LD1619, my faith compels me to submit 
comment on LD1619.  When reading the federal handbook referenced in the 
legislative document, privacy seems to be adequately covered in the confidentiality 
text. The patient’s identification section explains the sensible rationale to provide 
some type of identification. HIIPA has been around for over 2 decades and should 
serve to further protect privacy.  The expectation of anonymity is always dangerous.  
Abortion Policy - We all know that not all sexual relations result in a pregnancy.  
Pregnancy itself is divinely appointed, so no one should interfere with the course of 
that pregnancy.   Furthermore, we should recognize that the viability of a baby begins 
at conception!  When conceived the baby is immediately viable, and remains so until 
some other event or factor impacts such viability.  In truth, babies are viable before 
we know the baby exists!  Viability is the default state of a baby in the womb and a 
life that should be protected. Through ultrasonography, I was able to watch my own 
child about 8 months before I was able to hold her in my arms.  She was alive!  The 
mother’s health is the only reasonable consideration when abortion is contemplated 
and is covered in current law.  A mother is defined as “a female parent.”  To be a 
parent implies one must have children.  That child may be in the womb.
While I acknowledge some pregnancies are inconvenient, inconvenience does not 
justify taking the life of a baby!  Governments should protect the right to life of a 
preborn baby.  A baby that is the most vulnerable person of our society.  We have 
numerous options for pregnancy prevention.  We should do all we can to prevent 
unwanted pregnancies which will logically save lives by preventing the aborting of 
more babies.  The proposed legislation will promote abortion.  
Accountability penalties - It curiously seems that woman’s healthcare takes a back 
seat with the proposed changes.  Why would we want to remove criminal penalties for
unqualified persons that perform abortions or other medical procedures?  
Please stop LD1619, thank you!

