To the Members of the Judicial Committee  
In regards to LD 1619, 776 and 1343,  
 
As a mother, business owner, a Christian, and since we now have to define th ese things , a woman , I am 
writing to you to oppose all three bills LD 1619, LD 776 and LD1343.  The title of LD 1619  is deceptiv e in 
calling this “An Act to I mprove Maine ’s Reproductive Privacy Laws. ” First there is not hing about human 
“reproducing ” in this bill, only the taking of a life.  There i s nothing about improving privacy, only 
allowing non -medical , unli censed individuals to p erform abortions without pen alty.  This is improving 
medical access or pr ivacy for women? These bills take wome n and our state backward , not forward.   
LD 1619 allows for the murder of in nocent babies.  After viability , which is agreed to be around 24 
weeks, it is no longer  just the woman ’s body, it is the baby ’s as well.  Neither the woman, the father nor 
the doctor have any rights over that child in respect to taking their life.  You are proposing to legalizin g 
the killing of innocent babies.  Doctors take an oath to “First do no harm. ”  You are telling them to br eak 
that oath .   
After Dobbs, Maine ’s abortion law that was on the books  went into effect and  provided legal abortions 
up to 15 weeks.  That is almost 4 months, plenty of time for a woman to find out she is pregnant, have 
discussion with the father, and seek out a li censed physician  to perform  the abortion.  Polls prior to the 
election of 2022  showed that only 10% of Maine ci tizens were concerned ab out our abortion  law.  Both 
the Governor and former Governor LePage ple dged not to change that law.  Now, Governor M ills and 
this committee have propose d extre me, radical laws that Maine citizens do not agree with, forcing us to 
pay for the murders  of innocent babies , and will do nothing to guarantee the health and safety of the 
women who get those abortions.  However, the bills do protect those scoundrels who p erform these 
horrific acts without a license and no guarantee of even a cle an medical facility – seriously,  what  are you 
thinking?  
Maine already has in place legalized abortion with which  a majority  of Mainers  agree .  In polls a cross the 
country , accepta nce of abortion procedures in the second trimester drop  preci pitously because it is the 
taking of a life, a baby , not a fetus.  How can you as legislat ors, as parents, propose this horri fic bill  or 
even thin k that  legalizing abortion to the end of term is decent ?  
Maine is an aging state where more p eople are dying rather than being born.  Five babies are ab orted a 
day in Maine , and taxpayers are paying  for this.  This is a taking – both of life and liberties , as most object 
to this pro cedure  past 15 weeks , but I am forced to pay for someone else’s immoral decision.  Maine ’s 
state legislat ure is going be yond rationality and reasonability  and Mainer s understand this.  I urge you all 
to not pass these bill s.  They do not improv e the  life, health and safety of Maine  women, and certain ly 
not our fu ture children .  I suggest you focus on improving adoption procedu res instead.   
 
Sincerely,  
Carolyn Brodsky  
12 Crescent Avenue  
Windham, ME 04062   
