Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Carol Mills, and l'm a resident of South Thomaston. l am writing to testify in opposition to LD 
1619, Governor Mills’ proposed bill to expand abortion access beyond viability. 
I'm a woman, l'm pro-women, l’m a social worker and advocate for women's rights in the fullest sense. 
Yet, l believe this legislation is bad for women, men, children, families, and bad for our Maine 
communities. 
As much as the wording of the legislation speaks of abortion being between a woman and her doctor, we 
must be honest that this legislation will make abortion in Maine legal up until birth for any reason. Social 
issues like financial stressors, poverty, domestic violence, etc., will be brought up, in addition to serious 
birth defects, as valid reasons to expand abortion. 
As a practicing social worker of many decades, l see these problems face-to-face every day, and there 
are no easy answers. However, we must ask ourselves if eliminating children will solve these serious 
social problems. l have great compassion for women and men grappling with an unplanned pregnancy, 
and also know of a multitude of accessible resources that could support them. I also wonder what our 
Maine young people—-already struggling with skyrocketing incidences of depression and anxiety since 
Covid-think about solving social problems by legislating the right to eliminate children. 
Whether one’s position is that there is a right to life or a right to abortion, this legislation is extreme, 
unnecessary, and opens the door to decreasing rights for unborn children, whose lives it would terminate 
in a most painful and unusually cruel manner. Abortions done after viability must by necessity use partial 
birth procedures and saline injections. If you have not already done so, l recommend you research from 
an unbiased source what these procedures entail, the ability of the unborn child to experience pain during 
these procedures, and the long term negative mental and physical health effects of abortion for women 
(notably increased rates of depression and breast cancer). 
A simple Google search of child development in utero after 22 weeks clearly shows much more thana 
blob of tissue. Please vote ouht not to pass. 
Sincerely, 
Carol Mills 
23 tron Tree St. 
South Thomaston, ME 04858 
207 691~5369
