As a young military nurse I was handed the “result” of an attempted abortion, told to put “it” in formaldehyde & send it to the lab. This “result” was a perfectly formed 25 week baby girl struggling to survive with her chest retracting from her attempts to breathe on her own. It was heart-breaking. I refused to and ran her to the NICU since I was at a premier medical center where we were saving preemies. The NICU nurses took her and began to help her but were abruptly ordered to stop and send her back. She was still fighting to live yet I was ordered again to put her in the formaldehyde and sent her off to the lab - in essence, drown her. I could not and she eventually died after an incredible fight to live. It still haunts me.  I ask you to consider 3 questions:   1. What would YOU have done in that situation? 2. What if this was your child or grandchild?  3. If a “25 weeker” is born alive and trying to breathe on her own, can you honestly live with the fact that you will be complicit in terminating lives up to 40 weeks? (which LD1619 would allow)  I implore you to oppose LD 1619.   In addition, statistics show that abortion is rarely the result of the mother’s life at risk. Cases of anencephaly are also rare and until facts became distorted in the “pro-abortion war”, this heart wrenching issue was always handled between a woman and her doctor. “Ectopic pregnancy” is a emergency medical condition which is always treated as such, so a woman would never be denied proper care due to any legislation.   I pray that all who will be involved in this decision, are truly educated on facts, not emotional rhetoric. I also hope that they have all seen ultrasounds of pre-born babies (including those filmed during an abortion with the baby trying to get away from the medical instruments). Due diligence would also include researching renowned doctors/scientists like Jerome Lejeune, pediatrician and geneticist, on when life truly begins.  Finally, our tax dollars should not fund abortions. Judeo-Christian organizations involved in promoting health and saving lives should not be required to perform or pay for abortions and this includes providing coverage for abortion through insurance. Planned Parenthood has made it clear they will help any woman secure an abortion and they have the financial support and easy access with facilities throughout Maine.  Please oppose LD935 Please oppose LD1343.  Please also oppose LD776 until clarity is provided to Maine citizens.   Thank you for your consideration. Christine Dunster. MA, BSN, RN  107 Millbrooke Farm Dr Wells, Maine 04090 
Christine Dunster
Wells
LD 1619
 As a young military nurse I was handed the “result” of an attempted abortion, told to 
put “it” in formaldehyde & send it to the lab. This “result” was a perfectly formed 25 
week baby girl struggling to survive with her chest retracting from her attempts to 
breathe on her own. It
 was heart-breaking. I refused to and ran her to the NICU since I was at a premier 
medical center where we were saving preemies. The NICU nurses took her and began 
to help her but were abruptly ordered to stop and send her back. She was still fighting 
to live yet I was
 ordered again to put her in the formaldehyde and sent her off to the lab - in essence, 
drown her. I could not and she eventually died after an incredible fight to live. It still 
haunts me.
 I ask you to consider 3 questions:
 1. What would YOU have done in that situation?
 2. What if this was your child or grandchild?
 3. If a “25 weeker” is born alive and trying to breathe on her own, can you honestly 
live with the fact that you will be complicit in terminating lives up to 40 weeks? 
(which LD1619 would allow)
I implore you to oppose LD 1619.
 In addition, statistics show that abortion is rarely the result of the mother’s life at 
risk. Cases of anencephaly are also rare and until facts became distorted in the 
“pro-abortion war”, this heart wrenching issue was always handled between a woman 
and her doctor. “Ectopic
 pregnancy” is a emergency medical condition which is always treated as such, so a 
woman would never be denied proper care due to any legislation.
 I pray that all who will be involved in this decision, are truly educated on facts, not 
emotional rhetoric. I also hope that they have all seen ultrasounds of pre-born babies 
(including those filmed during an abortion with the baby trying to get away from the 
medical instruments).
 Due diligence would also include researching renowned doctors/scientists like 
Jerome Lejeune, pediatrician and geneticist, on when life truly begins.
 Finally, our tax dollars should not fund abortions. Judeo-Christian organizations 
involved in promoting health and saving lives should not be required to perform or 
pay for abortions and this includes providing coverage for abortion through insurance.
Planned Parenthood
 has made it clear they will help any woman secure an abortion and they have the 
financial support and easy access with facilities throughout Maine.
 Please oppose LD935
 Please oppose LD1343.
 Please also oppose LD776 until clarity is provided to Maine citizens.
 Thank you for your consideration.
Christine Dunster MA, BSN, RN
 

