Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Rev. Christopher B. Cain, and l am a resident of Littleton 
Maine. l am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. This bill is beyond extreme and is 
unnecessary as “Medical necessity ” is covered by current law. lf passed this law would be 
among the most extreme abortion laws in the Nation. Abortion on demand, at anytime and for 
any reason is not only too extreme for Maine, but also an abomination against the very gift of life 
itself. This law would allow for the murder of children who are fully able to live outside of their 
mother’s womb. We value life because we recognize it is a gift given to us by God Himself. 
Within the past week our family has welcomed a baby who was born early, and l can assure you 
that looking at those pictures the gift of life and viability of that child and others like him is 
self-evident. 
In the United States, it is against the law to intentionally destroy the egg of a bald eagle. Under 
the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940, deliberately destroying - or even disturbing- 
a bald eagle's egg is punishable by a maximum $5,000 fine and up to a year in prison. 
Not only is it against federal law, but in the State of Maine it is illegal to destroy turtle eggs 
according to Title 12 Chapter 915 which prohibits the taking, possession or needless destruction 
of wild bird nests or eggs (§11854), 
Federal law provides even greater protection (and criminal penalties as severe as $100,000 and 
a year in prison) if you “take, harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, or capture any 
marine turtle, turtle nest, and/or eggs, or attempt to engage in any such conduct." 
We can all easily endorse such a law for animals who are on the endangered species list, 
recognizing the inherent value of the life of an eagle or a sea turtle, and that the life in those 
eggs is something that should be given the same level of protection. While the great bald eagle 
and the sea turtle are beautiful and valuable creatures, the children this bill would allow for the 
murder of are far more valuable and unique than any birds of the air or creatures of the sea. 
Furthermore, there is a vast untold toll because of abortion, which weighs heavily in the hearts 
and minds of the mothers, fathers and relatives who have gone through such a terrible 
experience. Women are lied to about the procedures, and abortion is often used to cover up 
sexual abuse so that the perpetrators can go on abusing those women, many of whom are 
underage. 
if we value the unborn life of birds and turtles, why should we value human life any less, 
especially the life of babies who are fully capable of living on their own apart from their mothers. 
Let us not hide behind the cloak of talking points, special interest groups and political 
correctness, what we do as a Nation we will have to give an account for, not only in this life, but 
in the next. I implore you to stand up for life and oppose this bill and all the others like it. 
Respectfully,V 
Rev. Christopher B. Cain
