Chris Gerardi
Whitefield
LD 1619
.Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the joint 
standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Chris Gerardi and I am a resident of 
Whitefield, Maine.  I am here to testify in opposition to LD1619.
As a father of five children and a Papa to nine grandchildren, I urge you to have 
mercy for the poor beating heart of the most innocent of children.  These children are 
“viable”, according to this bill to live on their own.  Our Nation’s most fundamental 
right is embodied in the Declaration of Independence, which states, that all “are 
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life”.
Please do not let this evil bill pass denying the child the right to life and putting the 
mother’s life in danger by lowering the standard of medical care and the reason for 
abortion itself.  According to Pew Research, “less than 20 percent of the voters 
support the right to an abortion in all cases.”  
When we first moved to Maine in 1985, my wife Vickie, was 9 months pregnant.  I 
met the doctor who delivered our son Daniel for the first time in the delivery room at 
Miles hospital.  On the follow up visit, I noticed he displayed his own artwork in the 
waiting room.  I asked my wife Vickie, how do these paintings make you feel?  She 
said “uneasy and sad.”  After a lengthy discussion with the doctor, he wrote me a 
letter stating that because of our talk he was no longer doing abortions.  I trust his 
artwork is more positive these days.
As a Pastor, I have served as Chaplin at Miles memorial hospital.  One time I was 
visiting a young lady who tried to commit suicide by jumping into the Damariscotta 
River.  After visiting for a while, I asked if I could ask her a personal question.  She 
said, yes.  Did you have an abortion?  She broke down, cried, and shared how it was 
tearing herself up in side.  
Aborting hurts all those involved.  Therefore, I urge you to support the Voters of 
Maine, Mothers and children in saying NO to this bill LD1619.
