Written Testimony for LD1619 5/1/20 23 
 
My name is Chris Phillips. I live in New S haron. I ’ve live d in Maine my whole life and I love this 
state. I ’m just an ordinary guy. I went t o and graduated from MSAD 9. I went on to get my Associates 
degree  in Building Construction from C.M.T.C. I ’ve been living and working  here for 49 years. I ’m writing 
today in opposition to LD1619. I ’ve never done this  sort of thing  before. I just found out about this bill 
yesterday and I wish I could testify in person.  
 I’d like to tell a short story about people that mean a lot  to me p ersonally ; my sister and bro ther 
in law (best friend)  and nephew .  My sister was pregnant with my nephew and was 26 weeks into her 
pregnancy when she was diagnosed with toxemia. She was r ushed to Portland hospital and had an 
emergency C section and my nephew was bo rn. They measured his weight in ounces ; he was tiny. I 
remember seeing him in the NICU (which he spent the first 6 months of his life in). He is now 20 years 
old and doing well . My point with the story is that this isn ’t a story, it ’s an actual account of a real pe ople 
here in Maine. My nephew was just as much a person the morning that my sister was diagnosed with 
toxemia as he was that night when he was removed via c sectio n. He , as do all others , deserved that 
right to live.  
 Members of this committee , you are hearing testim ony after testimony today just like this one. 
There are others standing outside in protest against LD1619. I’m asking you , I’m imploring you,  to stop 
this bill from passing. Each one of you as individuals know that my nephew was a person  pre-birth . You 
all know that a baby inside their mother  is a person.  I am writing today because I cannot be silent about 
this bill. I am goin g to give an account before my creator as to what I did to stand up for those who can ’t 
stand for themselves. You as individuals are also going to stand before your creator and give an account 
for the same thing. You have a responsibility to protect these  innocent ones. God create s all human 
beings in His own image. No one has the “right ” to kill these lives.  
 
Chris Phillips
New Sharon
LD 1619
Written Testimony for LD1619 5/1/2023
My name is Chris Phillips. I live in New Sharon. I’ve lived in Maine my whole life 
and I love this 
state. I’m just an ordinary guy. I went to and graduated from MSAD 9. I went on to 
get my Associates 
degree in Building Construction from C.M.T.C. I’ve been living and working here for
49 years. I’m writing 
today in opposition to LD1619. I’ve never done this sort of thing before. I just found 
out about this bill 
yesterday and I wish I could testify in person. 
I’d like to tell a short story about people that mean a lot to me personally; my sister 
and brother 
in law (best friend) and nephew. My sister was pregnant with my nephew and was 26 
weeks into her 
pregnancy when she was diagnosed with toxemia. She was rushed to Portland hospital
and had an 
emergency C section and my nephew was born. They measured his weight in ounces; 
he was tiny. I 
remember seeing him in the NICU (which he spent the first 6 months of his life in). 
He is now 20 years 
old and doing well. My point with the story is that this isn’t a story, it’s an actual 
account of a real people 
here in Maine. My nephew was just as much a person the morning that my sister was 
diagnosed with 
toxemia as he was that night when he was removed via c section. He, as do all others, 
deserved that 
right to live.
Members of this committee, you are hearing testimony after testimony today just like 
this one. 
There are others standing outside in protest against LD1619. I’m asking you, I’m 
imploring you, to stop 
this bill from passing. Each one of you as individuals know that my nephew was a 
person pre-birth. You 
all know that a baby inside their mother is a person. I am writing today because I 
cannot be silent about 
this bill. I am going to give an account before my creator as to what I did to stand up 
for those who can’t 
stand for themselves. You as individuals are also going to stand before your creator 
and give an account 
for the same thing. You have a responsibility to protect these innocent ones. God 
creates all human 
beings in His own image. No one has the “right” to kill these lives.
