Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
 
My name is Cindy Boucher and I reside in Winterport.  I am testifying in opposition of LD1619 – An Act 
to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
The wording of LD1619 does not stand up to scrutiny.  An abortion may be performed after viability 
when a licensed physician determines in his professional judgement that it’s necessary?!  That’s it?!  It 
does not even say “medically necessary.”  What does “necessary” mean then? Necessary for what 
reason…because the woman is distraught and doesn’t think she can handle raising a child right now? 
Necessary because the unsavory physician could use a few more greenbacks in his/her pocket?  
“Professional opinion” without restriction doesn’t even cut it.  It leaves too much room for corruption. 
Are the people of the state of Maine thought to be so ignorant that we believe no physician (even one 
working for an abortion clinic) would ever tell a desperate girl or woman that an abortion after viability 
is necessary, even if it isn’t; even if it lines his pocket? I’m sure that’s never happened before!  The word 
“necessary” without accountability is too subjective and gives the physician too much power, since it is 
not difficult to convince an already vulnerable, desperate woman that the abortion is necessary. And, if 
she is already determined, then there is no lawful reason the doctor can give to talk her out of it, even if 
he/she would like to. 
I lost a grandchild to an abortion.  It was in the first trimester of a perfectly healthy pregnancy.  Although 
the father wanted the baby and was willing and able to raise the child, the mother could hear no 
amount of reason beyond her emotions and desire not to have a baby at that time. Not one person at 
the abortion clinic gave her information about an alternative, but she was given the abortion pills and 
sent on her way with minimal information about what to expect, only to suffer through the night and 
much of the next day alone with her decision; alone with horrible pains and cramping until she finally 
expelled my grandchild like so much waste. It’s a disgustingly evil practice, and the proposed rewording 
of this policy would make the process of an abortion and even more painful and horrific experience for 
both mother and baby in the second and third trimester. 
As for removing the penalties; unconscionable! Talk about giving abusers more power over their victims.  
This point needs no explanation, but it could use some common-sense thinking.  Please, reconsider your 
support of LD1619 and vote “ought not to pass.” 
Thank you for your consideration and for your service! 
 
