Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Courtney Giovinazzi, and l'm a resident of West Bath. I'm here to testify in opposition to LD 
1619. 
in order for Maine to become a state the Missouri Compromise of 1820 would have to 
pass. This would set the precedent for the expansion of slavery throughout the country. 
l\/lainers were directly opposed to the spread of slavery. This was a ditﬁcult choice for the seven 
state representatives, a vote for the compromise would spread slavery,V 
a vote against, Maine 
would not become a state. Here I quote the Maine State Museum, "in the end only two of the 
seven voted in favor of lvlaines statehood. The other ﬁve could not bear to vote in favor of the 
expanding slavery in America, even if it meant losing the opportunity to become an 
independent state." They actually voted against statehood! And what pushed them into that, 
their conscience, they knew slavery was morally wrong even though it was not obvious to all 
Americans. The representatives of 1820 are now looked upon as upstanding, brave, might l say 
heroic. They stood against great pressures and chose the higher ground. As representatives of 
the great state of Maine you have excellent examples of courage to turn to. 
The country again is looking to our state to see how we will vote, there is a lot of 
pressure, there are innocent lives at stake. This bill is wrong for the State of Maine. Maine hasa 
policy to preserve the life of the mother, under title 22. Expanding abortion as proposed by this 
bill would open the doors to unimaginable outcomes. Please do not test the strength of the 
human condition. The purposeful death of a viable baby with no restrictions, even up to the 
point of birth, is inconceivable and deplorable. Removing punishment for unlicensed 
abortionists is reckless. 
l believe that in your heart of hearts you each know this bill goes too tar, but you have 
been under extreme pressure and inﬂuence to vote for this bill. There is no good in it, there is 
great good in voting against it. Show the country again that Maine has a strong moral standing, 
that we stand for what is right against pressures. Be courageous. Show that we uphold the 
ideals of the statement, "The way life should be." The people of Maine are with those of you 
who vote against this bill, you are not alone. Please vote ought not to pass.
