Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Cynthia Wardwell and I am a resident of Poland. I am here to testify in opposition to 
LD 1619. I am a mother of 7 grown children, the grandmother of 15 amazing grandchildren, 
ages 16 years-8 months, and am no stranger to difficult pregnancies. One grandchild was born 
six weeks early, after an emergency induction because of severe pre-eclampsia, another was 
born with a cleft palate, and another born with Biliary Atresia, requiring a liver transplant to 
survive. I am grateful to say that, because each of my daughters recognize the value of human 
life, and because of life-saving medical technology available today, each is healthy and thriving. 
I believe LD 1619 to be not only unnecessary according to current laws already in place to 
protect the mother, but to be drastic, cruel, and too extreme. Any reasons given to support 
taking a human life weeks, days, or minutes before birth are indefensible. There are always 
other options that don’t include murder, given all the resources available today; medically, 
financially, and socially. Maternal death due to pregnancy or childbirth is less than 10 in 
100,000. Fetal surgeons are able to successfully correct any number of birth defects in-utero. 
Social media celebrates when premature infants are born as early as 22 weeks and survive. It is 
incredulous to me that the value of human life is reduced to a matter of convenience or 
hardship. But, I say hardship should never equate to homicide. Why not instead enact state 
programs making adoption less expensive and more readily available? inconveniences and 
hardships do not stop at pregnancy. But using the same reasoning supporters of LD 1619 give, 
if applied to a toddler in the home, would be deemed a criminal offense. 
The most defenseless among us deserve the most protection. To do any less is unjust 
discrimination. As a pro-life advocate, I hold the inclusive view that all human life is valuable. I 
ask that you cast your vote to also oppose LD 1619, Thank you for your time and consideration.
