rt 
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Danielle Barriault, l am coming to you today to testify against LD 1619 and to speak on behalf 
of those who cannot speak up for themselves. I have lived in the beautiful state of Maine my entire life 
and care deeply for the people of Maine as a whole.A 
lt grieves me greatly that we need to be here today, speaking against this new bill that will allow those in 
their most innocent stage of life to be aborted up to 9 months gestation for any reason. Our state already 
allows abortion up to 24 weeks gestation and abortion at any stage if deemed medically necessary. The 
argument for this abortion law is that babies are not viable outside of the womb before 24 weeks. This 
new bill, however, wit! allow abortion right up until birth. Why is this necessary if we already allow women 
the opportunity to abort before 24 weeks? Not only is this child completely formed and able to live if given 
the chance, but the abortion process also becomes more dangerous for the mother when performed later 
on. Why would we want to allow babies who can be given the chance to live, to die a horrible death? Why 
would we want to put women in more danger than necessary during the abortion process? l believe life is 
valuable and worth saving at all stages of pregnancy, however, how can one look at a baby who can 
sun/ive outside of the womb and choose to end its life? 
We have so much technology now that provides wonderful care for premature babies. A wanted baby, if 
in distress, would be given the best care before delivery and after, anything less would be viewed as 
inhumane and murder. If lost, this child would be wept over and mourned, and rightly so. However, this 
new bill would allow viable unborn babies to be brutally aborted from the womb, the place they are 
supposed to be most safe and protected in this world. One day could be a difference of life or death fora 
baby. Once delivered, the child is protected and allowed to live, yet hours before, is viewed as someone 
eligible to be aborted. 
l believe all life is created by God and that we are immensely loved and valuable. I believe one of the 
greatest honors and duties of being a human being, is to show this love to others. To remind others just 
how valuable and irreplaceable they are. To fight for life, freedom, and justice. if these things stop being 
valuable to us, stop being the basis of what we build our lives on, what will become of our society? If 
others lives are not worth protecting, why are ours worth protecting? We are either deeply valuable and 
irreplaceable human beings, each and everyone adding something to this life that only that unique 
individual can offer, or we are not even worth being given the chance to live. I am asking you today to 
ponder the gravity of late term abortion and the repercussions it has on society. Thank you
