 
  
 
 
Written Testimony of Danielle Pimentel, J.D.  
Policy Counsel, Americans United for Life  
In Opposition  of LD 1619  
Submitted to the Judiciary  Committee  
May 1, 2023  
Dear Madam Chair Carney , Vice -Chair Moonen , and Members of the Committee:  
My name is Danielle Pimentel, and I serve as Policy Counsel at Americans United for 
Life ( “AUL ”). Established in 1971, AUL is a national law and policy nonprofit organization 
with a specialization in abortion, end -of-life issues, and bioethics law. AUL publishes pro -life 
model legislation and policy guides,1 tracks state bioethics legislation,2 and regularly testifies 
on pro -life legislation in Congress and the states. Our vision at AUL is to strive for a world 
where everyone is welcomed in life and protected in law . As Policy Counsel, I specialize in 
life-related legislation, constitutional law, and abortion jurisprudence.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify  against  LD 1619  (“LD 1619 ” or “bill”).  If 
enacted, this bill  will result in further  harm to  women and young girls  by 1) authorizing 
elective abortion s after viability , and 2) removing criminal penalties that protect their health 
and safety . I strongly  urge this Committee  to oppose  LD 161 9 and act in accordance with its  
responsibility to protect the welfare of  the women and young girls  of Maine . 
I. The Bill Threatens the Welfare of Women and Young Girls by Allowing  Elective 
Abortion s Up Until Birth  
To say that LD 1619  is an extreme bill would be an understatement.   If enacted, LD 
1619 would allow a woman to obtain an elective abortion up until her baby’s birth date. 
Although Section 2 of t he bill only removes the short phrase , “to preserve the life or health 
of the mother,” and replaces it with 16 seemingly innocent words, the consequences of this 
new language will have detrimental effects  on the health and safety of women. These 16 new 
 
1 Pro-Life Model Legislation and Guides , AMS. UNITED  FOR  LIFE, https://aul.org/law -and-policy/  (last visited Mar. 
13, 2023). AUL is the original drafter of many of the hundreds of pro -life bills enacted in the States in recent 
years.  See Olga Khazan, Planning the End of Abortion , ATLANTIC  (July 16, 2020), 
www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/07/what -pro-life-activists -really -want/398297/  (“State 
legislatures have enacted a slew of abortion restrictions in recent years. Americans United for Life wrote most 
of them.”) ; see also Anne Ryman & Matt Wynn, For Anti -Abortion Activists, Success of ‘Heartbeat’ Bills was 10 
Years in the Making , CTR. FOR PUB. INTEGRITY  (Jun. 20, 2019) , https://publicintegrity.org/politics/state -
politics/copy -paste -legislate/for -anti-abortion -activists -success -of-heartbeat -bills -was -10-years -in-the-
making/ (“The  USA TODAY/Arizona Republic  analysis found Americans United for Life was behind the bulk of 
the more than 400 copycat [anti -]abortion bills introduced in 41 states.”).  
2 Defending Life: State Legislation Tracker , AMS. UNITED FOR LIFE, https://aul.org/law -and-policy/state -
legislation -tracker/ (last visited Mar. 13, 2023).  
2 
 
 words broadly authorize physicians to per form elective abortions up until birth as long as 
the physician deems it “necessary” according to their own “professional judgment.” Under 
Maine’s current law, elective abortions are prohibited after a n unborn  baby is viable, i.e. , 
after  the unborn baby is around 20 to 24 weeks’ gestation.  A woman may undergo an 
abortion after viability only if it is “necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother. ” 
However, under LD 1619, a mother’s  life or health would not have to b e at risk  in order for 
her to have an abortion after her unborn child is viable . In fact, LD 1619 would allow a 
woman to obtain an abortion for any given reason, as long as the physician deems it 
“necessary.” Notably, t he bill fails to  define the word “necessary,” thus, it will be left to each  
physician’s subjective opinion as to when an abortion  is “necessary.”  Maine would, thereby, 
abdicate its role  in protecting human life at all stages . 
Additionally, b y authorizing  elective abortions up until birth, this bill goes well 
beyond the overruled decisions in Roe v. Wade ,3 and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern 
Pennsylvania v. Casey ,4 which only licensed abortion through viability.  Only six jurisdic tions 
explicitly endorse  abortion -on-demand throughout pregnancy , endangering some of their 
most vulnerable citizens .5 Rather , the legislature should reject LD 1619  and affirm Maine’s 
legitimate interest to protect life  like many other states have done.6 
a. The Bill Subjects Women to Late -Term Abortions that Carry High er Risks  of Life -
Threatening Hea lth Complications  
Under Maine’s current abortion statute, women are already subject ed to grave health 
complications  due to the risks associated with abortion . However, t he passage of LD 1619  
will result in  even greater harm  to women by authori zing  elective  abortion up until  birth . It 
is undisputed  that abortion poses risks  to women, and the risk of harm increases 
substantially at later gestational age s. Even Planned Parenthood agrees that abortion 
becomes riskier later in pregnancy, and states on its national website that, “[t]he chances of 
problems gets higher the later you get the abortion, and if you have sedation or general 
anesthesia.  . . ,” which would b e necessary for an abortion at or after 20 weeks  of gestation.7  
Ten percent of women suffer  immediate complications from abortion , includ ing 
blood clots, hemorrhag es, incomplete abortions, infection s, and injur ies to the cervix and 
 
3 410 U.S. 113 (1973), overruled by Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Org., 142 S. Ct. 2228 (2022).  
4 505 U.S. 833, overruled by Dobbs , 142 S. Ct. 2228.  
5 Eighteen states have laws abolishing abortions at any gestational age, including Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, 
Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, 
Texas, Utah, Wisconsin, West Virgini a, and Wyoming. Three states have laws that abolish abortion at six weeks’ 
gestation, including Iowa, Ohio, and Georgia.  
6 CAL. CONST . art. I, § 1.1; MICH. CONST . art. I, § 28; 775 ILL. COMP. STAT. 55/1 -1 to 55/1 -97 (2019); MINN. STAT. § 
145.409;  N.Y.  PUB. HEALTH LAW §§ 2599 -AA to 2599 -BB (McKinney 2019); VT.  CONST . ch. I, art. 22; see also Dobbs, 
142 S. Ct. at 2282 -84 (acknowledging that states have a legitimate interest in protecting maternal health and 
safety and preservin g prenatal life).  
7 See How Safe Is An In -Clinic Abortion? , PLANNED PARENTHOOD 
https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/abortion/in -clinic -abortion -procedures/how -safe -is-an-in-
clinic -abortion (last visited Apr. 28, 2023).  
3 
 
 other organs.8 Even more concerning is that  1/5 of these complications are life -threatening.9 
Further, the incidence of major complications during an abortion procedure is significantly 
higher after 20 weeks’ gestation.10 For example,  after 8 weeks’ gestation, the relative risk of 
mortality increases by 38 percent for each additional week.11  
Because LD 1619  allows abortion throughout a woman’s pregnancy, more women 
will experience life -threatening complications from later -term abortions, which will also 
increase the number of maternal deaths. The women of Maine  deserve better than to be 
subject ed to late -term  abortion procedures that thr eaten their health and safety. Today, this 
Committee can protect the maternal health of its citizens by rejecting LD 1619 .   
b. The Bill Ignores Maine ’s Legitimate Interest in Preventing Fetal Pain  
By opposing LD 1619 , this Committee will also protect Maine ’s legitimate interest in 
preserving prenatal life and mitigating fetal pain.12 Because LD 1619  authorizes elective 
abortion up until a baby’s birth date,  unborn babie s who can experience pain from abortion 
are left unprotected.  
Current medical science has firmly established the existence of pain in preborn 
infants at or before 20 weeks.13 In 2019, scientists even found evidence of fetal pain as early 
as 12 weeks’ gest ation.14 Another study from 2010 found that “the earlier infants are 
delivered, the stronger their response to pain ” because the “neural mechanisms that inhibit 
pain sensations do not begin to develop until 34 -36 weeks [] and are not complete until a 
significant time after birth.”15  As a result, unborn children display a “hyperresponsiveness” 
to pain.16 According to one group of fetal surgery experts, “[t]he administration of anesthesia 
directly to the fetus is critical  in open fetal surgery procedures. ”17  Given the substantial 
medical evidence illustrating that preborn babies can experience pain by at least 20 weeks , 
it is well within Maine ’s legitimate interest to oppose LD 1619  and minimize fetal pain as 
much as poss ible.  
 
8 See id. (listing  complications that arise from later -term abortions); see also REPORT OF THE SOUTH DAKOTA TASK 
FORCE TO STUDY ABORTION 48 (2005) (finding that 10% of women undergoing induced abortion will suffer 
immediate complications).  
9 REPORT OF THE SOUTH DAKOTA TASK FORCE TO STUDY ABORTION , supra note 8, at 48.  
10 Linda A. Bartlett et al., Risk Factors for Legal Induced Abortion -Related Mortality in the United States , 103 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY 729, 731 (2004).  
11 Id. at 731 ; PROFESSIONAL ETHICS COMM . OF AM. ASSOC . OF PRO-LIFE OBSTETRICIANS & GYNECOLOGISTS , Induced 
Abortion & the Increased Risk of Maternal Mortality , Comm. Op. 6 (Aug. 13, 2019).  
12 See Dobbs, 142 S. Ct. at 2282 -83 (acknowledging that states have a legitimate interest in preserving 
prenatal life and mitigating fetal pain).  
13 Federal Pain Capable  Act, S. 160, 116th Cong.  § 2(1) –(11) (2019).  
14 Stuart W.G.  Derbyshire  & John C.  Bockmann,  Reconsidering  Fetal  Pain , 46 JOURNAL OF MEDICAL 
ETHICS  3 (2020).  
15 Charlotte Lozier Institute,  Fact Sheet: Science of Fetal Pain , https://lozierinstitute.org/fact -sheet -science -of-
fetal -pain/#_ednref14  (last updated  Feb. 19, 2020).  
16 Christine Greco and Soorena Khojasteh, Pediatric, Infant, and Fetal Pain , CASE STUDIES IN PAIN MANAGEMENT  379 
(2014).  
17 Maria J. Mayorga -Buiza et al., Management of Fetal Pain During Invasive Fetal Procedures. Lessons Learned 
from a Sentinel Event , 31 EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ANESTHESIOLOGY 188 (201 4). 
4 
 
 II. Repealing the Criminal Penalties in Maine’s Abortion Statute  Prevents Women 
from Seeking Justice  if They Are Harmed During an Abortion  
Maine has a legitimate interest in protecting maternal health and safety, as noted by 
the United States Supreme Court in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization .18  Yet, LD 
1619  directly contradicts with Maine’s  legitimate interest to safeguard pregnant mothers 
because the bill removes c ommonsense protections for their life and health. Under  Maine‘ s 
current abortion statue,  if an unlicensed  person knowingly performs an abortion  on a 
pregnant woman , they are  guilty of a Class C crime.19 Anyone who assists an unlicensed 
person in the performance of an abortion  is also  guilty of a Class C crime.20  Furthermore, if 
a physician performs an abortion after viability and knowingly disregards the viability of the 
unb orn child and that the abortion “was not necessary for the preservation of the life or 
health of the mother,” they are guilty of a Class D crime.21 These criminal penalties ensure 
women receive justice for harm caused by physicians or unlicensed persons performing 
illegal abortions. Yet, LD 1619  seeks to  eliminate  these penalties . As a result , if an unlicensed 
person  or physician performs an illegal abortion and gravely harms a pregnant woman, the 
injured wom an will have no legal recourse  to hold them accountable under  Maine’s abortion 
statute.  
The policy behind this bill – reducing  criminal penalties for physicians’  misconduct at 
the expense of women’s health and safety – is gravely concerning , especially when abortion 
providers have caused the death of many women.22 The criminal penalties under Maine’s 
abortion statute are necessary  because they protect women who are harmed during illegal 
abortions and hold the offending physician or non-physician accountable  for their 
malfeasance . In removing these criminal penalties, women will be forced to suffer from the 
harms of abortion in silence, while physicians and non -physicians will be allowed to violate 
the law without punishment.  
III. Conclusion  
For years, the abortion industry has marketed abortion as essential healthcare. This 
could not be farther from the truth. Abortion is the intenti onal destruction of a unique human 
being. Not only does abortion destroy a preborn child, but it is also a devasting practice for 
 
18 See Dobbs, 142 S. Ct. at 2282 -83. (2022).  
19 Me. Stat. tit. 22  §1598 (3)(B).  
20 Id.  
21 Id. at §1598 (4).  
22 Some  examples include Kermit Gosnell,  who  was found guilty of involuntary manslaughter, and Robert Rho, 
who botched an abortion that led to the death of the young woman.  See Conor  Friedersdorf,  Why Dr. Kermit 
Gosnell’s Trial Should Be a Front -Page  Story , ATLANTIC  (Apr. 12, 2013), 
https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2013/04/why -dr-kermit -gosnells -trial -should -be-a-front -
page -story/2749 44/; Associated Press,  NY Doctor Pleads Guilty  to Negligent Homicide  in Botched Abortion 
Procedure that Killed  Woman , NY DAILY NEWS (May 5, 2018),  https://www.nydailynews.com/new -
york/queens/ny -doctor -pleads -guilty -abortion -procedure -killed -woman -article -1.3972502. In New Mexico, 
Keisha Atkins died following an elective 24 -week abortion after the clinic instructed her to not seek 
emergency care.  See Marian Camacho,  Wrongful Death Lawsuit Targets Albuquerque Abortion Clinic , KOB  
4 (Sept. 12, 2018),  https://w ww.kob.com/albuquerque -news/southwestern -womens -options -wrongful -
death -lawsuit/5067812/.  
5 
 
 women that harms their health and endangers their lives . By authorizing elective abortions 
throughout pregnancy  and repealing criminal penalties under Maine’s abortion statute , the 
state is abandoning women and unborn children  to the life -threatening harms of abortion  
and turning a blind eye to physicians and unlicensed people who violate the law and harm 
women . If this bill is passed, Maine will become a safe haven for unscrupulous abortion 
doctors . Rather than  reducing  legal protections for wome n, the legislature should  be 
enacting measures that safeguard  maternal health , preserv e prenatal life , and mitigat e fetal 
pain . For these reasons, I strongly  urge the Committee to reject  this bill, and, in doing so,  
protect mothers and unborn children in Maine .  
Respectfully Submitted,  
      
 
Danielle Pimentel , J.D.  
      Policy Counsel  
      AMERICANS UNITED FOR LIFE 
