Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee, 
My name is Danika Turcotte and I live in the town of Wooiwich. I ﬁrst want to say thank 
you for what you do, and for serving the people of Maine. I am here today to testify in 
opposition to the bill LD1619. 
I do not believe there is any logical, let alone moral, reason for Maine to legalize and 
allow 3'“ trimester abortions. If there is a situation that arises in the 3'“ trimester of 
pregnancy where it would be best for the mother to not be pregnant anymore and her 
baby is past viability, that baby could be safely delivered and given the appropriate 
medical intervention to give them the best chance at a healthy, full life — in fact, a baby 
born at 22 weeks was recently released from Maine Medical Center and is doing well. In 
the case where the mother feels she cannot care for the baby as needed, then that baby 
could be placed for adoption with a loving family. My husband and I have been unable to 
have children for the past 6 years, however we would be very open to adoption if it 
wasn't for the extreme price tag. This leads me to a few statistics I would like to share 
with you — according to American Adoptions, it is estimated that around 2 million 
couples are currently waiting to adopt in the United States — which means there as many 
as 36 families waiting for every one child that is placed for adoption. There are so many 
families who would be overjoyed to welcome a child into their family through adoption, 
even more than the 2 million currently waiting... if it wasn't for the high price of 
adoption. According to an online source, an adoption through an adoption agency 
typically costs between $30,000-$60,000, and an independent adoption costs between 
$25,000-$45,000. 
The real discussion I believe we need to have here is about what kind of reform we need 
in our State so that way adoption is a realistic and obtainable option for not only Maine 
families, but also an option that pregnant mothers feel conﬁdent deciding for their 
unborn baby. In the meantime, choosing to end the lives of immeasurably valuable 
children is not the solution. We need to ﬁght for the next generation of Mainers, not 
take their lives from them. 
I urge you, please, think this through and vote ”ought not to pass" on bill LD1619. The 
future of Maine depends on it.
