Testimony of David C Burns 
before 
the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary 
May 1, 2023 
LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee. 
I am David Burns from Whiting, former member of our House of Representatives and Senate. 
During my eight years in the Legislature, I had the privilege of serving on this Committee for 
four years and with some of you serving here now. But I can say that it’s with a very heavy heart 
that I am appearing here before you today! I am here today to express my strong opposition to 
LD 1619. 
Those who come to the Legislature to testify on a bill most always try to express something 
profound, which may get committee members’ attention or gain their support. I only hope to 
cause you to think through what is before you in this bill, very carefully. If passed, LD 1619 
would make Maine only l of six states in the nation to do so and become the most extreme 
abortion legislation in the nation. Maine would become an extreme outlier. 
I see the incentive for this bill more as a ﬁnancial one, rather than an effort to enhance 
“reproductive rights” . Those responsible for its inception know that it would draw abortion 
services, ﬁnancial resources and clients from across the Country. 
Abandoning the requirements that an abortion should only be performed prior to “viability ”, 
unless a qualiﬁed physician determines it necessary after “viability ” , becomes a cruel and unjust 
assault on our most venerable humans. Going back to sanctioning “back alley” abortions by 
unqualiﬁed persons by decriminalizing them (which this bill prescribes) is contrary to all the 
logic and arguments previously used in support of abortions and contrary to everything this State 
and our people stand for. 
Finally, this legislation will clearly lead to barbaric, selective abortions, when it is determined 
that some mental or physical defect may be present, prior to birth. My wife and I adopted a 2 ‘/2 
year old boy with Autism and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. Eric is 39 years old now and we camiot 
imagine our lives without him. His life is as precious and wonderful as mine or any of yours! 
Had this bill been law before he was born, Eric probably would have been terminated. 
This should not be a political discussion, but one of facts, science, right and wrong. I implore 
each one of you to very carefully think through all the terrible implications this legislation has 
for our State, our citizens and unborn babies. I promise that I have prayed that for each one of 
you Judiciary members to do just that! Thank you for listening to me.
