David Milligan
Rumford
LD 1619
A prayer...  
    Lord God Almighty. King of all creation. Please grant us the needed wisdom and 
courage to do what is right in your sight. May we speak with honor  and dignity. 
Please tune our hearts to have love for all who will be effected by the outcome of this 
issue. To the one way or the other. Thank you for life. In Jesus name. Amen
I have ordered my testimony in three perspectives. 
1.As father of a teen girl
2.As a fellow sinner
3.As a sinner saved by grace
As a father I am very concerned. From what I understand, this proposed law would 
allow my teenaged daughter to make this type of decision all alone. It would also 
allow her to secretly seek out ways to have an abortion. I am learning that, these ways
could include people that are unskilled or unlicensed in killing the unborn, unsanitary,
and dangerous. I use the word killing because that is what it is no matter how you 
slice it. If you are going to stop a pregnancy you will need to kill. It’s common 
knowledge that when you relax penalties involving big money businesses like 
abortion it leads to an abundance of shady and dangerous business in the back ally.
 
From a fellow sinner perspective, this matter hits home. In the mid 80’s I found 
myself facing abortion.  My girlfriend became pregnant and we just accepted the idea 
of having a baby. We thought of names for the child. People kept telling us we would 
“ruin our lives” if the child was born. Honesty, I didn’t want to “ruin my life” so I 
bought into it. I influenced my girl friend to just get it done. She was not ok with it, 
but we set a date for the killing. I knew we were killing but I thought it was better 
than “ruining my life”. However, she was already a MOM from the day we found out 
she was pregnant. I will never forget how she looked when she got home from the 
abortion. She was consumed with guilt and depression. There was nothing I could do. 
I believe this depression changed her forever. We had to force forgetfulness just to 
move on. 
And from the perspective of a sinner saved by grace, I have been forgiven, forgiven 
myself and I was enabled to sincerely apologized to my ex-wife for treading on her 
God given instincts for motherhood. I now agree with God and what He says about 
abortion.
“You shall not murder. Exodus 20:13 NKJV
“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you  Jeremiah 1:5 NKJV
We must change our approach to a God approved; pro-life approach, or our society 
will fail. We have already fallen into great depressions and anxieties. It has already 
begun. Please do not make laws that approve of doing what is wrong.

