IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1619 . 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary:‘ 
I' 
My name is David Swihart, and l am a resident of Hampden. l am here to testify in 
opposition to Legislative Document 1619. _ "I 
The founding fathers of our nation including John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, John 
Hancock, and Thomas Jefferson laid out the following plain and clearly in the 
Declaration of Independence:I
‘ 
“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are 
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, 
Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." 
Please note that this is an AND statement, not an OR statement. 
While I recognize that today's hearing is about LD 1619 and not about the recent 
Dobbs v Jackson Supreme Court decision, l ﬁnd the specific arguments by the Supreme 
Court Justices for and against the issue of abortion valuable to our dialogue here today. 
On the pro-abortion side of the argument, Supreme Court Justices Breyer, Sotomayor, 
and Kagan put forth the dissenting opinion: 
"Women have relied on the availability of abortion both in structuring their 
relationships and in planning their lives." 
While I have much to say about the government using incentives of law in the 
structuring of relationships, three minutes is not enough time to have a true 
conversation about the societal costs that come with laws that incentivize hedonism and 
disincentivize the family structure. 
I return again to the quote from the dissenting opinion: "Women have relied on the 
availability of abortion both in structuring their relationships and in planning their lives." 
When talking about women planning their lives, specifically, they reference career and 
education. The argument is that the career of a woman in these United States is more 
important than the life of the child in her womb. They contend that the ability to enda 
pregnancy up to the point of viability is crucial to a woman's "liberty" . To get the 
argument down to it's most fundamental point, they value the liberty of the mother over 
the life of the child. l would remind you that the founding principle of Life, Liberty, and 
the pursuit of happiness is an AND statement. Therefore, the pursuit of liberty for one 
cannot come at the cost of the life of another., 
Even so, the dissenting opinion contends that the guarantee to equal ‘liberty’ within 
the fourteenth amendment protects a woman's choice to obtain an abortion up to the 
point of fetal viability._This is already Maine state law, with an exception carved out to 
presen/e the life or health of the mother. The proposed legislation goes beyond the 
stage of pregnancy argued for in the supreme court opinion.' 
LD 1619 has two key points: allowing abortions to be performed past the point of 
viability, and decriminalizing abortions in non-medical settings. Once again referencing 
the dissenting opinion in the Dobbs v Jackson case, the minority states in regardto
what are commonly known as ‘back-alley abortions ‘: 
"[Women] will turn [...] to illegal and unsafe abortions. They may lose not just their 
freedom, but their lives." , 
l contend that the proposal to remove criminal penalties for abortions performed 
outside of sterile medical settings and performed by people other than licensed medical 
professionals laid forth in Legislative Document 1619 will undeniably lead to an increase 
in ‘back-alley abortions ’ . By removing these penalties, the proposed legislation is 
incentivizing abortions to be performed outside of medical settings. "They may lose not 
just their freedom, but their lives." What do the citizens of Maine have to gain from 
decriminalizing these back-alley abortions? l, for one, do not see any benefit of striking 
the penalties from Maine's Reproductive Privacy Law. I would bet that the majority of 
the citizens of Maine would agree with me on that point, and l pray that the legislature 
will represent the interests of your citizens.
