Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Deanna Guimond, and l live in Freeport with my husband of 44 years. I am a lifelong 
resident of Maine. 
l am blessed to be a parent of one, adopted at birth, son, and am now blessed with two very 
active grandsons. The adoption was very special and with only10 days’ notice. It was meant to 
be. I was especially blessed to be there from the beginning, starting at his cesarean birth.This 
was a true miracle for us. Having struggled with infertility for 15 years with several miscarriages, 
ectopics and repairs. I cherish the miraculous creation of human life. 
I am testifying today in opposition of the Legislative Document 1619. A bill named "An action to 
Improve Maines Reproductive Privacy Laws" , also known as the Late Term Abortion Bill. I am 
testifying today because l believe a viable human life deserves the right to live. The current law 
allows this. LD 1619 is an extreme bill that allows elective abortion up to birth. l have worked 
for 45 years in the operating room and in the medical, surgical and OB settings. l value and have 
immense respect for the medical physician's role, to evaluate, to counsel, to present all options, 
and to present all risks to patients seeking an abortion. I also strongly feel the medical oath we 
take to promote life and do no harm, is being violated in LD1619. I believe that anyone who 
performs or assists on an abortion, without a medical degree should be prosecuted for a ClassC 
Crime. Only this protects the standard quality of care being given to patients. Picture in your 
mind, a newborn baby that's alive and well. This bill LD1619, allows that ONLY minutes before, 
that viable human life could have been aborted. That seems inhumane to me. Please oppose 
this unnecessary, drastic bill that the majority of Mainers do not want to be passed. LD 1619 
diminishes the value of a viable human life. The current law preserves the value of a viable 
human life. Please oppose LD 1619 and show Mainers that you also value a viable human life. 
I thank you all most respectfully for hearing my testimony today. Please vote ought not to pass.
1
