Debbie  Tibbetts 
Lewiston 
LD 1619
My grandson was diagnosed with Anencephaly and wasn’t supposed to live very long
after birth. The doctors encouraged abortion, but the parents decided to continue with 
the pregnancy to meet their child and say goodbyes. Well my grandson lived and 
because he lived the doctor encouraged that they stop feeding him to let him “go 
peacefully “. I heard this doctor say … you have other children at home this is best for
your baby. This doctor had no right to take away my grandson’s warmth and 
nutrition, this doctor encouraged death to parents in their weakest most vulnerable 
time of grief. To me this was a form of abortion/ murder. The parents had already 
decided on life, they wanted to wait till the Good Lord took their baby when he saw 
fit. The thing is my Grandson wasn’t in any pain because his birth defect didn’t allow 
him to feel pain. The Doctor from the beginning encouraged abortion and she used 
this very fragile moment to encourage death even after birth. This was discrimination 
against a child born with a disability and in my opinion immoral and went against 
their code of ethics. It took 15 days of starvation before my grandson died. Yes he 
didn’t die from his birth defect he was killed by starvation. So if you think that our 
medical professionals make moral and sound decisions… You are wrong!!!
I fought very hard to save his life. I reached out to every legal and state official and 
nothing helped. Our family has been torn apart and I not only lost my grandson but I 
lost my son. All because I VALUE LIFE!!! This bill discusses me!!!
Please do not put these decisions about life in the Health care Professionals because 
not all of them care about the well being of their patients. 
No one has a right to determine “Quality “ of Life or so called “ Normalcy “ of a 
human being.
My Grandson “ may” not have lived long, but if this doctor didn’t push abortion and 
death maybe … the Good Lord would have taken my grandson in his own time and I 
would still have a relationship with my son . But no I don’t because I fought the 
hospital and the doctors and my son was brainwashed into believing it was okay to 
starve their baby because the doctors told them it was the right thing to do. I’m sorry 
but he wanted to eat, because I feed him his last bottle. He didn’t need feeding tubes 
or anything to sustain his life. All he needed was warmth and food. Just like any 
normal baby would need.. 
Shame on our society to think that it’s OK to just take their food away and let them 
just die. It’s inhumane and wrong just the same as abortion is inhumane and wrong. I 
plead with you to make the right moral decision in the name of Jesus.
Please don’t pass this bill… Our Health care professionals are not to be trusted with 
innocent babies 
