1 
Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Debra Heathcote, and I am a resident of Holden, in Penobscot 
County. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
I am a hospital crisis worker, a former teacher, and the grandmother of 10 
beautiful grandchildren. I speak to you now of one grandson, currently a bright 
and talented 12-year-old boy. His story goes like this: 
When Beniah was 21 weeks in the womb, he was diagnosed with spina 
biﬁda, which means his spinal cord had an interruption in development. The 
doctor offered to end the pregnancy with a surgical abortion, grimly stating that 
he could be a vegetable. Data shows that 66% of babies so diagnosed are 
terminated. However, Beniah's parents declined that solution. As Beniah 
matured in the womb, a hospital pediatrician predicted that Beniah would be 
blind and the 2 lobes of his brain would not be able to communicate. The doctor 
made that conclusion because when reading the ultrasound, he could not see the 
part of the brain that connect the two lobes). On the other hand, the pediatric 
neurologist (bless his heart) weighed in and said these profound words: "Probably
12 
everyone has something abnormal about their brains, and they just don't know it, 
because they learn to compensate. Let's wait and see." 
What followed was a time of anguished prayer and encouragement from 
many sources. Beniah was born a full-term baby and immediately underwent 
corrective surgery with the kind neurosurgeon. So would he be considered a 
viable birth? Hmm. Today Beniah is a smart, kind, middle child in a family of6 
boys and one girl. He excels at chemistry and building Legos. He is also the most 
patient 12-year-old l know (and I taught 6*“-graders). According to his mother, he 
wants to grow up to be a scientist and work on ways to ﬁx damaged nervous 
systems. He will be an overcomer because the doctors, who did not know 
everything, did not call the shots. He may change the world. 
l don't think Beniah knows these all the details. But he would want others 
to have the same chance he did —- a chance to have a life, to be prayed for, to be 
healed, and to someday heal others. God is gracious. Don't take what God has 
made and despise it. 
Please do not turn Maine into an abortion mecca where people from all 
over the world come to have their full-term, unrestricted abortions. Do not turn 
”Vacationland" into ”Abortionland." Abortion is NOT ”the way life should be."
2
3 
This is a bill the Mainers do not want. Please represent the majority, the people in 
Maine who do not support LD 1619 or it's add-ons. 
Thank you.
3
