Diane Vernesoni
Topsham
LD 1619
Dear Senate Chair Carney, Rep Chair Moonen, and members of the members of the 
Judiciary Committee:
My name is Diane Vernesoni and I live in Topsham, Maine
In regard to LD1619 I would like to submit the following testimony:
Our country was founded on Christian values that treasured and protected the lives of 
our citizens.  All citizens.  This is especially true of our most vulnerable, our children.
A Christian knows that life begins are conception.  Where there had been nothing, 
now there is a new human being formed.  This human is filled with potential and love.
This human is full of life!  A scientist knows that this is a new life full of possibilities.
Scientifically, there was nothing there and now there is a new lifeform.  A teacher 
knows what learning this new life will accomplish over a lifetime.  A parent knows all
the "troublesome comforts" this new life will bring to them and the happiness.  A 
country can only dream of all the changes that could be brought about by this new 
life. 
LD1619 has taken all the potential for a worthwhile, happy, accomplished, and 
science out of bringing a new lifeform, a baby, a NEW LIFE, into this world.  A 
"viable" baby.  A baby with a whole life ahead of it!  This legislation makes it 
dependent upon finding a licensed physician willing to do it for the money.  Even if 
they are not licensed this bill takes any liability for doing it.  This will lead to many 
botched abortions, I'm afraid.  This is an abomination.  
Our Governor has said she will not extend the "adequate abortion laws" we already 
had in Maine.  She has broken that promise to her constituents.  Hold her to her 
promise!  Most important, this legislation has devalued life in its purest form, a baby. 
If women want birth control, they need to take care of that before they get pregnant 
and not make the baby pay with its life.  Life is too precious for us to do that.  
Therefore, I implore you all to vote to NOT PASS this bitter piece of legislation.  
Think of your children and grandchildren.  What would your life be without them?  
What would the world be without them?  What if Einstein or Michelangelo or 
Churchill or Lincoln had never been allowed to be born?  Where would the world be 
today?
Thank you for your consideration!
Respectfully submitted,
Diane Vernesoni, Topsham
