Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Judiciary Committee, my name is Dianne Fazio and l am a resident of Westbrook. l’m here today 
to testify in opposition to LD 1619." 
l remember when “safe, legal, and rare” was the pro-choice slogan. That was dropped 
about ten years ago because it was no longer true. Late-term abortion is not safe and it 
is not health care. We know that it poses greater medical risk to the mother. And her 
safety would be further jeopardized with the passing of LD 1619. Because it eliminates 
any serious penalties for an unlicensed person who provides an abortion illegally, we 
could actually see an increase in illegal abortions. 
Pro-abortion leaders have been advancing more and more extreme abortion laws, but 
gradually, in an effort to desensitize us to the cruelty of late-term abortion. The hope is 
that we'll eventually accept even abortion-on-demand until the moment of birth. But, we 
can ’t do that because it violates our basic human decency. We cannot and will not 
accept infanticidel Can you imagine being present, watching on a screen while a baby 
who's past the point of viability is destroyed inside the womb? l doubt you could. l know 
l wouldn’t be able to. 
No woman hopes to one day have an abortion. We know it’s often coerced by the 
partner or another person. As a woman’s pregnancy advances, she’s already bonding 
with this little life inside her and, without being pressured into abortion, she may be 
more inclined to accept support and resources offered for herself and her child. This 
extreme and unconscionable bill, if made into law, would encourage more to abortions 
at any stage of pregnancy and for any reason. 
On a personal note: From time to time when this topic comes up, an image comes into 
my mind of myself in the future, sitting with my grandchildren when one of them asks, 
“Grandma, what did you do to save babies during the abortion holocaust? ” 
l want to assure that child that l did the best l could to protect human life.
