To the Chair, and the Honorable members of the judiciary committee, 
My name is Dominic Pinto, I live in brewer Maine, and l’m here in opposition to LD 1619 
I was not a planned pregnancy, my parents were not married, and I was born almost two months 
early, we were very poor growing up, and by the time of my birth my father had been sent off to 
prison. My mother was the very demographic the pro choice side preys upon; unplanned, poor, 
single mother. I thank God Abortion was never even a thought that crossed her mind... but 
unfortunately for so many others that is not the case. 
My generation is having Abortion shoved in our face as a vital role to women’s success, as if 
women with children cannot succeed in life; to that I say what a misogynistic statement. We are 
told it's a solution to the trauma of rape, and that abortion really isn't a big deal because it's just 
a clump of cells anyways, though this denies all credible science. This bill would allow abortion 
up to 9 months of pregnancy, so I ask you, was I just a clump of cells at 7 months when I was 
born? How can we claim to follow the" science while we are putting 7 month premies in the nicu 
because they’re wanted, but allowing those same 7 month old babies to be violently 
dismembered because they’re deemed inconvenient? If wombs had windows this bill wouldn’t 
even be a question but I suppose it's easier to pull the trigger when the gunman is blind and you 
can’t hear the victim scream. If we live in a society that doesn’t allow for the legislation of 
morality, specifically on the killing of little kids, we live not in a society but a state of decay, this is 
a slippery slope to infanticide, if we can kill 9 month old babies right before the moment of birth, 
that is a thin line to allowing the moment aften/vards as well. 
At 6 months I was a person, and at 7 months I was a person. My right to life does not come from 
a 4 inch birth canal, wether or not I'm deemed desirable, or my convenience status, I assure you 
I was inconvenient, but my right to life comes from an Almighty God, Jesus Christ, from the 
moment of conception. Abortion at any time for any reason is too extreme and does not belong 
in Maine, thank you.
