LQ1519 
Title: An Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Position: Oppose 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name is Donald Webber, from Kennebunk, ME. l come before 
you today to speak in opposition to LD 1619 
This bill would allow a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed. 
My wife and l have had 5 children, and have 9 grand children and 1 great 
grandchild. l am so thankful for all of them. l could not imagine terminating the 
life of anyone of them. They are not perfect nor am l, but l love every one of 
them. They are members of our family and society. 
This bill would allow physicians to conduct an abortion at any point duringa 
pregnancy, up to birth. With wording if it is “necessary in the professional 
judgment of a physician ” , l ask, what it the physician is influenced in some way 
to err on the side of abortion? Doctors are human, and no amount of education 
or experience gives them the right to be the arbiters of life and death. 
This bill also eliminates any serious penalties for an unlicensed person who 
provides an abortion illegally, and it eliminates criminal penalties for licensed 
providers that perform abortions after viability, further undercutting the law, that 
may influence people to perform abortions illegally. 
This bill will significantly expand abortion in Maine and would make Maine 
more extreme than states like New York and California. 
Late-term abortion is not “healthcare. ” The definition of health care is; “efforts 
made to maintain or restore physical, mental, or emotional well-being especially 
by trained and licensed professionals. ” 
[i] Terminating a life due to sickness or disease or any reason is the opposite of 
health care.
in summary: 
l feel this bill is bad for l\/laine. This bill will make Maine one of the most 
permissive abortion states in the country, permitting abortion right up to birth for 
any reason. This is headless, radical, and extreme. lt is beyond abortion, it is 
infanticide, and it is a moral disgrace for the state of l\/laine. 
For these reasons, l ask the committee to vote (NO) on LD 1619. Thank youl 
Donald Webber 
[i] https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/health care
