 
 Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
 
 My name is Donna Crawford, and I am a resident of Auburn.I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD1619. 
 
Here is why I oppose LD1619. Abortion at ANY time, and for ANY reason is too 
extreme for Maine. Allowing a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed is 
pre-meditated murder. 
 
When I was 17 years old, I found myself in an uncomfortable situation. I was a junior in 
high school and pregnant.  I had so many plans for my life and having a baby at 17 was 
not one of them. Thus, I went to Planned Parenthood on a Friday for a “ fix” for my 
situation. Problem being, my mother would have to sign the consent form to have this 
“blob of tissue”, as was referred to by the practitioner at Family Planning, removed on 
Monday morning. When I asked my mom to sign the form, she replied, “Absolutely not! 
I will not allow you to kill a baby.” My mom won, and today I am beyond thankful for her 
wisdom. 
 
At the time, my only thoughts were about me! This “baby/blob of tissue” would be a 
burden to my goals, success, and prosperity. Not to mention my time, energy, 
educational or career prospects and my future earning capabilities. If I could remove 
this burden all would be well, or so I was led to believe. 
 
My son was born on November 25, 1975. He has been such a joy beyond measure. He 
married a lovely woman. They had three children who have all married and 2 of the 3 
have children of their own! Thirteen special relationships from this “blob of tissue”. 
I have learned much since 1975. And speaking up for the unborn babies in the most 
sacred place to grow, a mother’s uterus, is a passion of mine. 
 
The abortion industry has no regard for the silent screams as babies are torn apart, 
pierced, cut, left to die or burned through chemical solutions. What if that were you, I 
ask? I would be a voice for you as well. The devaluation and degradation of life is so 
morally wrong and contrary to all that undergirds human existence. Murdering the 
unborn baby is not the answer for Maine. We are better than that. 
 
By the way, that “blob of tissue” became your former colleague, the Honorable 
Jonathan Connor, State Representative from Lewiston. 
 
God help us. Please vote ought not to pass. Thank you 
