Donna Leavitt
Ellsworth 
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Donna Leavitt, I live in Ellsworth, Me. I am a wife, a mother of 6 adult 
children, and a grandmother to 8 grandchildren, as well as a retired RN. 
I am writing today on LD 1619 because I cannot believe that our legislators find it 
justified for any reason to take the life of a viable pre-born baby. If any of you 
legislators were present at a 22-week gestation baby’s birth would you participate 
with the doctor to end its life, when technology can maintain its life? Would any of 
you legislators take part in physically ending the life of a completely viable baby who 
is due to be born? It is very easy to say it is ok when you aren't the one ending the 
baby’s life for whatever reason. I know there must be some legislators reading or 
hearing this letter who believe in God. God will judge each one of us one day for the 
choices we have made during our life when our body dies. Think about that for a 
minute. How can anyone of you with a conscience choose to end the life of a baby so 
that you will get votes under the lie that it’s a woman’s right? How about the right of 
the baby?? The rights of the baby matter only when it fits the agenda of those who 
want the votes. It 
As an RN I have cared for women who have had an abortion and have been tormented
with guilt all the days following their abortion. Some suffered from depression, and 
some to the point of feeling suicidal. No one talks about what happens after the 
baby’s life has ended. The preborn is a baby no matter the gestation. An embryo or 
fetus is human, just as the inside of an eagle’s egg is an eaglet. It is also a maximum 
of $5,000 fine with up to 1 year in prison for destroying an eagle egg. An unborn 
eagle has more rights than a pre-born baby. Animal life is valued more than a baby. If 
someone kills or tortures their dog they are arrested. Read Maine Code title 17-1031 
which defines animal cruelty.  A human baby is a human baby inside or outside the 
womb. 
All women have choices, the choice for different forms of birth control, and the 
choice to place the baby up for adoption into a home that wants the baby, among other
choices. Instead, they choose to end the life of their offspring and have to live with 
that choice for a lifetime. 
Please, please give what I wrote thought. These little lives are depending on you to 
stand up for them dear legislators, not for a vote or selfishness. Their life is as 
precious as yours, and mine. 
Please vote ought not to pass
Sincerely, 
Donna M. Leavitt 

