Elisabeth Legendre
Sanford
LD 1619
Dear Janet Mills & the people of Maine,
I read something you wrote today, a document called LD1619. As a citizen of 
America, and as a resident of Maine, I am hopeful that you might return the favor and 
read what I’m going to write. 
Not only am I a proud American and a Mainer, I’m a mom. I have a beautiful 
daughter named Everly, who is also a Maine resident. She was born at 39 weeks, 
weighing 7lbs 8oz. She had 10 cute fingers, 10 chubby toes. She had/has bright blue 
eyes that light up when she smiles. I’ve attached a picture of her, hours after she was 
born, for you to see. 
In your document that I read, you’re pushing to make it legal in Maine to murder a 
baby just like her. I refuse to use the term abort, to ease anyone’s conscious. You’re 
trying to make it legal, for a woman to kill the child that they are carrying, up to the 
day they are born. Up to the final day of gestation. 
As a human being, I can’t wrap my mind around such a barbaric thing to do. As a 
mother, I look at my precious baby, at pictures of her on the day she was born, and I 
weep with heartbreak for the babies that you’ve now signed their death warrant. 
Abortion at any stage in gestation is wrong. It’s evil. But at 40 weeks? Governor 
Mills, as a mother yourself…. How could you? Look back on the days your children 
were born, and imagine opting to have them killed instead of birthing them. It’s hard 
to fathom, isn’t it? Because if you claim or have even a smidge of humanity, you 
know it’s evil. You know it’s wrong. 
People in third world countries murder their babies, not in America. Well…. They 
didn’t used to, in America. 
Governor Mills, I’m writing to tell you that my name is Elisabeth Bell Legendre. I’m 
a Christian. I’m a wife. I’m a teacher. I’m a mother. I’m a Mainer. I disagree with 
your bill you’re trying to pass and I am going to pray, with every ounce of breath I 
have in me, that your bill will not pass. I am going to beg the God of heaven to spare 
our state from this barbaric atrocity. I am going to pray that hundreds more like me 
will stand up and oppose this tragic, evil misuse of power on your part, that they will 
loudly proclaim that Maine is a state that will protect its citizens… even the citizens 
not yet born. I will do my part and reach out to my representatives, to tell them that if 
they are going to be my voice, this is the stand I’m boldly taking. 
Do not make us a state where murder is legal. Please… don’t do that to my home. 
Jeremiah 1:5 (KJV) Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou 
camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, [and] I ordained thee a prophet unto 
the nations.

