Elizabeth Bradley, Brunswick 
Testimony - LD 1619 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on ludiciary, my name is Elizabeth Bradley, resident of Brunswick. I am here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. _ 
Thank you for allowing me to share. 
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men [people] are created equal, that they 
are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, 
Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. 
Please consider whether your decision moves in the direction of Life, or away from it. 
If we listen to the wrong voices long enough, we can perhaps come to believe nearly 
anything. I offer only a few examples. 
In the years prior to the Civil War, roughly half the country believed slavery to be an 
acceptable practice and those supporters found ways to "eloquently" and "humanely" 
justify its practice. Thankfully, slavery has now been recognized as far beyond what any 
rational person could accept as a just and justified practice. 
During World War II, the leaders of a nation justiﬁed the annihilation of the physically and 
mentally disabled, and then the Jews. Thankfully, the free world now recognizes “ethnic 
cleansing" as far beyond what any rational person could accept as a just and justiﬁed 
practice. 
With a court decision in 1973, we were given a legal justiﬁcation of abortion, and then 
followed the deaths of some 60 million unborn babies. Perhaps one day we will be able to 
say, ‘Thankfully, such a routine procedure has now been recognized as far beyond what any 
rational person could accept as a just and justiﬁed practice." 
Toward the end of the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus shared (and I will quote this in the ﬁrst 
person), “If the light I think I have is darkness, how deep that darkness is." Not unlike “I 
once was blind but now I see." 
I’d like to suggest that we need to be very careful regarding our beliefs and what we accept 
as just and justiﬁed practices. I pray that we soon recognize that the rock on which we think 
we are standing, the rock of state sanctioned abortion, may soon be recognized for what it 
is the sand of babies’ lives slipping through our very fingers. 
Please vote ‘Ought not to pass.’ 
Thank you for your time. 
Respectfully submitted, Elizabeth Bradley, Brunswick
