Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, 
 
My name is Elizabeth Caruso, and I live in Caratunk. I am testifying in opposition to his bill. 
 
LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws 
LD 1343 AN Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People by Preempting the Field of Abortion 
Regulation 
 
As you already know, abortion is well protected and quite encompassing in Maine 
• It’s already available on demand, anytime, without medical reason until 24 weeks.  
• If medically-necessary for the mother’s health, late term abortions are already legal at any time. 
• Girls under 18 can already receive an abortion even without parental consent. 
• Maine taxpayers already fund abortions through the Medicaid program. 
• According to a Pew Research study , 80% of respondents support limits on abortion.  
This proposed change to the current abortion law is so radically vicious it is hard to believe we are actually 
having this discussion in 2023.  We cannot allow the culture of death to permeate Maine. The majority of 
Mainers, yes even pro-choice Mainers are against full term abortions. It is barbaric to dismember a living 
baby and without anesthesia. Killing full term babies is the child sacrifice of ancient times. It was the 
warfare of the day.  
Foundation of our society is not government, not business, not arts and entertainment. The foundation of our 
society is the family. This legislation only destroys families, women, and of course, children, our future 
generation.  
 
If you fall to the political pressure, then what’s next?  Killing born children maybe if they are disabled, not 
wanted, not perfect, not the right sex? Your vote in support of this bill is opening that door. 
I am pro-women, and I believe in bodily autonomy for not just women but all people.  But my rights in life 
don’t include the right to kill another person-even my viable baby. The viable baby will survive, and 
therefore, has rights we are to uphold- “Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness”.  Maybe the biological 
mother doesn’t want to raise her baby.  That’s OK.  Thousands of parents can’t conceive, and others want 
to love another’s child.  They are waiting with open arms.  I know many of them who are just as blessed as 
the babies they adopted.  
Lawmaker, you are not deciding the isolated killing of one baby; your vote is deciding the face and future 
course of Maine.  Will you preserve and protect Maine’s future, or will you welcome the culture of death 
upon Maine’s most vulnerable, helpless and innocent? 
Stop speaking death and defeat over our youth. Don’t sniff out our next generation. Instead – build them 
up. Our children need to know that they are wanted, cherished, valued, loved.   
Where are the bills to help, support, and get behind Maine women in their time of need? We can support 
women without having to violently kill or rip apart babies out of their womb. You can take the high road, 
stop this radical extremism, and sponsor bills which actually build up and strengthen our women, children, 
and families.   
Lastly, don’t vote until you’ve seen how barbarically these innocent, precious babies are killed in abortions.  
You’ve never seen that kind of vicious, painful violence on another person but you are willing to OK this for 
someone whose screams you can’t hear. 
I submit to you that Maine’s motto tells you how to vote on this bill.  Maine, the way LIFE should be.  The 
focus of our beautiful state has always been LIFE.  Having sworn an oath to our Constitution to represent 
Maine, your vote must be LIFE…. vote ought not to pass. 
