Emily Johnston
Carmel
LD 1619
Emily Johnston
Carmel, Maine
Testimony of Emily Johnston
Oppose LD 1619
An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws
Members of the Committee on Judiciary, my name is Emily Johnston and I oppose 
LD 1619.  I live in Carmel, Maine.  Thank you for the opportunity to address the 
Committee.
I oppose LD 1619 because I believe that it should not be legal for a pregnant woman 
to abort her viable (capable of living) baby up to full term.  According to 
https://medical-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/pregnancy, the monthly stages of the
baby during pregnancy are:
•First Month – The baby’s head and trunk and beginnings of arms and legs, liver 
and digestive system have begun to develop and the heart starts to beat.
•Second Month – The heart starts to pump and the nervous system (including the 
brain and spinal cord) begins to develop.  Arms, legs and all the major organs begin to
appear.  Facial features begin to form.
•Third Month – Major blood vessels and the roof of mouth are almost completed, 
fingers and toes appear, all major organs are now beginning to form, the kidneys are 
now functional and the four chambers of the heart are complete.
•Fourth Month – The baby can kick and swallow, hear, urinate and has established 
sleep cycles.  All organs are fully formed and will continue to grow.  The baby has 
skin, eyebrows, and hair.
•Fifth Month – The baby experiences rapid growth as its internal organs continue to 
grow.  The mother may feel the baby move and can hear the baby’s heartbeat with a 
stethoscope.
•Sixth Month – Even though the baby’s lungs are not fully developed, a baby born 
during this month can survive with intensive care.  The baby grows fast as its organs 
continue to develop.
•Seventh Month – There is a better chance that a baby born during this month will 
survive.  The baby continues to grow rapidly and can suck its thumb and look around 
its watery womb with open eyes.
•Eighth Month – Growth continues and may move into head-down position for 
delivery.
•Ninth Month – Growth continues and the baby drops lower into the mother’s 
abdomen and prepares for the onset of labor, which may begin any time between the 
37th and 42nd week.
It’s clear from the baby’s monthly development during pregnancy that the baby is 
viable long before birth.  Therefore legalizing abortion through the moment of birth is
the ending of a viable life.  Even the World Health Organization (WHO) defines 
abortion as pregnancy termination prior to 20 weeks’ gestation.  It just shows how 
extreme this proposed legislation is.  I respectfully request that you oppose LD 1619.

