Emma Mancine
Wilton
LD 1619
LD1619 Pro-Life Testimony
"Children are a heritage from the Lord, offspring a reward from Him."
                                      Psalm 127:3
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Emma  and I am a fifteen year old 
citizen of Maine. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619.
   I am testifying because I believe that life is valuable, God's design is perfect, and 
abortion is murder and clearly promotes the opposite of what is proclaimed in 
Scripture. I am testifying because I believe in the value of the lives of our precious, 
beautiful babies who are made in His image!
   I appeal to any of you who care deeply for those in your life and are grateful that 
neither your nor their parents chose death when you were in the womb. How grateful 
are you now that you are all alive and well? Think about those most dear to you- your 
families, spouses, your closest friends. To the new bride, what if your husband had 
never been born? The sweet dreams, moments together, plans you share, and love you
have for him would never have happened. To the young family, what if you had 
chosen abortion? Your beautiful children would not exist to bless your family. To the 
seasoned family who is watching their grown children blossom and flourish and enjoy
life with their grandchildren, what if you had chosen abortion? What if your children 
had never existed and your grandchildren had never been born? To those with dear, 
dear friends who are actively involved in their lives and mean the world to them, what
if your closest friend had never been born? 
   To those who chose abortion and now desperately wish your children back, what if 
you had let them live, even under the care of another? 
   Life is precious. God designed life to be a meaningful thing, not to be wasted and 
scorned. Why will America look at our babies and say, 'Let's make it more okay to 
kill our children'? Why do we call abortion 'choice' when it denies the freedom of the 
choice to live to the very subject of controversy, the baby in the womb? Why do we 
say that we support life when we steal it from those most dependent upon us? Is it 
because lies from the pit of hell make us feel good? Because abortionists go home at 
night and cheerfully think about all the babies they've killed? Because the wound is 
shallow and never leaves a scar in the mother's heart? 
   Because we've become slothful and don't want the added responsibility? Because 
we've turned from the King of kings and His perfect way to our own idiocy and 
selfish ideas?    
   Now for a moment, think about a child- someone made in the image of God. A child
is a human being, an individual with individual needs, desires, and characteristics and 
a life ahead of them to become what God created them to be. They are unique and 
valuable, and if they were killed by any means it would be called murder. If a child of
a young age, perhaps a year old, were killed by any means, it would be called murder.
How then, can we look at a baby, created in the image of God, unique and valuable to 
Him, and kill them? Even in the womb, a baby is a human being. With this new law, a
baby could be fully developed and near birth when it is killed. If outside the womb 
killing a fully-developed infant is murder, how is killing a fully-developed infant 
inside the womb any different? Is it because we haven't come face to face with a new 
life yet that we think we can throw it away like a piece of trash? Does a week and a 
different side of things (literally) make that much difference? 
  This law will mean our state has one of the most extreme abortion-related laws in the
country, even as a large portion of Mainers are voting against this new bill. It is in the 
very bones of our nation that we stand for life! These are precious, beautiful, living 
and breathing babies that are gifts to us from God and a blessing and the future of His 
kingdom. I appeal to each of you, as people made in the image of God, with a high 
and wonderful calling, as we face this threat to the lives of our own, to oppose 
LD1619!
Genesis 6:9
Deuteronomy 5:17
Psalm 139:13-14
Exodus 21:23
Exodus 20:13
"Children are a heritage from the Lord, offspring a reward from Him."
                                         Psalm 127:3
