Faith Adams
Orrington
LD 1619
Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Faith Adams. I am a resident of Orrington, Maine. I have been a pro-life 
activist and Ambassador for the Organization Live Action since 2019, and I am here 
to testify in opposition to LD 1619, which would allow access to Abortion up to birth!
I am testifying today because, as an activist, I have seen firsthand the effects that 
Abortion can have on women, men, and the family as a whole! 
This bill would allow the baby to be aborted between 24 and 26 weeks! At this point 
of the pregnancy, the baby's face, limbs, toenails, and organs are developed, and the 
heart is beating roughly 25 quarts of blood. Research by the University of Toronto 
shows that babies at this stage can feel pain in the womb — even with greater 
intensity than adults. At 24 weeks, the baby is roughly a foot long, and their brain is 
developing rapidly. The child's lungs are also developing into a branch-like structure. 
At 25 weeks, a baby is almost fully-developed and is considered viable, meaning it 
can stay outside the womb. If given proper support. For this reason, the abortionist 
usually kills the baby in utero by injecting a substance that causes cardiac arrest and 
induces the mother's labor to deliver her baby stillborn. This bill would allow a baby 
that could survive outside the womb to be killed.
You can't ignore the truth; these are basic scientific and medical facts that these lives 
are worthy and viable! And if you can't care for our precious and littlest members of 
society, what makes us think you can respect us? On March 25th, my friend and 
Pro-life activist AJ Hurley and the Progressive Anti-Abortion Uprising activist group 
discovered five full-term babies were found and thrown in a medical waste truck to be
incinerated outside Washington Surgi - Center in D.C., some babies perfectly intact, 
some torn to pieces. One baby girl, which we named Harriett, was found with her one 
eye still open, which will never stop looking to us for justice! This is the harsh, evil 
reality of Abortion! Maine deserves better; women deserve better! And so do our 
littlest members of society! 

