Gary Blair 
5 Old Meadow Road, Lisbon Me 
Gmblair9@gmail.com 
207-754-0570 
Senator Carney, Representative Mooney, Honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, My name is Gary Blair from Lisbon. I am here 
to testify against LD 1619. 
Governor Mills stated when introducing her bill that the word ‘Necessary ’ did 
not mean ”casual or frivolous" , but that is exactly what it means. It absolutely 
opens the floodgates to abortion for any reason and at any time. If an abortion 
provider says it is necessary, irregardless if a medical doctor objects because in 
his professional opinion, the health of the mother is not at risk. 
It is unnecessary to end the life of a human being at the third trimester. This 
opinion is shared by over 30,000 OBGYN doctors from various organizations. In 
a position paper in support of U.S. House Bill S.311 (2019), this paper also 
stated that abortion is not healthcare, much less an essential part of healthcare, 
nor is abortion in the third trimester necessary to save the mother's life. In 
Dana Pierce's personal circumstance, her physician was probably aware that 
aborting her little boy was unnecessary in the third trimester, as well as 
unnecessarily exposing his patient to the health risks of performing a D&E 
procedure. Instead, alternative procedures could have been performed where 
the child would be born having the opportunity to receive treatment for his 
condition, with pain management so that the child, in the event that he dicl not 
survive, would die in a humane and ethical manner. The above stated is in 
accordance with the current State of Maine Abortion Laws. In addition, The 
Maine Death with Dignity Act, provides Maine residents with terminal diseases the 
option to be prescribed a dose of medication that, if taken, will hasten the end of their 
life. This option requires the participation of a Maine—licensed physician. 
Thepublicdiscourse.com/2019/02/49619 
It is never necessary to intentionally kill a fetal human-being to save a womans life: in 
support of the born-alive abortion survivors protection act 
Feb. 1'7, 2019 ‘ Harrison M.D., etal
