Testimony of Gary L. Troester 
of Rockland, Maine 
On Bill LD1619 
Honorable members of The Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Gary Troester 
and I am a resident of Rockland. I am here to ask you today to do The honorable thing and vote 
LD1619, and the other bills being heard today as, ought not to pass. Why? 
The debate that is happening here today ought not to be a partisan issue. You have heard and will 
yet hear impassioned voices about a woman’s right to choose. However, I submit to you that this 
is really NOT about a woman’s right to choose. It is really a human rights issue and I want to 
believe that each of you know deep down in your heart that is true. The problem is that the human 
rights of one of the persons in this issue are being ignored, that of course being each unborn 
human baby. They are also a person, a person from conception, with the same constitutional rights 
and protections as any other citizen of these United States and as future citizens of our great state 
of Maine. They have the right to the same opportunity to live and to become productive citizens 
as any other person. Their problem is that they cannot speak up for themselves in their own 
defense. Since they cannot speak for themselves and their CHOICE many of us are here today to 
speak for them. 
[I have heard the testimonies of more than one very thankful person, one just this past weekend, 
where their mother was encouraged to have an abortion and she chose not to kill her child.] 
These yet unnamed people are also people made in the image of God, just as each of you are. They 
are people for whom Jesus Christ died, just as He died for each of you. 
This is really not an issue about a woman’s right to choose or the softened term, abortion. It is 
REALLY about life or death, the killing of innocent human babies, real people. It IS about NOT 
granting them their lawful constitutional rights and robbing them of the protections they deserve. 
As I stated earlier, I want to believe that you are indeed honorable people, and I plead with you 
today: PLEASE do what I believe you know in the depths of your heart is the right thing to do, and 
send LD1619, and the other bills being heard today, as ought not to pass! Let us not change our 
reputation as Maine Vacationland to Maine Death Land or Abortion land! 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on behalf of innocent babies, real people who cannot speak 
for themselves.
