Gina LeDuc-Kuntz
Freeport
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Gina LeDuc-Kuntz. I am a resident of 
Freeport, Maine and I oppose LD 1619.
LD1619 is dangerous for the health and welfare of women. The bill proposes to strike
important legal language currently in place to protect women faced with securing an 
abortion past their baby’s viability.
The current law sets safety parameters in this very grave matter of abortion after the 
time of viability by stating:
 “After viability an abortion may be performed only when it is necessary to preserve 
the life or health of the mother in the professional judgment of a physician licensed 
pursuant to Title 32, chapter 36 or 48.”
By striking “only when it is necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother” 
replacing with “when necessary in the professional judgment of a physician…” 
LD1619, if passed, will remove women’s health from the abortion equation.
This language change is dangerous.
If LD1619 passes, this tweak in language will expose both women and their unborn 
children to dangerous potential medical abuses by granting physicians authority in 
determining the necessity for a late term abortion based on non medical related 
factors. 
We can imagine such issues as poverty, addiction, previous live births and an endless 
array of social characteristics influencing a physician to recommend abortion at any 
point in pregnancy leaving all pregnant women vulnerable to abusive medical 
practices.
Imagine, for a moment, a poor homeless pregnant woman lands herself in front of a 
non-sympathetic physician who then deems her child to be better off not born alive 
based on the physician’s opinion of “necessity for the greater good” not on the 
woman’s or child’s health and welfare.
Further concerning, LD1619 states “a physician” and does not delineate the 
physician’s relationship to the said women nor does it include the woman in this 
decision-making process by crafting language such as “between her (the woman’s) 
physician” or “the woman and her physician.”
By only using “a” to identify said physician the bill’s language allows any physician 
to make grave decisions for the unborn child and the child’s mother.
This bill clearly removes the woman and her health from consideration in abortion 
and by doing so has opened the door to physicians’ holding legal authority over the 
woman in deciding a mother and baby’s fate, regardless of the mother’s wishes, 
health or baby’s health.
LD1619 is dangerous legislation. It is not in the State’s interest to encourage abortion 
through deregulation It is barbaric to both women and children. LD1619 ought not to 
pass.  
Thank You,
Gina LeDuc-Kuntz
Freeport

