My name is Ginger Leigh Smith, currently a resident of Lewiston and I'm here to testify in 
opposition to D 1619. This is difficult, but if not now, then when? I've never said these words 
out loud. _ 
In the mid-80s when I was in my mid-20s, living in Portland, working hard and trying to get 
ahead (who am I kidding; I was just trying to get by). I'd voted exclusively democrat and 
although I didn't really believe in abortion, I'd been convinced that was ok to have that choice. I 
had a nice boyfriend and was looking forward to getting married and having children of our own 
~ one day. 
Then, when I unexpectedly got pregnant, all of the plans of "how things should go" went out the 
window. I was mortified and terrified (there was NO way I could tell my parents), ashamed (I 
knew sex before marriage wasn't appropriate and could cause harm), and I felt helpless (I 
wasn't ready to raise a child on my own; I was barely making ends meet for myself). All very 
real concerns, but none really insurmountable or eternal, but the "choice" I did make was 
(eternal, that is)...and I have regretted it ever since. It was the wrong choice then, it is now, and 
we should always choose life. I sure wish I had. I'll never know this side of Heaven what an 
amazing person my baby might have been or what contributions he or she would have made in 
this world, however, when I finally do meet him or her, I will be sure to say, I'm so, SO very 
soriy that I wasn't brave enough to let you be born." 
Next month, I will be 60yo. Many women at my age are enjoying their grandchildren and maybe 
even great grandchildren. I never married nor had children, so I am alone in this life and have 
missed out on many of the greatest joys many people know here on earth. And that's not the 
basis of my testimony as I could imagine my position against this heinous legislation would only 
be more vociferous and heartfelt if I'd actually had the honor of being a mother. 
There are always more reasons TO choose life and very few, if any, valid reasons to end one. 
This legislation goes way, way too far. The governor broke a promise when she said she had no 
intention to change the existing law (which is more than adequate despite anecdotal tales to the 
contrary) and even the large majority of "pro-choice" people I know agree that this is beyond the 
pale and unacceptable. Killing a viable child is always wrong. There is no valid reason to 
expand the existing laws. Given the advancement of medical technology, I'm sure most of you 
know a baby that had a challenge in-utero, was born prematurely, spent time in the NICU and is 
now a thriving child, maybe even an adult today. Murder IS illegal and these types of late-term 
abortions are just that ~ the willful, unnecessary, and should be unlawful, murder of a beautiful 
child.
Please vote to leave the laws as they are and do NOT pass this extreme legislation. We want 
Maine to be a beacon of light where people enjoy the wonders of our state; not a become 
destination where killing children is the coming attraction. 
Thank you.
