Senator Carney, Representative Mooned, and members of the Maine Judiciary Committee. I am 
Halston R. Britton. I live in Houlton, Maine. I am here to oppose LD1619, ‘An ct to Improve Maines 
Reproductive Privacy Laws’ , which is sponsored by Rep. Talbot Ross.
I 
A Journey of a Lifetime Over in 30 Seconds 
l need to talk to you, my doctor said. He informed me that my then wife was pregnant and 
wanted him to get rid of the thing. He told her that he didn't do abortions. Then he warned me that 
sometimes a pregnant woman can do a self-abort. It was a long journey home, or should I say: ‘house’. 
After telling her what the doctor said, she took a drink of her Seagram 7 and Tab drink, sucked 
on her cigarette, then said: 'I’m not carrying this blanking thing for you or anybody else.’ She went into 
the bedroom, laid down on the bed, then started cussing, cursing and screaming. Then I saw a lifeless 
body lying on the bed. 
Eyes closed, lips sealed, eight little ﬁngers and two little thumbs laying on the chest, legs curled 
up with knees on the stomach, legs bent with ten little toes on the feet touching each other. It was 
silent. She left, then came back with her drink and cigarette saying: ‘Get rid of the blanking thing.’ 
As I gently put the lifeless body in a zip lock bag, then began closing it, that journey began. The 
ﬁrst dada, the ﬁrst diaper, that ﬁrst step, then ﬁrst grade, then high school, dad, can I have the keys to 
the car, I've got a date. Then he started leaving the earth, floating up towards heaven, waving goodbye 
or was it ‘I'll see you later’ . SNAP, the bag was shut, that journey was over. Even though it was only 
eighteen miles to the doctor's office, it was a long journey. Three days later, again at the doctor's office, 
he said: ‘If the child had llved, you would have had a son’ . It was a long journey back. 
Ten years later, 1989, I was back into a church where the drama ‘Heaven's Gate Hell's Flames’ 
was being put on. I was asked to play the part of a father that, with his family, got killed in a car 
accident. l didn't want to do it, but God did. As we rose from the floor of that church, Jesus would walk 
out of the door, that was the entry into heaven, with a son. God spoke to me saying: ‘Follow me and you 
will see your son for you see, your son is with my son‘ . Knowing that I couldn't handle it, a little girl 
played that part. Ever since then, I've been following Him. Someday, my son lob and I will meet again. 
Memories of the past will help guide us in the right direction into the future. Whose side are you 
on, the world's side, or on God's side. 
Written by, 
Halston R. Britton 
PS: God asked me this question: ‘How many prophets did I send to you were among the 62,000,000 
aborted babies?’ I've often wondered, was my Job one of those designated Prophets. Someday I will ﬁnd 
out.
