Hon. MaryAnne Kinney 
40 Maple Ln 
Knox, ME 04986 
maplenut4@gmail.com 
April 30, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee, my name is MaryAnne Kinney of Knox and this is my testimony in extreme 
opposition to LD 1619 poorly titled “An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws”. 
First of all, reproduction is defined as the process by which organisms make other organisms 
like themselves. For humans that process is done through pregnancy in which a baby grows in a 
woman’s uterus. I can speak to this process as I have reproduced 2 amazing humans before, 
sadly, losing my 3rd baby after 8 weeks of pregnancy due to a natural miscarriage. Abortion is 
not reproduction; it is the opposite of reproduction by definition: “the deliberate termination of 
a human pregnancy”. This bill would essentially expand the legalization of murder! Murder as a 
noun, is defined as the “unlawful premeditated killing of one human being by another” and as a 
verb, to “kill someone unlawfully and with premeditation”. Let’s break that down. If someone 
thoughtfully considers taking another’s life by running them down with a vehicle, or by causing 
an explosion near another person on purpose, or pointing a weapon at another person to end 
their life and succeeds in that mission, it is murder. Abortion is a premeditated decision to 
terminate the life of an unborn child-murder. 
This bill expands the law that allows the end to a beating heart of a life with separate and unique 
DNA just because the bio “parent” doesn’t want the growing baby. There does not need to be 
any sort of medical reason for the cruel and violent death of the unborn baby. Under the current 
law, which allows for this form of murder to occur in the eyes of man as “lawful”, an abortion 
can be performed up to about 24 weeks into a 40 week pregnancy. At 24 weeks the baby is 
considered to be viable outside its mother’s womb. Many premature babies have survived 
premature birth thanks to the wonders of modern medicine and the technology available in 
hospital NICUs. Recently, my own cousin gave birth to a premature baby girl.  She is now 
thriving and healthy despite being born a full month early. Two years ago one of my employees 
had a little boy, similarly, about a month early and today he is an amazing little guy who is such 
a blessing to have come to work with his mom so we all get to enjoy his life as he continues to 
thrive every day. But now, LD 1619 strives to give opportunity to murder these viable human 
beings because the “parents” have changed their mind about having the child in their lives. 
Murder because you changed your mind after 6, 7, 8, 9 months of massive changes to the 
“mother’s” own body just so you do not have to raise the tiny human! So many people are 
waiting to adopt a baby that isn’t wanted by the bio parents-no questions asked. Why not take 
this opportunity to make it easier for people to adopt and give loving homes to these babies?  
The language in this bill states “After viability an abortion may be performed only when it is 
necessary in the professional judgment of a physician licensed pursuant to Title 32, chapter 36 
or 48.” Let’s talk about this with a couple real life situations I have had the opportunity to hear 
about directly. The first was one of my teachers in high school, who became pregnant later in 
her biological clock life. Her doctor recommended abortion due to her own age. This was a 
“professional judgment” on the part of her doctor. Thankfully she chose life for her beautiful 
healthy daughter (I was blessed to return the favor of being that child’s teacher a few years 
later). Second, my own sister in law was told her 3rd child was going to be a boy with Down 
syndrome and they should consider abortion. This was a devastating option to their family. 
They realized the baby they created was a gift and they would gladly accept any challenges he 
would bring into their lives. When the big day arrived, in the delivery room, the doctor said as 
the baby was delivered, “Oops, I was wrong” because the Down syndrome baby boy was 
actually a perfectly healthy baby girl who today is a mother herself and a caregiver to her father 
who suffers with dementia. What a difference in our family’s lives if they had trusted the 
“professional judgment” of their doctor. 
During the gubernatorial debate on October 27, 2022, Governor Janet Mills stated “I have no 
plan to change the current law” when asked about Maine’s abortion laws. Why then is she 
pushing the expansion of murder by abortion to a full term viable pregnancy with this bill?  
Please vote ought not to pass on this bill, which makes premeditated murder of the most 
vulnerable among us “legal” in the eyes of what was once the great State of Maine.  
Thank you, 
Hon. MaryAnne Kinney 
Knox. ME 
