Isabelle Schmidt
Bowdoin
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:
 
My name is Isabelle Schmidt, from Bowdoin.
 
There are serious, long-term consequences to society should LD 1619 pass into law.
I have time to mention only three.
 
Firstly, common sense tells us that extending the legality of abortion to include 
entirely-developed fetuses would increase the seriousness and safety risks to the 
mother through such surgery. Common sense also tells us that there would be more 
mental health trauma in women after the abortion of a more developed fetus, 
especially if she faces it alone. Government denial and subsequent neglect of such 
effects upon a woman’s conscience allows the natural feelings of guilt, self-loathing 
and depression to worsen.
Secondly, during the last months of pregnancy, a fetus’ brain develops. Their kidneys 
and lungs mature. They become able to see and hear. They grow longer and become 
heavier especially during that stage. They’ll even suck their thumbs and be able to cry
in utero before they are born. Sadly, this is apt, because with the passing of this bill, 
they may be killed even at the 9-month point of development in their lives.
The Third Trimester | Johns Hopkins Medicine
 
Thirdly, we know that in 2014, women at or below the poverty level comprised 75% 
of those who accessed abortion. It stands to reason that lengthening the window of 
opportunity for legal abortion would almost certainly increase the number of the 
aborted within that demographic in particular. With this knowledge it occurs to me 
that this bill actually seems to target and exploit people at and below the poverty 
level! How licentious to lay the groundwork so that poor parents, especially, may kill 
their children through free and easy abortion, right up until the last minute of 
pregnancy. Poor parents ought to be encouraged to have their children, too. Maine’s 
poor children are as worthy to live as the rich ones are and should be treated with 
respect and real health care.   Abortion rates by income | Guttmacher Institute
 
I also oppose LD 776 and LD 1343, but the proposals in LD 1619 should be 
problematic to anyone. Abortion is already legal in Maine to an extent that should 
satisfy its biggest proponents. Please don’t further its effects but vote “ought not to 
pass” on this bill.
Thank you
