Isabella Mastroianni
Harpswell
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:  
My name is Isabella Mastroianni, and I’m a resident of Harpswell. I’m here to testify 
in opposition to LD 1619.
How does the medical profession determine if a living person is dead? They check for
a pulse, a heartbeat, for brain activity. When those things are not present, they can 
determine that there is no life and the person can be buried. 
According to recent research by the Lozier Institute, “A new study “Reconsidering 
Fetal Pain” confirms that babies in the womb can feel pain as early as 12 weeks old.” 
Medicineplus.gov confirms that infants in uteri are coordinated enough to start 
sucking their thumbs 12 weeks after conception. Why do they do this? “Thumb 
sucking can make children feel secure and happy. They may suck their thumbs when 
they are tired, hungry, bored, stressed, or when they are trying to calm down or fall 
asleep.” So as early as 12 weeks after conception, babies are using self-soothing 
techniques displayed in older children.
These are tiny, helpless human beings. They are the most vulnerable of all because 
they don’t yet have a voice to speak up for themselves and their inalienable human 
rights. But though an infant can’t actually cry in utero, according to healthline.md, “ 
The baby's practice cries include imitating the breathing pattern, facial expression, 
and mouth movements of a baby crying outside of the womb.” This again, is a 
confirmation of life and is a very human activity. 
Yet, we can’t see them, watch them moving or sucking their thumbs (except during an
ultrasound as I was able to see my 3 beautiful sons moving and sucking thumbs and 
even hiccuping). They are unable to protest, stand up for themselves or beg not to be 
slaughtered before they can draw their first breath of air. 
So in our convenience-based, disposable-focused society, we are murdering these tiny
human beings in the dark safety of their mother’s wombs where they ought to be 
nurtured and valued for the lives they possess.
They are connected to the mother by an umbilical cord, but they are NOT their 
mother! They possess their own independent hearts, brains, nervous systems, and 
souls. Can we really fool ourselves so much to believe that this is morally and 
ethically acceptable; to kill the most vulnerable of our species? 
How many Einsteins, Rembrandts, Beethovens or George Washingtons have we 
terminated? Can we begin to count the cost and the loss of these millions of lives and 
their undoubted contributions to humanity? We can’t redeem or resurrect those we 
have killed, but we can stop now! 
End abortion once and for all. How do we live with ourselves if we rob the most 
marginalized of their own rights to life, Liberty and the pursuit of happiness?  Please 
vote ought not to pass.
