Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary 
Committee, 
 
My name is James Swan, I live in Waldoboro, Lincoln County and I urge you to 
vote Ought to Pass on both LD 1334 and LD 1619. 
 
As a concerned citizen of Maine, I am write to express my support for LD 1343 
and LD 1619. These bills, sponsored by Representative Laura Supica and Speaker 
of the House Rachel Talbot Ross respectively, are crucial in protecting the 
reproductive freedom of Maine people. 
 
LD 1343 (An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People) would 
make sure that municipalities couldn't pass local restrictions on abortion. Every 
town in Maine would have the same rights to abortion care; no one town could 
enact local ordinances that differ from state law. 
LD 1619, aka the Governor's bill (An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive 
Privacy Law), would remove the viability limit so people could access the care 
they need, when they need it, throughout a pregnancy. It would also remove 
outdated data collection policies in order to protect patients' and providers' privacy. 
 
My interest in the issues stems from challenges my sisters, cousins and niece 
experienced in securing reproductive healthcare over the years. Long ago it was 
clear to me that these challenges should not exist in our state, let alone our country. 
I have and always will stand in support for protecting reproductive rights whenever 
wherever possible.  
 
It is important to remember that 1 in 4 Mainers who can be pregnant will have an 
abortion in their lifetime. Abortion is a safe and normal medical procedure, and 
people have abortions both in-clinic and with medication abortion.  
 
I am reminded that abortion is not limited to individuals who look like my sisters, 
cousins, or niece. Trans, nonbinary, and intersex people can be pregnant and may 
need access to abortion. It is also important to recognize that a person's ability to 
access abortions is impacted by their identity. Black, Indigenous, and people of 
color face disproportionate barriers to accessing reproductive healthcare. I am 
mindful of my privilege and try to use my voice, when possible, to advocate for 
reproductive freedom for all. 
 
In closing, I believe it important to support abortion access unconditionally, 
without the need for extreme circumstances for justification. It is not for me to 
judge the reasons why someone may need an abortion. I submit that, as a state, we 
respect the autonomy of individuals and support them in their reproductive 
decisions. 
 
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD 1619. 
 
Sincerely, 
James Swan 
Waldoboro, Maine 04572 
 
 
 
 
 
Regenerate response 
