JAMES PEARCE
Roque Bluffs
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary
My name is Jim Pearce , and I’m a resident of Roque Bluffs. I’m here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619.
In 1993 I was a missionary doing development work in a slum in Quito Ecuador. My 
wife and I had befriended Maria, a young woman, whose husband abandoned her 
because she was pregnant. He had done this twice before during two other 
pregnancies preferring to live with another women whose affections were 
un-inhibited by being with child. Maria was now on her third pregnancy and again 
found herself alone and without economic or emotional support. Her meager income 
came from the few jobs she could find cleaning house. Realizing her dire situation we
took her under our wing and she became like a daughter to us. 
We had been trying to start a family of our own but it turned out to be biologically 
impossible. 7 months into her pregnancy she came to us and said “I think God wants 
me to give you a piece of my heart, I think he wants me to give you, my baby.” After 
much deliberation and prayer, we accepted and two months later we received one of 
the most precious gifts imaginable – a baby girl. Maria had given us the gift of 
parenthood. She had given me the opportunity to be a father. This fall I will proudly 
walk my daughter, Juliana, down the aisle at her wedding. My daughter, whose life 
has so enriched me and countless others. 
Today hopeful couples wait months to years to find a child to adopt. So why, I ask, 
why on earth would we legalize ending the life of a viable, precious child when 
people are longing to embrace and love that very same child as their own? This bill 
erodes that opportunity as it will reduce the number of available children. Surely there
is a better way. I beg of you, do not support taking life but support the gift of life to 
couples who are desperate to share their love with a child but due to no fault of their 
own cannot. Please vote no on this bill, “This bill ought not to pass.”

