April 30, 2023  
 
Dear Honorable Members of the Maine Legislature,  
I wish to voice my opinion and concerns regarding:  
LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws  
This bill fits hand and glove with LD 1343 and amends the law governing abortion reports to eliminate 
the requirement to use the United States Standard Report of Induced Termination of Pregnancy .  
Furthermore, this bill changes the standard for when an abortion may be performed after viability to 
when a licensed physician determines that it is “necessary ” which is completely arbitrary.  Instead of the 
current law of when it is necessary  to preserve the life or health of the mother . What has happened to 
the Hippocratic  oath to do no harm?  What does this have to do with improving Maine's Reproductive 
Privacy Laws ? Nothing.  
By removing  the criminal penalties for performing an abortion without being a licensed clinician  and for 
performing an abortion after viability of the  fetus when it was not necessary for the preservation of the 
life or health of the mother  opens the mother to grave risk by allowing unlicensed  people  to conduct this 
“business ”. How  does this improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws?  
This reproductive privacy bill is a wolf in sheep’s clothing.  
James Dux,  
Searsport, Maine  
James Dux
Searport
LD 1619
April 30, 2023
Dear Honorable Members of the Maine Legislature,
I wish to voice my opinion and concerns regarding:
LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws
This bill fits hand and glove with LD 1343 and amends the law governing abortion 
reports to eliminate the requirement to use the United States Standard Report of 
Induced Termination of Pregnancy. 
Furthermore, this bill changes the standard for when an abortion may be performed 
after viability to when a licensed physician determines that it is “necessary” which is 
completely arbitrary. Instead of the current law of when it is necessary to preserve the
life or health of the mother. What has happened to the Hippocratic oath to do no 
harm? What does this have to do with improving Maine's Reproductive Privacy 
Laws? Nothing.
By removing the criminal penalties for performing an abortion without being a 
licensed clinician and for performing an abortion after viability of the fetus when it 
was not necessary for the preservation of the life or health of the mother opens the 
mother to grave risk by allowing unlicensed people to conduct this “business”. How 
does this improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws?
This reproductive privacy bill is a wolf in sheep’s clothing.
James Dux,
Searsport, Maine

