Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, this is my testimony in opposition of LD 1619.
My name is Jan Peaslee and I live in Rumford with my husband and our wonderfully-lively teenage son, Maynard.
We were together 15 years before we had our only successful pregnancy and there was an abundance of monitoring due to risk factors associated with my advanced maternal age. 
This monitoring gave me the opportunity to be more aware of his growth and development.  It was amazing and satisfying to see so vividly the development of his life in my body. 
Anticipating the arrival of our child brought a lot of joy and a little worry every day. Would he be healthy and develop correctly? Would he survive if he came early? There was no way to know, but nothing would stop me from being in his corner and ﬁghting for his life.
Due to complications he was delivered 3 weeks early with a blood sugar of only (9) and some issues with his heart. Even with those challenges to overcome and nine days in the NICU, he healed and thrived; full of life as a true miracle in every sense of the word. Maynard continues to be a joy to me and great source of light and life to those who know him.
Today I want to continue my ﬁght and be in the corner of other potential sources of joy, light, and life!
•I urge you to vote in opposition of LD 1619! It is an extreme and unnecessary bill to allow abortion up to birth. This bill would allow an abortion to be performed at ANY time in pregnancy, for ANY reason. • This bill would allow a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed. The current law addresses viability and already allows for medical necessity in the case of stillbirth, ectopic pregnancy, etc.
•Maine would have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the country. We don’t want to be known for that or draw people to our beautiful state for that reason.
•Over 65% of Mainers don’t want late-term abortion. I am one of that 65%.
Thank you for the opportunity to leave you with my testimony.

Jan  Peaslee
Rumford
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, this is my testimony in opposition of LD 1619.
My name is Jan Peaslee and I live in Rumford with my husband and our 
wonderfully-lively teenage son, Maynard.
We were together 15 years before we had our only successful pregnancy and there 
was an abundance of monitoring due to risk factors associated with my advanced 
maternal age. 
This monitoring gave me the opportunity to be more aware of his growth and 
development.  It was amazing and satisfying to see so vividly the development of his 
life in my body. 
Anticipating the arrival of our child brought a lot of joy and a little worry every day. 
Would he be healthy and develop correctly? Would he survive if he came early? 
There was no way to know, but nothing would stop me from being in his corner and 
fighting for his life.
Due to complications he was delivered 3 weeks early with a blood sugar of only (9) 
and some issues with his heart. Even with those challenges to overcome and nine days
in the NICU, he healed and thrived; full of life as a true miracle in every sense of the 
word. Maynard continues to be a joy to me and great source of light and life to those 
who know him.
Today I want to continue my fight and be in the corner of other potential sources of 
joy, light, and life!
I urge you to vote in opposition of LD 1619! It is an extreme and unnecessary bill to 
allow abortion up to birth. 
This bill would allow an abortion to be performed at ANY time in pregnancy, for 
ANY reason.
This bill would allow a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed. The 
current law addresses viability and already allows for medical necessity in the case of 
stillbirth, ectopic pregnancy, etc.
Maine would have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the country. We don’t 
want to be known for that or draw people to our beautiful state for that reason.
Over 65% of Mainers don’t want late-term abortion. I am one of that 65%.
Thank you for the opportunity to leave you with my testimony.
