Thank you Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Jane Maguire-Tyce; I reside in Augusta. 
I am here to voice my opposition to LDs 1619, 776, and 1343 
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Amen. 
God does exist whether you believe He does or not. The passage of LD16l9 et al will lead you and all 
of us down the wrong path. God gave us free will to do what is right. Those of you in power havea 
great mandate to do what is right and just. We did not elect you to vote according to your own selﬁsh, 
self-centered world view; You are to vote for truth, beauty and goodness. 
It is statistically impossible that the majority of Maine people want to kill healthy, viable infants in the 
womb before they are born in the name of so-called “reproductive rights” because that will be the 
destruction of the next generation. Thousands of married couples will adopt the babies you want to 
abort before they can be born. 
Deuteronomy 30:9 reads “Choose life that you and your descendants may live.” 
There is the question of abortion. Yes, it is a baby. Yes, it is wrong to kill. Obviously, everyone MUST 
know this. If you support abortion, you are pretending that action is not wrong. 
Many people hurt others because they themselves were hurt. Many supporters of the so-called pro- 
choice mentality promote abortion because they have had an abortion themselves. They don't want to 
look bad. 
Please know that if you are truly sorry, God will forgive you. Please ask God to open your eyes. God 
wants you to know His truth. 
To all the members of the State Legislature, both the Senate and the House of Representatives: If you 
are baptized Christians, you each have an indelible mark on your soul. Satan's demons are especially 
looking at you. Please do not let them see you promoting late term abortion and paying for mothers to 
come from out-of-state to our so-called “sanctuary state” for abortions. You Christians are endangering 
your own souls. We Christians who act badly are in more spiritual danger than non-Christians who act 
badly. 
I ask you to ask God to open your eyes. Vote ought not to pass LDs 1619, 7'76, andl343.
