Members of the Judiciary, 
I am writing today, to let you know that I oppose LD1619.  It is my belief that not only is abortion at any 
time and for any reason wrong for Maine, but LD1619 would allow a baby that could survive outside the 
womb to be murdered.   
As you are aware of the historic event at the State House last Monday, May 1, when hundreds of people 
descended on the State House to vehemently oppose this bill, LD1619.  Please realize that an even 
larger group of Mainers, who are also opposed, is represented by those who testified on May 1. 
Many differing reasons for their opposition were shared on May 1.  I know, because I, was also there.  
Myself and a few others with me arrived at 9:30 Monday morning and were there for the next 22 hours 
listening to testimony after testimony of how LD1619 is NOT good for Maine or preborn babies. 
Maine already has approved abortions up to viability and for the health of the mother.  Now, Governor 
Mills not only has gone back on her word that she would not broaden abortions in our state, but wants 
to broaden abortions up to 40 weeks!?!?  Beyond viability!?!?  Proponents are saying we need to 
broaden support of abortions due to late term fatal fetal anomalies.  This has no merit.  First this 
happens in such a very small percentage of pregnancies.  Second, all too often, these fatal fetal 
anomalies are misdiagnosed.  And third, when we open the door for late term abortions, it can and will 
most likely become a free for all.  Women will want abortions for reasons that have nothing to do with 
fatal fetal anomalies.  Why not allow the woman to deliver the baby alive and then allow the child to be 
adopted by one of the thousands of Mainers that are wanting to adopt.  And they are ready and will to 
adopt even children with physical issues.  
Our daughter in-law had a tough first pregnancy.  Her doctors offered termination due to a long list of 
issues this child “could possibly have”.  She declined the abortion and our grandson was born at 30 
weeks gestation, but due to the complications of the pregnancy, he was at a developmental age of 24 
weeks.  Yet despite the number of ‘possible’ complications the doctors warned her about, our grandson, 
now 16 years old, has only minor issues.  He is thankful that his mom took a stand against abortion and 
today says, ‘I would rather be alive today with a few inconveniences then be dead’. So, you see, fatal 
fetal anomalies can often be mis-diagnosed. This bill should not go any further. 
Please, please reconsider any support you may have for this bill.  Stand against those who would try to 
intimidate you to vote for it.  Listen to the throngs of people who have been asleep as abortion has 
grown to such extents.  The silent majority has now awakened from our sleep and will fight for the lives 
of those who cannot. I am one of those people. 
I ask that before you vote, that you watch a video on late term abortions (if you can get through it). 
I pray that God blesses you in your position, I thank you for your service and ask that you search your 
heart and vote, ‘LD1619 Ought not to pass’. 
Thank you, 
Janice Gendron 
3 Beaver Lane 
Otisfield, ME 
 
