jason joyce
Swans Island
LD 1619
Dear Members of the Judiciary Committee,
 As a father and grandfather it saddens me to see a bill prioritizing and promoting late 
term abortions.
 With all of the problems confronting Maine's citizens (rising fuel and energy costs 
contributing to inflation and food insecurity for working families, to name a few) 
some have chosen to emphasize expanding late term abortion access when the 
mother's life and health are not at risk. 
 There have been so many advancements in science since the phrase "safe,legal, and 
rare" was coined by President Clinton. Advancements that provide details which 
should give us pause when contemplating the removal of "except in cases of rape, 
incest, or the protecting the life of the mother" from the current law which protects 
access up to point of viability(approximately 24 weeks).
 Statistics tell us that Maine's abortion rate ranks the second lowest per capita 
compared to other New England states. This data,  coupled with the fact that the 
majority of ALL abortions occur within the first trimester, reveals that abortions in 
the 2nd trimester are rare, and encouraging more abortions in the 3rd trimester is not 
an approach I have seen our citizens clamor for. There has been no mandate from 
Maine's voters that I have seen to allow abortions for any reason right up until birth. 
Considering our state's statistics in comparison to surrounding New England states, it 
would appear we should instead be doing more for expectant mothers who reach the 
point of viability.
 While I am personally pro-life, I have not felt repealing current laws the best 
approach to reduce the current abortion rate, considering the majority of Mainers 
polled support abortion access. I vehemently oppose expanding our state's laws, 
which gives the appearance our state is encouraging mothers at all times to consider 
making the unfortunate decision to abort their child with no regard for the presence of
life.
 The state should be willing to allocate more funds to assist expectant mothers with 
adoption options rather than fund late term abortion services. Increasing financial 
assistance for mothers and adoption opportunities would result in less abortions which
is what we all should strive for.
 Safe, legal and rare should not be replaced by less-safe, legal, and common. The 
more commonplace abortions become, the more risk to expectant mothers from 
complications.
 I urge legislators to oppose LD1619.
Jason Joyce,
 Father, Uncle, Grandfather, Fisherman

