To the honorable judicial 
legislative branch. 
My name is Jeannette Parks, l live in East lvlachias. 
The overturning of Roe vs. Wade at the Supreme Court, brought it back to the states to decide abortion laws. And 
please remember you work for the people in your state. Of course, federal level eliminates guilt from those who 
hold office in our state. We can blame others, it's a federal law. 
A woman's choice? Our government can not even describe what is a woman. Her choice to compete in sports 
with other biological woman is gone. The protection from men in the locker rooms from YMCA's to professional 
sports lockers is gone. Her bodies choice was eliminated with a vaccine mandate. But she can choose to murder 
the child within her womb. 
Science tells us wombs are in females, biological females, a nurturing, safe place. 
Abortion is one dead and another wounded, l know, I've experienced an abortion in 1975. Growing up in the mid 
seventies, abortion came on the scene. The elimination of babies by coat hangers, or other means, woman dying 
of infection or hemorrhaging was reason or excuse to make abortions safe and legal. lt was never meant to be 
birth control. Two wrongs don't make a right. Eliminating the use of condoms, birth control pills, lUD's, abstinence. 
Planned parenthood an organization was forced to admit, in court, harvesting aborted babies body parts in an 
article in the Washington Examiner. (9/12/2019.) ls itjust a money scheme? 
Do you really care about women's choice, the hipocracy knows no bounds. You encourage and cheer for the 
innocent souls, growing in what is supposed to be the most safe, loving, environment, to be murdered. 
l noticed each one of has not been aborted, think about that. A woman's choice has happened when she has 
unprotected sex. Except the 1% in rape. And that can be taken care of immediately if she goes to the hospital. 
There is and should be choices other than abortion. 
We all have a love for our pets. Dogs having puppies, cats having kittens, horses having foals and so on. We protect 
them, make sure they see the vet for some, do everything to keep them alive. Are we, as humans, lower than 
animals? 
When it comes to human babies, we think it's okay to eliminate them? Not to protect them? Not to nurture the 
beautiful life and soul growing in that womb? 
We can agree on a woman's choice but murder can not be one of them. Offer other choices. Please vote no for 
abortion.
