Jeffrey Dubay
Cambridge
LD 1619
It is easy to agree that discussion of the topic of abortion can, and usually does, 
provoke anger between supporters and proponents. Generally speaking, it can be 
easier to discuss abortion with a complete stranger than it is to discuss the topic with 
relatives and friends. The fact is, you can lose friends when your stance is the 
opposite of theirs. We all know someone, or someone we know knows or is related to 
someone who has been affected by abortion. The person who has had an abortion and 
is defending theirs, or a loved ones choice to abort, usually shows signs of being 
ashamed of that decision. After all, ending the life of a fetus is not something anyone 
involved with is happily discussing in their circles. People don't go about their lives 
chatting up the topic much like they do when a baby is the subject of the conversation.
There is a reason for that. It has a lot to do with what the Bible has to say about 
abortion; which is nothing. On the contrary, children are spoken about in the Bible in 
great detail and are placed in the highest regard. Even Republicans and Democrats 
can agree as to what the Bible says about children; can't we?
In Maine, laws already exist that would provide a woman the opportunity to have an 
abortion of a child up to the age of viability. I'm sure most people are aware of this. 
This term viability describes the period of time in which an incubating fetus would be 
far enough along in its creation to be able to exist outside of the womb without special
care. That period of time is approximately one hundred eighty days; or six short 
months. It seems to me that a decision as important as people generally consider 
'babies' to be, could easily be thoroughly examined and decided upon in this amount 
of time. I think the majority of reasonable people would also agree with my 
assessment. My personal opinion reflects what almost everyone I speak to on this 
topic is in agreement to, and that is, if a person or couple cannot decide whether or not
to carry a baby to term in the first six months, perhaps they shouldn't be doing the 
things that would create a pregnancy in the first place.
As you know, the Supreme Court of the United States recently decided that a mistake 
had been made in the familiar case of Roe vs. Wade. It is your duty as legislators of 
this State, to include the message that this groundbreaking decision sends to 
legislators of this great nation, in moving forward with laws of a similar nature. May 
the LORD Bless and guide you.
