 I am writing in opposition to LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws. This 
bill seeks to remove the penalty for performing an abortion without a license.  One argument pro-
abortion people often use is that making abortion legal prevents “back alley” abortions, yet this bill 
would encourage such a practice.  This bill if enacted would change the standard for when an abortion 
may be performed after viability (approximately six months gestation) to ‘when a licensed physician 
determines that it is necessary’ instead of ‘when it is necessary to preserve the life or health of the 
mother’.  Hence this change would allow for late term abortions even after six months.  The majority of 
Maine voters do not agree with such a practice.   
Please be aware of how a baby develops in the womb: 
17 days blood cells 
18 days heart begins to develop 
19 days eyes begin to develop 
20 days nervous system develops 
24 days heart begins to beat 
28 days arms & legs form 
30 days blood flowing, ears & nose develop 
42 days skeleton complete & reflexes present 
43 days electric brain wave patterns 
8 weeks all organs present,  
All future development is simply refinement.  The baby will increase in size until maturity at 
approximately age 23 years. 
9 & 10 weeks squints, swallows, retracts tongue 
11 & 12 weeks arms & legs move, sucks thumb, nails appearing, inhales & exhales amniotic fluid 
14 weeks the heart pumps several quarts of blood through the body every day 
4 months genital organs clearly differentiated, grasps with hands, swims, kicks and turns somersaults 
4.5 months vocal cords working 
5 months weighs 1 lb & is about 12” long & hair appears 
6 months increased movement 
The term “viable” is used to describe the point when a baby can survive outside the womb.  If a child, 
grandchild, nephew, sister is born three months premature we do all we can to help that baby survive 
and thrive.  The thought of aborting a viable baby after six months is appalling to me and most Mainers.   
Thank you for your consideration, please vote no on LD 1619.   
Sincerely 
 
Jennifer Gogan 
Littleton, Maine 
