Jerome Collins
Kennebunkport
LD 1619
To: the Chairs and Members of the Judiciary Committee:
I oppose LD: 1619: To Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws
In my opinion, killing anyone should never be a private event; particularly, in the case
of late term abortion/immanent birth abortion. This bill sets dangerous, new 
precedents in law and medicine that taking any life can take place outside of 
longstanding, traditional, legal oversight, and that a woman and her physician may 
take the place of the entire legal apparatus for state oversight of state sponsored death.
It is a very bad, very dangerous idea.
Almost every physician in today's world verges on being a civil servant of the state 
through many necessary ties. Medical licensing, government fees for medical 
services, malpractice adjudications make physicians dependent on state approval. The
idea that a woman and her physician can independently, privately decide about an 
abortion fails to recognize that this hoped-for private agreement is one step away from
state government, one step away from any complaint that would necessitate physician 
evaluation. There is also the centuries old dictum to physicians: "First, do no harm." 
In any abortion, "someone" is definitely "harmed".
Depersonalizing the sanctity of life through abortion of late term babies has drastic 
spill-over consequences in many other areas of life: shoot-outs in schools, random 
acts of public violence, domestic abuse (and murder). Unavoidably, life has become 
cheapened by abortion and this "cheapness" cannot be contained or easily bounded 
once the law legitimates the extensive private collaborative murder of innocent 
children, between a woman and her doctor.
I also oppose, LD: 776, a constitutional amendment, which is proposing a very 
dubious right to bodily autonomy. Does this cover ALL possible circumstances of 
bodily autonomy? LD: 776 might well be read as including the autonomy of babies 'in
utero', but there may be other medical and other circumstances where "autonomy" 
may need thoughtful qualifications. It appears to be a bill that was rushed through 
hastily, without careful thought an analysis.
I also oppose LD:1343: which attempts to "preempt", the field of abortion regulations.
This bill would seem to disallow future modifications, amendments, changes resulting
from normal experience, to shut out any future repairs. I question the legality and the 
logic of precluding repairs of any legislation in advance. None of us can read the 
future.
All three of these bills: LD: 1619, 776, 1343, Ought not to pass.
Jerome A. Collins
PO Box 1190
Kennebunkport, Maine 04046
  
 
 
 
