Jessica  Tripp
Auburn
LD 1619
My name is Jessica Tripp and I am a resident of Auburn, Maine. I am writing to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619
I have 3 birth children and one adopted son. I am a volunteer for Safe Families for 
Children.  Safe Families is an organization that supports isolated families with 
children to give the parents the help and support they need to successfully parent.  We
have had several children stay with us through this program.
As you can see, children are very important to me.
I am also a believer in Jesus and the Bible.  The Bible makes clear that all life has 
value and Jesus loved children.   I suspect many of you would say you believe in God.
If you learn about Him through His word, you will see that there are many Biblical  
truths that run contrary to this bill.  If you don’t believe in God, that doesn’t mean He 
doesn’t exist. 
It says in Psalms 127:3 "Behold children are a gift from the Lord" 
Psalm 139:15-16 says "My frame was not hidden from you when I was made in the 
secret place, when I was woven together in the depths of the earth.  Your eyes saw my
unformed body; all the days ordained for me were written in your book before one of 
them came to be"
Matthew 18:10 says "See that you do not despise one of these little ones. For I tell 
you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven."
People who take action to harm babies or allow harm to happen to babies will surely 
not be seen as innocent in the eyes of God. Matthew 25:45 says, “...Truly I tell you, 
whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me” 46 Then 
they will go away to eternal punishment…”
All people have value and purpose, regardless of their age. By the age of viability 
there is no question that you are killing a human being.  That is murder. 
It is for the government to protect those who can not protect themselves.  Abortion is 
already allowed after the age of viability if the life of the mother is in danger.  What is
the ethical difference between a doctor deciding a viable pre-term baby should die and
a 1 month old or a 6 month old, who is also completely dependent on the mother for 
survival?
Another issue with this bill is now taking away consequences for non-medical 
professionals who perform abortions.  Can a person without a medical license remove
a leg without penalty? Why would a person without a medical license be allowed to 
perform an abortion? This is very dangerous.
Thank you for your time.

