1 
 April 29, 2023  
To: Joint Standing Committee on  Judiciary  
Maine House of Representatives  
Jesse Bifulco  
Camden,  ME  
 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1619  
Dear Senator Carney and  Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary,  
I strongly oppose Bill LD 1619 because it severs an important connection between the decision to end 
life and its justification.  
The proposed law eliminates prior legal understanding that both the mother and child have competing 
rights to live.   
Without this analysis, the Bill removes without repl acing the prior rationale for regulating abortion. The 
proponents of this bill, by their own words, justify elective abortion for its economic benefits . Because at 
nine months gestation a child is a viable human being, LD 1619 legalizes the profoundly immo ral belief 
that it is justifiable to end a child’s life if it will reduce the mother’s lifetime earning potential. In fact, the 
Bill goes even further . Because economic justification is merely public rhetoric and not part of the Bill , 
proof that birth woul d limit earning potential  is not a statutory precondition to legal abortion. In fact, t he 
law does not require any justification to terminate a child nine months in gestation.  
LD 1619 makes abortion elective by removing the qualifiers of the health of the mother, or the ability of 
the child to live apart from the mother, from the judgment of when an abortion is legal. Despite the 
requirement of involvement of a physician , there is no medical standard. Therefore, there is no limit.  
LD 1619 is a radical departure from American law. O ur country has never established a right of a citizen 
to take the life of another , apart  from the necessity to save life.  Legal taking of a life in our system is 
extremely rare. No law permitti ng the taking of human life sets the bar as low as LD 1619. The state’s 
right to take life  (capital punishment) , and the citizen’s right to take life  (self -defense) , are established for 
the defense of an innocent against a transgressor. But LD 1619 allows the execution of a person merely 
for being dependent upon another for her or his needs. Conversely,  there are many laws enacted to help 
individuals preserve their right to live. The Bill of Rights, even Maine’s new Constitutional Right to Food, - 
all of our laws establishing citizen’s “rights” are based on these two facts: 1) that to each person her or 
his own life is valuable and important; and 2) that an individual may be too weak to prevent others from 
taking her or his life.  
LD 1619 departs from the steady progress of legal precedent that has led to a recognition of unqualified 
rights to an individual that no government can take away  - dating back at least to the Magna Cart a. LD 
1619 hurls us backward to the regressive , atavistic principle  that “mi ght makes right” .  LD 1619 replaces 
the present presumption that all innocent people have a right to live , with a precedent that only 
2 
 independent  people have a right to live. A law that allows dependent people to be legally executed  
justifies legal euthana sia of the incapacitated – the elderly, the disabled, and others. Further, because 
none of us are independent, LD 1619 creates a legal precedent that none  of us has an inviolable legal 
right to live.  In a very real way, we all depend upon the recognition o f the value of our own life by others. 
Few grow their food, or harvest the fuel needed to warm them in winter. Yet most have what they need 
to sustain their life because of voluntary cooperation with others. We participate in this system because 
of a funda mental understanding: that despite our differences we all have inherent value. We all have a 
right to live. To act otherwise is to transgress in a way that violates that compact and sacrifices our 
shared humanity.  
No advocate of LD 1619 is saying the law is needed to save lives. This law will allow a pregnant woman to 
choose to kill her child , so long as she decides proximate in time to the child’s birth – because it is her 
right to do so.  
Please reconsider your support of this Bill.  
Sincere ly, 
Jesse Bifulco   
Camden resident.  
 
Jesse Bifulco
Camden
LD 1619
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1619
Dear Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary,
I strongly oppose Bill LD 1619 because it severs an important connection between the
decision to end life and its justification.
The proposed law eliminates prior legal understanding that both the mother and child 
have competing rights to live. 
Without this analysis, the Bill removes without replacing the prior rationale for 
regulating abortion. The proponents of this bill, by their own words, justify elective 
abortion for its economic benefits. Because at nine months gestation a child is a viable
human being, LD 1619 legalizes the profoundly immoral belief that it is justifiable to 
end a child’s life if it will reduce the mother’s lifetime earning potential. In fact, the 
Bill goes even further. Because economic justification is merely public rhetoric and 
not part of the Bill, proof that birth would limit earning potential is not a statutory 
precondition to legal abortion. In fact, the law does not require any justification to 
terminate a child nine months in gestation.
LD 1619 makes abortion elective by removing the qualifiers of the health of the 
mother, or the ability of the child to live apart from the mother, from the judgment of 
when an abortion is legal. Despite the requirement of involvement of a physician, 
there is no medical standard. Therefore, there is no limit. 
LD 1619 is a radical departure from American law. Our country has never established
a right of a citizen to take the life of another, apart from the necessity to save life.  
Legal taking of a life in our system is extremely rare. No law permitting the taking of 
human life sets the bar as low as LD 1619. The state’s right to take life (capital 
punishment), and the citizen’s right to take life (self-defense), are established for the 
defense of an innocent against a transgressor. But LD 1619 allows the execution of a 
person merely for being dependent upon another for her or his needs. Conversely, 
there are many laws enacted to help individuals preserve their right to live. The Bill of
Rights, even Maine’s new Constitutional Right to Food, - all of our laws establishing 
citizen’s “rights” are based on these two facts: 1) that to each person her or his own 
life is valuable and important; and 2) that an individual may be too weak to prevent 
others from taking her or his life.
LD 1619 departs from the steady progress of legal precedent that has led to a 
recognition of unqualified rights to an individual that no government can take away - 
dating back at least to the Magna Carta. LD 1619 hurls us backward to the regressive, 
atavistic principle that “might makes right”.  LD 1619 replaces the present 
presumption that all innocent people have a right to live, with a precedent that only 
independent people have a right to live. A law that allows dependent people to be 
legally executed justifies legal euthanasia of the incapacitated – the elderly, the 
disabled, and others. Further, because none of us are independent, LD 1619 creates a 
legal precedent that none of us has an inviolable legal right to live. In a very real way,
we all depend upon the recognition of the value of our own life by others. Few grow 
their food, or harvest the fuel needed to warm them in winter. Yet most have what 
they need to sustain their life because of voluntary cooperation with others. We 
participate in this system because of a fundamental understanding: that despite our 
differences we all have inherent value. We all have a right to live. To act otherwise is 
to transgress in a way that violates that compact and sacrifices our shared humanity.
No advocate of LD 1619 is saying the law is needed to save lives. This law will allow 
a pregnant woman to choose to kill her child, so long as she decides proximate in time
to the child’s birth – because it is her right to do so.
Please reconsider your support of this Bill.
Sincerely,
Jesse Bifulco 
Camden resident. 

