Jessie Boda
Poland
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and all members of the Judiciary Committee:
My name is Jessie Boda, and I am from Poland. I am the local director of a Classical 
Christian hybrid homeschool, a registered nurse, mother, and grandmother. I compel 
you to vote "ought not to pass" for LD 1619.
To quote my eleven-year-old son, "Abortion is evil and it's murder". A child easily 
and quickly comes to this conclusion. Why? Because they want to know the truth 
about things and thus ask the adults in their lives a million questions a day. They are 
not fooled by words such as “fetus” or “tissue” or “pregnancy” or “healthcare 
procedure.” They know it is a baby and that it is being intentionally killed. They 
would only answer otherwise unless adults coached them with more "mature" and 
“enlightened” reasoning. What reasoning? That we do not want children to be 
unwanted or that we do not want children to be poverty-stricken or to suffer physical 
ailments? Or we say that women are harmed by being “forced” into having a baby. 
My children and I once lived below the poverty level. My first pregnancy was 
unplanned, but that baby, my daughter, saved my life. I was on a road headed for 
drug-addiction and prostitution. Today, she is a wonderful mother to my incredible 
grandson. I know a man who was born in the 1960's, as the result of an adulterous 
relationship between two parents of different races. He was adopted by loving 
parents. Today, he is a great, successful man. One of the most joyous and influential 
students in my homeschool group has down syndrome. None of us has the right to 
predict a child's "dismal" future, and claim mercy and compassion to justify murder. 
Likewise, motherhood is difficult and will result in suffering, but it is also stabilizing 
and positively life-changing. It should be encouraged, not easily sacrificed on the altar
of self-indulgence.
“Thou shall not murder” is a clear, simple, beneficial, just, and loving command from 
the Giver of Life, and thus a deeply held conviction of mine. You may not share my 
love of Jesus and His words of life, but you cannot deny that this bill will only result 
in increased death. There is one whose goal is to, “seek, kill and destroy.” Satan loves
death. Jesus has overcome death. Who will you side with today? I pray you choose to 
halt the expansion of abortion in Maine. I pray you choose life for the children of 
Maine and Life Everlasting for yourselves. Amen
