Joanne Van Loenen
Falmouth
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, I am Joanne van Loenen, living in Falmouth.  I am a 
feminist and I am pro-life. As a feminist I strongly believe in non-violence, 
non-discrimination and justice for all and as such, there is no other choice for me but 
to oppose LD 1619.
Are you going to vote in favor of LD1619 and allow a doctor to abort a child who is 
about to be born because the doctor says it’s necessary when the word necessary isn’t 
even defined? Isn’t taking the life of an unborn child post-viability better known as 
infanticide, the epitome of violence?
Why take the life of this unborn child when a Caesarean birth would not only give 
this child a chance at life but would also be a gift to one of the more than 2 million 
couples who want to adopt? 
And as for justice, who represents the unborn child when the decision is being made 
to take his or her life, a child who from the moment of conception has a genetic code 
unique to itself, different from the mother’s and the father’s?  Don’t all human beings 
deserve justice and protection under the law?
And as for discrimination, isn’t it true that for years abortion advocates have been 
pitting a woman against her unborn child, dehumanizing the growing child, 
discriminating against the child because of his or her size or age?
Wouldn’t a feminist support women centered solutions to the real challenges of 
pregnancy, childbirth, child rearing, solutions that affirm the well-being of both the 
mother and her child, solutions that are offered by pregnancy support centers?
Don’t you want to live in a society where all human life is championed, where one 
person doesn’t devalue the life of another human being,  OR  do you want to live in a 
society that tells itself it is civilized and appropriate to permit the killing of innocent 
defenseless human beings as long as the killing is being done by a doctor with the 
permission of the victim’s mother?
Do you realize that what we’re doing here is deciding who’s going to live and who’s 
going to die? I urge you to vote in opposition LD 1619. 
Thank you 

