Jodi Bentley
Levant
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:
My name is Jodi Bentley and I live in Levant, Maine. I am testifying in writing today 
in opposition of LD1619. 
I’ll never forget as a young child hearing the story of a couple who murdered their 
infant child, placed its body in a plastic bag, and deposited it in the trash. That couple 
was tried, found guilty and sentenced to prison terms. I’ll never forget the feeling of 
incongruency as I grappled with the concept of abortion. What is abortion? I would 
define it as the intentional act of ending a baby’s life while in utero. So then, 
logically, what is the difference between the ending of a life post-birth versus 
pre-birth? Who determines which lives are worth fighting for? Where is the limit to 
the termination of human life?
You, as the lawmakers, are deciding whether a baby can be killed up to the time of 
birth. Your decision today affects every single Mainer, today, tomorrow, and for the 
future to come. We need to stand up as a state and say that every single life has value. 
Every human life is worth fighting for. 
Politically speaking, ALL Mainers have the right to life. It’s a fundamental human 
right, recognized by our forefathers as an inalienable human right. I don’t think they 
ever would have imagined how far we would fall for the sake of individual choice. 
What about the child’s choice?
Morally speaking, empathy is worth standing up for, it is worth choosing to do the 
right thing. Just take a moment to consider your own mother, your own life. How 
many lives have you impacted? How many lives have been impacted by you? Your 
life has value. Every life does. 
If it’s a matter of choice, no baby chooses to die. If you wouldn’t choose death for 
yourself, don’t legislate it for others. Murder is murder. Terminating a life up to nine 
months of gestational age is really just the beginning of the end of our society. 
If LD 1619 becomes law, it won’t be long until the bill is for forced euthanasia and it 
might be your life on the line. Stand up for the dignity of human life, before your 
choice is taken from you. Disrespect for life has a beginning, this may be it, but who 
knows where will it end? It just may end with you. 
Consider wisely. Please vote ought not to pass.
