TESTIMONY OF JOHN ANTHONY, HARPSWELL, MAINE; 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is John Anthony, I reside in Harpswell, and I am here to 
testify in opposition to L.D. 1619. 
I oppose this bill for many of the same objective reasons you have 
heard already or will hear. Rather than recount them I will briefly 
address three aspects that make this legislation additionally 
problematic. 
First, we should ask what is the impetus or motivation to craft such an 
extreme extension of already existing statutes. It is extreme because it 
crosses the line of viability, the well-acknowledged point when life can 
sustain itself without aid from the birth host. The impetus cannot be 
about saving the life of a mother who may be in medical distress, for 
this contingency is already provided for in existing law. Neither can it 
be about saving the life of a baby for that life, under this legislation, is 
permitted to be lawfully terminated. No, this legislation concerns itself 
with death, not life. Legislation that advances the death of individuals 
capable of living independently in a medical context is in contradiction 
to the natural right to enjoy life declared in Article 1, Section 1, of the 
Constitution of the State of Maine. So the motivation to craft such 
legislation is not only suspect but reprehensible and an affront to the 
foundational bases of our government and society.
Second, in the public discourse presently being carried out, people are 
asking, what becomes of the body or remains of those whose 
otherwise viable life was terminated? Good question, for it is not clear 
in this legislation that there are provisions to guard against abuse or 
even exploitation. Further, due to the advanced stage of pregnancy 
when life becomes viable, the only method of safely removing the baby 
may be by inducing birth. At that point, does terminating a life fall under 
the abortion rubric or is it murder? People are not only concerned but 
alarmed at these ambiguities and questionable moral legitimacies. The 
proposed legislation is irresponsibly deficient in addressing them and, 
from the moral standpoint, may even be unlawful on its face. 
Third, it is consistently documented that the majority of the Maine 
electorate, by almost two to one, opposes extreme expansion of legal 
abortion allowed by this legislation. Maine legislators are 
representatives of the people, not of special interests, not of party 
interests. It is unconscionable that some of them are poised to approve 
this measure in the face of broad majority popular resistance. This is 
not an emergency measure; there is ample time for debate. Perhaps 
this has not occurred because the outcome will corroborate what they 
already know are the public’s predilections. 
ln summary, this legislation ’s genesis has shaky constitutional 
grounds, introduces disturbing and unresolved moral ramifications, and 
the majority of Maine citizens do not support it. l stand with this Maine 
majority in opposing it. Please vote ought not to pass.
