John Lewis
Cape Elizabeth
LD 1619
Dear Respective Members of the Judiciary Committee,
I am submitting testimony today on LD 1619: An Act to Improve Maine's 
Reproductive Privacy Laws. In 1993, under Republican Governor John McKernan, 
Maine's current abortion law was enacted as a "trigger" should Roe v Wade be 
overturned. The current law allows the termination of pregnancy for ANY reason up 
until the point of viability. Viability is defined as the ability of the baby to survive 
outside of the womb naturally or with life-preserving technology. Beyond viability a 
pregnancy may be terminated to preserve the life or health of the mother.
LD 1619, if enacted, will position Maine as the most extreme in the county when it 
comes to allowing abortion. This is not where the Maine people are at. Mainers are 
not extreme, whether that's to the right or to the left. The majority of Maine people are
in the middle. Maine's current abortion law represents the middle.
During the 2022 campaign season Governor Mills, and many Democrat candidates 
running for office, claimed their support of Maine's current abortion law, vowing 
NOT to change it. In fact it was Governor Mills and the Democrats that accused 
Republican candidates as wanting to change the abortion law if they were to be 
elected to office. In only a matter of days after the Governor's inauguration for her 
second term, was what we now know as LD 1619 proposed. If we cannot trust the 
Governor on her word, how can we trust her supposed good intensions with this bill?
The governor cites the example of a Yarmouth mother who, after receiving the tragic 
news that her baby was diagnosed with a deadly form of skeletal dysplasia, travelled 
out of state for an abortion as the reason why Maine's current abortion law must be 
expanded. While deep sympathy and compassion towards the mother is justified and 
with merit, the current law would have allowed her to seek an abortion here in Maine.
Her baby would not have met the definition of viable. Unfortunately, this mother is 
being exploited for an agenda.
LD 1619 removes the restriction "to preserve the life or health of the mother" and 
replaces it with "in the professional judgement of a physician" beyond the point of 
viability. This change allows for on-demand, late-term abortions. What happened to 
safe, legal, and rare? We would be naïve if we ignore the potential abuse of this 
proposed language. In recent history we witnessed medical professionals allowing 
their political ideology to impact the care they provide their patients by defying their 
legal and ethical obligation to informed consent. If LD 1619 were to pass, a mother 
would be able to "shop" for physicians that agree with their ideology and choice to 
terminate a pregnancy in the hours before birth.
As a reminder, the vast majority of Mainers oppose on-demand, late-term abortions. 
Whether you personally agree or disagree with abortion, the Maine people support the
current law as written. I am imploring you to make the more humane choice. Please 
vote Ought Not To Pass.
John Lewis
Cape Elizabeth, Maine
