Testimony Regarding Maine LD 1619  
 
Madam Chair, Speaker Talbot Ross, and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, please 
accept my sincere appreciation for all that you do.  
My name is John Wallace and I live in the town of Greene. Legislative Bill LD 1619  is one of great 
concern and potential impact for our state, and I pray that you carefully consider your 
conscience and the voice of the people when voting.  
My heart goes ou t to a young pregnant mother who has no support from family or the father of 
her child and  is told by society the lie that abortion is the solution. What she and her child need 
most is love and support to protect both their lives and there are many resourc es that exist to 
do just that. Additionally, I sym pathize with a mother who is told that her life is endangered by 
her pregnancy. My understanding is that this represents a relatively small percentage of all 
pregnancies . Furthermore,  many doctors (some who  are former abortionists) assert  with 
authority  that the safest course of action is not to subject the mother to the trauma of aborting  
her child but to just deliver the baby (who may or may not live but  is not intentionally killed ). 
We seem to live in a t hrow -away society that regrettably has been extended to human life. I 
believe that the unborn child is unique, fully human, and unrepeatable, and that we as 
members of the human race have a civic and moral duty to protect all innocent human life. I 
believe  that abortion is not health care because health care is intended to safeguard and 
preserve life , not destroy it. I believe that all of us have a right to li fe, and I’m deeply grateful 
that anyone reading or hearing this testimony had a mother and/or fathe r who honored that 
right to li ve.  
LD 1619 is directly opposed to the precious gifts of freedom and life that I fought for as a career 
U.S. Naval officer. I humbly, but with conv iction, ask you to oppose this bill.  The State of Maine 
deserves better!  
