My name is John Perry, and I am a resident of Hallowell, and I want to thank you 
for allowing me to present testimony against LD 1619. 
 
I was reading the statement from the Executive Director of the Maine Council of 
Churches supporting this bill which said, in part, “We affirm the ability of pregnant 
people (not pregnant women, pregnant people) to make good moral choices …”  It 
got me thinking about a critical question:  Where does our morality—our sense 
of what is right and what is wrong, good and evil, come from?  I believe that 
most people do not seriously consider this question, or if they have, they do not 
dwell on it because of the grave implications it brings.  Where morality comes 
from really boils two choices: nature, or God.  That’s it.   
 
Because morality cannot be dictated by the government.  If it did, then the 195 
different governments around the world can have different standards of good and 
evil, and our own government couldn’t condemn another government’s actions.  
After all—they set their standard of good and evil, our government sets ours.  In 
other words, if government determines morality, then what Nazi Germany did was 
simply a difference of opinion, and nothing more.  So, morality clearly cannot be 
dictated by the government. 
 
Morality cannot be dictated by culture or the society.  If it did, then who are 
we, in our American culture, to condemn those cultures that still practice female 
genital mutilation? According to the United Nations Population Fund, an estimated 
200 million girls and women alive today are believed to have been subjected to 
female genital mutilation. These girls and women live predominately in sub-
Saharan Africa and the Arab States, but female genital mutilation is also practiced 
in select countries in Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin America. It is also practiced 
among migrant populations throughout Europe, North America, Australia and New 
Zealand.  So, the question is, if society determines what is good and bad, and these 
various cultures continue to promote female genital mutilation—an act that I think 
all of us in this room would abhor—who are we, in our American culture, to 
condemn it?  So, morality clearly cannot be dictated by the culture. 
 
If the theory of evolution is true, then morality does, in fact, come from 
nature.  Because if evolution is true, as our human species simply evolved over 
billions and billions of years through random chemical reactions, from space rocks 
leftover from the Big Bang to some primordial soup to fish to apes to you (from 
goo to the zoo to you), it follows that our morality must also have evolved.  In 
other words, it comes from nature.  And it that is the case—if evolution is true and 
our morality evolved, and there is no God—then right and wrong, good and evil—
do, in fact, become a matter of opinion in a Godless universe.   
 
And if that’s the case—that my morality is different from your morality because 
that is the way my own personal morality evolved, then I have no objection to LD 
1619.  Just like you and I cannot be blamed for the ways our eye colors or skin 
colors or heights or sexes evolved, we cannot be held accountable for the way our 
individual morality evolved.  Morality becomes individually subjective.  My 
morality is different than your morality and that’s okay—that is simply how we, as 
individuals, evolved.   
 
But if morality is subjective, then why are you locking your doors at night?  If 
someone wants to break into your house, what are they doing that’s morally 
wrong?  Especially if stealing from you makes their lives better, if stealing your 
money or your possessions helps that person survive?  After all, we are taught 
“survival of the fittest.”  For example, no one calls what the lion does to the gazelle 
evil, do they?  The lion needs to survive.  In the same way, if me robbing a 
convenience store to provide for myself, to make my life better—why is that 
morally wrong?  If our morality comes from nature—it is not wrong, that’s simply 
the way my own personal morality evolved.  And then we truly are nothing special 
in this universe—just evolved rocks leftover from the Big Bang, I would have 
absolutely no objection to murdering unborn babies. If our morality comes from 
nature and evolved through the by-product of completely random chance in a cold, 
dark, indifferent universe, then we are nothing more than fancy space rocks 
tumbling around together amongst the trillions of other space objects tumbling 
around the universe.  And if killing unborn babies is not wrong in a random, 
Godless universe, then why is murder wrong?  Why is rape wrong?  In a Godless 
universe—these things are not morally wrong.  Or another way to look at it is if 
evolution is true, and we are evolving—remember, evolution is a series of 
random changes--that means our morality is evolving as well.  So, who is to say 
that someday rape, someday murder, someday killing an innocent baby…might be 
considered morally good things?  Because without God, there is no eternal 
accountability, no final judgement to worry about.  Live your life to the fullest—
lie, steal, rape, and murder, including the murder of full-term babies separated by a 
few inches of flesh—do what you need to do because it is survival of the fittest and 
enjoy life the fullest, because soon enough, we all die. 
 
Of course, there is Option #2:  that our morality, our sense of what is good and 
what is evil, comes from God.  And God has clearly called the murder of human 
beings of all stages of development evil.  And if Option #2 is where we derive or 
morality—if God Himself is the Moral Standard—He also makes it clear that we—
both you and me--will stand accountable before Him for our sin, which includes 
the endorsement of murdering the unborn.  And without a Substitute—the Lord 
Jesus Christ—to pay the price for your guilty judgement—and my guilty 
judgement—the just punishment will be grave indeed, and it will be eternal. 
 
Nature or God, those are the only choices.  Both have grave implications in this 
life, but only one option—the True Option #2--has consequences for eternity.  
Please, use your God-given ability to reason out where our morality comes from, 
and do not support this bill, which Option #2—our God—calls evil. 
 
Thank you  
 
John Perry
Hallowell
LD 1619
My name is John Perry, and I am a resident of Hallowell, and I want to thank you for 
allowing me to present testimony against LD 1619.
I was reading the statement from the Executive Director of the Maine Council of 
Churches supporting this bill which said, in part, “We affirm the ability of pregnant 
people (not pregnant women, pregnant people) to make good moral choices …”  It got
me thinking about a critical question:  Where does our morality—our sense of what is 
right and what is wrong, good and evil, come from?  I believe that most people do not
seriously consider this question, or if they have, they do not dwell on it because of the
grave implications it brings.  Where morality comes from really boils two choices: 
nature, or God.  That’s it.  
Because morality cannot be dictated by the government.  If it did, then the 195 
different governments around the world can have different standards of good and evil,
and our own government couldn’t condemn another government’s actions.  After 
all—they set their standard of good and evil, our government sets ours.  In other 
words, if government determines morality, then what Nazi Germany did was simply a
difference of opinion, and nothing more.  So, morality clearly cannot be dictated by 
the government.
Morality cannot be dictated by culture or the society.  If it did, then who are we, in 
our American culture, to condemn those cultures that still practice female genital 
mutilation? According to the United Nations Population Fund, an estimated 200 
million girls and women alive today are believed to have been subjected to female 
genital mutilation. These girls and women live predominately in sub-Saharan Africa 
and the Arab States, but female genital mutilation is also practiced in select countries 
in Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin America. It is also practiced among migrant 
populations throughout Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand.  So, the 
question is, if society determines what is good and bad, and these various cultures 
continue to promote female genital mutilation—an act that I think all of us in this 
room would abhor—who are we, in our American culture, to condemn it?  So, 
morality clearly cannot be dictated by the culture.
If the theory of evolution is true, then morality does, in fact, come from nature.  
Because if evolution is true, as our human species simply evolved over billions and 
billions of years through random chemical reactions, from space rocks leftover from 
the Big Bang to some primordial soup to fish to apes to you (from goo to the zoo to 
you), it follows that our morality must also have evolved.  In other words, it comes 
from nature.  And it that is the case—if evolution is true and our morality evolved, 
and there is no God—then right and wrong, good and evil—do, in fact, become a 
matter of opinion in a Godless universe.  
And if that’s the case—that my morality is different from your morality because that 
is the way my own personal morality evolved, then I have no objection to LD 1619.  
Just like you and I cannot be blamed for the ways our eye colors or skin colors or 
heights or sexes evolved, we cannot be held accountable for the way our individual 
morality evolved.  Morality becomes individually subjective.  My morality is different
than your morality and that’s okay—that is simply how we, as individuals, evolved.  
But if morality is subjective, then why are you locking your doors at night?  If 
someone wants to break into your house, what are they doing that’s morally wrong?  
Especially if stealing from you makes their lives better, if stealing your money or your
possessions helps that person survive?  After all, we are taught “survival of the 
fittest.”  For example, no one calls what the lion does to the gazelle evil, do they?  
The lion needs to survive.  In the same way, if me robbing a convenience store to 
provide for myself, to make my life better—why is that morally wrong?  If our 
morality comes from nature—it is not wrong, that’s simply the way my own personal 
morality evolved.  And then we truly are nothing special in this universe—just 
evolved rocks leftover from the Big Bang, I would have absolutely no objection to 
murdering unborn babies.  If our morality comes from nature and evolved through the
by-product of completely random chance in a cold, dark, indifferent universe, then we
are nothing more than fancy space rocks tumbling around together amongst the 
trillions of other space objects tumbling around the universe.  And if killing unborn 
babies is not wrong in a random, Godless universe, then why is murder wrong?  Why 
is rape wrong?  In a Godless universe—these things are not morally wrong.  Or 
another way to look at it is if evolution is true, and we are evolving—remember, 
evolution is a series of random changes--that means our morality is evolving as well.  
So, who is to say that someday rape, someday murder, someday killing an innocent 
baby…might be considered morally good things?  Because without God, there is no 
eternal accountability, no final judgement to worry about.  Live your life to the 
fullest—lie, steal, rape, and murder, including the murder of full-term babies 
separated by a few inches of flesh—do what you need to do because it is survival of 
the fittest and enjoy life the fullest, because soon enough, we all die.
Of course, there is Option #2:  that our morality, our sense of what is good and what 
is evil, comes from God.  And God has clearly called the murder of human beings of 
all stages of development evil.  And if Option #2 is where we derive or morality—if 
God Himself is the Moral Standard—He also makes it clear that we—both you and 
me--will stand accountable before Him for our sin, which includes the endorsement of
murdering the unborn.  And without a Substitute—the Lord Jesus Christ—to pay the 
price for your guilty judgement—and my guilty judgement—the just punishment will 
be grave indeed, and it will be eternal.
Nature or God, those are the only choices.  Both have grave implications in this life, 
but only one option—the True Option #2--has consequences for eternity.  Please, use 
your God-given ability to reason out where our morality comes from, and do not 
support this bill, which Option #2—our God—calls evil.
Thank you 
