Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary.  My name is Jon Schmidt, I am a 
resident of Bowdoin, and I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619.  I also 
oppose LD 776, and LD 1343. 
Only a few years ago, legalized abortion was defended even by its 
proponents as basically a regrettable, necessary evil.  “Safe, legal, and rare”, 
Bill Clinton said.  Today, there are concerted efforts to “remove the stigma” of 
abortion.   “Abortion is health care”, advocates claim.  Some popular 
influencers even urge women to “shout out your abortion” without shame.  
Such are the vagaries of popular culture.  And why not?  According to the 
polls, abortion is supported by  “most Americans”.  
I would suggest a history lesson is in order, a reminder of the slippery slope a 
society descends when a popular majority becoming fixated on its own 
preeminence and desensitized to brutality toward the weak and inconvenient.   
The Holocaust of Nazi Germany didn’t begin with ethnic cleansing and death 
camps.  It began in German hospitals, sanatoriums, and psychiatric wards, 
where physicians convinced parents to abort imperfect fetuses, and physically 
and mentally impaired people were euthanized  --  all allegedly for their own 
good and the benefit of society.  Only after years of conditioning to this 
irreverence for life did the purges begin.  And the majority of Germans went 
along with it.  Whether the individual citizens were evil, stupid, cowardly, or 
apathetic, we'll never know, but of one thing there is no doubt:  that "majority" 
was morally bankrupt.     
This is but one of many such examples of popular opinion and ethical 
behavior being on opposite ends of the moral spectrum. 
Although majorities often have the power to inflict their will on the weak, 
history will judge them severely for abuse of that power.  Furthermore, hiding 
behind the so-called “will of the majority” provides no excuse. 
In case after case, the majorities rationalized injustice against their victims by 
deeming them something less than human. 
On this template abortion is rationalized.  The unborn are called "potential 
humans”.  “Viable" and "non-viable" unborn babies are afforded different 
degrees of human legitimacy.  The killing of a tiny human being with a beating 
heart is re-labeled “healtth care" or preposterously, "reproductive justice".  
Whether the majority of Mainers want LD 1619's expansion of third trimester 
abortion or not is irrelevant.  You, as legislators, have the duty to vote for what 
you know to be morally right, regardless of the consequences.  I call upon 
THIS MAJORITY to respect life and reject more state-sanctioned death.   
Vote: OUGHT NOT TO PASS. Thank you. 
Jonathan Schmidt
Bowdoin
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary.  My name is Jon Schmidt, I am a resident of 
Bowdoin, and I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619.  I also oppose LD 776, 
and LD 1343.
Only a few years ago, legalized abortion was defended even by its proponents as 
basically a regrettable, necessary evil.  “Safe, legal, and rare”, Bill Clinton said.  
Today, there are concerted efforts to “remove the stigma” of abortion.   “Abortion is 
health care”, advocates claim.  Some popular influencers even urge women to “shout 
out your abortion” without shame.  Such are the vagaries of popular culture.  And 
why not?  According to the polls, abortion is supported by  “most Americans”. 
I would suggest a history lesson is in order, a reminder of the slippery slope a society 
descends when a popular majority becoming fixated on its own preeminence and 
desensitized to brutality toward the weak and inconvenient.  
The Holocaust of Nazi Germany didn’t begin with ethnic cleansing and death camps.  
It began in German hospitals, sanatoriums, and psychiatric wards, where physicians 
convinced parents to abort imperfect fetuses, and physically and mentally impaired 
people were euthanized  --  all allegedly for their own good and the benefit of society.
Only after years of conditioning to this irreverence for life did the purges begin.  And 
the majority of Germans went along with it.  Whether the individual citizens were 
evil, stupid, cowardly, or apathetic, we'll never know, but of one thing there is no 
doubt:  that "majority" was morally bankrupt.    
This is but one of many such examples of popular opinion and ethical behavior being 
on opposite ends of the moral spectrum.
Although majorities often have the power to inflict their will on the weak, history will
judge them severely for abuse of that power.  Furthermore, hiding behind the 
so-called “will of the majority” provides no excuse.
In case after case, the majorities rationalized injustice against their victims by 
deeming them something less than human.
On this template abortion is rationalized.  The unborn are called "potential humans”.  
“Viable" and "non-viable" unborn babies are afforded different degrees of human 
legitimacy.  The killing of a tiny human being with a beating heart is re-labeled 
“healtth care" or preposterously, "reproductive justice". 
Whether the majority of Mainers want LD 1619's expansion of third trimester 
abortion or not is irrelevant.  You, as legislators, have the duty to vote for what you 
know to be morally right, regardless of the consequences.  I call upon THIS 
MAJORITY to respect life and reject more state-sanctioned death.  
Vote: OUGHT NOT TO PASS. Thank you.
