Madam chair and Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Jonathan Ferreira of Roxbury, Maine. I am the father of an amazing 
son and the uncle of a niece that was born prematurely. I am testifying in 
opposition of LD1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
  I am testifying because I cannot keep silent while there is an imminent threat to 
an innumerable number of innocent lives. The heart of this bill is not about 
privacy. It is not even about protecting a mother’s health. This bill is about 
expanding abortion to allow the horrendous act of killing a child up till the point 
of birth. Studies have shown that a baby can survive outside the womb after just 
24 weeks. This bill would allow that child to be violently killed and in constant 
danger of death for another 16 weeks. That means the only thing putting that life 
in danger is its location because at 30 weeks outside the womb we would charge 
them with murder, but inside the womb it is justified? When my niece was born, 
she could fit in the span of my hand. She is now 16 years old. What is often 
referred to as just a clump of cells is now a beautiful young woman that brings 
light to this world. 
You have all read the bill and the amendments that are being proposed. There are 
already protections in place to protect the life of a mother. This bill aims to 
remove the punishment for non-licensed people performing abortion. If this were 
really just about health and welfare, wouldn’t we want a licensed professional 
involved in such a dangerous and deadly procedure? Again, this is not a bill about 
privacy, this is a bill to expand the age that babies can be killed. I am asking you to 
stand with the majority of Mainers who you all represent and vote ought not to 
pass. This bill is too extreme. It is too vile. We cannot let this pass. 
 
   
Jonathan Ferreira
Roxbury
LD 1619
Madam chair and Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Jonathan Ferreira of Roxbury, Maine. I am the father of an amazing son 
and the uncle of a niece that was born prematurely. I am testifying in opposition of 
LD1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws.
  I am testifying because I cannot keep silent while there is an imminent threat to an 
innumerable number of innocent lives. The heart of this bill is not about privacy. It is 
not even about protecting a mother’s health. This bill is about expanding abortion to 
allow the horrendous act of killing a child up till the point of birth. Studies have 
shown that a baby can survive outside the womb after just 24 weeks. This bill would 
allow that child to be violently killed and in constant danger of death for another 16 
weeks. That means the only thing putting that life in danger is its location because at 
30 weeks outside the womb we would charge them with murder, but inside the womb 
it is justified? When my niece was born, she could fit in the span of my hand. She is 
now 16 years old. What is often referred to as just a clump of cells is now a beautiful 
young woman that brings light to this world.
You have all read the bill and the amendments that are being proposed. There are 
already protections in place to protect the life of a mother. This bill aims to remove 
the punishment for non-licensed people performing abortion. If this were really just 
about health and welfare, wouldn’t we want a licensed professional involved in such a
dangerous and deadly procedure? Again, this is not a bill about privacy, this is a bill 
to expand the age that babies can be killed. I am asking you to stand with the majority
of Mainers who you all represent and vote ought not to pass. This bill is too extreme. 
It is too vile. We cannot let this pass.

