Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members ofthe Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Josh and I'm a resident of Sidney. I am here to testify in opposition to LD1619 
I speak to you out of deep concern, and to caution you of a likely outcome if this bill is passed and signed 
into law... Many citizens across this State and Nation have taken down statues, expressed disgust, and 
stood up to boycot names in History. I'm sure you can think of names... This is usually due to 1 decision 
they made during their terms in office. 
THIS (TODAY) IS A MOMENT IN MAINE STATE HISTORY THAT WILL REVERBERATE THROUGHOUT TIME. 
I believe these men were certain that they held the high ground during their tenure... and took no 
thought for how they would be judged based on generally acceptable choices in their time and culture. 
The act of abortion past viability is hardly considered generally acceptable today... It's considered the 
murder of an innocent, by a large percentage of your piers and the voting citizens of this State. 
ESPECIALLY once he or she is past the point of viability. 
I believe that every man and woman that signs their name in favor of bill (LD1619) will be harshly 
judged by history, and have their names forever tainted, and their accomplishments ignored, and soon 
their names will be highlighted as an example of this unexcusable act of cruelty and abandonment of 
empathy. Maybe some of you are in favor of this bill, and you see yourselves as pioneers and trailblazers 
of your time... maybe you believe you're on the right side of history. The problem is that the line has 
already been clearly drawn in the sand... that line is at the point of viability. Janet Mills promised that 
she would not expand the abortion laws before she was re-elected. She campaigned on it... Janet Lied. 
Don't tie your fate to hers. I believe that slave owners thought that they would be forever considered 
as the patriots that built this great country... That's not the case today... I believe that the majority today 
believes it was completely inhumane and unexcusable! The difference was, at least most of them 
weren't killed immediately. They were treated horribly, and some were killed immediately... As horrid as 
it was, it still wasn't the massaccre of millions that Abortion has been. How will Historyjudge this?? 
And Finally... The men that crucified Christ, they probably believed they were silencing a false prophet 
with a god complex... UNTIL THE TEMPLE VEIL WAS TORN IN 2 AND THE GROUND BEGAN TO SHAKE.. 
That is. Matthew 27:51 but history tells us that when that occurred they knew that this was the son of 
God. 2000 years later and his words still exit our lips. Father forgive them. They know not what they 
do... Do You Know? 
PLEASE consider the gravity of this Bill and the consequences if it passes and Vote Ought not pass! 
Please consider the Lives that will be saved if you do, and the consequences if you do not! 
We only live once on this side of eternity, and then we are judged please consider this.... consider who 
the blood of these innocents will cry out and accuse if this bill is moved forward. Their blood will cry out 
to those that signed this into law. Avoid that fate... for yourselves, and for our State.
