LD 1619 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Julia Stahlnecker and I am a resident of Farmingdale. I am 
here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
24 years ago, my parents were advised to consider their options because their baby was at 
significant risk for Down syndrome. In 1999, this was reason enough to stop my beating heart. 
They were wrong about me. They would have ended the life of a typical, healthy baby girl. I urge 
anyone in this room to look me in the eye and tell me my life is worthless. 
We’re here to decide if a difference of hours affords a fully independent person the right to life 
- a core principle this country was founded on. ls it not illegal to murder the dependent elderly? 
Have we not rallied for and funded positive change for special needs children? 
It has been said that this decision ought not to lie with politicians, but with women and 
healthcare professionals. I am both. I stand before you as a female clinician who has faithfully 
served those in this community dependent upon my care to walk, to eat, even to breathe - ina 
state where the abdication of my responsibility is punishable by law. I stand before you asa 
survivorin a generation already missing over a quarter of its peers due to abortion. I beg of you 
- do not shed more of our blood. 
Whatever your persuasion on this matter, I urge you to watch how a child struggles against 
these weapons ~ and they are weapons - that literally tear them limb from limb. I assure you, it is 
not a sight you will soon forget. Protect women from this emotional and even physical scarring. 
Protect women from medically dangerous abortions that this bill proposes to decriminalize. 
Protect me, and the millions of other little girls and boys with stories just like mine whose ability 
to tell theirs one day hinges on what you decide about this bill. I know that I speak for myself, for 
my church, and for many others when I say we are not just pro-birth. We are ready and willing to 
support and love on women in crisis. There is a way that is just and loving towards women, and 
this is not it. 
Thank you for your time and careful consideration of my testimony today.
