Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Judiciary Committee, I am Julie 
Russo. I live in Amity. I am here to oppose LD 1619, “An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive 
Privacy Laws” , sponsored by Rep. Talboto Ross. 
A friend told me the following true story. I share it with his permission. 
How Do You Feel Now? 
“After her persistence about telling me why she was a strong supporter of abortion, I responded with: 
‘May I ask you a question? ’ She answered, yes. 
What if, when you were in your mother’s womb, she told her doctor that because she didn’t have 
enough love in her heart to have this thing that is inside her, she wanted him to get rid of it. He agreed 
to perform an abortion. 
So, to begin the abortion, he reached up into your mother’s womb. He grabbed your leg and began 
twisting and pulling on it to rip your God given leg from your body. Because of the sever pain, you 
began screaming. But, because you were in your mother ’s womb, no one could hear your painful 
screams. Then came the second leg. Then came one arm and then the other arm. As your body was 
slowly dying, so also were your screams. Then he grabbed your body, ‘Snap’ , felt and heard only by 
you, as your body was torn away from your head. 
Then the last part of your body and your head was removed from your mother’s womb. With this 
procedure now over, answer this one question. ‘If, when you were in your mother’s womb, she had 
aborted you, who would I be talking to right now?’ 
Then with tears ﬂowing down her cheeks, looking into her sorrowful eyes, I asked her; ‘How do you 
feel now?”’ 
How about you, abortion supporters? How do YOU feel now? 
Planned Parenthood has aborted 372,155 babies during ‘21-’22. This is the 2"“ most abortions 
performed in their history. This is 40% of all abortions in the U.S. Their primary mission is making 
huge profits by aborting innocent Babies. Abortion is not health care and is not safe. It is an 
intentional act of killing a human being. That is human genocide for profit. Even though the Supreme 
Court over turned Roe vs Wade we must continue to fight to protect and be the voice of these voiceless 
babies. 
Ask yourself, “What about the right of the baby?” 
In closing, this act of murder breaks the 6"‘ Commanclment- ”Thou shall not murder.” 
Please search your heart and soul when voting to kill babies up to birth! 
Thank you for your time today. Please join me by voting ought not to pass on LD 1619.
O
