Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Kandace Porter, and l’m a resident of Scarborough. I'm here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
Every life has value! 
Your life has value. My life has value. Every life has a purpose and plan. 
There are no mistakes. 
Life is valuable no matter your gender, color of skin, hair color, whether you 
are short or tall, blue eyed or brown or green. Every life has value, no 
matter whether you live in a big city or small town or in the country. 
Value isn't based on a high school diploma or a PhD, whether or not you 
are a school teacher, a nurse, a landscaper, a scientist, professor, a 
carpenter, a computer technician, a civil engineer. Whether a fire ﬁghter or 
a garbage facilities worker or even governor. Every life has value! 
When we hear in the news about a shooting that killed small elementary 
school children, or about a horrific car accident that killed an an elderly 
person, or a tragic accident of a toddler or teen suicide death, all of these 
lives have value. A baby still in the womb and a baby who is in the process 
of being born, they all are valuable and have a plan and purpose for their 
life.
Maine does not want extreme abortion rights with the horrific killing of a full 
term baby. That late term baby has value just like the toddler, school age 
child, teen and elderly person that all also suffered a terrible death and end 
to their life. 
We hear of these other stories in the news and the names of the victims 
and our hearts break. Our hearts break also when a late term abortion ends 
the life of a baby, but that name does not make the evening news. Yet the 
fact remains that there is no difference between the tragedies we see on 
the evening news and the tragedy of a fully formed infant whose life is 
terminated due to a technicality of the law. 
Please see the value that you have, the value that I have, the value thata 
late term baby has and do not vote for late term abortion. 
Thank you for your service to the people of Maine and for voting against 
LD1619.
