Kathrin Hastey
Sullivan
LD 1619
Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is 
Kathrin Hastey and I am a resident of Sullivan. I am writing to testify in opposition to
LD 1619.  This bill to allow an abortion up to the point of birth for any reason a 
medical provider finds necessary is deeply concerning. Our nation was founded on the
principles articulated in the Declaration of Independence, “We hold these truths to be 
self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator 
with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of 
Happiness.” I believe all unborn babies have the right to life and should not be 
terminated. Abortion is taking the life of innocent unborn babies. This is murder and 
it is morally wrong. Exodus 10:13 says “You shall not murder.” This sixth 
commandment prohibits the unlawful taking of human life, including that of the 
unborn child. The unborn child is precious to God. Psalm 139:13-14 says “For you 
formed my inward parts; you knitted me together in my mother’s womb. I praise you, 
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made.” God tells Jeremiah the prophet, “Before I 
formed you in the womb I knew you; Before you were born I sanctified you” 
(Jeremiah 1: 5). In Luke 1:41 it says, “And it happened, when Elizabeth heard the 
greeting of Mary, that the baby leaped in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the 
Holy Spirit.”  Psalm 127:3 says, “Behold, children are a gift of the Lord, The fruit of 
the womb is a reward.” God makes it clear that judgement will be upon any man or 
woman who commits murder. Genesis 9:6 says, “Whoever sheds man’s blood, By 
man his blood shall be shed; For in the image of God He made man.” God also makes
it clear that children are important to Him. In Matthew 18:4 it says, “whoever 
humbles himself as this little child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.” God 
warns us in Matthew 18:6 that “whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in
Me to sin, it would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck, and he 
were drowned in the depth of the sea.” LD 1619 erodes any rights that the unborn 
have remaining in the State of Maine. I find any politician that supports LD 1619 to 
be guilty of innocent bloodshed. Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee, I implore you to do the right thing for the unborn babies of Maine and 
oppose this proposed bill. Thank you for your time and attention to my concern.
