Kathleen Dunn
Leeds
LD 1619
Dear Honorable Members if the Judiciary Committee,
First, thank you for your service. You have my prayers that you will do what is truly 
loving and best for the people of Maine.
I am writing to ask you to say “no” to the changes in the law proposed by LD 1619 
“An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws”. 
-It releases liability from the abortionist by not having documented the patient’s 
name. This puts already vulnerable and compromised women at a much higher risk of
poor healthcare, permanent injury and/or death with no recourse to fight against any 
malpractice that could easily occur. This is not protecting or loving women. It is no 
secret that this is a business, which preys on vulnerable women and now this is 
promoting not protecting our Maine women at all!!! This is definitely not healthcare 
or protective. 
-By allowing for the baby to aborted up to the time of death, we would be denying 
that this human, who could live with support, and it is saying that this child is not 
worthy of life. It opens up a precedent that when there is pain and inconvenience, we 
can avoid the people in front of us and kill those who are inconvenient. 
-Prevention should be promoted much more and I don’t mean the current sex ed 
curriculum. I mean treating all our little girls as the true treasures that they are and by 
paying personal attention to them. Teach them how beautiful and wonderful they are, 
how they are a gift,  and how to become truly loving people and should they decide to
partner with a man, teach them how to choose a good, loving man and how to avoid a 
“user” who knows how to manipulate them through their fears and desire for 
attention/love. In fact, I suspect that many of our current societal woes would be 
prevented with such care. Such a woman goes on to raise more loving and healthy 
children with a responsible man. They also help to care for the parents and 
community members who loved them into existence. This focus of prevention is 
much better for all in society.
Dear Committee Members, there are much better ways to address these woes and 
much better ways to truly care for women in Maine. Please vote “no” on LD 1619 and
protect them. 

