Kathryn  Raymond
Easton Maine
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary, I am Kathryn Raymond of Easton, Maine.  I am writing in opposition to LD
1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
It is frustrating how out of touch our government actually is with the needs of the 
people it serves. This addendum which will allow abortion past “viability”  is nothing 
more then a way to play to the most radical of a political parties base. The majority of 
Americans, and Maine Residents exist in the middle of these radicals. Yet, legislation 
and lawmakers keep firing up these polar opposite radical parties. Shame on our law 
makers for encouraging this circus. 
Abortions “later term” are incredibly unpopular with the majority of voters. They also
impact approximately 1 % of the population (CDC). This change being conveyed as 
some life saving measure for women is a fluke. It will impact minimal women, and 
will do harm. 
I am a nurse practitioner and serve hundreds of women. I have cared for many 
individuals who have felt they needed to make a decision to end their Childs life and 
did so. They never come to me empowered about the choice. They are broken, often 
depressed and full of shame. 
Our laws are supposed to protect our rights, but they should also protect the 
individuals on the other end of them. Expanding abortion does not protect women. 
Yes, abortions done without access to medical care are a huge risk to women, but we 
should be asking ourselves what is driving women to feel so desperate to end their 
pregnancies?
Statistically most abortions occur in women aged 20-40 often with another child of 
their own. Largely it is due to financial strain and timing issues. It isn’t, as we would 
want to believe, the result of rape or incest, nor teenagers. These make up very 
minimal of the abortions that occur (which shocked me when I read this as a young 
female who used to think she was pro choice).
What will save lives and improve our economy is supporting mothers. Having 
children is good for our economy.  Instead of coming up with expensive ways to kill 
the next generation, why don’t we find ways to support mothers?  Women, who if 
they felt they had another choice would raise their babies and not be plagued by 
depression for the rest of their life. All over a choice our government told them should
make them feel empowered as they practiced their right.  
This continued push for expansion of abortion does not value women or their 
families. As a working Mom I can tell you America and Maine do not value mothers 
or our children.  These type of proposed changes just further prove that. You are 
completely off target. 
