 
Testimony of Katie Fullam Harris 
MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1619, “An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Law” 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Judiciary, I am Katie Fullam Harris, and I submit this testimony in 
support of LD 1619, An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Law.”  
MaineHealth is an integrated health care system providing access to a continuum of health 
care services to the residents of eleven counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire. 
MaineHealth strives to meet its vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the 
Healthiest in America” through the delivery of exceptional care to our patients; training 
Maine’s health care workforce of the future through our academic and workforce training 
programs; and supporting innovation and research through the MaineHealth Research 
Institute.   
As part of our mission and vision, MaineHealth offers a continuum of reproductive health 
care services throughout the footprint we serve.  MaineHealth strongly believe that our 
patients should have a voice in their care, including the right to choose whether to 
terminate a pregnancy. 
We support LD 1619 for two main reasons: 
1. It updates the antiquated reporting requirements that are currently required in statute to include only 
those data elements that are relevant to the procedure; 
2. It removes ambiguous criteria to allow for post-viability abortions and replaces it with an opportunity 
for physicians to use their professional judgement when such rare circumstances arise. 
Health care decisions, including those involving reproductive health, are appropriately and 
best made between a health care provider and their patient. This bill seeks to enforce that 
 
fundamental principle by codifying the sacred relationship that exists between a physician 
and their patient. While Maine’s current law is strong, there have been circumstances in 
which the ambiguous language regarding “preservation of life or health of the mother” that 
this bill seeks to replace has created confusion and forced patients to seek care in other 
states.  That is neither patient-friendly, nor equitable for those who may not have the 
financial means for such an option.   
In addition, the current abortion reporting requirements include such questions as 
providing the marital status of the woman. That is irrelevant to the provision of care, and 
we strongly support updating the data elements as provided in this bill.  
For this primary reason, we support LD 1619. 
Thank you and I would be happy to participate in the work session if there are questions. 
