Katie Wieninger
Cherryfield
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary, 
My name is Katie Wieninger. I am a twenty-nine year-old female living in 
Cherryfield, Maine. 
I am writing this testimony to urge you to vote against LD1619 on the grounds that it 
will allow for the unethical violation of the most basic of human rights and that it will 
be detrimental to the health of expectant mothers seeking abortions. 
First, it is morally wrong to allow abortions at any stage of pregnancy, but late-term 
abortions are especially inexcusable. Our founding fathers recognized and made 
provision to protect the right to life in both our state and federal founding documents. 
Killing the unborn is just as much a crime as any other murder. 
Many who are prochoice argue that it is impossible to know when life really begins, 
but science, conscience, and commonsense all point to the fact that life begins at 
conception, not birth. Since LD1619 allows for abortions up to the moment of birth, it
is even more evident that human life will be taken. 
Human life at all stages is sacred. Genesis 1:27 tells us that God created men and 
women in His own image. The life He gives is to be valued, not thrown away by those
more powerful. The Nazis used concentration camps to exterminate those that were 
unwanted because of their age, race, gender, religion, or perceived usefulness. In 
short, they killed those that were unwanted. Today in America, we use abortion to 
accomplish the same goal. May God have mercy on us! The value of a human life is 
not determined by how a doctor, pregnant woman, or politician feels about it. The 
value of life is determined by the God Who creates it. 
LD1619 seeks to not only allow for late term abortions, but also to protect those 
committing abortions without a license. Many who are in favor of abortions have 
argued that they should be allowed on the grounds that women will seek them through
less safe methods if they cannot obtain them legally. First, this is no excuse to take an 
innocent life. Secondly, there is no such thing as a safe abortion. Abortions 
intentionally result in one death, but they often cause the death of the mother, as well. 
A study published in the Southern Medical Journal reports that women who have 
abortions are 62% more likely to die within eight years of their pregnancy compared 
to women who delivered their babies. Suicide rates are much higher in women who 
abort, as well.  (DC Reardon et. al., “Deaths Associated With Pregnancy Outcome: A 
Record Linkage Study of Low Income Women,” Southern Medical Journal 
95(8):834-41, Aug. 2002) 
These statistics will likely grow worse in Maine if LD1619 is passed because it will 
allow unlicensed persons to perform abortions penalty-free. 
In conclusion, I would like to thank you for your time. Every one of you voting on 
this bill started out as a tiny life in your mother’s womb. I urge you to vote against 
LD1619 and protect others from being stripped of the right to life that you have 
enjoyed.  

