Senator Eamey/' and Representative: Mioonemg, l§ —lfon:ora;l'£1"le~ m€m;l§1€iiS,€tlll§l?t €%J3I£td?iCl6rI?y' 
Committee, 
My name is Kelly Cofﬁn from Clinton. l am testifying in opposition to LD 1619. 
Maine: recently made» liitiaztimneill mews llor sending, ai baby girl? home fromitl1e~ Miaimter 
Medical Nl€Zt’J’ . The youngest ever born in Maine. Her name is Winner and she 
was bum at -only 22 wseefks {about 5 motnthsj) gestation. Maine’s current iilaw puts 
viability at 24-28 weeks (about 6 and a ‘half months). This bill wouid remove even 
that res,tri?etilom ’ =.c 1il%"i.e> tJ'ni;tedl SlI81lES»Wi8SlOiilET of onrllyi com mtrifes tli 1:a~tI permiittedi 
abortion without restriction as to reason. Now that states are deciding F must ask 
‘why Maine want to join China or iilertih Korea? i find it ob§eci2i>0natie to join 
the ranks of those who place so little value on life. 
Dr. Anthem §EV'&lEl3?1 €J* perﬁormlecl‘ 11206? aboirtionsr be€ore- leaving ind’usti'y_ E-lie 
states that tate term abortions are performed on la futly developed and viable 
baby and take '3-4 days to complete. ‘lt starts ‘by injecting Digoxin into the baby 
who lieels this palm. this. S'lZ0fl')51'ElllIE ‘ heart, andl the baby/’d1ies. Now" Elite cervix: mast: 
be opened, which takes clays. This poor wom-an is now’ carrying an expired baby 
until is idiiatecl. She will cleftivier this deaid ‘baby at a clinic er a iaetei 
room. if it cannot be delivered whole, it must be removed by dilation and 
evacuratiomi ism pieces: making; sure nothing is left llléllll ﬂidl to cause imiiectiierr- 
asserts there is a HIGH risk for hemorrhage, laceration to or perforation of the 
uterus, mataeai death, or subsequent complications with tutu re pregeaaaies. 
There is }ust.TOQ M.UCH< RlSK,for womenw-ith. at complete. removaiof restrictions-W 
lihea pfﬁfﬂiﬁﬂﬂ oﬁtliriis types ﬁll bill? makes it leek like it is llor poelitica-li reasons or 
about mask-in,g money when -women come to Maine from places that wisely don't 
offer ilateiterm options. Maine slhould remain ‘Va-cationland not become 
A\bortiom.|amd=.. 
Semewhe-re the line must be dralwra that is crossed and this ibiii 
is far beyond that line. Please do the responsible thing, for the safety of 
our sisters, daughters, grrarndidlauighters, €ri_endls' ancl? neiighborse by 
asiscraie LB ztsi9.
