Madam Chair & Honorable Members of the  Judiciary Committee,  
 
I am writing to urge you to oppose LD1619, which seeks to amend Maine's abortion laws. As a 
constituent and a Christian, I believe that every human life is valuable and should be protected, from 
conception until natural death.  
 
I am particularly concerned about the removal of the word "viability" from the current law. This change 
would allow for abortions to be performed at any point during pregnancy, including late -term abortions, 
which are deeply troubling to me. Removing the word 'viability' would create ambiguity and permit late -
term abortions, and potentially permit leaving a baby born to die after a botched abortion. I believe that 
life begins at conception and that every unborn child deserves protection and the right to life.  
 
Furthermore, I am troubled by the potential implications of this bill regarding the care of infants who 
survive abortion attempts. The bill does not explicitly require medical care for infants who survive 
abortion attempts, and I find this to be unacceptable. Every life, born or unborn, deserves access to 
medical care and protection.  
 
As a Christian, I also draw from biblical teachings that uphold the sanctity of life. Psalm 139:13 -14 says, 
"For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my mother' s womb. I praise you because I 
am fearfully and wonderfully made." The removal of the word "viability" in this bill disregards the 
sacredness of human life and undermines the value of every person, no matter their stage of development.  
 
In light of these concerns, I urge you to oppose LD1619 and any legislation that seeks to diminish the 
protection of human life in our state. Thank you for your attention to this matter.  
 
Sincerely,  
  
Kelly Parker  
Oakland  

Kelly Parker
Oakland
LD 1619
Madam Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
I am writing to urge you to oppose LD1619, which seeks to amend Maine's abortion 
laws. As a constituent and a Christian, I believe that every human life is valuable and 
should be protected, from conception until natural death.
I am particularly concerned about the removal of the word "viability" from the current
law. This change would allow for abortions to be performed at any point during 
pregnancy, including late-term abortions, which are deeply troubling to me. 
Removing the word 'viability' would create ambiguity and permit late-term abortions, 
and potentially permit leaving a baby born to die after a botched abortion. I believe 
that life begins at conception and that every unborn child deserves protection and the 
right to life.
Furthermore, I am troubled by the potential implications of this bill regarding the care
of infants who survive abortion attempts. The bill does not explicitly require medical 
care for infants who survive abortion attempts, and I find this to be unacceptable. 
Every life, born or unborn, deserves access to medical care and protection.
As a Christian, I also draw from biblical teachings that uphold the sanctity of life. 
Psalm 139:13-14 says, "For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my 
mother's womb. I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made." The 
removal of the word "viability" in this bill disregards the sacredness of human life and
undermines the value of every person, no matter their stage of development.
In light of these concerns, I urge you to oppose LD1619 and any legislation that seeks
to diminish the protection of human life in our state. Thank you for your attention to 
this matter.
Sincerely,
Kelly Parker
Oakland
