Senator Carney and Representative Moonen and members of the chambers of this body of government, 
my name is Ken Anderson from Windham ME. I am here to declare to you that I oppose this bill known 
as LD1619 that takes the life of the innocent. 
I must speak directly to the matter of life. When science is done properly, it provides an answer as to 
when a fetus is viable. Today the evidence is very compelling. The fact that we all came from a code of 
DNA is obvious when we look at our hands or study our face in a mirror. We are no more or less ofa 
human being then when we were formed at the point of conception. Two sets of DNA make another set 
of DNA and here we all are. How else does more of humanity come to be. You certainly cannot foster or 
grow anything if you are not here to begin with. All of life right now screams our origin from the womb. 
And I would argue from even before the womb. Before a point of viability is sought, we must ﬁrst think 
about how any of us have arrived. Why was I given life? ls my life merely circumstance or accidental? 
I believe that our lives were planned long before our parents were even conceived. I believe this because 
we all are valuable, we all have purpose, we all have meaning... we all matter. Each one of us was unborn 
at one time, but that does not mean we were not planned or that somehow our lives were given to 
chance. We are not mathematical equations bound by some universal chord of accidental slime. Our 
image comes from our great providence; the one who sits outside and above the sphere of this world 
and so intended each fetus at conception. 
There is a ﬁght for the life of the fetus to which we all must contend. Why do some of us think that the 
life of an unborn child should get ill treatment or causal death by trading it for political expediency? Is 
this the point of utopia that some are exhausting and calling public virtue. 
Why does life matter? All of our lives certainly have importance, and we all came from the womb, didn't 
we? Please do not send the unborn to the grave by slaying sound reasoning in our streets. Let us bea 
State known for promoting life by way of birth. 
Ken Anderson 
121 Smith Road 
Windham ME. 
(207) 321-1986
