Kennith Couch Jr
Rumford
LD 1619
Honorable Representatives, and all concerned;
I oppose LD1619, and all legislation that threatens human life.
First and foremost, I follow “The Way, The Truth and The Life” (John 14:6). As a 
committed follower of Jesus Christ; member, Head Deacon and Missions Minister of 
First Baptist Church, 20 Cherry St, Mexico, Maine: I must stand in defense of the 
voiceless. Children, before and after their birth, are precious- not disposable 
commodities. Failing to see this suggests moral and ethical bankruptcy.
Second, as a reasoning, moderately well-educated man, I must speak out against 
poorly reasoned law.
“This is about reproductive rights” is fallacious. In a society replete with 
contraceptive options, both men and women have a myriad of choices well before the 
fact, not least of which being abstinence.
“Rape and incest!” Statistically, very small fractions of the annual abortion industry. 
Also, already covered by current law.
“A woman has the right to control her body.” Spurious and medically unscientific, in 
that abortion is about someone else’s body.
It is basic biology that, at fertilization there is the creation of a totally unique DNA 
human identity. That new DNA is fully distinguishable from the mother. Further, that 
DNA informs the placenta, amniotic sac, umbilicus, and all blood, tissues and fluids 
contained therein. The mother is not the child.
“It’s only fetal tissue.” Then why does the “viability development stage” keep getting 
pushed back? Why are millions of dollars invested to save premature “22 week” 
births, if they would not be human during a “late term” abortion?
“But it’s NOT viable.” Viability is defined by life function in a given environment. 
Barring disease, injury, chemical, mechanical or medical trauma, an unborn child is in
his/her natural environment, and fully viable. When they become “non-viable,” we go
to heroic lengths to continue his/her “viability.”
None of this is the “moral and medical gray area” proponents paint it to be.
These are DNA identifiable human lives. These are viable people being executed for 
profit, convenience or whim.
Equally wrong, this new legislation endangers or removes important protections to 
our mothers, sisters, daughters… any woman who unadvisedly seeks already 
dangerous procedures, from those no longer under penalty of law for unsanctioned 
medical practice.
LD1619 is morally, reasonably and legally bad law.
Sincerely;
Kennith M Couch Jr
Rumford, ME 04276

