Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
onJudiciary: 
My name is Kim Smith, and I am a resident of New Sharon. I am here to testify in opposition to 
LD1619. 
I am the mother of one son. His start in life was less than ideal. I was 24 weeks into my 
pregnancy when I developed HELLP syndrome, also known as Toxemia. My case was sudden 
and severe. I live in rural central Maine where my son could not have sun/ived outside of my 
womb. The doctor didn't think I would live long enough to get to Portland where the baby would 
stand a chance of survival. We were told that terminating the pregnancy was the best option, 
quite a dilemma to be faced with. According to witnesses I never hesitated and told the doctor 
that “we had to try" . I went to Portland in an ambulance, my doctor alongside instructing the 
driver to go as fast as possible making it from Farmington to Portland in record time! Mine and 
that baby boy’s lives mattered! 
I would be lying if I told you, it was smooth sailing from there on. I was in MMC for 2 full weeks, 
and I had a long road to be fully recovered. My son was there for 6 months. He was discharged 
with a feeding port in his belly and a computerized pump to feed him with. His progress was 
slow and he did have setbacks, but nobody would guess it now! He had a feeding tube until he 
was 5 years old! Oh, howI 
g longed to hear the words,“Mom, I'm hungryl”. 
Now, I hear them so oftenV 
the opposite is true! 
My son is now 20 years old! He likes the ladies, and has a network of good 
friends! Growing up he was part of 4-H, and was a Page for a day here at 
this state house. He went to Washington DC as part of Citizenship 
Washington Focus. He went to the Big E on the public speaking team. He 
was on the dairy quiz bowl team. He was number 3 in New England and 
the team was number one and went on to Louisville Kentucky! Now he has 
his class A license, a full-time job, and is a responsible tax paying 
citizen of this state! 
The reason l’m sharing this with you is to hopefully show you that when babies are born as early 
as mine, just on the cusp of viability, they can grow into responsible citizens. The decision to 
give my son life is one I would do over again, even at great risk to myself. 
This bill that is being proposed is nothing short of murder! I ask you to please think carefully 
before you vote on this bill. Look carefully at all the facts! These are future citizens! They 
deserve to be protected! Please vote ought not to pass.
