To Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary Regarding LD 4619: 
 
As humanity has recognized the sacredness of life, we have implemented laws preventing murder, child 
abuse, child labor, human trafficking, and other crimes. We have even enacted laws prohibiting cruelty 
to animals. 
 
Because we abhor murder, the abortion issue must address the primary question: if it is murder to kill a 
baby that was just born, why is it not murder to kill a baby as it enters the birth canal? Would we 
condone someone walking into a hospital and shooting the babies in the nursery? 
 
The abortion debate attempts to reframe the definition of human life. The argument for abortion uses 
language to divert the attention away from the living baby in question and to emphasize external 
circumstances having nothing to do with the infant. 
 
Many cultures around the world practice something called education in the womb, like reading aloud, 
playing music, and talking to the unborn infant. Many parents have testified that babies recognize the 
voices of family members after they are born. Unborn babies are conscious, living human beings. 
 
I believe that the legislators in favor of this bill are morally obligated to view a late-term abortion, 
either in person or on video. It is only when a person witnesses an infant with fully human features, like 
fingers and toes and faces, being killed inside a womb and then often cut into pieces---a little being 
who is expecting to be received and loved by its parents---that they might have an accurate perspective 
on the reality of late-term abortion. 
 
Remember: none of you were aborted. There should be some real soul-searching after witnessing an 
abortion. 
 
This bill ought not to be considered, or voted to pass.  
 
Kimmy Sophia Brown 
 
Kimberly Brown
Gray
LD 1619
To Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary Regarding LD 4619:
As humanity has recognized the sacredness of life, we have implemented laws 
preventing murder, child abuse, child labor, human trafficking, and other crimes. We 
have even enacted laws prohibiting cruelty to animals.
Because we abhor murder, the abortion issue must address the primary question: if it 
is murder to kill a baby that was just born, why is it not murder to kill a baby as it 
enters the birth canal? Would we condone someone walking into a hospital and 
shooting the babies in the nursery?
The abortion debate attempts to reframe the definition of human life. The argument 
for abortion uses language to divert the attention away from the living baby in 
question and to emphasize external circumstances having nothing to do with the 
infant.
Many cultures around the world practice something called education in the womb, 
like reading aloud, playing music, and talking to the unborn infant. Many parents 
have testified that babies recognize the voices of family members after they are born. 
Unborn babies are conscious, living human beings.
I believe that the legislators in favor of this bill are morally obligated to view a 
late-term abortion, either in person or on video. It is only when a person witnesses an 
infant with fully human features, like fingers and toes and faces, being killed inside a 
womb and then often cut into pieces---a little being who is expecting to be received 
and loved by its parents---that they might have an accurate perspective on the reality 
of late-term abortion.
Remember: none of you were aborted. There should be some real soul-searching after
witnessing an abortion.
This bill ought not to be considered, or voted to pass. 
Kimberly Brown
