Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Kimberly Hutchinson and l'm a resident of Windsor. I am testifying today in 
staunch opposition to LD1619 and I respectfully ask you to you to vote ought not to pass. 
As l'm sure you are all aware, when Governor Mills was campaigning last Fall she stated she 
supported Maine's current abortion law and multiple times stated she would not change it. 
That was a campaign promise that she promptly broke when she submitted this bill. Many 
Mainers support our current law, I do not, and feel abortion up to viability is sufficient. 
They support the exceptions to the viability rule which take the mother's life and health 
into account. So what is the purpose of this bill? A barbaric action which will kill a child in 
the most horrific manner. A child that, if allowed to be born, will live. 
What is the definition of infant? Infant: a very young child or baby. Similar terms are: 
newborn, bairn, wean, tot, baby, babe in arms. In our home our babies had many names: 
Punkin, Peanut, Sissy. My 3 pregnancies were for the most part uncomplicated, until they 
weren't. My first daughter decided 19 days early sounded like to good time to make a very 
prolonged entrance into the world. She was beautiful, healthy, and very much able to 
survive. I will never forget the feelings that flooded my heart the moment they placed her 
in my arms. My world changed forever! Incidentally, that baby girl started her internship at 
an architectural firm in Portland this morning and my heart explodes with pride at the 
young lady she has become. As a new mom, I was unaware of so many things. I was 
unprepared for the emotions, the intense love that would sweep over me the moment 
"Momhood" became tangible. As my husband's grandfather used to say, you don't know 
what you don't know. No statement could be truer about becoming a mom or dad. I fear 
for the moms, and yes they are moms, who make the decision to kill the child in their 
womb, especially at this later stage in pregnancy. The emotional rollercoaster that will hit 
them, literally nothing in this world will prepare them for that. When they see a baby being 
nursed, a child taking its first steps, riding a bike, stepping on the school bus, kindergarten, 
prom pictures flooding Facebook and lnstagram, graduations, weddings, funerals. How 
many times in a mother's lifetime will she relive that decision. Every day. A child is not the 
only one that dies that day. Anyone that is a parent knows exactly what l'm talking about. 
S0 l'm asking you to vote ought not to pass, not only for the life of the precious child that 
would be taken from this world, but for the moms and dads who are left behind to live in 
this world without them. Because those who don't know, don't know. But those of us who 
do know, have a responsibility to protect them. Thank you.
