Public Hearing Testimony: Opposing LD 1619 on March 1, 2023 
Good Day. My name is Laurice Baddour, and l‘m grateful to stand and remain standing, representing the voice of 
virtuous women, testifying in today's public hearing. I live in, and am an active resident of, Richmond. 
Greetings, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of The Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. i reached out to each of you via phone calls, emails, and some hand-written cards in opposition to LD 
1619. _ 
Over the last 13 years, l have labored nationally and internationally, educating and counseling, both publicly in large 
areas, and privately behind closed doors, multiple hundreds of completely devastated and traumatized women, men, 
and families. l've sat with and shared tears with too many, in their ashes. Unable to move forward with their lives, they 
are suffering from Post-Abortion Traumatic Syndrome (PATS), which affects the mind, body, soul, spirit, and all 
relationships. They each bought into the myth of "safe and effective" for personal gain, and their abortions 
terminated in endless pain. NO Mainer, regardless of resilience, is immune from this regrettable, lifelong ball and 
chain. 
Abortion, regardless of time, condition, or justification is still murder - whether or not a law states it - from conception 
to birth. Blood money, always at the core of abortion, is a greenback deceiver, betrayer, schemer, manipulator, and 
lunging opportunist that aims at the shocked, scared, confused, broken, lost, or desperate woman and man. 
LD 1619 is a hideous assault on every Mainer. The Pine Tree State is not tolerating third~trimester abortion - 
regardless of which side of the aisle one is in. Let's not make history by leaving excessive innocent bloodstains in the 
hands of our legislators for all time, from the slaughter of our viable babies. Let's not leave bloodshed on the heart of 
every provider, mother, father, family member, supporter, or abortion participant, including the paying accessory to the 
hitman "service" or product. Let's not be the Death Destination for pregnant pre-abortive mothers who would target 
Vacationland, first to lie in a facility to kill her child, then to lie on the beach to lie to herself that she will be OK. 
Maine, lets make history by Voting with Virtue, replacing the visceral, vicious, and violent. Let's take a good look at 
the abused term "medical necessity" . Let's abort LD 1619 and ALL abortion bills in Maine, producing a domino 
effect in our nation, and in all the nations. , 
Thank you.
