Lauren Knebel
Cape Elizabeth
LD 1619
Dear Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:
My name is Lauren Knebel.  I am a resident of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.  This is my 
written testimony in opposition to LD1619: An Act To Improve Maine's 
Reproductive Privacy Laws.  I urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on this terrible bill.
Let me start by stating that I am pro-bodily autonomy - all forms of bodily autonomy 
- for all adults, who pay for it themselves.  That means that I have historically been a 
pro-choice voter when it comes to abortion.  I am opposed to this bill because it goes 
entirely too far, for too many reasons.
1.) ) Maine law was already secure for thoughtful abortion-rights supporters. Maine 
law as it stood ensured the right to an abortion until the age of viability (24 - 28 
weeks, in other words up to about 7 months) and exceptions for maternal or fetal 
health after that;
2.) The Democratic Party’s inconsistency on my body, my choice is mind-bogglingly 
hypocritical and offensive to many of us - we don’t have the right to decide what 
pharmaceutical cocktail injections go into us or our kids so that kids can go to the 
schools that their parents pay for but heck, yes, under this new law killing a baby that 
could live outside the uterus is  acceptable; 
3.) This bill is part of a larger effort to redefine what is moral and ethical, all while 
trying to claim this is moral and ethical; 
4.) No one's taxpayer money should be used to violate their moral, ethical, and 
religious beliefs.  By providing services under publicly-supported insurance, that is in 
essence what Maine is doing.  There are plenty of private organizations who could - 
and should - cover or offset this procedure;
5.) I am concerned about the possibility of Maine becoming a destination for abortion 
tourism - because it is lucrative (particularly when offset by taxpayer funds).  Not 
only is that morally repugnant, it would also further limit Mainers’ access to specialist
care in the area of OB/GYN health as providers reprioritized services based on 
financial decisions.  Let’s keep in mind that with executive branch healthcare 
mandates and the vastly increasing population brought in over the past years, this 
state is already at a tipping point in terms of healthcare;
6.) As an historically pro-bodily autonomy voter, this pushing of the window is 
appalling to me. Abortion access was never my one issue, but I am disgusted that for 
those for whom it was could even begin to support this.  This kind of legislation 
makes personal responsibility absolutely unimportant and pushes costs off on 
taxpayers. 
If this bill passes where would the line then be drawn on when this procedure 
becomes murder?  Why is a week to a month before birth not murder but then a week 
or a month after is? 
Once again, I urge that your votes ought to be OUGHT NOT to pass.
Thank you in advance for reading and paying attention to my testimony.
