Libby Fotter
Auburn
LD 1619
Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Libby Fotter and I live in Auburn. I am a nurse and a mother of four 
young girls. I am testifying today in opposition of LD 1619 - An Act to Improve 
Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws.
I am testifying in opposition because I believe that this bill will not help women, but 
harm them. I also believe that an unborn baby is a life with value. I believe that God 
created our female bodies to grow the most special form of life. Though a woman 
may not be ready for motherhood, I do not believe that gives her a right to end the life
of another. I do understand that it is her body however, there is another body inside 
her that is not her own.
We all have free will. Free will to love and free will to hate. However, we also have 
laws to stop people from barbaric crimes; barbaric crimes such as murder.  I believe 
that when a life is taken it is murder. Therefore, I believe if women are given the 
opportunity to take the life of their children it is murder.
As a nurse I recognize that there are times in the medical field where life or death 
situations occur. I was an ER charge nurse for over 10 years. However, I also believe 
in the doctors and their educations to use their critical thinking skills and moral 
compass to make the best possible decision, with the patient or family, to save the 
woman and by God's grace the child as well. 
If there is new information late in the pregnancy that leaves the possibility of the child
not surviving, I do not believe that the woman should have the legal right to end that 
life. We would never allow a parent to end the life of their child at any other point 
even if they knew they had a terminal diagnosis.
I believe that the process of these procedures are barbaric and no one could continue 
on after without emotion damage. There is already a significant lack of mental health 
support in our country. I do not understand adding another pathway to add to that 
already overburdened situation.
Please oppose this barbaric, unethical bill where the majority of Mainers do not want 
it to pass.
