Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Lina OBrion from Saco. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1619 
I would like to share my story: I was fearful of an unexpected pregnancy. The physician who examined me, 
verified I was pregnant. I had asked about abortion, He told me I had a healthy baby growing inside me. At that 
point I knew Abortion was not an option for me. I am so grateful to God and that good doctor for telling me 
the Truth that day. My son is a beautiful person who is gifted & talented. He has helped so many people on his 
journey through life. 
Every ultrasound/sonogram, I have had during my pregnancies - showed me a vibrant living person, who hasa 
God given right to life. To experience this beautiful world and contribute to it. 
This bill is too extreme, It would allow a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed. 
I know so many young women who could not get pregnant, tried to adopt, but there were no babies and it was 
very expensive to adopt.~ 
Many people who I spoke to about LD 1619, were not aware of it. When l explained abortion up to 9 months; 
they exclaimed ” Noll That is murder!! ” 
People in Maine do not approve of this. 
Maine law currently covers medical necessity. This bill has taken out ’ to preserve the life or health of the 
mother ’ giving her rights over to judgement of a physician. See Sec. 2. 22 MRSA {1598, sub-{ 1 1. 
Policy. line 20 
This is Maine and Maine women have rights now. 
Please see Sec 3. 22 MRSA { 1598, sub-{3, line 26. 3. Persons who may perform abortion; (penalties) is 
crossed out. See line 31 ~33 B. ls all crossed out. Taking away protection from a frighten young girl or you 
could say giving a sex trafficker easy access to any person not licensed to perform abortion but willing to. With 
not being guilty of committing a Crime. 
Maine women deserve more care & protection, if they choose an abortion 
Please vote ought not to pass 
Thank you very much. 
Sincerely, 
Lina OBrion 
God Bless you all 
Sent from my iPhone
