PENOBSCOT COUNTY REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE 
PENOBSCOT COUNTY, MAINE 
 
Bob Cote, Chair      Brandi Savage, Vice Chair 
Ed Youngblood, Treasurer    Lisa York, Secretary 
 
May 1, 2023 
 
Re: LD1619 
 
Dear Representative/Senator: 
 
As your constituents, we write to urge you to vote NO and defeat the 
passage of LD 1619, An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
as sponsored by Rachel Talbot Ross and other partisan lawmakers. 
As you may recall, last year The Dobb’s Decision overturned Roe V. Wade. 
This decision simply states that abortion is not a right afforded by the US 
Constitution and returned abortion laws to be decided by each state. Maine 
had already put into law the provisions involved with The Dobb’s Decision.   
Furthermore, Governor Mills made a campaign promise that she would not 
expand Maine’s current abortion laws and we would expect that she honors 
her promises. 
We understand this bill is inspired by a resident who had to seek an abortion 
out of state due to the discovery her child developed a deadly form of 
skeletal dysplasia, a rare genetic mutation. Maine’s existing law already 
allows late-term abortions for non-viable babies. So, it is unclear why this 
mother chose to go out of state for her abortion. 
We have heard of cases of regret after young couples decide to terminate a 
viable pregnancy only to go on to try to start a family years later to no avail. 
The distraught couples realized, as time went on, that they destroyed their 
only chance at giving birth. This sort of stress can weigh heavily on the 
future of relationships, and the overall mental health of both partners. But 
especially the woman, causing depression, anxiety, and an increased risk of 
medical and health problems.   
In Maine, women abort 5 babies per day, or 150 babies per month. In 
comparison, 50 Mainers lose their lives to overdoes every month and 
another 1,200 people die of other causes including, accidents, illnesses, 
suicides, or natural causes. In contrast, only 1,000 babies are born per 
month. More people are dying per month than being born. Also, as a state, 
Maine has the oldest average-age population. 
Some points to consider: 
-Abortion Clinics are not required to have safety inspections as other medical 
or dental clinics are required to have. 
-The burden of the costs for abortions is placed on the taxpayers. 
-One does not need to be a doctor to perform an abortion nor are providers 
required to have admitting privileges at a hospital in the event there is an 
emergency during the procedure. 
-There is no requirement for an ultrasound prior to having an abortion. 
Likewise, there is no requirement for medical information to be provided and 
there is no wait period. When all the facts are provided to a patient, they 
have a better chance to make an informed decision. 
-Women have access to do-it-yourself, mail-order chemical abortions 
without ever seeing a medical provider. 
-Children are able to obtain an abortion without parental permission. If a 
child under the age of consent has become pregnant, it should seem 
reasonable to involve the parents and law enforcement. 
-There is no requirement to kill the unborn baby before the abortion 
procedure. The baby may be delivered alive. 
-If this bill passes, it will legalize abortion up until the due date, which is 
many weeks beyond viability, for any reason, as long as the provider agrees 
to perform the procedure. 
The motto for our great state is “Maine, the way LIFE should be’. Life is the 
greatest gift of all. It should be protected, respected, promoted, and 
encouraged. 
Thank you for your consideration, 
 
PENOBSCOT COUNTY REPUBLICANS 
 
