Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary,
My name is Lisa E. Beal of Cherryfield, Maine, and I have a question:
If we cannot find it in our hearts to protect the smallest and most vulnerable among us, what kind of 
callous, unfeeling people have we become?
More innocent children in Maine must not be allowed to needlessly die.  Lessening restrictions and 
removing penalties to open the door to abortion access ever wider is not the boon to women that 
proponents would have us believe.  The general acceptance of abortion among our citizens is a curse, 
and we are already paying for our collective sin as a state and as a nation.
First, can we not see that half these babies would grow up to be women someday?  Let us not pretend 
that we are protecting women as we slay them.   Second, each woman who chooses abortion must live 
the remainder of her life with the knowledge that she caused the death of a child—because no matter 
what pretty words we may use to cloak the evil, in the stillness of the night, the conscience knows.  
Scripture tells us the law of God is written on the hearts of men.  Isn't there something better we can 
offer Maine women than lifelong guilt and regret?
We are lying to women when we try to persuade them that abortion is a valid "choice" and that 
rejecting a baby will somehow make them empowered.  Death is not the answer.  Life is the answer, 
and every expectant woman can choose life for her baby even if she ultimately chooses not to parent 
that little one herself.  There are Christian couples who would gladly adopt and raise the baby that she 
may be free of the weighty responsibility of bringing up a child if that is what she truly desires.  And 
there are churches across our state where couples and families would selflessly come alongside a young
woman and help her to successfully parent if that is what she desires instead.  
My husband and I largely built our family through adoption and would embrace such an opportunity 
again, and we know other Christian couples who would gladly open their hearts and homes as well.  
And when my friends and I have one day passed on, my grown daughters and their friends would be 
happy to do the same.  Then, Lord willing, when they are someday gone, my future grand-daughters 
and their friends would stand ready and willing to rise up and carry the torch.  So there will always be 
Christian men and women who are ready to raise the children that someone else cannot—not because 
they stand to gain anything financially, politically, or socially but because they value the precious lives 
that God has created and desire the opportunity to give the next generation a home, a hope, and a 
future.  
Thank you for listening.  Please stand for righteousness and for life by voting AGAINST LD 1619.  All 
lives matter, and Maine can lead the nation in rejecting the lie that some lives do not.
  
