 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members  of the Joint Standing Committee  on Ju diciary,  my name is 
Lisa Parent and I am a resident of Hamlin. I submit  my testimony  in opposition to LD 1619 , as well as oppose LD 776 and 
LD 1343 , also under your consideration today. LD 1619  would allow a bortions of full -term babies  who are able to survive on 
their own outside the womb , and even those babies viable  beginning at 20 weeks gestation.  In defense  against  the cruel and 
inhumane torture that abortion does to babies in their mothers’ wombs, medical experts agree that these preborn human  
beings begin to feel pain at 12 weeks , with some experts’ research pointing to fetuses feeling pain at 8 weeks ! Ima gine the 
torture these little babies feel when dismembered, burned alive with saline, or injected with drugs to kill them ! 
I am opposed to these bills from my experience s as a former professional Nurse M idwife and F amily Nurse P ractitioner , 
Instructor at the University of Florida Graduate  School of Nurse -Midwifery and Faculty for the School of Nursing, teaching 
Obstetrics,  Gynecology  and Pediatric s Nursing  at the University of Maine at Fort Kent. I was an Independent Doctorate 
Student in Philosop hy at the University of Maine studying  Advanced Practice Nur sing, Health Care Policy  and Access for 
Advanced Practice Nurses  as a Feasible Alternative to Affordable Health  Care and Access to Primary Care  in Rural Maine . 
In 1999, while a doctoral student, I was approached by the Maine Nurse Practitioner Association ( MNPA ), which learned of 
my research studies,  and who asked me to write a “white paper ” to help them in their political efforts to persuade Maine 
Legislators of the 117th Legislative Session to pass a bill that would allow  mid-level providers to gain  primary  care provider 
(PCP) status, hence insurance company recognition and direct reimbursement of services  to nurse practi tioners and nurse 
midwives . Beca use of the persuasiveness of this  paper, LD 857  passed unanimou sly after amendment  and Governor Angus 
King signed it into law.  As a result of this political achievement, I was encouraged to run for , and was voted , President -Elect  
of the MNPA . 
However, a t the first MNPA Board of Directors ’ meeti ng, it was brought to the table  that the next item on the ir political 
agenda was to pass a law in Maine that allowed mid -level providers, PAs, nurse practitioners, and midwives to PERFORM 
ABORTIONS!  I refused to support this and proffered  to resign if this was not taken off the agenda , statin g that midwives and 
nurse practitioners  are health care provider s for people of al l stages of life . I objected as health CARE providers are mo rally 
obligated to “do no harm ” and that abortions were NOT  withi n our mid-level provider SCOPE OF PRACTICE. Furthermore, 
with our lack of skill and  knowledge this subjected  women to h ealth risks while killing babies in their mother s’ womb s. Even 
the Hippocratic Oath for Doctors states: “DO NO HARM !” My protests  were dismissed . 
The 117th Legislature , specifically LD 857  – which was the foot in the door to change the legislative  landscape  of Maine – 
has since opened a “Pandora’s Box ” to push further laws for providing abortions. The MNPA paved  the way to get to this 
point  as Maine Legis lators recently  supported  the Abortion Mills ’ agenda  and passed a law that finally allowed NPS, CNMS, 
PAs, and even non -health care providers to perform  abortions – “services” that kill human babies  and are NOT without 
damaging effects to women . Back in 1999, I washed my hands of the blood of innocents that has now come upon your hands 
today  should you vote to approve LD 1619 . Your decisions today  would allow any abortion provider procedurally trained to 
abort fetuses at any time, any reason. A s you know, a dditional legislation , specifically LD 616,  under revie w would  establish 
immunity from incurring liabilities from untoward outcome s for performing abort ions. This is an unwise move by Maine’s 
Politicians who give their stamp of approval to pass such laws  that would make Maine the abortion capitol of the world, a 
ghastly recognition that most conscientious Mainers would be horrified by, let alone not welcome nor approve . 
The dangers of performing abortions are increasingly well-documented, especially irreversible damages to fert ility, substance 
addiction, post -traumatic stress disorder as well as domestic violence, mental health problems and suicide. To have a mi d-
level provider perform  this “procedure” is met with greater dangers to physical outcome f or the women who seek abortions  
as, and I repeat , for litigious reasons as well, performing abortions is NOT within our  training and SCOPE OF PRACTICE . 
Nurse Practitioners and Nurse -Midwives are NOT “mini -doctors” and it is a professional disgrace to do harm to any patient. 
As former Faculty for the University of Florida University Medical Center in Jacksonville, Florida at the College of Nurse -
Midwifery, I know what was  and was not taught  in curricula, having taught  and trained student nurse midwives as well as 
medical doctor s in their  interns hips and practicums  in gynecological and obst etric procedures . 
Sadly, many uninformed women deny the  truth of what conception is and  are adamant about their body , their choice, 
dismissing  the reality that there is another hu man being that is growing within  their womb,  conceived and fully human with 
its unique blueprint . Even more tragic , women are  not fully informed, and are even deceived, about abortion’s adverse 
sequelae . As a result, l egally, UNINFORMED CONSENT places all abortion providers an d facilities at risk of liable.  
Additional leg islation under consideration in other  hearings  scheduled  would make Maine ’s abort ion providers not liable for 
 
any damages, which , if the public was fully aware  of this, plus being forced to pay for increased costs to healt h insurance 
policy premiums and raising taxes to pay for abortions , more would be  demanding that you vote NO on these bills before you 
today.  
Women speak of “terminating a pregnancy ” as ridding a parasite which is merely a “ blob of tissue,” many choosing to 
remain  ignorant of the fact that it is a human baby that is already grow ing in its mother’s womb. This is wrongful thinking.  
Once conceived, and even in the wisdom of Horton, in Horton Hears a Who  by Dr. Seuss, “a person is a person, no matter 
how small.”   
Adolf Hitler’s atrocities of human genocide in the Holocaust brought about a great outcry  in the murder of human beings. 
Many of these “inhumanely denoted” blobs, for which this  bill would eliminate, are future women and men of society . Maine 
is treading dangerous waters in revisiting a greater holocaust should LD 1619 , and actually all SIX  bills,  be enacted into law. 
Hitler’s crimes were abominable. In this era, we are witness to even  greater human genocide on a worldwide scale  and if 
these bi lls are passed, Maine would be the Capit ol of Unjust and Unaccountable Murders . Where is the Nuremburg Tria l for 
such crimes against humanity now?  
Who’ s crying  for the babies murdered in their mothers’  wombs – the ultimate human genocide with billions of babies aborted 
worldwide , such unimaginable atrocities in destruction of the lives of little innocent, defen seless human beings who  “have a 
documented voice on ultrasound at 18 weeks” yet have no voice in public pol icy that denies their existence;  their gasps and 
gags are unheard in their pain -felt “silent screams” as they are dismembered, body part by body part, torn limb from limb, 
and their little heads crushed and removed by surgical forceps instruments that rip them from their mothers’ wombs , and if 
aborted at full -term, babies  are partially delivered, legs first, thrashing about in pain, whereup on the base of their bony skull 
is pierced with a sharp  instrument to pierce through the brain and suck out the contents to render them lifeless, a defenseless 
state, as  someone terminates their life, unable to fight for their right to live, to live their purpose for which the Creator made 
them and allowed them to be conceived, fully hum an, wonderfully made,  from the moment of conception . 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in this revisited genocide of human preborn babies  as presented in LD 1619 , the womb  is the most 
dangerous battlefield of our times, with our children killed  in action . All of the bills before Committees this day and this 
week are being forced upon Mainers by the Abortion -friendly Mills administration  in such extreme legislative act s, many of  
which are already on the books and codifying these bills would make Hitler ’s genocide “child ’s play.  All testimonies here 
today are insignificant compared to the testimonies  of the silenced voice s, babies murdered  which, if enacted, would expand  
the right of another human being in choice  to kill a nother  living human being in the womb , with no a ccountability, no 
conscientious objection by those responsible for this evil . Life is precious. All life is sacred  and has a “raison d’etre” – a 
reason for being . ALL lives matter!  Once we were all embryos! When it comes to the “CHOICE” to take a child’s life, 
choose wisely. Choice is not reasonable , nor humane,  when it is a choice of one more powerful voice silencing the little voice 
that cries out: “Let me LIVE, let me LOVE!”  
Finally, t he lucrative bu siness of abortions gives a  deceivingly “caring ,” packaged image of “r eproductive health services” i n 
self-determined choice . The bottom line is their self -serving agenda to increase profits for  those involved in the abortion 
industry , which have notoriously been targeting  the poor and peop le of color, while callously  selling aborted babies’ parts 
harves ted in the process. This lucrative human body parts trafficking  business has been exposed in the media in videoed 
admissions by Planned Parenthood directors, which is heinous, atrocious, and inhumane . Maine ’s bottom line  depends on 
your decisions today.  
In closing, search your moral compass and conscience as this bil l is a moral injustice to society and its children. Inevitably, 
abortion is killing a child awaiting to be born . Before you pass LD 1619, remember the Judeo -Christian Laws upon which our 
Nation , under God, was founded:  “Thou shall NOT kill.”  Resist the tem ptations to bloody your hands that would result from 
passing LD 1619 in this horrific crime against humanity, against children. It is YOUR choice.  
Respectfully, always a PARENT FOR LIFE, Lisa Marie Pa rent, MN, CAG (retired ARNP -C, CNM and FNP -C), Hamlin, 
Maine  
 
