OPPOSE - L.D. 1691 ~An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary 
My name ls Lori Cloutier and l live in Richmond. With God’s gift of nine 
grandchildren l stand before you in opposition to L.D. 1619, an extreme 
and inhumane bill. 
Current Maine law is already broad and expansive with abortion on 
demand. It is deadly to the baby, dangerous to the mother, and unethical, 
especially for the doctor, in light of the Hippocratic oath to first do no 
harm.i 
ls abortion murder‘? Let’s follow the science, a phrase we have heard 
frequently over the last two to three years. Factually, the science says this 
is a human being at conception until the last breath at death. 
And Now, there are those who advocate for allowing the murder of babies 
after they are born. ls this the slippery slope we want Maine to be on? We 
are already well down it. 
l do not use the word murder lightly, Some may even consider it extreme. 
Abortion is a euphemism, used to soften and ease the conscience to make 
acceptable the murder of the most innocent and vulnerable among us. 
Words matter. Change the word, you change perception, change 
perception, you change the mind, change the mind then anything can be 
made acceptable. This is a well known tenet of Marxism, an ideology 
behind the murder of millions over the last century. ln that same period of 
time millions of babies have been murdered in the USA. Our constitution 
explicitly endows us with the God given right, to LIFE, liberty and the 
pursuit of happiness. 
Who are we to deny anyone, especially the most innocent and vulnerable 
among us, those same God given rights?
lf passed, Maine would have the most extreme abortion laws in the entire country, including unlicensed abortionist having free reign . You claim to care about women’s health but what about the physical damage done to women including infertility or the scarred emotions and serious regrets that can last a lifetime. Pernicious realities that are rarely brought to light. 
When you enter Maine on the turnpike there is a sign that says, ‘Maine The Way Life Should Be’ . For some it may be, for others not so much. For those others, babies in the womb, it’s a lie. 
As history is written, is this the legacy we want to be known for? ls this what future generations of Mainers will proudly pronounce as righteous? The way life should be? l think not! 
I strongly urge you to vote against this extreme and inhumane bill for the future of Maine. 
Thank you,
