Let The Babies Cries Be Heard 
Louise Farrand Decoteau May 1, 2023 
Child sacriﬁce is nothing new. For thousands of years children have been sacriﬁced to the 
gods of the underworld. It even happens today with human trafficking. Evil forces gain 
power from their blood sacriﬁces. These demonic beings come to steal, kill, and destroy. 
They are very good at deception. They are good at convincing you that what you are 
doing is acceptable and you have a right to choose life or death for your baby. 
Our nation has become numb to the grim realities of abortion. We have become convinced 
that the unborn can't feel pain, but we know through the reports from Dr. Ben Carson, a 
Neonatal Surgeon who operates on unborn babies, that unborn babies feel pain very early 
in gestation. He reports that surgeons can even give anesthesia to the unborn babies during 
surgeries so they won't feel pain. Why in God's name would anyone want to hurt them‘? 
Consider how complex human anatomy is. It's astounding! There are doctors trained in 
every part of the body. It's a miracle! If you have a problem with your vision, see an eye 
doctor; your foot‘?see a podiatrist; your heart, a cardiologist; your back, a chiropractor! 
You get the idea. We're complicated and God created us this way. Every egg and every 
sperm cell joined together is a miracle! The genetics are all there at conception! Every 
chromosome and gene tells the little human what it will look like and how it will function. 
It's all there! 
Let me tell you about my wonderful little granddaughter. 
I have the most incredible ultrasound of her yawning in the womb. I wish I could share it 
with you. She's yawning! It's absolutely wonderful! My ﬁrst words upon seeing this were, 
“Oh My God!” 
I have another video of her as a l year old swaying and smiling to a musical greeting card 
that's playing Louis Armstrong's, “And I think to myself, what a wonderful world.”I 
wish you could see her happy little smiling face. She's awesome! 
Finally, I wonder if any of you have attended a funeral hoping that your loved one would 
be in heaven. If so, you have hope of eternal life, right? Moms, dads, aunts, uncles, friends 
and family are heaven, right? We hope, right? We somehow know that etemity is inﬁnite! 
Our mortal bodies are ﬁnite, and we have an expiration date, but the soul is inﬁnite and has 
eternal life! Those who choose abortion are determining where your soul will spend 
eternity. That's right! Not only are you killing babies, you are choosing where your soul; 
your mind, will and emotions, will spend eternity. Other souls will be affected by your 
decisions too, if you choose to allow abortion up to the time of birth. Not only will babies 
die, those who participate in taking the lives of unborn babies are in jeopardy as well. 
Doctors, nurses, hospital staff, friends and families. 
Legislators, you have the most important decision of your mortal lives and your eternal 
lives. You must not allow our great state of Maine to allow abortion.
