Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Louise Fecteau, and l’m a resident of Hebron. l‘m here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
Currently, the law allows for exceptions for the life of a mother and baby. As if legalized abortion was not 
tragic enough, the suggested changes are catastrophic to women and their unborn babies. This bill will 
not liberate or help women, but it will inflict unbounded pain and misery upon them. It allows not only 
mothers and fathers to end their unborn child's life, but it also tells doctors who have taken a vow to ‘DO 
NO HARM‘ to break their solemn oath. 
Can we even begin to understand the psychological damage left in the wake of those who succumb to 
such a heinous and violent act against life? To even suggest deliberately killing a fully developed and 
innocent human life is dishonorable and profoundly immoral. lt is evil. 
LD 1619 suggests changing a woman's womb into her baby's tomb by way of 'CHOlCE' . This is NOTa 
CHOICE, but a premeditated murder and a death sentence. This bill is not help for women and is in no 
way beneficial to women, but it IS a hate crime against pregnant women and their unborn -up-to-term - 
viable babies and it will oppress women. 
LD 1619 is neither a help nor a benefit to women. The action of this bill is irrevocable and brings absolute 
irreparable harm. This bill will continue to harm women and their children and is offering anything BUT 
Mercy and it offers women and children to be 100% victimized. 
LD 1619 suggests dehumanizing, demoralizing, and demonizlng mankind. Should not these unborn 
babies be held in higher esteem than an animal? Because we are human, we make ourselves less than 
animals when we sacrifice our children. 
The only promise this bill delivers to us if passed, is chaos and doom to our society. The unjust and 
devastating financial consequences will be required from ‘WE THE PEOPLE’ . This bill offers an all- 
around, negative impact on all of society, and the damage will carry on to countless future generations. 
LD 1619 would allow murdering an infant within its m0ther’s womb up to term and before they are born 
and for what? ls it so that doctors are not held accountable for infanticide? This is murder. It involves the 
killing of an innocent, fully developed human being. These precious, innocent babies do not have a voice 
to defend themselves. I am here to be their voice today. 
Each one of us is and will be fully accountable before God and man if this horriﬁc Bill is to pass. What will 
you say when you meet The Creator, Our Father? All of us here were called into existence and given the 
gift of life and a chance to live this life to its fullest. Does not the unborn child desen/e the same gift and 
chance? How can we stand and say: ‘God Bless America’ if this bill is passed? 
Please vote ought not to pass- And God Bless America!
