PO Box 950 ini0@gn'now.org 
G93 Beth, ME 04530 www.grrnow.org 
May lst, 2023 
Senator Anne Carney, Representative Matt Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Lucy llull, and I am a staff member with Grandmothers for Reproductive Rights (GRRI), an education 
and advocacy organization dedicated to advancing reproductive health, rights and justice for present and ﬁxture 
generations. I'm testifying on behalf of GRR! in support of LD 1619: An Act to Improve Mainc’s Reproductive 
Privacy Laws.T 
GRRl wholeheartedly supports all changes proposed in L-D i619. My testimony focuses on the removal of criminal 
penalties. As elders who survived the days before Roe—and many did not sm-vive—we remember vividly the fear and 
desperation of seeking abortions from strangers, in secrecy, and not knowing if we’d come out alive. The 
innovation of medication abortion offered a safe and private option for people to end pregnancies, both in and 
beyond clinical settings. Millions of people in the United States have safely used these pills‘. 
Assisting someone who is self-managing their abortion is medically safe, but legally risky under current Maine law. 
The existing criminal statute could be used, for example, to prosecute someone who supplies abortion pills toa 
friend in need. We should not crhninalize support, and there are suﬂicient laws on the books to prosecute someone 
who performs a procedural abortion without appropriate licensure. We do not need to add to the criminal code. 
Abortion pills offer safety, discretion and autonomy. Abortion-including self-managed abortion with pills—is 
incredibly safe. Criminalization increases the likelihood of bad actors exploiting desperate pregnant people. Present 
and future generations of abortion seekers should not be terrorized with misinfomiation about a process that is not 
only safe, but also a human right we have collectively fought for across more than ﬁve decades. 
Opponents of LD 1619 are raising concerns about “back alley abortions" in order to frighten lawmakers and the 
public into ignoring decades of medical evidence showing the safety and eﬁicacy of abortion pills. We who 
remember the terrible pre-Roe days will not have our own history leveraged against future generations of young 
people. 
GRR!s want pregnant Mainers to feel supported and safe, and LD l6l9 moves us toward that goal. ORR! urges the 
committee to vote in support of LD 1619. 
Thank you for your consideration, 
Lucy ltlull & GRR!s across Maine 
‘ httos1//www.quttmacherorq.-'articlel2022/OZ/medication-abonion-now-accounts-more —ha|f-all-us-abortions
