I have 5 grown children.  I had always said that I wanted an even amount of children as I was 
the youngest of 3 and my middle brother blamed everything on the oldest: “He always gets to 
do _____ because he’s the oldest!” or me, the youngest: “She always gets away with _______ 
because she’s the youngest.”   
Two of my children were conceived when I was actively taking birth control pills and never 
missed a pill.  They were my 3rd and my 5th.  We had planned to stop after the 2nd or the 4th.  
We took this as a sign that God had other plans. 
Abortion, (although legal) was never even a consideration in our minds.  And now- both of 
those two children are doing amazing things with their lives.   
I also was a teacher for over 20 years, specializing in Special Education.  Special Education 
children are often some of the most loving, caring and fun population to care for.  I am now a 
librarian, and to my pleasure- the two organizations in our area that specializing in working with 
Developmentally Challenged adults often bring their clients in to play games and/or give the 
clients a new set of walls to look at books, magazines and so on. 
I cannot fathom taking the lives of any of the people that I work with.  They are not blobs as 
adults- so for goodness sakes- why would they be blobs in utero.  I’m not overly scientifically 
minded, but that concept definitely doesn’t work to me. 
If you made a mistake, (and who hasn’t)- have the baby and give him/her up for adoption.  
There are thousands of people in the world looking for children to raise.  I certainly DO NOT 
believe it is the ‘right’ of the mother to get rid of the problem.  The problem she should have 
gotten rid of was the action that put that baby there. 
Please, please- I ask and pray- as government elected personnel-   do not agree to Bill 1619.  
You may be helping to kill a future president or doctor. 
 
   
Marilla A Couch
Rumford
LD 1619
I have 5 grown children.  I had always said that I wanted an even amount of children 
as I was the youngest of 3 and my middle brother blamed everything on the oldest: 
“He always gets to do _____ because he’s the oldest!” or me, the youngest: “She 
always gets away with _______ because she’s the youngest.”  
Two of my children were conceived when I was actively taking birth control pills and 
never missed a pill.  They were my 3rd and my 5th.  We had planned to stop after the 
2nd or the 4th.  We took this as a sign that God had other plans.
Abortion, (although legal) was never even a consideration in our minds.  And now- 
both of those two children are doing amazing things with their lives.  
I also was a teacher for over 20 years, specializing in Special Education.  Special 
Education children are often some of the most loving, caring and fun population to 
care for.  I am now a librarian, and to my pleasure- the two organizations in our area 
that specializing in working with Developmentally Challenged adults often bring their
clients in to play games and/or give the clients a new set of walls to look at books, 
magazines and so on.
I cannot fathom taking the lives of any of the people that I work with.  They are not 
blobs as adults- so for goodness sakes- why would they be blobs in utero.  I’m not 
overly scientifically minded, but that concept definitely doesn’t work to me.
If you made a mistake, (and who hasn’t)- have the baby and give him/her up for 
adoption.  There are thousands of people in the world looking for children to raise.  I 
certainly DO NOT believe it is the ‘right’ of the mother to get rid of the problem.  The
problem she should have gotten rid of was the action that put that baby there.
Please, please- I ask and pray- as government elected personnel-   do not agree to Bill 
1619.  You may be helping to kill a future president or doctor.
