Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
 
My name is Marilyn Amoroso, and I’m a resident of Gorham. I’m here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619, An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
 
Unborn babies should not be subjected to a two-class system where some 
babies are given medical care and others are left to die. Babies are babies, no 
matter where or why they are born. Yet currently, babies born during an abortion 
procedure are being refused medical treatment and left to die. Sometimes they 
are left to die for hours or days. 
 
These babies are human beings and have a right to life. In fact, the response 
from a recent survey revealed that over 75 percent of Americans believe that a 
baby who survives a failed abortion should be given the same medical treatment 
as any other baby born prematurely. 
 
Life is a God-given gift to humanity, not something to be despised and destroyed, 
selfishly and cruelly by uncaring individuals. Let the responsible, self-deciplined 
adults who support the unborn and common-sense legislation to prohibit abortion 
when an unborn child can feel pain in the womb, speak up on this issue. Most 
Americans don't want America's abortion policy to mirror the likes of North Korea 
and China. 
 
Imagine the pride of Maine if we were the national beacon for life as the born-
alive bills introduced in the U.S Senate and House require the same medical care 
that’s given to premature babies to be also given to any child who survived an 
attempted abortion. This legislation would also establish criminal penalties for 
healthcare practitioners violating this requirement. 
 
A baby’s right to life and medical care does not change because it was born in an 
abortion clinic instead of a delivery room. Medical practitioners should be legally 
required to administer medical care to babies no matter where or why they are 
born. 
Please, let's choose life instead of death. Please, let's be compassionate instead 
of destructive and hateful. Babies or children are not material things to be used 
as an inconvenient prop or a political game piece! Please  “vote ought not to 
pass.” Thank you! 
 
