Marie Wieninger
Cherryfield, Maine
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Maine Committe on 
Judiciary,
I am writing today to strongly urge you to oppose LD1619. I cannot even believe that 
it would be necessary here in our great USA to have to ask you to protect our most 
basic right -- the right to life. It is barbaric to snuff out the lives of unborn babies who 
are clearly human beings. It is very evident when you look at an ultrasound, that 
babies are truly a living miracle at all stages of their lives.  When we saw the very 
first ultrasounds of our babies, I can still remember being amazed at how tiny and 
perfect they were. Even Dr. Suess books recognize the common-sense truth that, "A 
person is a person, no matter how small." To allow these babies to be killed is 
absolutely unthinkable. They are the very future of our state and country. 
We have family members and friends that have wanted to adopt babies, and it is next 
to impossible to do that in this country because so-called unwanted lives are discarded
before they are even born. There are so many who would gladly take any of these 
little precious lives and lovingly bring them up in their homes. 
From my own experience, I was advised by my doctor to abort one of my babies, due 
to my health issues. They said if I carried through with the pregnancy that both of us 
would likely die. I refused to abort my baby, knowing that her life was a gift from 
God that was not mine to take. We both lived, and she was perfect. I cannot even 
imagine what our lives would have been without her. I am beyond grateful for 
choosing life, and I urge you to do the same today.
Many of you that are in favor of this bill are claiming to have the mother's best 
interest in mind; however research and countless personal testimonies from women 
that have had abortions suggest that those women deal with a lifetime of grief, loss, 
and emotional trauma over their choice to kill their child. It is not helping them by 
enabling them to commit murder.
Please do not pass LD 1619. Thank-you for your time.  
 
