Mark Cowperthwaite
Thomaston
LD 1619
To my elected representatives:
As a citizen of the great state of Maine, I stand opposed to LD 1619 in regard to 
extending legal protection to the killing of innocent babies in the womb. My 
opposition to the destruction of babies made in the Imago Dei (Image of God) cannot 
be adequately expressed in such brief comments as it is not only unthinkably cruel but
in direct rebellion against the God Who made us all when he commanded "You shall 
not murder." Truly abortion is murder!
As elected officials, your duty is to protect and defend the weak and helpless just as 
adamantly as you would protect yourselves, just as Jesus Christ also commanded 
"You shall love your neighbor as yourself." I implore you to consider your ways and 
repent (change your mind) as regards the moral duty of the state to protect the 
innocent and punish evildoers, and to do so without prejudice. I implore you to act 
without partiality against a human being merely because of their size, level of 
development, environment, or level of dependency and allow them to be killed for the
convenience of their mother. 
 
If you refuse to do your duty in protecting our preborn neighbors, you are not 
defending the rights of women, but rather dehumanizing the babies in the womb who 
have been killed by the thousands each year in Maine, whether by means of chemical 
or surgical abortion. The method of destruction may seem more or less cruel but in 
every case abortion destroys a living human being and defies the protections of our 
state and federal constitutional documents.
The inner rooms of abortion clinics do not protect the wicked from the eyes of God, 
so I plead with you all to consider the words of the Psalmist in the Holy Bible and 
turn from this wickedness of abortion and rather embrace life. 
“O Lord, you have searched me and known me! You know when I sit down and when
I rise up; you discern my thoughts from afar. You search out my path and my lying 
down and are acquainted with all my ways. Even before a word is on my tongue, 
behold, O Lord, you know it altogether. You hem me in, behind and before, and lay 
your hand upon me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high; I cannot 
attain it. Where shall I go from your Spirit? Or where shall I flee from your presence? 
If I ascend to heaven, you are there! If I make my bed in Sheol, you are there! If I take
the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there your 
hand shall lead me, and your right hand shall hold me. If I say, “Surely the darkness 
shall cover me, and the light about me be night,” even the darkness is not dark to you;
the night is bright as the day, for darkness is as light with you. For you formed my 
inward parts; you knitted me together in my mother’s womb. I praise you, for I am 
fearfully and wonderfully made. Wonderful are your works; my soul knows it very 
well. My frame was not hidden from you, when I was being made in secret, intricately
woven in the depths of the earth. Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your 
book were written, every one of them, the days that were formed for me, when as yet 
there was none of them.”
‭‭Psalm‬ ‭139‬:‭1‬-‭16‬ ‭ESV‬‬
To the praise of the righteous Judge of all the Earth, King Jesus.
Mark Cowperthwaite
Thomaston, Maine
