Mark and Regina Scanlon
Bath
LD 1619
Please vote NO on LD 1619.  This bill removes ANY and ALL restrictions to killing 
a baby after she can live outside the womb and any penalties for any unlicensed 
persons who perform abortions.  (Which is so perplexing since pro-abortion advocates
say they’re concerned about “coat hangers” and “back alley” abortions.) This Bill is 
truly inhumane. 
Here are some FACTS....
Current Maine law is already broad and expansive. 
In Maine, one does not need to be a doctor to perform an
abortion.
In Maine, abortion clinics are not required to have safety
inspections, as other medical and dental clinics are required to have.
In Maine, taxpayers are forced to pay for abortions.
In Maine, providers are not required to have admitting privileges at a hospital, in case 
something goes wrong during the abortion.
In Maine, women may access do–it–yourself, mail-order chemical abortions without 
ever seeing a medical provider.
In Maine, there is no requirement for parental permission for a child to have an 
abortion.
In Maine, there is no requirement to kill the baby before the abortion procedure; they 
may be delivered alive.
In Maine, there is no requirement for medical information to be provided.
In Maine, women are aborting more than 5 babies per day or 150 babies per month. In
comparison, 50 Mainers die every month of overdose. 
How can these extreme policies already existing in Maine not be considered enough? 
Why do we need abortion on demand all the way and up to and including birth, with 
no restrictions, done by anyone who wants to perform them? The answer is, we don’t.
Abortion is already a highly controversial and divisive issue. Is it good leadership to 
force the issue to extreme, unconscionable limits? Please open your eyes and see the 
TRUTH of what this Bill actually is. It has nothing to do with CHOICE (women in 
Maine already have excessively more “choice” than almost any other state in this 
country and any other country in this world.) and it certainly has nothing to do with 
“WOMEN’S HEALTH” (as it literally takes the world “health” out of the Bill and 
removes any safety precautions about who can perform abortions.)
PLEASE, PLEASE, SHOW THAT OUR STATE STILL HAS SOME HUMANITY 
LEFT AND VOTE NO ON THIS BILL!!
