Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Mark Philbrick and I am a resident of Canaan, Maine., and I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. You have been put in a place to be able to do the right thing and be on the right 
side of history. Over the ages, people in authority have made decisions that have either been heroic and 
life saving or resulted in great cruelty and killing of hundreds, thousands and even millions. I assume you 
have researched the common processes through which the unborn child is torn out of the womb and 
subsequently disposed of. Recently my ﬁrst grandson was born. I had the privilege of holding him in my 
arms the day after he was born. If someone were to come into that hospital room and threaten to usea 
vacuum device to violently tear him out of my arms and end his life, or to latch on to him with some 
other instrument that would extract him from my protective grasp and terminate his existence, I 
guarantee you I would ﬁght to my own death to protect him for such brutality, and i imagine each of you 
would do the same. Yet, we are contemplating passing laws in this country and in our beloved state that 
would make it easier and more convenient than ever to do just that to viable lives that arejust inches 
from the arms of someone who could love them and nurture them, and for the sake of convenience to 
some, will make even more allowance for this savagery towards others, towards the most innocent of all 
among us. When my oldest son was in the womb and very possibly able to survive if born, the doctors 
met with us as the result of a test that had been run and recommended that we consider terminating 
the pregnancy since the test indicated that there was a high probability that he would be severely 
handicapped. We chose to protect his life. A few weeks later it was revealed to us that there had beena 
mistake on the blood test. We were horriﬁed to think of the many instances in which decisions would 
have been made to end his existence. Our son Jordan is now in his twenties, he is a gifted builder, he isa 
loving husband and father to my two precious granddaughters! I wish I had the time to show you some 
pictures and video of them today! Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, I beg you to do the right thing, and thwart this extreme bill in 
committee. Thank you very much for your time and consideration.
