 
May 1, 2023 
Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Marta Laser, and I live in Bath. I am sending my testimony to you because I am opposed to 
Governor Mill’s late term abortion bill, LD 1619. 
Our youngest was born with two chromosomal anomalies that were discovered halfway through my 
pregnancy. Our son Michael has been through a lot medically. He is greatly loved and appreciated by his 
siblings, and he’s well-known in our town.  He went to junior high school in Bath and graduated from 
Morse High School. He loves life; who had the right to take it from him? 
As a citizen of the great state of Maine, I want to see it remain great. I want to see Maine’s greatest 
resource, its good people, protected. It was with shock and disbelief that I learned about LD 1619, the 
most extreme abortion bill proposed by our Governor, who had previously stated that she felt Maine’s 
law didn’t need to be changed.  This bill is a war on the unborn, who are so close to seeing the light of 
day.  
During elections in Bath, many yards signs are posted that state, “follow the science.” Well, I do follow 
the science. One scientist I follow is the late Dr. Jerome Lejeune, a geneticist who was awarded the 
prestigious William Allan Memorial for his work with chromosomal pathologies in 1969. One of his 
quotes is worth the people of Maine thinking about: “The quality of a civilization can be measured by 
the respect it has for its weakest members.” How do we, the citizens of Maine respect our weakest 
members? How do you, the legislature, plan to protect the unborn? 
I urge you to vote “no” on LD 1619. The babies and people of Maine deserve much better. 
Sincerely, 
Marta Laser 
Bath 
 
Marta Laser
Bath
LD 1619
May 1, 2023
Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Marta Laser, and I live in Bath. I am sending my testimony to you 
because I am opposed to Governor Mill’s late term abortion bill, LD 1619.
Our youngest was born with two chromosomal anomalies that were discovered 
halfway through my pregnancy. Our son Michael has been through a lot medically. 
He is greatly loved and appreciated by his siblings, and he’s well-known in our town. 
He went to junior high school in Bath and graduated from Morse High School. He 
loves life; who had the right to take it from him?
As a citizen of the great state of Maine, I want to see it remain great. I want to see 
Maine’s greatest resource, its good people, protected. It was with shock and disbelief 
that I learned about LD 1619, the most extreme abortion bill proposed by our 
Governor, who had previously stated that she felt Maine’s law didn’t need to be 
changed.  This bill is a war on the unborn, who are so close to seeing the light of day. 
During elections in Bath, many yards signs are posted that state, “follow the science.” 
Well, I do follow the science. One scientist I follow is the late Dr. Jerome Lejeune, a 
geneticist who was awarded the prestigious William Allan Memorial for his work 
with chromosomal pathologies in 1969. One of his quotes is worth the people of 
Maine thinking about: “The quality of a civilization can be measured by the respect it 
has for its weakest members.” How do we, the citizens of Maine respect our weakest 
members? How do you, the legislature, plan to protect the unborn?
I urge you to vote “no” on LD 1619. The babies and people of Maine deserve much 
better.
Sincerely,
Marta Laser
Bath

