Mary  Lemke 
Berwick 
LD 1619
Good afternoon. My name is Mary Lemke from Berwick, Maine. I am writing in 
opposition to LD1619. My twin daughters, Grace and Hope, were born at 29 weeks 
gestation. When I realized there was no stopping their arrival that soon, I was 
terrified. I couldn’t bear to lose them. I had struggled through the entire pregnancy but
I knew all along that every complication was worth it. The doctors did everything in 
their power to keep the 3 of us healthy — amidst extreme sickness, a pulmonary 
embolism, gestational diabetes, etc., etc. On November 19, 2008, they arrived in a 
whirlwind and were quickly whisked away to the NICU where a whole team could 
get to work on them. As an ICU nurse, the number of machines and medications in 
that room terrified me.  Only the peace of God could sustain me in those uncertain 
days and nights. The number of people and the amount of time and money that was 
spent keeping those precious miracles alive is sobering.  Today, they are smart and 
beautiful teenagers.  I simply cannot fathom how anyone can see no problem in 
spending so many resources to help premature babies but have no issue in murdering 
full term babies. This is why I am extremely opposed to LD1619, which is proposing 
legalizing abortion up until birth. God is still on the throne. Ultimately, it wasn’t the 
doctors or machines that kept my girls alive. I’m so glad I know the Great Physician. 
He’s had a plan for them from before I felt their first kicks.  I refuse to silently sit 
back and ignore God’s Word. I implore you to read Psalm 139:13-18, which I have 
included below.. Lord, have mercy on Maine.
“For thou hast possessed my reins: Thou hast covered me in my mother's womb. I 
will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: Marvellous are thy works; 
And that my soul knoweth right well. My substance was not hid from thee, When I 
was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes 
did see my substance, yet being unperfect; And in thy book all my members were 
written, Which in continuance were fashioned, When as yet there was none of them. 
How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! How great is the sum of them! If
I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: When I awake, I am still 
with thee.”
‭‭Psalm 139:13-18
