Mary Tuttle
Phippsburg
LD 1619
Honorable Judiciary Committee,
     As a voter, and a tax payer in Maine, I am against the passing of LD 1619 that 
would allow a woman to have an abortion up to the point of birth.  When I was a 
teenager I had a female black lab.  She got pregnant because of my carelessness.  My 
father was furious.  So being an arrogant teenager I said I would put the puppies down
so he would not have to do so.  This was many years ago when that is what people on 
the farm did with unwanted animals.  When it came time for me to drown the puppies 
I proceeded and then freaked out at the horror of it. I experienced how precious life is 
from the struggle of helpless puppies to live.    My father kindly took over.  I will 
never forget this incident.  Many people in the United States have decided that it is 
okay to put baby humans down yet like me would cringe at having to kill puppies.   
     The  American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) says pain for 
a fetus most likely begins at 24 to 25 weeks.  That is supposedly the best science we 
have right now.  We know that science knowledge changes all the time.  We do not 
know absolutely  that fetuses do not feel pain  before 24 weeks.  The only one that can
judge pain for sure is the individual. Plus, most women who seek and receive an 
abortion are forever painfully scarred emotionally.  I know this from talking to 
women who have aborted a baby.  
     It is difficult to think of a scenario where a woman would actually seek an abortion
of a child that was almost fully developed unless of course her life was in danger.  Yet
even then most women hopefully would not.    There is no excuse for many of the 
unplanned pregnancies today with the easy access to proven birth control.  Planned 
Parenthood was started for women to acquire birth control not to kill precious babies 
who are unable to defend themselves.  
     Again I oppose LD 1619.     Respectfully, Mary Tuttle
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                               
                                                                                                        

