l\/[E Filon 
Testimony LD 1343 and LD 1619 
Hello Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee; my 
name is Maq/Elizabeth F ilon, and I live in F almouth, Maine. 
Thank you for this opportunity to share my experience in support of LD 1343 and LD 1619 
today. On Monday, April 1, 2003, squeezed in before scheduled appointments, the 
perinatologist, my now ex-husband, and I peered at the fetal ultrasounds that clearly showed the 
extent of developmental anomalies initiating in the 11"‘ Week of embryonic development. I 
earned my masters in human anatomy, and embryology was essential to my training. At the time, 
I was Working at a medical school in another state and would routinely go into the library to 
reread embryology books during my lunch break to see exactly what was going on in real time 
fetal development. (In fact, I remember clearly reading about and dismissing my exact issue asa 
fascinating twist of nature that clearly wouldn’t happen to me.) My ex, a physician, shareda 
look with the specialist; this told me without words that the fetus was at risk, that we weren’t 
going to Walk out of the office with reassurance that the test results were just a false negative. 
Because of our connections and our proximity to three pediatric hospitals, We Were able to get 
consults within hours. Pediatric specialists independently confnmed that the developmental 
anomalies were too signiﬁcant and if I was able to carry the pregnancy to term, incompatible 
with life. This pregnancy carried increasing risks to both the fetus and me and, due to how far 
along I was in this pregnancy, a decision about care needed to be made that day or it was decided 
for us. We were one day from the legal limit. 
Yet, we were incredibly lucky. We had access to resources, knowledge, and professional and 
private support. We lived in an area with abundant specialized facilities and healthcare 
professionals Within a 45-minute drive. My care that day made the decision to tenninate my 
pregnancy very easy. Every clinician and my then husband gave me the choice to continue or 
terminate my pregnancy. It was my first parenting decision and one of the hardest I have ever 
made. And still, I wouldn’t change a thing. 
The reality is that you can’t control how a pregnancy unfolds, that you can’t change certain 
diagnoses. You need time to make informed healthcare decisions that are right for you. 
Regardless of where you live, you have to have access to quality health care and resources. 
I hear about physicians who are leaving their practices and graduates choosing not to pursue 
training in states where people without any medical knowledge are legislating restrictions on 
reproductive healthcare with legal repercussions for providing that care. Who will care for 
women like me? Maine had three high risk OB/GYNs when I was pregnant with my second 
child in 2006. Three. I was lucky to have such specialized care. 
Our actions have a ripple effect, felt long after the initial experience. I know that I made the right 
choice for me, for my fetus, for my children. I am lucky because I had a choice and because that 
choice gave my family a future. Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD 1619 to ensure 
all women the same opportunity they deserve and need.
