May 1, 2023 
 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Maureen Rispoli and I am a resident 
of Palermo. I am writing to testify in opposition to LD 1619. I am a teacher who is 
bound to administer standardized testing to her students today, in a time of 
substitute teacher shortages, and so I cannot be there to testify in person. My heart 
and spirit, however, are there.  
 
This proposed change to the current abortion access laws is completely 
unnecessary and abhorrent in its scope. I am the mother of a daughter who was 
born prematurely at 35 weeks. I needed to have a C-section to deliver her because 
it was deemed that awaiting natural birth at term would have endangered both my 
life and hers. She was a preemie who did not need any artificial means to keep her 
alive. Today she is a healthy, beautiful and smart teenager who will soon be 
deciding her path after high school, hopefully to remain in our beautiful state. My 
baby was viable five weeks before term without the need for artificial life supports. 
Current Maine law establishes a time frame for viability, but this current bill 
proposes to remove any standard of viability entirely and make it legal to take the 
LIFE of a baby before birth, right up to the moment of birth. This is extreme and 
would give Maine the distinction of being among 8 radical states in our nation that 
allow the termination of a pregnancy up to the moment of birth. This is a not a 
distinction of which most Mainers would be proud, and it certainly is not 
“progress.”  
 
Expanding abortion is not progress, nor is it healthcare. Is not the goal of 
healthcare to preserve life? In the case of abortion, there is more than one life to 
consider as the developing baby is most definitely a human life. As for the other 
life, that of the mother, current Maine law already allows for exceptions to the fetal 
viability standard when her life is in danger.  On what grounds does this need 
expansion? 
 
Please oppose this extreme bill, a bill that is unnecessary considering the law as it 
already stands in Maine. Mainers have the distinction of being reasonable, salt-of-
the-earth people, do we not? Please take the only reasonable course of action in 
considering this bill, which is to oppose it. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
Maureen A. Rispoli 
Palermo 
