 
House District 108: Gorham (part) 
  
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Terry@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: Maine Relay 711 
 
 
May 1, 2023 
  
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry in support of 
LD 1619, An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
  
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed members of the Judiciary Committee, I 
am Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in House District 108. I am here today to speak 
in strong support of LD 1619, An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
 
As a mother of three daughters, I know firsthand the importance of access to proper medical 
care. It is essential that we trust medical professionals who have committed to uphold ethical 
standards outlined in the Hippocratic Oath, including to care for the sick and to do no harm. With 
all due respect, they are the experts, not me and not you. They have dedicated their lives to 
helping others and should be allowed to make decisions with their patients without interference 
from politicians.  
 
This is why I am in favor of LD 1619, which would waive the current viability standard for 
abortions deemed medically necessary but that are currently prohibited. This bill would help 
ensure that women have access to the care they need when they need it when making an 
extremely difficult decision to end a later-term pregnancy.  
 
Current Maine law restricts access to abortions after viability, even if it is deemed medically 
necessary. This means that individuals are forced to carry a pregnancy to term, regardless of the 
risks to their own health or the health of the fetus.  
 
That is not only unfair, but it is dangerous. Women should not be forced to put their lives at risk 
because of outdated laws that do not take into account modern medical advancements. Medical 

 
House District 108: Gorham (part) 
 professionals should be allowed to make decisions based on their expertise and the individual 
needs of their patients.  
 
I want my daughters to have access to the best medical care possible. I want them to know that 
they can trust their doctors and that they will be able to get the care they need when they need it 
in their communities and surrounded by family and loved ones. Passing this bill will not change 
the number of abortions that occur later in pregnancy, but it will mean that women won’t have to 
drive hours out of state, leaving behind their support networks and possibly having to spend 
thousands of dollars just to access necessary medical care.   
 
This bill would help ensure that my daughters and all people who might need an abortion have 
access to the care they need, without fear of political interference. It would allow medical 
professionals to do their jobs without the burden of restrictive laws that do not take into account 
the complexities of individual medical cases. 
 
I urge you to support this bill. It is time for us to trust medical professionals and ensure that 
women have access to the care they need when they need it. This should not be a political issue; 
it is a matter of basic human rights and access to appropriate medical care.  
 
I appreciate your time and am grateful for the opportunity to testify about this incredibly 
important issue. 
 
 
