Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: My name is Michael Russin, I am a resident of Windham Maine, and I’mhere to 
testify against LB1 6 19 
What separates us as humans from the birds of the air and the beasts of the field? What has allowed for 
the innovation of technology, the modernization and improvement of our living conditions and the 
advancement of human civilization across the globe? 
We have, as a race, collectively come together to create a society in which cooperation is necessary and 
expected and utilized as a tool through which we improve not only our own lives, but the lives of those 
around us. 
In this highly civilized and comparatively ordered society, a very basic right is inherent- the right to LIFE. 
The ability to go to school, start a family, and go to work without the fear of violence and death is 
undoubtedly the halhnark of a civilized society. As we all know, Maine has one of the lowest crime rates 
in the country. 
I cannot come up to one of you and murder you-because I think that your life is inconveniencing mine or 
because I want something that you have. Again- this is indeed a civilized society. 
So let me ask you, if we allow for the murder of our most vulnerable citizens in their most vulnerable 
state- IN THE WOMB- can we continue to call ourselves a civilized society? Can we continue to take 
pride in our extremely low crime rate? The answer to that question is a resounding NO. Not if the most 
vulnerable are at risk at the hands of their mothers and medical professionals- those SWORN to protect 
them. 
If we legally support the murder of FULL TERM babies, I no longer see the merits of outlawing any other 
type of murder. Why don’t we lift the bans on ﬁrst degree, second degree murder, manslaughter, and all 
other related charges? That would be absolutely ludicrous, right? 
We have heard many arguments today, but there is no distinction. In factl and many others agree that the 
murder of a human life, an image bearer of God at its infant stages is perhaps the most vile of all crimes. 
You may not hear the love in my tone, andl do not mean this with malice- but please understand that this 
comes from aplace of love. I see you for what you are, just like I see these babies for what they are- 
image bearers of the true living God. I say this because I care for you. 
Whether you choose to believe or not, God is the ﬁnal judge, jury and executioner. To fall into the hands 
of the living God is a terrifying thing. You as leaders have been put into your positions by God and we 
are told that, as leaders, we will be held to a higher standard. I cannot even begin to wrap my head aroimd 
the terrible judgement that would come upon you in the next life should you choose to use your power to 
legalize and endorse infanticide, because that is what this bill would legalize. Infanticide. The murder of 
babies. 
The 14* amendment of the Constitution of the United States which you swore before God to uphold and 
protect says “nor shall any states deprive any person of LIFE liberty or property without due process of 
law.” Let me ask you, where is the due process for these children? 
I will pray, for your sake, but especially for the sakes of these children that you vote correctly and destroy 
LB 1 61 9. 
Please vote ought not to pass
