Senator Carney and Re presentative Moonen  and Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary my name is Michael Sullivan , Sr. Pastor of Caribou United  Baptist Church . I come before you 
today to speak in opposition of LD 1619 .  
Today I place before you a  heartfelt plea  to let the unborn children live. Genes is 1:27 proclaims that “God 
crea ted man in His own image, in the image of God He cr eated Him; male and female He created them. ” 
Life is s acred and created  by God a nd it is His workmanship .  
Although now  we sadl y look back upon legislation  that str ipped indi genous people  of there  humanity in 
times past , I believe that similarl y future generations will look back in horror  in many of the stance s we 
have  taken that are in d irect opposition  to the revealed  will of God, and as such each person will stand 
before Him to give an account . You all here today  will give an account before God for i f LD 1619 is 
passed , or re jected . You and you alone will bear the responsibility  for the allowance of  taking innocent  
lives of the unbor n babies  if this  legislation  is passed  (Romans 1 4:12 ). 
These are some of the ke y truths why Christians  stand with life beginning  in the womb . In P salm 139:13 -
16 it say s, “For yo u formed my in ward pa rts; you knitted me together in my mother’s  womb . I prais e you , 
for I am fearfull y and wonderfully made. Wonderful are your works ; my soul  knows it very  well. My 
frame was not hid den from you, when I was being made in secret , intricately woven in the dept hs of the 
earth . Your eyes saw my unformed substance ; in your book were written, every one of them, the days 
that were formed for me , when as  yet there  was none  of them. ” 
➢ God formed us in the womb  
➢ He knit us together in the womb  
➢ We are intricately  woven  together by God  
➢ He knows all our our days from the womb to the to mb 
As you move forward with any decision, I respectfully request th at you are mindful of the rights of 
Christians and the rights of the unborn. There i s no more basic right th an the right to li fe. I implore you 
to consider which side of histor y you will be on and whether or not you  will stand with the revealed will 
of God . Biblically it is clear life is l ife. As a mini ster in the State of M aine , I stand in solida rity with the se 
truths  of God.  
I urge you to  vote “ought not to pass ” on LD 1619.  
