LD 1619 
LD 1343* 
Good afternoon, members of the Judiciary Committee, and thank you for the opportunity to 
address you today. My name is Mindy Woerter, and I live in Durham. 
Seven years ago, almost to the day, I decided to have an abortion. It wasn't a decision I 
expected to make at that point in my life. I was married, already a mother, and desperately 
hoping to grow my family.'
_ 
But, after making it through the ﬁrst trimester, I found out my wanted pregnancy was nonviable 
due to fetal anomalies incompatible with life. Continuing the pregnancy put my health at risk.l 
had a daughter at home to take care of, a family who needed me healthy and whole. 
I knew I couldn't continue a pregnancy feeling like a ticking time bomb waiting for a miscarriage 
to happen, wondering if I'd face serious complications like infection, infertility, or even death — all 
were possibilities. There wasn't a question in my mind. I knew an abortion was the right choice 
for me. . 
Even while I mourned that loss, I felt such relief - that I got to decide what was best for myself 
and my family. And that relief has blossomed into deep gratitude. Without that abortion, I 
wouldn't have been able to get pregnant again a few months later, and my youngest daughter 
wouldn't be here today. 
She is 5 now, and she has a big heart and a ﬁery spirit. She loves dragons, drawing, and 
making up songs. She is her big sister's best friend. This year, she earned her kindergarten 
class's empathy award. She comes home from school with worms in her pocket that she 
rescues from the playground, and rocks that she's named. I get to sing her to sleep every night 
thanks to safe, affordable abortion access.t 
No one faced with the deeply personal decision of ending a pregnancy should be forced to 
leave their support systems and travel to ﬁnd the care they need. No one should have to jump 
through hoops to get an abortion, while putting their health and their well-being in jeopardy. 
No one should be denied this life-saving care because of where they live, how much money 
they have, or when they receive a heartbreaking diagnosis. And the right to bodily autonomy 
should not be subject to the whims of the insurance companies or lawmakers, or dictated by 
arbitrary restrictions designed to control and to punish people capable of pregnancy. 
I urge you to support LD 1619 and LD 1343, because everyone in Maine deserves to choose, 
without interference or barriers or shame, what we do with our bodies. Abortion access isa 
fundamental human right. - 
Thank you.I
