Good afternoon honored members of the committee, 
My name is Nancy Brown from Pittsﬁeld, Maine. I am a mother of two,a 
and a grandmother of three. I am here to testify because this is something 
very important to me. I was a teen when Roe V Wade was enacted. We did 
not know scientiﬁcally when life began. It was viewed as a blob of tissue 
not a living human being. Decades have passed. Science and technology 
have greatly advanced. Now with the new sophisticated ultrasounds we 
have a window into the life of an unborn baby. They suck their thumbs, get 
the hick ups, laugh, play, are ticklish, feel pain, scream, and even try to 
move away from the source of the pain 
Back in 2010 my oldest grandson was high risk. We counted the days 
until the 24th week when he would be viable. I had his 3D picture on my 
desk at Work. VVhen he was born by C section at 36 weeks he looked very 
much like his 3D ultrasound picture. 
There is a mistaken notion that the life of the mother is not protected. The 
life of the mother has always been protected even before Roe V Wade was 
enacted. It was always a choice between the woman and her doctor. I know 
this because it was given as an option the women in my family. It was 
discussed with their doctors as a choice if it became necessary, even as far 
back as in the 1950s. 
The real issue is do we dispose ofa viable baby for just any old reason. 
Where is their, “ right to life, libertyiand the pursuit of happiness ”. 
My youngest grandson is medically complex. Hehas a rare congenital 
neuromuscular condition. It is so rare that there are less than eighteen cases 
in the world with his condition. My daughter and husband were told they 
could pull the plug on him. Five years later he is an active ﬁve year old and 
is in preschool. If you saw him on the playground with other kids you 
Wouldn’t know the difference except he has a trach on his neck. He isa 
good natured happy child. He does require around the clock care but it is 
worth all the work. No, my daughter and her husband are not rich. There isa 
foundation set up in the State of Maine to support families with these 
children. 
I used to work at a large corporation that had a whole department that
gave jobs to medically challenged people. The people did an excellent job. 
There are plenty of medically challenged people who own businesses, live 
full lives, and are a beneﬁt to their community. My mother used to say, “it 
takes all kinds of people to make up a World.” 
We have plenty of other safe contraceptive options and We do not need 
to use abortion as birth control. Abortion was never meant to be birth 
control. 
Planned parenthood needs to focus on the parenthood not abortion. It 
needs to come along side of young women and young families and support 
them with options on how to get what they need to be successful. If keeping 
the baby is not an option, to assist them in the process of giving their babies 
to someone who would love to have them but can‘t have a baby themselves. 
I have a friend that did two direct adoptions. She adopted a boy and a girl 
right from birth. She and her husband have given them a loving stable 
home and every advantage in life that they can afford. Those were the best 
gifts they ever received. What a special gift to give someone longing fora 
baby but a precious baby. 
At the very least, planned parenthood needs to stop trying to prevent 
those organizations that offer the real choices not just abortion. 
We have lost several decades of babies to abortion. It staggers the 
imagination. It makes me wonder who the children would have grown up to 
be as adults. Maybe one would have been the President or found the cure for 
cancer. The things these children could have accomplished if they had been 
given the chance just boggles the mind. Actions have consequences. 
The majority of the people in Maine are not for late term abortion for just 
any old reason. Please do not pass this bill. Our unborn babies are 
depending on you for their future. We protect seal pups and whale calves so 
why not baby humans. We also fight against animals being killed for tusks, 
hide, fur etc. but we sell aborted baby parts which has become big business. 
Shame on us! 
We need to support each other in making the right choice to give a babya 
chance to be all they can be for the long term not just the short term. 
Thank you for the opportunity to let me speak for those precious babies who
