April 30, 2023 
 
 
 
 
To Members of the House Judiciary Committee; 
 
I am writing today to express my opposition to the passage of LD1619, “An Act to Improve 
Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws”.  I am writing to you as a woman, a mother, a 
grandmother, an ordained member of clergy, and as a licensed clinical counselor in the State of 
Maine.  I urge you to utilize rational and logical reasoning as your cast your vote on this crucial 
matter. 
 
As a mother and grandmother, I could speak to you about the tragic loss of innocent human life 
that will occur if this bill is passed, the horrific pain and torture endured by the child who is 
being ripped from his or her mother’s womb, and the massive threat to women’s health that 
will be allowed by removing criminal penalties for those who perform abortions (this aspect of 
the proposed bill clearly refutes the stated intent to protect women’s health).  But I know there 
will be others who will address this impact of the bill. 
 
As a mental health therapist, I could speak to you of my years of experience in counseling 
traumatized, post-abortive women whose lives have been forever altered as a result of their 
decision to abort their child.  Many of these women continue to live in physical, mental and 
emotional anguish – years after their abortion.  On more than one occasion I have had to hear 
the wailing of a grieving mother as she asked me, “Why didn’t someone tell me what was going 
to happen?”  But I know there will be others who address this impact of the bill. 
 
As an ordained member of clergy, I could speak to you about the very real and tangible spiritual 
consequences that will come to those whose hands shed innocent blood – both on an individual 
and corporate basis.  But I know there will be others who address this impact of the bill. 
 
While all these statements represent valid opinions and points of view, some may claim these 
arguments are subjective at best - based in emotionalism, morality and spirituality. Therefore, I 
would like to express my concern with a series of simple questions - questions based in logic 
and rational thought. 
 
Why is it that, when a pregnant woman is excited to have a baby, governing officials, the 
medical community (and society at large) encourages her to care for herself and her “baby” 
during the gestational period?  Why do we, as a society, encourage expectant mothers to 
refrain from “harming their baby” by avoiding the use of alcohol, tobacco, drugs or other high-
risk behaviors?  Why are we so quick to celebrate this “new life”, to ensure proper medical care 
for mom and baby, and to anticipate the “baby’s” impending birth?  Is it because science and 
common sense inform us that this is a child in his or her mother’s womb – the most vulnerable 
of all human life forms? 
 
Conversely, why is it that, when a pregnant woman decides she no longer wants to be pregnant 
– but is - governing officials, the medical community (and society at large) tell her it is not a 
child, but a blob of tissue that has no value, no life, no purpose, no worth – even up to the age 
of 9 months of development?  Many of us have family members who were born as premature 
infants at 6, 7, and 8 months of development.  What gives anyone the right to decide that 
another person’s life is disposable and worthless? 
 
There is an old adage that describes this type of thinking and behavior as “a double-minded 
man, unstable in all his ways.”  Today I am asking you to no longer be double-minded in your 
thinking or your actions.  It is far past time for our leaders in government to make up your 
minds about pregnancy.  You can’t have it both ways.  For every member of the judiciary 
committee who is a parent, to support this measure is to openly practice hypocrisy and 
demonstrate a lack of integrity.  To quote from one of my favorite books, “Today I have given 
you the choice between life and death, between blessing and cursing.  Now, I call on heaven 
and earth to witness the choice you make.  Please, choose life, so that you and your 
descendants might live!”   
 
Thank you for your consideration and your courage to stand for the unborn. 
 
Nancy C. Nichols, M.Ed., LCPC, NCC 
Transformations Ministries, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
