Naomi Cowperthwaite
Thomaston
LD 1619
Good afternoon, I write to you today as a servant of Christ, a minister of the gospel, 
and a voice for those who can't speak for themselves. Men and women of the 
legislature of the state of Maine, I address you today on behalf of a minority 
population in our state, which is in danger of being exterminated. I am speaking of 
children, not yet born, who are being attacked, tortured, and killed in their own 
mothers' wombs every day. They are poisoned, burned, torn apart at the joints, 
beheaded. This is not medieval times, this is the 21st century! We pride ourselves on 
our "rights", but what about their rights? While we march and chant all day long 
about "women's rights", we ignore the rights of tiny women in the womb! I implore 
you, as my legislators, to oppose LD 1619, as it grants liberty to kill our fellow 
citizens in the womb! Stand up for their lives, don't let them die on your watch! It is 
your duty, as a law maker, to uphold the constitution of this state and this country, 
which grant the right to life to every human being. If you do not stand against 
abortion, at any gestational age, you are being negligent in your duties, complacent to 
murder, and should be removed from your position. I pray that this evil would end, 
and that you would fight for these people, made in the image of God. God has created 
them for His glory, and you are crushing them! I exhort you with His own words: 
“Rescue those who are being taken away to death; hold back those who are stumbling 
to the slaughter. If you say, “Behold, we did not know this,” does not he who weighs 
the heart perceive it? Does not he who keeps watch over your soul know it, and will 
he not repay man according to his work?”
‭‭Proverbs‬ ‭24‬:‭11‬-‭12‬ ‭
“There are six things that the Lord hates, seven that are an abomination to him: 
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, a heart that devises 
wicked plans, feet that make haste to run to evil, a false witness who breathes out lies,
and one who sows discord among brothers.”
‭‭Proverbs‬ ‭6‬:‭16‬-‭19‬ ‭
Do not let this bill pass. Oppose it with all your might. Do your duty.
