Planned Parenthood of Northern New England 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Judiciary, my name is Nicole Clegg, I serve as the Interim CEO at 
Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, and I am pleased to submit testimony 
in support of both LD1619 and LD 1343.I 
Planned Parenthood of Northern New England provides comprehensive reproductive 
and sexual health care to more than 14,000 people in Maine at four health centers 
located in Biddeford, Portland, Sanford and Topsham. People turn to us for affordable, 
high-quality care including wellness exams, birth control, disease testing and 
treatment, cancer screenings, abortion care as well as a variety of primary care services. 
We see everyone who comes to us regardless of ability to pay, and in a typical year, we 
provide more than $4 million in free and discounted care to our communities in Maine. 
As a mission driven health care provider, we fundamentally believe everyone should be 
able to get affordable, high quality sexual and reproductive health care in their 
communities, no matter where they live or how much money they make, and we 
advocate for policies that help make this vision a reality. 
LD 1619, An Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
LD 1619 addresses three aspects of Maine's Reproductive Privacy Law: abortion data 
collection, access to abortion later in pregnancy and the criminalization of abortion. 
Abortion Data Collection 
Currently, the DHHS uses the US Standard Report of Induced Termination of 
Pregnancy published by the National Center for Health Statistics for data collection and 
reporting for abortions provided in Maine. The form has not been updated in decades. 
LD 1619 repeals the use of this form and directs the Department to create a data 
collection procedure similar to the one already in place for miscarriage data. This 
change is a much-needed update for two reasons:®
1) The current form is outdated and forces providers to collect irrelevant and 
deeply stigmatizing information from patients on topics like education level and 
marital status during their appointments. 
2) The level of data collected can pose a risk to patient and clinician safety by 
potentially jeopardizing their anonymity. This risk is magniﬁed for patients such 
as those from rural communities or those from states with abortion bans. 
Abortion Later in Pregnancy 
The current Reproductive Privacy Act (RPA) when adopted thirty years ago was 
modeled on the language used in Roe v Wade. While the RPA has served its purpose, 
protecting abortion access in the wake of Dobbs, the ensuing three decades have 
shown flaws in the language — especially with regards to abortion later in pregnancy. lt 
set the concept of "viability" as a restriction. Yet the vague ambiguous language has 
left providers unclear and unable to offer care to their patients in these circumstances. 
Viability is not a precise medical term. ln fact, it was conceived by the US Supreme 
Court as a compromise in the Roe decision. Estimations of viability are imprecise and 
can be inaccurate by up to four weeks. The unintended consequence of Maine's RPA 
language is that providers are unable to navigate or accept the risks to provide needed 
care to their patients. 
Abortion's later in pregnancy occur for two primary reasons: 
1) New information, generally about fetal or maternal health. 
2) Barriers to care, structural, personal or economic reasons which have prevented 
the pregnant person from exercising their rights at the desired earlier date. 
While abortions at or after twenty-one weeks account for approximately 1% of all 
abortions performed in the United States, they are and will continue to be a necessary 
part of comprehensive pregnancy care. LD 1619 would ensure that in those 
circumstances providers can legally offer care to their patients instead of forcing them 
to travel hundreds of miles, away from support systems and loved ones for care. 
Criminalization of Abortion 
LD 1619 repeals crimes that only apply to abortion.
1) The law criminalizes providing an abortion later in pregnancy unless the health 
or life of the pregnant person is at risk. This statute is deeply problematic in its 
ambiguity causing a chilling effect on providers unwilling to risk potential 
criminal prosecution simply for providing necessary care. 
2) The law criminalizes obtaining the pills for medication abortion outside of the 
medical system. While we strongly recommend people access medication 
abortion through a provider, we know that for some the risk is too great. 
< 
Prosecution is not the answer. Decriminalizing abortion and treating it like any 
other medical procedure is an important step for Maine in our post- 
Dobbs world. 
LD 1343, An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People by Preempting 
the Field of Abortion Regulation 
LD 1343 would ensure every l\/lainer, regardless of what town they live in, has the same 
rights to abortion care, regardless of any anti-abortion efforts at the local level. lt would 
prohibit towns or municipalities from enacting any local ordinance in conflict with 
Maine's Reproductive Privacy Act, thereby ensuring that all Mainers retain the ability to 
access comprehensive Reproductive health care regardless of where they live. 
A tactic long abused by anti-abortion extremists, in the wake of Dobbs, this approach 
has grown in popularity as a way to restrict reproductive freedom in states that 
otherwise support it, such as Delaware, New Mexico, Colorado, Virginia, and 
Minnesota. While no ban has successfully passed in Maine, we know that those who 
oppose abortion have no plans to stop their efforts to make abortion illegal. One of the 
best defenses against this kind of local action is clear language in Maine law that 
localities do not have the authority to restrict the provision of abortion care or 
otherwise limit abortion access. 
LD 1343 sends a message loud and clear to the people of Maine that our elected 
leaders stand with them and will do everything in their power to make sure that 
abortion remains accessible. To make good on this promise, we must ensure that all 
people — no matter where they live in this state — will benefit from that protection.

