Nikki Birmingham
Bangor
LD 1619
In response to LD1619 which is being discussed tomorrow, I wanted to share my 
stance on this egregious attempt to allow murder of our most innocent population here
in Maine.
Abortion is an issue that has been debated for decades. Progressively, 
bills seek to expand the time in which an abortion can occur - even now, calling for 
full term abortions. When it comes to late-term abortions, or those performed on 
full-term babies, the argument against it is clear. The value of human life should be 
upheld, no matter the stage of development, and allowing abortions to be performed 
on full-term babies goes against this principle.
One of the main arguments for late-term abortions is that it is necessary to protect the 
health of the mother. While it is true that there may be cases where a late-term 
abortion is necessary to save the mother's life, these cases are extremely rare. In fact, 
less than 1% of all abortions are performed after 20 weeks gestation, and most of 
these are not due to health risks to the mother.
Furthermore, late-term abortions are often performed on healthy babies who could 
survive outside of the womb with medical assistance. In these cases, the argument for 
late-term abortion becomes even weaker. If a baby could survive outside of the 
womb, then it is clear that they are a living human being who deserves the same rights
and protections as any other person.
The value of human life should not be determined by age or stage of development. All
human beings have inherent worth and dignity, regardless of their size, level of 
development, or degree of dependency. This principle is enshrined in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, which recognizes the inherent dignity and inalienable 
rights of all members of the human family.
Passing a bill that allows abortion to be performed on full-term babies in Maine 
would be a grave injustice. It would undermine the fundamental principle that all 
human life is valuable and worthy of protection, no matter the stage of development. 
As a life-long Maine resident, I strongly urge legislators to reject this bill and uphold 
the dignity of human life.
