Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Norman J Labonte. I'm a pastor and I live in Searsport. I am 
testifying today in opposition to LD-1619, An Act to Improve Maine's 
Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
Several questions have come to mind as I considered the impact of this 
legislation, and I would ask you all to think about them as well. 
First, I'm reminded of statistics from a poll by the Associated press that 
show 68% of pro—choice voters don't agree with or approve of late-term 
abortions. Quoting the AP article, “As expected, the opposition was stronger 
among all adults surveyed: 79 percent rejected late-term abortion, and 80 
percent opposed day—before-birth abortion." And our governor has said in 
the past that our state's law doesn't need to be changed. Why, then, are you 
moving in such a radical direction as this now? 
Why is there a need to override the current viability standards of legislation 
previously enacted? 
Why does the state of Maine need to assert a no time limit clause allowing 
professional judgment to determine whether a pregnancy can or should be 
terminated? 
Why does this legislation remove the penalties for unlicensed providers 
performing abortions? 
Why is the life or health of the mother no longer a matter of concern? 
The recent news of the tragic violence and subsequent shootings on I-95 
that took the lives of four people in Bowdoin, Maine was addressed, in part 
by Governor Mills, with the following statement: “I am shocked and deeply 
saddened [by] acts of violence ” . Isn't abortion up to the time of birth also an 
act of violence? I say yes, it most certainly is! The Bible clearly states that 
“the life is in the blood" . Please take heed to these words. 
This bill is an extreme piece of legislation that is offensive and cruel. It flies 
in the face of those of us who hold life in highest esteem, and who believe in 
the sanctity of life regarding both the mother and the unborn child. You arey 
setting a terrible precedent here, and I pray that you all would reconsider 
your support of this travesty. 
Please vote ought not to pass.
