Pamela Felice
Bristol
LD 1619
Honorable Judiciary Committee:
I ask you to vote aught not to pass on LD 776, 1343 and 1619. 
God is the author of life, the creator. EVERY life is equally valuable in His eyes. This
afternoon I listened to one college student after another speak of abortion in terms of 
birth control . Many of these young women repeatedly said they wanted to see the 
gestation age for abortion expanded because the birth of a child might cause financial 
distress or burden. 
None of these young women connected pregnancy to their own choice;  a choice to 
engage in sexual activity, as if no consequences should be associated, with their 
choice. Rather they argued that abortion should be readily available at any time their 
circumstances made the pregnancy inconvenient. Why do these young women think 
their lives are more valuable than the lives of the babies in their wombs? Again, God 
sees all life as equally valuable and whether one chooses to believe in God or not, one
should take responsibility for their own decisions and actions rather than take the life 
of another for the sake of connivance and financial comfort.
These bills would allow for the killing of babies who are very much viable outside the
womb by unlicensed practitioners. They would turn the Democrat moto, "Safe and 
Rare," on it's head, and would make abortion, in Maine, "Anytime, Anywhere, For 
Any Reason."
With the church of satan recently suing the state of Texas over new laws limiting 
abortion,  claiming it infringes on their religious rights, we can now openly 
acknowledge the truth about abortion. It is a form of child sacrifice. Of child sacrifice 
to occult gods, The Lord said in Jeremiah 32:35 Says, "They built high places for 
Baal in the Valley of Ben Hinnom to sacrifice their sons and daughters to Molek, 
though I never commanded—nor did it enter my mind—that they should do such a 
detestable thing..."
Please do not expand abortion rights, this detestable thing, in the eyes of our creator, 
The Lord. 

