Senator_Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee 
on Judiciary,- 
I am Patricia Prescott. I live in Houlton. I am here to testify against LD 1619. 
LD 1619 is animated by a desire to protect the welfare and preserve the freedom 
of women. I would like to share my experience so that you can see the pitfalls of 
LD 1619. To meet that desire to protect women, please consider better ways to 
direct that noble and worthy desire. 
The experience that I have had with abortion in my own life, is that women are 
coerced,I 
shamed, and manipulated into having an abortion. Abortion for my friends was 
born out of the message that a child would ruin their life, the abortion was an act 
of utter hopelessness, not a choice. The traumatic experience of abortion is only 
compounded as time passes. My friends imagine the child they gave up for 
abortion. They grieve every day for the love they would be sharing with their 
child, and with each passing year, the grief increases. Mothers who have 
miscarriages grieve for the loss of their child. When you compound that grief with 
the fact that it was a decision you made, well, compassionate people can only 
imagine. Grief aggravated by 
what we are calling “privacy” produces shame. 
My friends feel an incredible sense of betrayal, not only by those who forced the 
abortion upon them but also by the legislators and government agencies who 
allow this procedure. Please don't betray an increasing number of women and 
children by passing LD 1619. 
This bill puts too much power into the hands of people who have a financial 
interest in abortion, which clouds theirjudgment about what is truly best for the 
mother and child. One of the promises of abortion was that every child will bea 
wanted child. This has been proven false and the fact that this bill has removed 
the language preventing late term abortion, only demonstrates an increasing 
willingness to do violence toward children. Maine needs policies that protect, 
support, and empower women and promote motherhood and family life. 
I strongly urge you to vote "ought not to pass" on LD 1619.
