Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committe, 
Thank you for your service.  I am writing to share testimony against bill LD1619.  I am the mother of 
three adult children and extended family member of two aborted children. I understand the argument 
that an unwanted pregnancy can “adversely affect the life of a struggling mother”.  A family member 
was struggling severely with depression, anxiety, and physical issues at the time of her pregnancies.  She 
was in no condition to be a healthy mother and the prospect worsened her condition. Ultimately, she 
became a victim of abortion proponents, convinced abortion was the only way out.  I say victim because 
she is in a much worse state now.  Many years later, she is more depressed, has cut herself off from all 
spirituality and believes herself someone who God couldn’t forgive.  Regret from mothers who have 
aborted babies and have deteriorated in mental health is a common theme and one I don’t believe the 
proponents of abortion give much thought. Compassion to the individual takes a back seat to political 
ideology.  If you find yourself leaning toward this bill, ask yourself, “Are you promoting it out of 
compassion for that young woman or are you voting for an idealistic political purpose?”   
Other Issues:  Viability is ambiguously defined.  With medical advances, babies can live outside the 
womb at younger and younger ages.  My nephew was born around 24 weeks at just 1 pound and is 
thriving today as a 7 year old.   
The law leaves the legal decision to a physician who is not infallible.  There are many accounts of parents 
being encouraged to abort their child because the doctor stated there was evidence of a serious medical 
condition, only to have the child born perfectly healthy.  My good friend and neighbor was one of those 
parents.  Holly was encouraged to abort her child because the doctor believed the liver would be 
malfunctioning resulting in death or lifelong disability.  My friend decided to have the child with the 
knowledge that they were going to ultimately lose the child or face great medical difficulties.  Hayden, 
the child, now a highly productive and loving 23-year-old, was born perfectly healthy.   
The bill removes criminal penalties for violating the law.  This could lead to very dangerous situations 
including death for the life of the mother as well as for a baby who could live outside the womb with 
support.  I can see no other purpose for decriminalization other than to make it a free for all.  It seems 
like sloppy bill writing and not what anyone would hope of their Legislators, regardless of their views on 
life. 
Please consider this video highlighting science.  I believe advocates for this bill do not understand the 
“science” or they have lost all moral compasses and are stuck in a political agenda. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S-lQOooYAs8  
There are many problems with this bill.  I do not think it reflects the opinion of conscientious Mainers.   
Sincerely, 
Patricia Knapp 
559-802-7127 
Franklin, Maine 
 
