Hi, my name is Patricia Fletcher, and I am here today to implore you not to pass LD1619.
The legal deﬁnition of abortion according to, dictionary.law.com is “the termination of pregnancy by various means, including medical surgery, before the fetus is able to sustain independent life.”
The Oxford Dictionary meaning of abortion is commonly deﬁned as “the intentional termination of pregnancy with reasonable knowledge that such termination will cause the death of the embryo (embryos and embryonic stem cells) or fetus.” 
Let’s think about that ﬁrst deﬁnition for a minute. What does it mean to sustain independent life? When I really thought about this I came to the same conclusion time and again. Being able to sustain independent life could mean being able to live outside the mother’s womb to some, and to others it could mean being able to live independently without help. I think of my own two daughters when they were born. They were young ladies before they could reasonably sustain independent life without myself and my husband caring for them. If you were to give abortion this deﬁnition that would mean it would be okay to terminate any child’s life up until the day they could independently sustain their own lives. Let’s let that set for a second. Sounds ridiculous right? Okay so let’s take the other way you may look at this deﬁnition. A fetus must be able to sustain it’s own life in order to live. My own daughter, born 6 weeks early would not have been able to sustain independent life, as she needed help from medical professionals to live. These medical professionals, doctors, nurses and specialists who worked so hard to make sure that my daughter was allowed a ﬁghting chance at life, are now being asked to do the unimaginable, take away a child’s chance at life. With so many medical advances available to us we know that a baby born very early with medical intervention can survive and even thrive. Isn’t it wrong to take away that child’s chance at life?

Now let’s look at the second deﬁnition. “the intentional termination of pregnancy with reasonable knowledge that such termination will cause the death of the embryo (embryos and embryonic stem cells) or fetus.” 
Death. It’s a sobering word, it brings to mind so many diﬀerent emotions. When you put death, and intentional termination in the same sentence, this says to me one thing, murder. I would implore you to think about your own children, grandchildren, nieces and nephews, think about all of the children who would never get a chance at life if this bill were to pass. Think for just a brief moment, what if…what if one of the children in your life was terminated, that is put to death when they could have survived and thrived, maybe even had grown up to change the world. Would you be able to say without any reservations today that it is okay to kill a baby who could live, could you do this with no regret? Murder is a serious crime, and isn’t that exactly what you would be condoning if you voted to pass this bill?  Please I urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD1619 today. Thank you.
