Testimony in opposition to LD 1619 “An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy 
Laws” 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Paul O. Dillon and I am a resident of Exeter, Maine.  I am 
submitting my written testimony in opposition to LD1619. 
I am speaking up for all of the yet unborn babies whose lives should not be taken by their 
mothers, their fathers, and their mothers’ doctors. 
Maine should not expand the present law allowing the termination of a baby’s life to allow for 
the killing of a baby that could survive outside the womb.  That would mean that Maine would 
have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the entire United States of America. 
I realize that as a 71-year-old, white, heterosexual male, and follower of Jesus Christ that there 
are some that would say that I am not someone that has the right to speak to this issue of late 
term abortion allowing a woman to decide to end the life of their child at any time before it is 
born.  As a father of four adult children and having lost my oldest daughter in a car accident at 
the age of 18, I believe that I have the right to have a say.  I have not yet gotten over my 
daughter’s death in the accident that happened 21 years ago.  My heart still aches to this day.  I 
recognize that the pain is even stronger for her mother.   
I do not know what father would want to support the aborting of their baby’s life, and for the life 
of me I cannot understand why a mother would want to kill her baby. 
I ask you to please consider the long-term devastating effects that the passing of this law 
allowing parents to kill their babies will have on them and their families. 
I ask you to please vote “Ought Not to Pass” on this legislation. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Paul O. Dillon 
Exeter, Maine 
Micah 6:8 
 
May 1, 2023 
Paul Dillon
Exeter, Maine
LD 1619
Testimony in opposition to LD 1619 “An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive 
Privacy Laws”
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Paul O. Dillon and I am a resident of 
Exeter, Maine.  I am submitting my written testimony in opposition to LD1619.
I am speaking up for all of the yet unborn babies whose lives should not be taken by 
their mothers, their fathers, and their mothers’ doctors.
Maine should not expand the present law allowing the termination of a baby’s life to 
allow for the killing of a baby that could survive outside the womb.  That would mean
that Maine would have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the entire United 
States of America.
I realize that as a 71-year-old, white, heterosexual male, and follower of Jesus Christ 
that there are some that would say that I am not someone that has the right to speak to 
this issue of late term abortion allowing a woman to decide to end the life of their 
child at any time before it is born.  As a father of four adult children and having lost 
my oldest daughter in a car accident at the age of 18, I believe that I have the right to 
have a say.  I have not yet gotten over my daughter’s death in the accident that 
happened 21 years ago.  My heart still aches to this day.  I recognize that the pain is 
even stronger for her mother.  
I do not know what father would want to support the aborting of their baby’s life, and 
for the life of me I cannot understand why a mother would want to kill her baby.
I ask you to please consider the long-term devastating effects that the passing of this 
law allowing parents to kill their babies will have on them and their families.
I ask you to please vote “Ought Not to Pass” on this legislation.
Thank you for your consideration.
Paul O. Dillon
Exeter, Maine
Micah 6:8
May 1, 2023

