Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am 
Peggy Robinson. I live in Houlton. I am opposed to LD 1619, “An Act to Improve Maine’s 
Reproductive Privacy Laws,” which is sponsored by Rep. Talbot Ross. 
I’m here today on behalf of a segment of our population that has been 
dehumanized. I speak of the innocent preborn babies in their mothers womb. 
Abortion robs the innocent unborn child of the protection afforded to the 
most hardened criminal under the 8“‘ Amendment - Protection from “cruel and unusual punishment ”. 
Abortion is cruel and barbaric as it dismembers the tiny body and crushes the scull. According to Dr. 
Donna Harrison, executive director of AAPOG the pain-capability of babies at only 20 weeks gestation 
is almost indistinguishable from that of an already-born human being. The baby at 20 weeks IS pain- 
capable. 
Don’t comfort yourself by thinking “it’s not true—it’s not that bad” . It is true and it’s worse than you 
can imagine. I recommend to you, The Silent Scream. A 1984 documentary, narrated by Dr. Bernard 
Nathanson, a fonner abortionist. It depicts the baby’s reaction to the horror of abortion. He admitted 
that even back then they knew it was a baby. 
Bill 1619 is an all out assault upon the sanctity of human life never before experienced in our state. 
This bill is most grievous because it threatens the removal of the viability standard. It would legalize 
aborting a child up to the moment of birth here in our state of Maine. This extreme legislation is 
unconscionable and doesn’t reﬂect the principles and values of Mainers. The intention of the bill far 
exceeds the mantra of “just a cltunp of cells” being aborted. 
In 1973, Maine was the first state to denounce the Supreme Court’s ruling on Roe vs Wade. 
Now, after 50 years of unprecedented scientific advancement in embryonic development we are 
debating a bill that would allow full term abortion. 
We are on a slippery slope. We need to seriously consider where we are headed. With man at the helm 
we’ll continue dovm the slippery slope to who knows where? Humans should never usurp the authority 
of the Lord of Life. He alone has the authority to give and take away life. 
The unborn babies in Maine are counting on your choice to serve the public 
not kill the public. 
Kill the Bill! 
Not the Baby! 
Thank you for your time today. Please join me by voting ought not to pass on LD 1619
