Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Rachel Carll and I am a resident of New Gloucester. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I am the mother of four adult children. I am also the mother of an infant daughter who died way 
too soon. My husband and I found out halfway through our pregnancy that our little child had 
something wrong with her brain. We were informed she may not make it to birth and the most 
heartbreaking news was that even if she made it through the difﬁcult birth there was a one 
hundred percent chance she would not survive long after. We were given the “choice” to end the 
pregnancy. 
At this time my heart was breaking, and my head was spinning with how to take this news all in. 
It didn't take us any time to let the doctor know we would not terminate our little child. I would 
take whatever time I had with her to be her loving mom, no matter how little or how long that 
time was. For the next few months I’d sing to her, tenderly touch her over my belly, and let her 
know how much I loved her. I also knew the reality of the situation. I did not prepare a room or 
buy her clothes other than the ones she would be buried in. We also prepared her funeral. 
The day came when she, Talitha, arrived. It was a difficult day, and a beautiful day. It was the 
day our child would be born... It was also the day when we would have to let her go... The most 
beautiful little girl was given to us. A gift. She had beautiful lips, my ears, and the most tender 
little ﬁngers. We got to sing to her, kiss her over and over again, and tell her how much we loved 
her. My husband and I passed her back and forth for about an hour and twenty minutes when 
she quietly passed in my husband's loving arms. Way too short. I wanted... I needed... more 
time... but this was the time we were given. 
Her life was and still is so very precious. Precious to both my husband and I, as well as to her 
siblings and other family members. We were given a precious, valuable gift. Not all that is 
given to us in this crazy life is easy. It is so important to value ALL the children, even the 
ones that come at hard times, in difﬁcult circumstances or when they don't meet your 
original hopes or expectations. 
My husband was the child of a ﬁfteen-year-old mother and seventeen-year-old father. She was 
fourteen when they refused to abort him, against the recommendations of many. Because his 
parents preserved his life, my husband exists today and so do my children and grandchildren. 
Please, I ask you to hear me. Hear us all. Please, please do not pass such a megciless bill. 
For the lives of these valuable, innocent children. Please vote ought not to pass.
