Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:1 
Hello, my name is Rachael Ehle, l am a resident of Friendship, Maine. This is my ﬁrst time 
ever at a public hearing and l am here to oppose LD1619. 
As you can see, I am pregnant. My baby is 29 weeks old. He is a healthy and active baby, 
able to feel sensations of pleasure and pain. He can sense my hand on my belly and 
distinguish between my voice and my husband's voice. He is able to store memories and if 
he was born today, he would survive." 
This bill lays out plain and simple what it wants—-it wants to destroy viable human life. 
(According to the Oxford dictionary: under medicine; a fetus able to live after birth.) 
This is no longer a "clump of cells,” this is a fully developed and functional human being 
who is ready for the outside world. What this bill is advocating for is murder. This child can 
feel, taste, smell, and remember. 
We can and do strongly disagree on whether a human fetus should be terminated at any 
other stage in pregnancy, but l would think, that once a child is able to live outside the 
womb we would agree that this life should be protected, not killed. To take a human life is to 
murder. Viability is the only thing that the Maine state law requires for a human fetus not to 
be aborted. Think about tha.t for a moment; this bill wants to take VIABILJTY out so thata 
live and healthy fetus, capable of surviving outside the womb, can be terminated for any 
reason. 
My question for you legislators is this: if you vote for this bill, do you plan to watch one of 
these late term. abortions? 
My call to you is to listen to the small voice of conscience in your heart. Don’t sign into lawa 
bill that you could not stomach to waw take place. Before your pen hits the paper, think 
deeply about how this affects future generations. lf even a viable human unbom baby is not 
safe from termination, what's to stop it here‘? Next the elderly, then the disabled..before you 
know it, it will be anyone deemed unworthy of life. Granted, it‘s harder to kill a person whose 
voice is not silenced by amniotic ﬂuid. 
Please vote ought not to pass. Thank you.
