Statement of Rachel Criswell, MD, MS to the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
 
May 1, 2023  
 
LD 1619 and 1343 Ought to Pass  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the joint standing committee on 
Judiciary, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. 
 
My name is Dr. Rachel Criswell, and I am a full-spectrum family physician practicing in central 
and northern Maine. I hold a Medical Degree and Masters of Science in Biomedical Research 
from Columbia University, and I completed my residency here in Maine. Prior to becoming a 
physician, I worked as a humanitarian aid worker and researcher in maternal and child health, 
family planning, and abortion care around the globe.  
 
My colleagues have discussed the rich evidence that supports the safety and clinical 
appropriateness of the proposed legislation. I would like to highlight the impact this legislation 
will make to pregnant people and clinicians.   
 
In my practice, I deliver prenatal care, provide abortions, manage miscarriages, catch babies, 
and care for families as they grow. My work involves a lot of joy, and it also involves helping 
people navigate some of the most challenging moments of their lives. The current status of 
abortion care in Maine makes it difficult for me to care for my patients in the ways that they 
deserve.  
 
I have been trained to provide abortions later in pregnancy, and yet I have had to refer a patient 
to New Hampshire at 24 weeks who sought an abortion for lethal fetal anomalies. Rather than 
calling a trusted colleague to refer a different patient who had misdated her pregnancy at 28 
weeks, all I could offer her instead was a list of phone numbers for the clinics in the few states 
where she could receive care.  
 
Consider what it feels like as a physician to send a patient into the unknown like this. Not only 
are these moments challenging, they are time sensitive, and added barriers such as travel, 
inter-state referrals, and hotel costs add further unnecessary delays. As a family doctor, I take 
pride in knowing my patients well and being a bridge for them to the medical community. This 
becomes nearly impossible when patients are forced to travel out of state for care.  
 
LD1619 and 1343 offer a chance to re-imagine these scenarios: what if you could have your 
abortion at a clinic in your home town by a clinician whom your doctor knows? It does not take a 
lot of imagination to consider how much safer you might feel if you could have your care here in 
Maine. Please vote ought to pass to make care simpler, more compassionate, and safer for 
pregnant individuals who need it most.   
Rachel Criswell
Mount Vernon
LD 1619
Statement of Rachel Criswell, MD, MS to the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
May 1, 2023 
LD 1619 and 1343 Ought to Pass 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the joint standing 
committee on Judiciary, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Dr. Rachel Criswell, and I am a full-spectrum family physician practicing
in central and northern Maine. I hold a Medical Degree and Masters of Science in 
Biomedical Research from Columbia University, and I completed my residency here 
in Maine. Prior to becoming a physician, I worked as a humanitarian aid worker and 
researcher in maternal and child health, family planning, and abortion care around the 
globe. 
My colleagues have discussed the rich evidence that supports the safety and clinical 
appropriateness of the proposed legislation. I would like to highlight the impact this 
legislation will make to pregnant people and clinicians.  
In my practice, I deliver prenatal care, provide abortions, manage miscarriages, catch 
babies, and care for families as they grow. My work involves a lot of joy, and it also 
involves helping people navigate some of the most challenging moments of their 
lives. The current status of abortion care in Maine makes it difficult for me to care for 
my patients in the ways that they deserve. 
I have been trained to provide abortions later in pregnancy, and yet I have had to refer
a patient to New Hampshire at 24 weeks who sought an abortion for lethal fetal 
anomalies. Rather than calling a trusted colleague to refer a different patient who had 
misdated her pregnancy at 28 weeks, all I could offer her instead was a list of phone 
numbers for the clinics in the few states where she could receive care. 
Consider what it feels like as a physician to send a patient into the unknown like this. 
Not only are these moments challenging, they are time sensitive, and added barriers 
such as travel, inter-state referrals, and hotel costs add further unnecessary delays. As 
a family doctor, I take pride in knowing my patients well and being a bridge for them 
to the medical community. This becomes nearly impossible when patients are forced 
to travel out of state for care. 
LD1619 and 1343 offer a chance to re-imagine these scenarios: what if you could 
have your abortion at a clinic in your home town by a clinician whom your doctor 
knows? It does not take a lot of imagination to consider how much safer you might 
feel if you could have your care here in Maine. Please vote ought to pass to make care
simpler, more compassionate, and safer for pregnant individuals who need it most.  

