Madam Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
I am writing to urge you to oppose LD1619, which seeks to amend Maine's abortion laws. As a 
constituent and as a future physician, I believe that every human life is valuable and should be 
protected, from conception until natural death. 
I am particularly concerned about the removal of the word "viability" from the current law. This change 
would allow for abortions to be performed at any point during pregnancy, including late-term abortions, 
which permits the destruction of a viable human life. Removing the word 'viability' would create 
ambiguity and permit late-term abortions, potentially allowing a baby to be born and left to die without 
medical intervention after an unsuccessful abortion. The removal of the word "viability" in this bill 
disregards the sacredness of human life and undermines the value of every person, no matter their 
stage of development. Life begins at conception and that every unborn child deserves protection and 
the right to life regardless of the circumstances that surround their conception. They have no voice so 
these children rely on us to be their voice and protection. 
I am particularly concerned by the potential implications of this bill regarding the care of infants who 
survive abortion attempts. The bill does not explicitly require medical care for infants who survive 
abortion attempts, which is unacceptable. Every life, born or unborn, deserves access to medical care 
and protection. As a future physician it is my duty to fight for access to medical care for all humans, 
including those who cannot speak out for their rights or defend themselves. 
Additionally, as a current medical student, a former clinical technician, and a future physician, I am 
deeply concerned for the diminishing of health standards in Maine related to LD1619. To allow an 
unlicensed individual who is not a physician, physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse 
to perform a medical procedure especially when it is not necessary for preservation of life or health of 
the mother is not only dangerous but it shows a lack of health care stewardship in our state. To be an 
unlicensed medical professional performing elective surgery that would destroy a growing infant and 
potentially risk the mother’s life without any repercussions on the part of the individual performing the 
procedure is reckless. As a future physician I do not want to see my home state damage the health of 
our citizens by allowing for the unlicensed, and potentially untrained, practice of surgical medicine 
without repercussions. 
I urge you to oppose LD1619 and any legislation that seeks to diminish the protection of human life in 
our state and to allow the practice of surgery by unlicensed individuals without penalties for their 
actions. Thank you for your attention to this matter. 
Sincerely, 
Rachelle Mendola 
Rachelle Mendola
South Berwick
LD 1619
Madam Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
I am writing to urge you to oppose LD1619, which seeks to amend Maine's abortion 
laws. As a constituent and as a future physician, I believe that every human life is 
valuable and should be protected, from conception until natural death.
I am particularly concerned about the removal of the word "viability" from the current
law. This change would allow for abortions to be performed at any point during 
pregnancy, including late-term abortions, which permits the destruction of a viable 
human life. Removing the word 'viability' would create ambiguity and permit 
late-term abortions, potentially allowing a baby to be born and left to die without 
medical intervention after an unsuccessful abortion. The removal of the word 
"viability" in this bill disregards the sacredness of human life and undermines the 
value of every person, no matter their stage of development. Life begins at conception
and that every unborn child deserves protection and the right to life regardless of the 
circumstances that surround their conception. They have no voice so these children 
rely on us to be their voice and protection.
I am particularly concerned by the potential implications of this bill regarding the care
of infants who survive abortion attempts. The bill does not explicitly require medical 
care for infants who survive abortion attempts, which is unacceptable. Every life, born
or unborn, deserves access to medical care and protection. As a future physician it is 
my duty to fight for access to medical care for all humans, including those who 
cannot speak out for their rights or defend themselves.
Additionally, as a current medical student, a former clinical technician, and a future 
physician, I am deeply concerned for the diminishing of health standards in Maine 
related to LD1619. To allow an unlicensed individual who is not a physician, 
physician assistant, or advanced practice registered nurse to perform a medical 
procedure especially when it is not necessary for preservation of life or health of the 
mother is not only dangerous but it shows a lack of health care stewardship in our 
state. To be an unlicensed medical professional performing elective surgery that 
would destroy a growing infant and potentially risk the mother’s life without any 
repercussions on the part of the individual performing the procedure is reckless. As a 
future physician I do not want to see my home state damage the health of our citizens 
by allowing for the unlicensed, and potentially untrained, practice of surgical 
medicine without repercussions.
I urge you to oppose LD1619 and any legislation that seeks to diminish the protection 
of human life in our state and to allow the practice of surgery by unlicensed 
individuals without penalties for their actions. Thank you for your attention to this 
matter.
Sincerely,
Rachelle Mendola

