§%g;;Gmail 
(no subject) 
1 message g 
Nick Bessette <njtma2002@gmail.com> Mon, May 1, 2023 at 9:17 AM 
To: njtma2002@gmail.com 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, 
My name is Rebekah Chapman from Norway, Maine and l am testifying in opposition of LD 1619, "An act to 
improve Maine's reproductive privacy laws." 
Hi l'm here today speaking on the behalf of US citizens that cannot speak for themselves but are just 
important in this country and in this world as you and I. 
I am speaking for the unborn as well as my fellow sisters and friends. Women my age that have been 
misguided and lied to, but that will have a life changing experience that will affect them for the rest of their 
lives. lt is easy to say and I have heard it often that "there are cases where the child's life could cost the 
mother's life.”Current law already allows for medical necessity for stillbirth, ectopic pregnancy and related 
complications. Maine's current law allows abortion to the point of viability about 24 weeks gestation and in 
deemed medically necessary cases. This bill is extreme and completely unnecessary. To allow babies in the 
womb to be aborted up until the moment of birth is clearly saying that murder of the youngest, most innocent 
citizens of Maine is acceptable. With the exception of medical concerns, there is no valid excuse to pass this 
bill into law. 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, 
My name is Raquel Chapman from Norway, Maine and I am testifying in opposition of LD 1619, "An act to 
improve Maine's reproductive privacy laws." 
l am asking you today to think of the people that will forever be affected by this. 
l'm stand here today in opposition to the dramatic change this bill would bring. 
Maine's current law allows abortion to the point of viability about 24 weeks gestation and in deemed medically 
necessary cases. This bill is extreme and completely unnecessary. To allow babies in the womb to be aborted 
up until the moment of birth is clearly saying that murder of the youngest, most innocent citizens of Maine is 
acceptable. With the exception of medical concerns, there is no valid excuse to pass this bill into law.
\
