Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Rebekah Carmichael, and I am a resident of Saint Albans. I am testifying in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I am the mother of two beautiful children. I was advised to get an abortion when I was pregnant with my 
daughter, because I was told that she would have no brain function. Today, she is a happy, healthy 16-
month-old who speaks hundreds of words, plays and laughs and sings, and is developmentally just like 
any other child. I am so glad that I did not end her dynamic and amazing life. 
As I ponder the suggestion that we should expand abortion access in our state, I have been considering 
some of the other things that have happened in the history of our country. The things in the forefront of 
my mind right now are the crimes committed against the American Indians in the name of establishing a 
civilized society, and the crimes committed against Black people in the name of legal slavery. Many of 
the tremendous problems our society is trying to remedy right now are the repercussions we face 
because of our government sanctioning such atrocities.  
Even after we as a society realized how wrong it was to treat Black people and American Indians as less 
than human, we still continued to make some terrible mistakes. The American Academy of Pediatrics 
waited until 1987 to recognize the ability of infants to feel pain, and to declare the importance of 
surgeons using anesthetics for infants. This may shock us, and yet today, we are considering a bill which 
subtly suggests that full term babies cannot feel pain prior to being born. I would like to ask everyone 
present to consider the fact that unborn babies with fully developed nerves feel the exact same levels of 
pain as the newborn babies in 1986 who were undergoing surgeries with no anesthesia. 
Someday down the road, our children are going to finally accept all of the scientific and medical studies 
regarding the development of unborn babies, and they are going to be mourning the inhumane acts that 
we justified as legal. They will be desperately trying to fix these mistakes, just as we are now attempting 
to fix the mistakes of our past. What a greater burden we will place upon future generations by 
legalizing an even worse situation for our posterity to someday try to remedy. 
May we each have the courage and integrity to take a stand and to help create an enlightened and truly 
civilized society. 
Rebekah Carmichael
St. Albans
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Rebekah Carmichael, and I am a 
resident of Saint Albans. I am testifying in opposition to LD 1619. 
I am the mother of two beautiful children. I was advised to get an abortion when I was
pregnant with my daughter, because I was told that she would have no brain function. 
Today, she is a happy, healthy 16-month-old who speaks hundreds of words, plays 
and laughs and sings, and is developmentally just like any other child. I am so glad 
that I did not end her dynamic and amazing life. 
As I ponder the suggestion that we should expand abortion access in our state, I have 
been considering some of the other things that have happened in the history of our 
country. The things in the forefront of my mind right now are the crimes committed 
against the American Indians in the name of establishing a civilized society, and the 
crimes committed against Black people in the name of legal slavery. Many of the 
tremendous problems our society is trying to remedy right now are the repercussions 
we face because of our government sanctioning such atrocities.  
Even after we as a society realized how wrong it was to treat Black people and 
American Indians as less than human, we still continued to make some terrible 
mistakes. The American Academy of Pediatrics waited until 1987 to recognize the 
ability of infants to feel pain, and to declare the importance of surgeons using 
anesthetics for infants. This may shock us, and yet today, we are considering a bill 
which subtly suggests that full term babies cannot feel pain prior to being born. I 
would like to ask everyone present to consider the fact that unborn babies with fully 
developed nerves feel the exact same levels of pain as the newborn babies in 1986 
who were undergoing surgeries with no anesthesia. 
Someday down the road, our children are going to finally accept all of the scientific 
and medical studies regarding the development of unborn babies, and they are going 
to be mourning the inhumane acts that we justified as legal. They will be desperately 
trying to fix these mistakes, just as we are now attempting to fix the mistakes of our 
past. What a greater burden we will place upon future generations by legalizing an 
even worse situation for our posterity to someday try to remedy. 
May we each have the courage and integrity to take a stand and to help create an 
enlightened and truly civilized society. 
