May 1, 2023 
Madam Giair, Mister Chair and Honorabie Members of the iudiciary tlommittee, . 
Thank you for holding these hearings and allowing ail who are concerned about this very weighty matter to have an 
opportunity to weigh in on the subject, and in particular LD 1619. 
My name is Rebecca Pringle-Gleske, l'm from Berwick, Maine. 
For starters - shame on Governor Mills for introducing this legislation. This is a very divisive move on your part. lt 
betrays the trust that many of the people who voted for you her put in you when you indited that you would not 
change Maine's abortion law. it was wrong of you to pull us into this divisive mess. 
Maine's current abortion law allows for abortion up to viability (24 weeks) and later ifthe health of the mother is 
endangered. This strikes a balance between prolife and prochoice citizens. Actually, it's on the more extreme side of 
what most of the rest of the worid aliows. 37 of the Work?’ s about 195 countries ban abortion. Most of the rest allow 
for it up to about 12 weeks, the ﬁrst trimester. A hand fuil of countries aliow for abortion up to viability, 22-24 weeks. 
Only 6 countries allow abortion ‘til birth. 
We all know THAT what's growing inside a pregnant woman is a human being. In Maine, we have said it's ok to kill it; 
abort its growth, so iong as it could not survive on its own. However, LB 1639 goes beyond kiiiing somethings that can't 
survive on its own. We are now proposing to kill a iive person who can survive once separated from its mother. There's 
no doubt this is murder. And a brutal horriﬁc murder at that. N0, we didn’t sign up for this. 
We say, "My body, my choice" , but after viability there are 2 distinct people. 
if the little tyke could speak for itseif, it wouid it say, “My body, my choioe To Live!" 
Shame on you Janet Mills. 
Our son's wife became pregnant. Around 4 ii months she started taii-ting about aborting the baby. She almost did it at7 
months. I ﬂew to Florida and brought them back here where we could support them. She went through many bouts of 
“S love this baby” , followed by "I want this out of me nowl“ . She went to the ER at least once a week to be seen for 
some exotic aliment she had read about. The medical team decided that for the mothefs health they would deliver the 
baby 3 weeks early. l got the privilege of cutting her umbilical cord. She was an absolutely beautiful baby girl. Perfect in 
every way —just over 6 pounds- She is now almost 4 years oid, and a marvel of chatty excitement and inteiligence. i 
can't imagine our serfs life without her. , 
l get ill thinking of how close that beautiful child came to being killed just before she came into this world. The horrible 
painful way she would have died — either by being chemically burnt to death, or by being cut up and sucked out. The 
horriﬁc pain - makes me want to puke. This is wrong. This proposed bill is wrong. Trust your gut. Stop this madness 
right here. Thank you. 
From the Declaration of Independence: 
We hold these truths to be seif-eviknt, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator uﬁth 
certain unalienable Rights, that among these are life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.- — 
Abortion is not a right. But Life IS a right. Abortion after viability is definitely taking a Life. In our gut, we know it is 
wrong. Most of the worid knows ifs wrong. Little chiidren how it's wrong- it was wrong of Governor Janet Mills to 
propose this dwisive bill. Piease stop it here.
