Renee Fortin
Lewiston
LD 1619
Dear Judiciary Committee Chairs and Members, 
I am writing to appeal to you concerning LD 1619
I will begin with my appeal to heaven, and declare Isaiah 33:22, LORD, You Who are
our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King, MOST HIGH GOD, thank You for saving us!
Thank You Father for opening minds, and hearts, in order that LIFE may be chosen.  
Amen
Heavenly Father, Your word says, "This day I call heaven and earth as witnesses 
against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; now 
therefore choose life, that both you and your children may live. Deut. 30:19
Again Father, Your word states in Isaiah 10:1-3 “Woe (judgment is coming) to those 
who legislate evil decrees and statutes, and to those who constantly record unjust and 
oppressive decisions, so as to deprive the needy of justice, and rob the poor of my 
people, of rightful claims.” Like the claims of, (Right to LIFE, LIBERTY and the 
PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS) Without life, how can we enjoy anything else?
Finally, Lord God Almighty, You are God who takes vengeance on Your enemies. 
It’s time for You to punish evil! Let Your rays of revelation ~ light shine from Your 
people and pierce the conscience of those who wish to enact wicked laws and punish 
them. It’s time to arise as Judge of all the earth; arise to punish the proud with the 
penalty they deserve! How much longer will You sit back and watch the wicked 
triumph in their evil, boasting in all that is wrong?  Listen they are bragging among 
themselves, big in their own eyes, all because of the crimes they’ve committed among
the innocent of Your people! See how they’re crushing those who love you, God, 
cruelly oppressing those who belong to you.  Murder is in their thoughts all day long. 
They say to themselves, “The LORD God doesn’t see this. So You’d better watch out,
better wise up! Why would you act like God doesn’t exist? Do you really think that 
God can’t hear the cries of the innocent?  God isn’t hard of hearing; He hears all of 
their cries. God isn’t blind. He who made the eye has superb vision and He is 
watching all that you do. The Lord Who deals with and punishes nations will surely 
punish you! It’s obvious to all: You oh Lord, will have nothing to do with the corrupt 
rulers who pass laws that empower evil and defeat what is right. For they gang up 
against the lovers of righteousness and condemn the innocent to death. But I know 
that all their evil plans will boomerang back onto them. Every plot they hatch will 
simply seal their own doom. For You my God, You will destroy them, giving them 
what they deserve.   Psalm 94 Passion Translation
Dear Committee members, you all have a choice! None of these judgments will 
belong to you, if you decide to turn from the platform of death, the culture of death 
and this day, choose life!  Choose blessing, rather than curse! Listen, and be wise, 
LIVE! God’s words are life to those who choose to believe them.  Vote, “ought not to 
pass” on LD 1619
Because of His great love for each of you, I respectfully submit this testimony. 
Sincerely,   Renee Fortin 

