Rhiannon  Olson
Machias
LD 1619
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
My name is Rhiannon Olson and I live in Machias, Maine.
I am writing this testimony in opposition of the LD-1619 bill, hoping to touch the 
hearts of those who are in authority to vote on the LD-1619 bill.
Taking the life of innocent children in the womb at any moment.. children that God 
has created in His image, not only breaks His heart and robs those children of an 
opportunity at life, but also inflicts extensive damage and trauma to the physical, 
mental, and emotional health of the women getting this procedure. I have 
unfortunately experienced the effects of such regrettable actions and wish that there 
had been someone who had cared enough to have a conversation with me. Someone 
who cared enough to speak up and tell me the truth. Someone who had cared enough 
to educate me, support me, tell me the other many options I had to choose from and 
prevent that irreversible decision from ever being able to be made. But by the love 
and grace of Jesus Christ do I stand today forgiven, with a changed life, heart, and a 
conviction to stand up for righteousness. 
Do we not love our children? Do we not love our women? This scary, extreme, 
insidious, and radical move towards passing the LD-1619 bill will be an open door, 
allowing and supporting a bigger and darker agenda in this world. Satan seeks to 
steal, kill, and destroy anything of God and will use whatever means he must to do so.
Please see past the Pro Choice movement of hurt, fearful, misguided, and ignorant 
people and see the bigger picture. Have compassion. Have mercy and please vote no 
on the LD-1619 bill. Prevent this bill from becoming law and instead gear your 
support, funds, and education towards helping the children who do not have a voice in
the matter and the women who believe in this moment that abortion is the only way. 
Stand for Life. Stand for children. Stand for women. Stand for righteousness and 
please vote ought not to pass on the LD-1619 bill.
Thank you.
