May 1, 2023 
Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Rhonda Loncto. I live in Fletchers Landing Township, also known as 
Central Hancock. 
I am testifying today to request that you vote “ought not to pass” on bill LD 1619 
titled, “An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws”. 
At ﬁrst glance, the name of the bill sounds quite harmless but it is very misleading. 
Why not be honest with Maine taxpayers and have the title of the bill read “An Act 
to Terminate Viable Pre-born Babies, Without Penalties ” . The “Privacy” angle 
sounds great to most of us. Who doesn't want privacy? That is what we sign every 
time we go see our doctor, you know... “H1PPA”? 
Currently, here in the “great” state of Maine, abortions are allowed up to 24 weeks 
gestation, or 6 months; a time frame that was determined that the baby could not 
live outside of the womb. But that is not true anymore. Many babies have lived at 
22 weeks, including a recent report where a baby born at 22 weeks, weighing only 
one pound, 2 ounces, has deﬁed the odds and is now at home, hopefully beginning a 
wonderful life for many years to come. 
LD 1619 eliminates the “penalties ” . I question the reason for this? The current 
abortion bill states: “Any person not so licensed who knowingly performs an 
abortion on another person or any person who knowingly assists a nonlicensed 
person to perform an abortion on another person is guilty of a Class C crime.” 
What was wrong with this portion of the bill? Does it need to be stricken from the 
bill as it would hinder access to abortions at anytime, anywhere, for any reason, 
performed by anyone? 
I will close with this prayer- Dear Heavenly Father, I lift up these precious souls 
who have been placed in authority over the people. They will be hearing or have 
already heard testimony by many who are either for or against this proposed bill. 
Lord, speak to them as we are speaking up for life. May they be guided by Your 
wisdom. Give them boldness to also “speak up for life” . In Jesus name, Amen. 
Thank you and may God bless you all. 
Rhonda Loncto 
207 Fletchers Landing Rd. 
Fletchers Landing TWP, ME 04605 207-873-8283 C 207-667-6167 H
