Ladies a nd Gentlemen of  the J udiciary  Commi ttee,
My name is Robera  Manter a nd I live in Fay ette.
First, I ’m not here  to make any one fe el guilty.  We’ve a ll made mistakes base d on faulty
information or motives. We can’ t chang e the pa st, but there ca n alway s be for giveness whe n we
chang e wha t we will do in the future.
I am alwa ys a bit suspicious when the title of a bill doesn’t re ally say what the bill will do.  W hat
is being  hidden, and why ?  In this case, the bill’s title say s it’s to im prove Ma ine’s re productive
privac y laws.  No proble m there.  See ing tha t title, I would not expect it to be any thing I  would
object to.
But wha t else does the bill do?   It allows abortion af ter viability  whene ver “ in the profe ssional
judgme nt of a phy sician” it is “nec essar y.”  How c an it ever  be “ne cessa ry” to kill a baby  that
could survive outside the w omb?   Even if the mother ’s life will be save d by taking  the baby
befor e term, (and such c ases a re extremely  rare,) how  can the  brutal murder  of the ba by be
“necessar y”?  
It is a well established princ iple of law tha t judicial proce eding s require  disinterested pa rties.  A
judge  is deemed to ha ve a c onflict of intere st if they  have a  possible financia l interest in the re sult
of the c ase. Should the judgment of “necessity” be left up to a doctor who may profit from the
abortion?
The third thing  this bil l does is to remove the pe nalties for a n unlicence d person pe rforming a n
abortion.  F or years we’ve  been told, “Saf e, leg al, and r are.” How doe s this bil l do that?   Making
it lega l was supposed to eliminate da ngerous ba ck alley  abortions.  So why  remove  the pena lties
for abortion perf ormed by  a non-lice nced pe rson, unless the objec tive is to lega lize abor tion at all
costs?   
Does “ reproductive priva cy” mea n the per son who perf orms back a lley abortions ca n continue to
do so without fear  of prose cution for the da mage they  may  do to the mother as we ll as the child?  
Whose interests does this bill really  protec t?  Not the mother’s inter ests, and ce rtainly  not those
of the c hild.  But when doe s it become a  child?   Certainly  by the time of viability  it can no long er
be re ferred to a s a “lump of tissue,” but a t what point does it become huma n life?
Imagine y ou’re  out hunting and y ou see something  move behind the bushe s.  You ca n’t be sure  if
it’s a dee r or y our hunting  buddy .  If you would pull the trigg er, ple ase raise y our hand.  I f it
might be some  strang er or strang er’s child, would y ou pull the trigg er?  What if it was a per son
with Down’s sy ndrome, or some  serious disability ?  What if the person wa s conce ived in rape ?  
I hope y ou would all ag ree that y ou would not pull the trigg er if the re were any chanc e that doing
so would take any human life.  You must be sure of your target .
At what ag e does a  person a chieve  value a s a human be ing?  Babies have  survived outside the
womb at six  months of ge stational ag e.  Babies’ lives ha ve bee n saved by  surg ery inside the
womb at 4 ½ months.  Can you be sure at what point it becomes a  human life?  
EVERY per son should have a r ight to choose  what’s done  with their own body .  I chose not to
have a  COVI D booster a fter I  learned it could ca use me to have  another  stroke.  B ut is a g rowing
fetus the woma n’s body , or is it a separ ate human be ing w ith a rig ht to life?   Is the woman g iven
the information she ne eds?  Why  all the re sistance to showing  the mother a n ultrasound?   Can
she be sure ?
From the moment of conc eption, there  is new DNA  that deter mines the baby ’s sex, blood t ype,
hair c olor, ey e color , skin tone, and countless other  features indepe ndent of the mother ’s.  At
three  to six  weeks from conc eption, the baby ’s hea rt beg ins beating , at a diff erent rate f rom the
mother’s.  So is it part of the mother’ s body , or is it a separ ate life , a unique individual?   Can you
be sure?
Science  define s a living thing  as having  one or more  cells, the a bility  to take in nourishment and
to grow, the pre sence  of DNA  to pass to the next gene ration, and the  ability  to respond to stimuli . 
All but the last of these is pre sent from the moment of c onception.  Scienc e shows by  16 wee ks
the baby  can he ar.   Tw ins interact with ea ch other  in the womb by  week 14. There  are touch
sensors on the ba by’s hands by  week 12 and on his fac e by week 8.  We keep lea rning .  Science
shows that from the moment of c onception ther e is a de veloping  life, and the  DNA pr oves that
life is human.  So isn’t abortion the taking  of a huma n life?   Can you be sure?
 If there is ANY  doubt, please don’t pull the trigger .  Please prote ct mothers and ba bies (at the
very least, fr om late term a bortions and bac k alley  abortions) by  voting L D 1619 Oug ht not to
pass.
Thank y ou.
