LD 1619         Robin Smith   Hampden Me 
 
 
 
I am a woman, designed in every cell of my body to nurture life. It 
is against nature, and against nurture to destroy a life in a mother’s 
womb. 
 
As a younger woman, I thought about the phrase, “It’s just a blob 
of tissue.” Or is it?  One day, I was given the opportunity to peruse 
a passage that cleared things up for me, real good! 
 
I was struck by the appropo’ness of Psalm 139, verses 13 – 16.   
  
(Verses 13- 14)  
 “For you formed my inward parts: you wove me together in my 
mother’s womb. I will give thanks to You for I am fearfully and 
wonderfully made: Wonderful are Your works, and my soul knows 
it very well.”  
 
 (Verse 15) “My frame was not hidden from You when I was made 
in secret, and skillfully wrought in the depths of the earth.”  
 
(Verse 16) “ Your eyes have seen my unformed substance; and in 
Your book were all written the days that were ordained for me, 
when as yet there was not one of them.” 
 
(Well, I’ll tell you, back in the day  when they were talking about  
just that ‘blob of tissue’ -- this  verse cleared up everything! 
  
 “Your eyes have seen my unformed substance;  
  And in Your book were all written the days that were ordained for 
me, when as yet there were NONE of them”! 
 
  This is truth being spoken into our lives.  -- From God’s Word! -- 
It  sure is convincing truth!  1) that HE sees our unformed 
substance 2) that He values us and has already established the 
number of days we are to live 3) before we have even been 
birthed! 
 
The language of the pro-“choice” movement is carefully crafted to 
give women the idea that it is only their body. Well, whereas it is a 
single individual’s body before conception, it becomes two 
individuals at conception.  A miracle occurs! -- A life begins! 
Science has recognized that life begins at conception. 
 
A woman needs to be encouraged to protect that life. There are 
wonderful support systems for the woman who may find herself 
pregnant unexpectedly. Resource centers and Mothers Homes. 
Counseling for men and women who have faced the awful tragedy 
of abortion. Millions of people have been lost to this holocaust. 
Indeed, it is the genocide of the unborn and those newly born. How 
terrifying  for a little one to feel the pain, to be extracted from his 
mother’s womb, to be torn apart, to have his skull crushed, to have 
his life nullified, in a room surrounded by people who are 
supposed to protect him. 
   Abortion is an evil plan foisted upon the American people and 
other nations as well. So many individuals have been lost to this 
holocaust!   
 I am totally against expanding the  legal right to abort a baby in 
any way, shape or form. That would include LD 1619, LD776, and 
LD1343.   
 
 If God can see your unformed substance and has secured all of 
your days that you are to live in this world,  before you even begin 
to commence your entry,  you better believe that He loves you, He 
values you and has great purpose for your life as well as for  your 
loved ones, and all little ones.  
                                   Robin R. Smith 
