l am Robin Pellerin and l am testifying against LD 1619, “An Act to Improve Maine's 
Reproductive Privacy Laws." 
The world has a long and sordid history of cultures that dispose of unwanted children 
and perform barbaric practices on other humans for unconscionable reasons. In Rome, 
unwanted babies were left to die on the banks of the Tiber River. ln Greece, unwanted babies 
were left out on the plains to suffer starvation and exposure. ln Phoenicia, you could place your 
child in the outstretched arms of the god Molech, whose stiff, straight arms would let these 
innocent children fall immediately into the fire below to suffer the agony of being burned alive. 
ln more recent history, cannibalism and brutal violence in the South Pacific was claiming 
the lives of untold thousands. The Chinese were binding the feet of baby girls, so each foot was 
about 3 inches long, and every step was painful. ln Africa, some tribes were mutilating the 
vaginas of baby girls, so that sex would alway be painful, and therefore, perhaps, she would be 
less likely to seek out sexual partners other than her husband. 
ln many areas of the world, a civilizing and dignifying influence came in primarily when 
Judeo-Christian values entered the culture. ln Rome, it was Christians who waited by the Tiber 
to pick up and care for abandoned babies. ln the South Pacific, the message of Christianity that 
told there was no need to kill babies caused one elderly Pacific lslander to cry out, “Oh if l had 
known these blessings were in store for us! Then l would have saved my children. l shall die 
childless, though l have been the father of nineteen children. ” 
Again, an important trailblazer in bringing liberty and justice to the innocent and 
oppressed came in the late 18th century in the form of the British MP William Wilberforce, who 
dedicated his life to ending the slave trade, and reforming the base injustices of society. We 
have many examples of cultures moving away from their barbaric practices toward a society 
that dignifies people, rich and poor, young and old, able or disabled. 
The United States was a nation founded on principles ofjustice, tranquility, welfare, and 
liberty for all of its citizens. This was a wonderful opportunity to place these virtues at the core 
of our nation's founding documents, and its culture. 
LD 1619, is an opportunity for us in a first-world, civilized country to go a step beyond 
foot binding, beyond vaginal mutilation alone, and enshrine in our state law, anachronistic and 
barbaric practices that only belong to the bygone times when people believed that their cruel 
deities required this for their sun/ival. lt is an embarrassment to civilized society that this 
measure is being considered. Late term abortion, is a gross injustice, and an appalling practice. 
There is no reconciling the mutilation and killing of a fully-formed baby in the womb with 
the constitutional principle of securing, and l quote our constitution, “the Blessings of Liberty to 
ourselves and our Posterity."
