Roland M. Arsenault
Mexico
LD 1619
Dear honorable members of the committee;
Abortion in and of itself is a stain on the fabric of America and this great State of 
Maine.  But late term abortion as proposed in this bill is an abomination to our 
Creator, and should be to all of us - His creation as well.  It is written in His Word 
Deuteronomy 30:15-19: “See, I have set before you today life and good, death and 
evil.  If you you obey the commandments of the LORD your God that I command you
today, by loving the LORD your God, by walking in Hos ways, and by keeping His 
commandments and His statutes and His rules, then you shall live and multiply, and 
the LORD your God will bless you in the land that you are entering to take possession
of it.  But I’d your heart turns away, and you will not hear, but are drawn away to 
worship other gods and serve them, I DECLARE TO YOU TODAY, THET YOU 
WILL SURELY PERISH.  (Emphasis is mine.). You shall not live long in the land 
that you are going over the Jordan to enter and posses. I call heaven and earth to 
witness against you today, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and 
curse.  Therefore, CHOOSE LIFE, (Emphasis is mine) that you and your offspring 
may live, loving the LORD your God, OBEYING HIS VOICE (Emphasis mine) and 
holding fast TO HIM.  (Emphasis is mine .)
These are the Words of God, not mine.   This week is the celebration of the Second 
Passover which some believe to be the actual Passover and Easter season based on the
positioning of the sun, moon and stars as directed in ancient writings.  The Savior of 
the world, who is the Word of God, laid down His life for all mankind so that those 
who believe in Him will have their sins forgiven.  In the Olivet discourse, Jesus 
promised He would come again to judge the living and the dead.  His return is rapidly
approaching.  
I implore you for the sake of all residents and not part of the population to be on the 
RIGHT side of this.  Please choose LIFE - not death.
May The LORD God be with you and an s send His Holy Spirit to guide you all in 
Hos most righteous ways.
Peace and grace,
Roland M. Arsenault
