Good afternoon Madam Chair and members of the Judiciary committee. 
My name is Ron Merrill from the great town of Benton and l speak in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it. 
The God who made us had told us in Psalm 106:29-42 about historic child 
sacrifice. Sewers are polluted with the blood of innocence and God is giving 
us over to be ruled by those who hate us. 
God will not bless a land that allows the sacrifice of his babies. We need to 
give God a reason to show this country mercy. It starts with eradicating 
child sacrifice. God is loving and just. When we use our tax dollars to have 
this state and countries around the world do abortions — well, our silence is 
giving consent. People try to guilt us into just going along with the 
madness. Just be Christlike. We must not tolerate anything 
peoplelgovernment say if it’s contrary to God’s Word. 
According to Marc Newman in his book Contenders, he says, 
“You may think abortion clinics are non-profit medical facilities that provide 
women’s healthcare. l cannot blame anyone for having such a thought. The 
public relations machine of Planned Parenthood, using our tax dollars to 
fuel it’s demonic message, has build one of the world’s most pervasive and 
trusted brands. lt has all the traits of a benign, non-profit enterprise. It has 
become extremely skilled at hiding its core purpose. It is notjust me that 
asserts that. Abortion providers hide what they really do. As early as 1970,3 
years before the Roe v. Wade decision, the editors of California Medicine, 
the journal of the CA Medical Association, were not at all shy about 
revealing their strategy. ” V 
I have included that article along with my testimony. 
ln closing, silence in the face of evil is itself evil, not to speak, is to speak, 
not to act, is to act. God will not hold us guiltless. Sexual promiscuity is 
followed by killing innocent children. Ancient Israel knew this then, we know 
it now. 
l urge you to vote ‘ought not to pass LD 1619.
the thymus in myasthenia is itseli the victim of 
an autoimmune process - “thymitis ” - ‘which re- 
leases a humoral substance causing neuromuscu- 
lar block. This substance is considered to bea 
normal constituent of thymus rather than an anti- 
body. (In this conteitt muscle antibodies are epi- 
phenomena resulting from the coincidental pres- 
ence of primitive muscle-like cells in the thymus, 
so that some antibodies against thymus also react 
with muscle.) Coldstein and his colleagues have 
provided interesting experimental evidence which 
indirectly supports the idea that damage to the 
thymus by autoimmune mechanisms may lead to 
altered rieuromuscular transmission. “ There are, 
however, two objections which have not been 
fully answered. One is the incomplete success of 
thymectomy in curing inyasthenia. The other is 
the occurrence, in 15 reported cases, of myasthe- 
nia months or years after apparently total re- 
moval of a benign thym_oma.* Clearly the thymus 
has not yet unlocked all its secrets. 
ROBERT B. LAYZER, ,M.D. 
Department of Neurology 
Uniwuily _of California 
San Franc/no 
REFERENCES 
1. Kat: B: Nerve, Muscle and Synapse. New York City, McGraw- 
Hill Book Company, 1966 
2. Elmqvist D, Hofmlnn WW, Kugelberg J, e_t _al: An electro- 
physiological investigation of neuromuscular transmission in myasthe- 
nia gravis. I Physio! 17-6:417, 1964 _ 
3. Elmqvist D, Lambert EH: Detailed analysis of neutomuscular 
transmission in a patient with the myasthemc ‘syndrome sometimes 
associated with bronchogenlccatcinoma. Mayo Clin Proc -8:689, 1968 
4. Desmedt JE: Ptesyriaptic mechanisms in myasthenia gtavis. Ann 
NY Acad Sci 135:209. l966_ 
5. Strauss AIL, Smith CW, Cage GW, et al: Further studies on 
the specificity of presumed immune associations of rnyasthenia gtavis 
and consideration of gaossible pathogenic implications. Ann NY 
Acad Sci 135557, 196 
_ 6. Goldstein G, Hofmann WW: Electrophysiological changes sim- 
ilar to those of m astheniabfravis in rats with experimental auto- 
immune thymitis. {Neural eurosurg Psychiat 31:453. 1968 
7. Kimura J. Van Allen MW: Post-thymecmmy myasthenia grrivis. 
Neurology 1714]}, I967 A New Ethic for Medicine 
And Society 
THE TRADITIONAL VVEsTE1iN ETHIC has always 
placed great éinphasis on the intrinsic worth and 
equal value of every human life regardless of its 
stage or condition. This ethic has had the blessing 
of the Judeo-Christian heritage and has been the 
basis for most of our laws and much of our social 
policy. The reverence for each and every human 
life has also been a keystone of Western medicine 
and is the ethic which has caused physicians to 
try to preserve, protect, repair, prolong and en- 
hance every human life which comes under their 
surveillance. "This traditional ethic is still clearly 
dominant, but there is much to suggest that it is 
being eroded at its core and may eventually even 
be abandoned. This of course. will prodiice pro- 
found changes in Western medicine and in West- 
ern society. 
There are certain new facts and social realities 
which are becoming recognized, are widely dis- 
cussed in Western society and seem certain to 
undermine and transform this traditional ethic. 
They have come into being and into focus as the 
social by-products of unprecedented technologic 
progress and achievement. Of particular impor- 
tance are, first, the demographic data of human 
population expansion which tends to proceed un- 
controlled and at a geometric rate of progression; 
second, an ever growing ecological disparity be- 
tween the numbers of people and the resources 
available to support these numbers in the manner 
to which they are or would like to become ac- 
customed; and third, and perhaps most impor- 
tant, a quite new social emphasis on something 
which is beginning to be called the quality of 
life, a something which becomes possible for the 
C/\LlFORNlA MEDICINE 
The Western Journal of Medicine
ﬁrst time in human history because of scientiﬁc 
and technologic development. These are now 
being seen by _a growing segment of the public 
as realities which are within the power of humans 
to control and there is quite evidently an increas- 
ing determination to do this. 
What is not yet so clearly perceived is that in 
order to bring this about hard choices will have 
to be made with respect to what is to be pre- 
served and strengthened and what is not, and 
that this will of necessity violate and ultimately 
destroy the traditional Western ethic with all that 
this portends. It will become necessary and ac- 
ceptable to place relative rather than absolute 
values on such things as human lives, the use of 
scarce resources and the various elements which 
are to make up the quality of life or of living 
which is to be sought. This is quite distinctly at 
variance with the ]udeo-Christian ethic and car- 
ries serious philosophical, social, economic and 
political implications for Western society and 
perhaps for world society. 
The process of eroding the old ethic and-sub- 
stituting the new has already begun. It may be 
seen most clearly in changing attitudes toward 
human abortion. In deﬁance of the long held 
Western ethic of intrinsic and equal value for 
every human life regardless of its stage, condition 
or status, abortion is becoming accepted by so- 
ciety as moral, right and even necessary. It is 
worth noting that this shift in public attitude has 
affected the churches, the laws and public policy 
rather than the reverse. Since the old ethic has 
not yet been fully displaced it has been necessary 
to separate the idea of abortion from the idea of 
killing, which continues to be socially abhorrent. 
The result has been a curious avoidance of the 
scientiﬁc fact, which everyone really knows, that 
human life begins at conception and is contin- 
uous whether intra- or extra-uterine until death. 
The very considerable semantic gymnastics which 
are required ‘ to rationalize abortion as anything 
but taking a human life would be ludicrous if 
they were not often put forth under socially im- 
peccable auspices. It is suggested that this schizo- 
phrenic sort of subterfuge is necessary because 
while a new ethic is being accepted the old one 
has not yet been rejected. 
It seems safe to predict that the new demo- 
graphic, ecological and social realities and aspira- 
tions are so powerful that the new ethic of rela- 
tive rather than of absolute and equal values 
68 SEPTEMBER 1910 - ||3 - 3 will ultimately prevail as man exercises ever more 
certain and effective control over his numbers, 
and uses his always comparatively scarce re- 
sources to provide the nutrition, housing, eco- 
nomic support, education and health care in such 
ways as to achieve his desired quality of life and 
living. The criteria upon which these relative 
values are to be based will depend considerably 
upon whatever concept of the quality of life or 
living is developed. This may be expected to 
reﬂect the extent that quality of life is considered 
to be a function of personal fulﬁllment; of indi- 
vidual responsibility for the common welfare, 
the preservation of the environment, the better- 
ment of the species; and of whether or not, or to 
what extent, these responsibilities are to be exer- 
cised on a compulsory or voluntary basis. 
The part which medicine will play as all this 
develops is not yet entirely clear. That it will be 
deeply involved is certain. Medicine's role with 
respect to changing attitudes toward abortion 
may well be a prototype of what is to occur. 
Another precedent may be found in the part 
physicians have played in evaluating who is and 
who is not to be given costly long-term renal di- 
alysis. Certainly this has required placing rela- 
tive values on human lives and the impact of the 
physician to this decision process has been con- 
siderable. One may anticipate further develop- 
ment of these roles as the problems of birth con- 
trol and birth selection are extended inevitably to 
death selection and death control whether by the 
individual or by society, and further public and 
profession _al- determinations of when and when 
I1OlI t0 USC SCQICG I'6SOl.lI'C €S. 
Since the problems which the new demo- 
graphic, ecologic and social realities pose are 
fundamentally biological and ecological in nature 
and pertain to the survival and well-being of 
human beings, the participation of physicians and 
of the medical profession will be essential in 
planning and decision-making at many levels. 
No other discipline has the knowledge of human 
nature, human behavior, health and disease, and 
of what is involved in physical and mental well- 
being which will be needed. It is not too early 
for our profession to examine this new ethic, 
recognize it for what it is and will mean for 
human society, and prepare to apply it in a ra- 
tional development for the fulﬁllment and better- 
ment of mankind in what is almost certain to be 
a biologically oriented world society.
