Hello, MY NAME IS Rose Corriveau. I am from the Bangor area and I oppose Bill LD 1619. 
In January of 1986 at the age of 20 I found myself 12 weeks pregnant and quickly engaged to a noble 
man that I hardly knew. 
I was off to Stowe Vt on a ski vacation with the family I lived with and was a nanny for. As we arrived 
that night, I had cramps and bleeding and by the middle of the night I spent 2 hours in the bathroom 
having a miscarriage. I was horrified only because nobody else knew my secret. Several times I hearda 
knock on the door asking if I was ok. As soon as I was able to stand up, I stood staring into the toilet ata 
fully formed ”FETUS"—which surprisingly had a head, body, arms and legs. I hesitated, in disbelief, 
looking into the toilet at a baby. What was I supposed to do, I thought? 
So I pushed the handle and flushed my baby down a drainll I gave my ﬁancée back his ring, pretty much 
celebrated with relief and lived to my mid 50's without ever thinking too much of this event ever again. 
UNTlL....my daughter, almost 30 years later, had my grandson. He was precious, ten fingers and ten 
toes. Something inside of me triggered!!! I immediately knew the child I had lost was a baby boy. 
Emotions surfaced like I had never experienced before, along with shame at never acknowledging my 
baby. I was disappointed in myself for keeping this secret all these years from my entire family. I might 
not have had an abortion, but it certainly felt like it. I kept telling myself, it all happened naturally and it 
did. 
Now my feelings are so strong on what I've seen an abortion can do to our psyche! 
Did you know when pregnant the cells of the baby migrate into the mother's blood stream and then 
circles back into the baby and so this cycle continues. Many of these cells stay in the mother's body 
forever leaving a permanent imprint in the mother's tissues, bones, brain and skin. Even if a pregnancy 
doesn't go full term or even if you have an abortion, it does not go away peoplell 
Research also has shown that if a mother has an injury or illness during pregnancy that fetal cells can 
rush to that site and possibly repair it. HOW AMAZING ARE WE AS WOMAN? BUT, WE ARE NOT 
EQUIPPED TO FORGET FOREVER! I have a lot of friends and people I know who still, sadly, are yet to 
forgive themselves for the choices they made. When we play God and do not let nature take its course 
there are devastating repercussions. There can always be a plan B. 
I oppose this bill with every ﬁber of my being and hope you reconsider your vote. God has a plan for 
each and every one of us, good or bad. Whether you believe in Him or not, disposing of our babies like 
they never existed is not the humane answer .... ..even flushing them down the toilet. 
I love you my angel baby. 
Thank you.
