Page 1 of 2 TESTIMONY IN OPPOSTION TO  
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws  
LD 1619  
PRESENTED TO THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE  
May 1, 2023  
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee:  
 
My name is  Russell Brimmer .  I am  a resident and registered voter in Levant, 
Maine.   
 
I am testifying to oppose in the strongest possible terms LD 1619,  An Act to 
Improve Mai ne’s Reproductive Privacy Laws.   
 
Life begins at conception.  This is an incontrovertible fact of biology.   A human 
fertilized egg, an embryo, is a new human being.   
 
Many people of many different cultures believe that human life is sacred.  I share 
this belief.  Confucius  said, "What you do not wish upon yourself, extend not to 
others."   Jesus  said, “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.”   
 
There are many arguments t o support the killing of an unborn  baby, but they all 
pale considering  the right of every person to live.  Once that life starts…at 
conception…that new human person deserves the same respect that all humans 
deserve.  As the Preamble to our nation’s Declaration of Independences boldly 
state s, “All men…are endowed by their C reator  with certain unalienable rights, 
that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”  Yet, people w ith 
less power are treated with less respect.  People with no power are treated with 
no respect.  More and more, we live by the motto, “Might makes right.”   
 
Saddam Hussein ruled with fear, torture and death.  Vladimir Putin has created a 
story and is still trying to sell it to the world to justify the killing of innocents in 
Ukraine.  All over the world, might makes right.     
 
A brand -new human in its mother’s womb has no power to defend themselves.    
This person cannot testify before you to defend their life.  I am doing that in their 
place.   
 
Now we come to the next logical step in this “might makes right” argument.  With 
LD 1619, w e are set to kill unborn people right up to the point at which they are 
born.  These are ba bies that are capable of functioning  outside the womb, of 
growing, of living long lives of greatness.  Yet, we have the power to end all that .  
Might makes right.  This is a huge step forward in a culture of death, a culture 
Page 2 of 2 where the will of the powerful is a ll-important and the will of the weak is nothing 
at all.  
 
Today we consider the life of the unborn child to be inconsequential , an 
inconvenience to be disposed of any way someone sees fit.  Today, you are 
considering making that designation the law of the state, right up to that child’s 
birth.    
 
I am 73 years old.  My body is not as capable as it once was.  At what point will 
someone consider my life to be inconsequential, an inconvenience to be 
disposed of in any way someone sees fit ?   
 
When will someone see your lives that way, members of the committee ?  This is 
a logical step from where you are today.  Please, I beg you, do not go down that 
road.   
 
I ask the committee to vote NO on LD 1619.  Thank you.   
 
 
-end- 
 
 
 
 
