Samantha Heyns
Chelsea
LD 1619
Madam/Mister Chair and Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee,
I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1619.
     Babies are small and utterly dependent on others to take care of all their needs.  
They can be exhausting and smelly, noisy and frustrating. They take a lot of time and 
effort and money, but as the mother of two grown men, and having miscarried my 
first pregnancy, I can also say with assurance it is so rewarding to watch them grow 
and develop, and wonder, who will this little one develop into? Will he be an artist? 
Will she be a scientist? 
     Having known the grief of miscarriage, I can tell you, that baby was not just a 
clump of cells, it was our child whom we valued, and we mourned the loss of that life 
intensely.  My friend who struggled with infertility and finally got pregnant will tell 
you that the new life growing inside her is not a tumor or a disease, but a valuable 
human being.  If we do not value human life while in the womb, when the major need
of the developing baby is for the mother to take good care of herself, then how can we
say we care for and value human life at all?
     LD 1619 would allow babies who could survive outside the womb to be killed. 
This would make Maine one of the most extreme in the country by allowing babies, 
who would otherwise live, to be destroyed. The majority of Mainers do not want 
late-term, viable babies to be slated for death by abortion.  
     Every life is precious – a woman’s right to her own body is and should be 
protected, but an OB GYN will tell you that a developing fetus is not part of the 
mother’s body. A baby in the womb has a distinct life of its own – nurtured by the 
mother’s body – yes, but not part of it.  Allowing a baby who would otherwise 
survive to be aborted, is not a choice, it is killing a human being.
     Please vote no on all bills that would expand abortion or use public funds to pay 
for abortion. I respectfully, but firmly, stand in opposition to LDs 616, 935 and LDs 
1343 and 1619.

