Sandra Burtchell
Fort Fairfield
LD 1619
Members of the Judiciary Committee:
I have called some of your offices, and I have E-mailed your offices regarding my 
thoughts about LD 1619.  Admittedly, this is the first time I have been passionate 
enough about an issue that I actually took time to make my voice heard in a political 
matter.  Like many, I have complained about things done in the government, but way 
too often I have went on without saying anything directly.  This time, it is different.  
First of all, I never thought anything this extreme would be introduced in the State of 
Maine, let alone be sponsored by my own senator.  I have contacted Senator Jackson 
regarding this issue, and told him that, sadly, he does not know his constituents.  
I use the word “extreme”, because it is definitely that.  In Ancient times, the 
Egyptians sacrificed babies to crocodiles in the Nile, and the Assyrians sacrificed 
children to their god Moloch.  People today, I hope, would call that barbaric, yet this 
bill would allow abortion up to the time of birth – when that baby could live outside 
of  the womb and be held and loved (by someone else, if mother unable to provide).  
A dear friend had complications during her pregnancy and her daughter was delivered
at 28 weeks.  She survived, and is now married and a school teacher with a Master's 
degree. She is a vibrant young lady, and a joy to all who know her. My cousin and his
wife were unable to have children and they adopted three children.  Their middle 
child was a product of rape, and yet her mother gave her a chance at life, so she could 
be loved by a family.  She is also married, and works with children.  She has always 
been outgoing and a joy to be around.  
How is it that legislators are now in the place that they feel they can decide who gets 
to live.  No, they are not picking and choosing who gets to live, but they are giving 
women or girls, who are frightened and unsure of what they should do, a very extreme
option, when they have polarizing public rhetoric bombarding them daily.  People 
protest the death penalty for known criminals, yet want to put legislation in place that 
would end the life of an innocent baby up to full term.  This doesn't end for the 
mother at this point either; I have known women who have had abortions and, sadly, I
have watched them struggle with this decision for years. There are alternatives – this 
isn't one of them.  
According to statistics, over 65% of Mainers don't want late term abortion, and the 
current law addresses viability.  This should mean something.  We are not California, 
or another state who has implemented this legislature, and we truly do not want to be 
placed in the company of China and North Korea.  Please do not advance this extreme
bill.  
Thank you.

