May 1, 2023 
Public Hearing for LD 1619: An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Testimony: Sara Bulkley, Clinton ME 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Sara Bulkley and I am a resident of Clinton. I would like to begin bythanking each of 
you for your service on this Committee and for representing your constituents as an elected ofﬁcial here 
in Augusta. I've never participated in this process before but my concern for the direction of our state is 
growing steadily and I have come to the realization that I have a responsibility to stand up and speak on 
very critical issues being debated and decided within the walls of this building. That being said, I am here 
to speak in opposition to LD 1619. 
Ourstate is facing a decision that I ﬁrmly believe will hinge on your collective understanding orlack thereof 
of life and the intrinsic value of each individual. If life within the womb is not considered to be sacred and 
worthy of protection, then life outside the womb is equally diminished, whether we wish to acknowledge 
that or not. To mourn for lives lost in a school while simultaneously ﬁghting to remove common sense 
limitations on abortion practices demonstrates a profound misunderstanding of our most basic right as 
individuals, the right to life. That right begins in the womb and comes from our Creator, not from our 
elected officials ora medical professional. 
I understand that there are rare instances where some would say a baby is not going to survive and use 
that as justiﬁcation for a late term abortion. I am not without compassion forthose parents who walk that 
difﬁcult path but the truth is that the character of an individual and of a community is built through 
adversity and it is not the role of government to create avenues for its citizens to avoid every difficulty that 
life presents. It is the role of government to ensure that its most vulnerable citizens, the unborn, are 
protected with the same passion and fervor as those who have been birthed. 
To those who are sponsoring this bill on behalf of Governor Mills and to those who supportits passing, it 
is to speak out of both sides ofyour mouth to say that you value and protect children and then also modify 
existing law so radically as to allow children within their mother's womb to be exterminated right up to 
the point of birth for any reason. Life is precious at all stages and it must be protected bythose in power, 
if we wish to remain a civilized, peaceful people. You are in a unique position to chart the course for our 
beloved state and I challenge each of you to separate from the political battle being waged here and search 
deep within your conscience for direction on this critical issue. Our state needs leaders who are guided 
not by political agendas or parties but by a strong moral compass and the courage to make decisions based 
on what they know deep inside to be right and best for the people that they serve. 
When you take this bill into your work session, I am asking that you take seriously the outpouring of 
opposition to this extreme measure and vote with full conﬁdence Qught Not to Pass. And may God be 
with you.
