Savanah Quirion
Lewiston
LD 1619
Savanah Quirion
Lewiston, ME
savanahq1997@gmail.com
Hello Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Distinguished Members of the 
Judiciary Committee. My name is Savanah Quirion, I live in Lewiston, Maine and am
a lifelong Mainer. I am here today to urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343, An 
Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People, and LD 1619, An Act To 
Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Law.
These acts are not only about abortion but reproductive healthcare as a whole and 
how we are able to access it across the state of Maine. 
During fall of last year, I left an abusive marriage. Through all the types of abuse, I 
endured, I want to highlight the effects of the sexual abuse and reproductive coercion 
I dealt with for almost five years and how having access to proper medical care, 
specifically reproductive healthcare, saved my life.
For those of you who don’t know what reproductive coercion is, it is a type of abuse 
that involves behaviors that a person will use against their partner to maintain power 
and control over their reproductive health. Including behaviors such as pressure, 
manipulation, emotional blackmail, threats, and even physical violence.  
After being on birth control for the first year of our relationship, I moved in with my 
then-boyfriend; this was an hour and a half from my home and my doctor. It was 
decided shortly after moving that I would go off of birth control, and we were going 
to start trying to have a child. During this time, the abuse I experienced increased in 
frequency and severity. 
Eventually, I realized the caring and love-filled home I wanted to provide for a baby 
was no longer possible. However, there were a multitude of barriers I faced in trying 
to access reproductive healthcare. It wasn’t safe for me to ask to go on birth control, 
and the risk of being found out to be secretly taking it was too much. I wasn’t allowed
to take a pregnancy or ovulation test by myself, and when I was found to have done 
so, I faced repercussions. For a long time, I lived in constant fear that I would be 
forced into a pregnancy I didn’t want. 
I ask you to please pause and think of how common this reality is in our state. With 
unfortunately 1 in 7 women in Maine experiencing contact sexual violence, physical 
violence, or stalking by an intimate partner.
The fear of carrying a pregnancy continued until I reestablished at a new primary care
provider's clinic that was multi-purpose, meaning here I was able to access 
reproductive healthcare and counseling.
Through the counseling of my new provider, we found a method of birth control I 
could receive in the office that same day that wouldn’t be able to be tracked by my 
husband, this being the Depo shot. For those of you unfarmiliar, you recieve an 
injection every three months to manage medical conditions related to your menstrual 
cycle and prevent pregnancy. 
Even with all the barriers I had, had I not had access to the reproductive healthcare I 
needed, I very likely would have been forced to carry a pregnancy and bring a child 
into an unsafe home. Restricting any kind of access to reproductive healthcare is 
dangerous, especially for women already exsperncing restrictions due to abuse. 
Today, some will call me terrible names, saying I hate babies and am an evil person. 
To that I want to let you know that I worked in childcare for over eight years, and 
more recently worked in the foster care system with medically needly and special 
needs children. I want children of my own someday, either biologically, through 
fostering, or adopting. But I want to do it when the time is right and with the right 
partner who won’t make me fear for my or my child's safety. Access to proper 
reproductive healthcare is essential in our state to protect women and children from 
being put in extreme and unsafe situations. 
With this given testimony, I ask you to please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD
1619, to protect the women and children of our state. Thank you for your time and 
consideration.
