Shelley Morris
Corinna
LD 1619
April 30, 2023
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Shelley Morris and I am a resident of Corinna. I am a proud 
Mainer and I have been married to my husband of 49 years this May. I am a parent of 
two adult children and 2 young grandchildren.
I am supplying written testimony in opposition to LD 1619. “An Act to Improve 
Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws.”
At one time, abortion was said to be “safe, legal and rare.” Today, abortion has 
drastically changed and would be more extreme if this bill passes because this would 
legally allow abortion up to birth. Personally, I’m very saddened and horrified that 
Maine or any other state would allow an abortion at any stage of life, let alone a 
full-term viable baby that could survive out of the womb. In my opinion, this barbaric 
procedure should be banned. Most Mainers do not support late-term abortion because 
they understand how painful the procedure is for the baby and that it ends an 
innocent, human life. 
Recently in the news, an Iowa woman was accused of giving birth to a baby boy at a 
dilapidated residence. With the alleged help of her father, they left the newborn to die 
alone in a snow-covered trash bag. Although that is unimaginably cruel and abusive 
for a baby, the saddest part is if the mom had chosen to have an abortion at that same 
stage of her pregnancy, on that same day, it would have been legal for her to rid 
herself of the baby. To me this is such a ludicrous and nonsensical way of “reasoning”
for life or death. Also, under the “Safe Haven Act,” the defendants could have left the 
newborn at a hospital or health care facility without fear of prosecution for 
abandonment for up to 90 days after the baby’s birth. The Safe Haven Act should be 
presented to any mom as an option to abortion and especially before a late term 
abortion.
I truly believe this bill would turn Maine into an abortion revenue state and I don’t 
want that to happen! Please vote NO on LD 1619.
I want to thank the Judiciary Committee for serving the people of the State of Maine 
and for hearing my concerns.
Sincerely,
Shelley Morris
Corinna
