Sherry Bryant
Bath
LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Mooney, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:
My name is Sherry Bryant. I live in Bath.
This regards the upcoming committee vote on LD 1619.
Abortion is morally wrong. We know that a first trimester fetus is a living, beautiful 
baby in a stage of life, with its own DNA, even if is an identical twin. Abortion 
advocates can’t use ignorance as an excuse anymore. Science now tells us that these 
babies have nerves that feel pain. If this bill is passed, a woman can get an abortion on
demand, even at full-term. 
We don’t have the right to murder another human being, a person with its own soul!
My brother was in high school when he impregnated his girlfriend. She wanted an 
abortion. He begged her not to do that, and told her that he would raise the baby, that 
she didn’t have to have anything to do with it. But she chose abortion. To the day my 
brother died, he mourned the loss of that baby. Even the children that he had after he 
was married can tell you how much that affected his life, how distraught he would get
at times to know that the baby was murdered.
A few decades later, my own teenage daughter, who had already made plans for 
college, discovered that she was pregnant. This was a daunting situation for our whole
family. She knew from what we had taught her that the baby was a human being and 
had a right to live. So thankfully, she never had any thought of abortion, though she 
knew it would be a tough time. She loved that baby from the beginning. He is now 29 
years old with two children of his own. I cannot imagine what life would be like 
without this wonderful man.
You may say, “Well, she had a supportive family.”  That is true. So let’s look at 
another family who were not as supportive, but this girl had a supportive grandmother
who encouraged her and helped her with the adoption process.
It is in the best interest of everyone to realize that abortion is not birth control and 
pregnancy is the gift of another human being. So I ask that you look deep into your 
own souls and please vote “ought not to pass.”
