         May 1, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen,  and members  of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Stacey Modrusan , and I am a resident of Hermon. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619.  
I am a mother of 4 children. I also worked as a Sonographer, a ka Ultrasound Technologist , for 19 
years. This included 6 years in Maternal Fetal Medicine, which is for those  experiencing a higher 
risk pregnancy.  
I believe abortion at any t ime, for any reason is too ex treme for Maine. It particularly disturbs 
me that anyone would think it okay to abort a baby who is considered full -term. Th is bill would 
allow babies that are able to live outside the womb to be brutally killed via abortion.  Every 
human deserves  a chance at life. An unborn baby at any stage of gestation is a living human 
being. They all deserve the right to live.  
Over the many years  in my professional role,  I have encountered many different heartbre aking  
situations. Many of the se situations also included moments of great joy. I have witnessed many 
mothers and couples who have regretted a previous abortion, or changed their mind  during 
their pregnancy and were beyond grateful that they chose life for their child.  
I’ve also been part of discovering many different genetic conditions and anomalies. I’ve talked at 
great length with  families  experiencing thes e situations, during various stages of their 
preg nancies , and after the birth of their children. I’ve seen many who were initially upset, and 
over time they realized that their child was a gift regardless. I’ve seen those who cherished the 
brief time they had with their child, whether it be  only during p regnancy, a few moments after 
birth, a couple days, weeks, months. They all mourned the loss of their child . They all knew their 
child was an individual person .  
I have seen babies who have survived premature births, as early as 22- or 23 -weeks  gestation. 
Yes, this early ! This is not anywhere near full -term . I have seen those who were told that their 
child  would experience great difficulty in life or even that their child was non -viable. Yes, this 
ended up being the case many times, but there were also thos e who beat their given odds. Any 
child regardless of any disability is able to bring great joy to others, especially their family.  
Everyone deserves to live the life they were given by God. We have no right to end the life of 
any child. Again , please vote ought not pass on LD 1619. This is too extreme and unwanted in 
Maine.  
Thank you.  
Stacey Modrusan    
Hermon, Maine  
