MadamlMister Chair & Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
lam Stephanie Hamlyn from Kennebunk, and l am here to oppose LDi6l9 
l'm grieved to hear of bill LU l6l9. 
l'm grieved that we no longer honor and value life. 
It grieves me that we have rejected our identity as stewards of life. 
We have lost touch with our innermost being. 
We have abandoned our commission to maintain justice and do what is right. 
Why are you laying the foundations of our government in death and oppression of the 
innocent? 
This madness has to stop. 
This is not who we are as a people. 
I do not consent to this. 
l do not support LD 1619. 
Who is this bill really for? 
lt does not servejustice. 
lt does not protect a human baby. 
It does not protect the mother. 
This bill does not protect anything other than the agenda of Augusta hoping to make 
themselves relevant in the national eye. 
It is nothing but a cloak to fill your publicity agenda and you're using the innocent lives of 
human babies to get there. 
The fuel in this is to be seen and known in your own company as forward and radical. 
You're using the bloodshed of the innocent to gain your own approval and a false security of 
temporary power. 
So, what makes you [supporters] so different than the warlords using their position to 
release genocide into their territory? 
Your eyes are blinded by pride and arrogance. 
Your thoughts are twisted into webs of deception. 
Your tongues are forked, cloaking your words as light and good but rooted in greed and 
abuse of power. 
You've chosen to live in denial of your ownership and actions of murder against human 
flesh.. 
You have protected and walled yourself against your own identity as a human and merely 
disregarded life as a political debate instead of what this is— 
innocent human blood shed masqueraded as "rights" and "health" .
What purpose does this bill serve other than to make Maine a sanctuary for generational 
infanticide? 
We have turned our backs on our duty to protect life. 
The Declaration of independence states 
"We hold these truths to be self—evident, that all men are created equal, that they are 
endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life...” 
All human beings are created equal. 
All. 
We are called to contend for justice. 
We are called to defend what is right. 
We are called to protect the innocent. 
Please vote "ought not to pass" this bill.
