Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
I am Sue Dearborn, a long-time resident of Corinth, and I come to you with a heavy 
heart. For nearly 24 years, I have been proud to call Maine my home, but in recent 
years, I've watched with growing concern as our state slides down a slippery slope 
toward destruction. 
As Mainers, we have always stood for what is right and just, but now our very values are 
being called into question. Governor Mills is considering legalizing late-term abortion - 
a move that goes against the wishes of the majority of our state's citizens, and which 
puts the lives of both mothers and their unborn children at risk. 
I implore you to listen to the voice of the people. 65% of Mainers oppose late-term 
abortion, and for good reason. Abortion is already available on demand in our state 
without a medical reason up to 24 weeks gestation. Is that not enough? Do we really 
need to risk the health and safety of our mothers and their unborn children by legalizing 
late-term abortion? 
As a medical professional, I know the risks and benefits of treatment, and I take the 
Hippocratic Oath seriously. We must do no harm, and that includes not endangering the 
lives of innocent children and their mothers. 
We must also consider the possibility of misdiagnosed fetal abnormalities. If a doctor 
mistakenly diagnoses a problem with a child in the womb, and a late-term abortion is 
performed, the mother and potentially healthy child are put at serious risk. 
My husband and I recently welcomed our ﬁrst grandchild into the world, and I can tell 
you that there is no difference between a fully developed baby in the womb anda 
newborn. They both have the right to life, and we must protect that right for all future 
generations of Mainers. 
I urge you to vote against this radical bill and its implications for our state. Let us stand 
up for what is right and just, and protect the lives of our mothers and their unborn 
children. Thank you for your time and your serious consideration of this important 
issue.
