Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Susan Clardy, and I live in Augusta, Maine. I’m here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
On September 23, 2019, the Washington Examiner reported on a hearing in California regarding 
undercover videos made by the Center for Medical Progress, featuring Planned Parenthood executives 
discussing abortion industry practices. Obstetrician Forrest Smith, who stated he’s performed at least 
50,000 abortions, testiﬁed that “Planned Parenthood and other abortion clinics were selling aborted 
baby parts for proﬁt, but babies were often born alive, then murdered, in order to ensure the 
organs to be sold were more fresh and intact.” 
Smith further testiﬁed that “based on what he saw in the videos and what he knowsi about the abortion 
industry, he believes doctors performed abortion procedures so that babies would be bom alive, even 
though it puts the mother at greater risk.” 
In a presentation, given at a 2014 Planned Parenthood conference, “[Dr.] Alisa Goldberg suggested using 
large doses of misoprostol so a second-trimester induced abortion procedure could be completed in one 
day.” The large dose oﬁen causes rapid delivery of a live baby. Smith also testiﬁed that “very few people 
in abortion, outside of Planned Parenthood, do that.” Dr. Smith’s testimony contradicted previous claims 
by Planned Parenthood that babies’ organs were simply being donated for scientiﬁc research and that 
their abortion procedures did not put mother or baby at risk. 
To anyone with a basic respect for human life, this bill is unconscionable. It has nothing to do with risk 
to the mother or viability of the baby. That is clearly a pretext, as there are no guidelines for either, set 
forth in the bill and to suggest otherwise is disingenuous. So, what is the true motive? Is it money? 
Chopping babies into pieces and selling them for proﬁt is a very lucrative business for Planned 
Parenthood and its affiliates. Is it for religious purposes? The Satanic Temple has sued several states, 
asserting that restrictions on abortion infringe on their right to hold “Satanic Abortion Rituals, ” claiming 
they’re fundamental to their religious beliefs. 
Mainers are good and decent people and most do not support infanticide. The incremental debasement of 
human life leads to a very dark and frightening place for all of us. I would ask each of you to examine 
your conscience before voting and ask yourselves whose interests are truly being served by this bill? 
And who do you really serve? 
If you do vote to pass this bill, at the very least all ﬁnancial incentives for killing pre-born babies should 
be removed. No money should ever change hands in exchange for snufﬁng out the life of an innocent 
baby. If funneling back-end proﬁts to reliable donors isn’t the true motive for this legislation, nobody 
should object to that. 
Please vote ought not to pass. 
https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/abortion-doctor —admits-sold-baby;parts-often-came-from-babies-bom-alive 
https:f/www.newsweek.com/satanic-temp]e —sues-states-infringing-religious-abortion-ritual~indiana —idaho-1748758 
https://www.centerformedicalprogress.org/human-capital/how-planned-parenthood-pro ﬁts-from-fetal-tissue-donation/
( iMP The Denier icriilgdieai Pragress 
HUMANCAPITAL project 
Fact Sheet: Tissue Procurement Organizations (TPOs) 
Tissue Procurement Organizations (TPOs) are "middleman" companies that procure human 
tissue samples and supply them to researchers. There are several TPOs that specialize in or are 
devoted entirely to selling aborted fetal tissue: 
Advanced Bioscience Resources (ABR) — ABR, headquartered in Alameda, CA, is the largest and 
oldest fetal tissue seller in the U.S. ABR was founded in 19891 by Linda Tracy, a nurse who had 
previously worked for the National Disease Research Interchange (NDRI) in Philadelphia, PA. At 
the time, NDRI was also involved in fetal tissue sales. Today, ABR operates in abortion clinics in 
California, Minnesota, Oregon, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and an unknown number of other 
states. ABR is organized as a 501(c)3 non~profit, but brings in over $1—1.5 million in fetal tissue 
sales revenue each year.2 
Stemlixpress, LLC - StemExpress, based in Placerville, CA, was founded in 2010 by Cate Dyer,a 
former procurement technician for ABR. StemExpress has close ties to Planned Parenthood and 
employs Planned Parenthood abortion doctor Ronald Berman as its Medical Director.3 
StemExpress charges $595 per fetal tissue specimen and had a yearly revenue of $2.2 million in 
2014.“ 
Novogenix Laboratories, LLC - Novogenix was founded by Dr. Ben Van Handel while a graduate 
student at UCLA.5 Novogenix is partnered with Planned Parenthood Los Angeles and is the TPO 
served by PPFA Senior Director of Medical Services, Dr. Deborah Nucatola. 
SciKon Innovation —-SciKon is a more generalized human biologics company located in Chapel 
Hill, NC. However, like many TPOs, SciKon does offer aborted fetal tissue procurement to clients 
as a custom product. 
Anatomic Gift Foundation (AGF) — A non-profit company established in 1994, one of the largest 
and oldest whole body donation programs. AGF was heavily involved in fetal tissue sales in the 
1990s, although claims to have ended its fetal tissue procurement since then. However, AGF is 
cited as the source of 7 aborted fetal kidneys used in a 2014 study.” 
1:: 
Overview," Advanced Bioscience Resources, lnc. httgﬂwww.centerformedicaIprogress.orgLvgp-contentgploads/2015/OS/OVERVIEW.pdf 1 
See 2013, 2012, and 2011 IRS Form 990~PF for ABR, httgl/www.guldestainorg/FinDocuments/2013/943/110/2013-943110160-0ae637bfg 
ipclf, httgl/www.guidestar.org/FinDocuments/2012/943/110/2012-943110160-09c27aff~F,pdf, and 
httgi/www.guidestanorg/FinDocuments/2011/943/110/2011-943110160~08be399f-F.ndf ' 
3 
"Dr. Ron Berman,” Stemlixpress. httgj/stemexpress.com/tearn/dr-ron-berman[ ' 
Schneider, Kirsten, "Fast—Growing StemExpress Provides Clinical Specimens to Advance Research. ” SARTA 18 February 2014. 
httgzi/sarta.org/blog/fast —growing-stemexpress~nrovides-clinical —specimens-to-advance~research[ 
S 
"B.V.H., A.H., and M.M. are cofounders of and own signiﬁcant ﬁnancial stakes in Novogenix Laboratories, LLC." See Mikkola et al, "The ﬁrst 
trimester human placenta is a site for terminal maturation of primitive erythrold cells." Blood 28 October 2010. 
httgz//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gos/[pmc/articles/PMC2995359[ 
6 
Ben-Dov et al. "Urine MicroRNA as Potential Biomarkers of Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Progression: Description of miRNA 
Profiles at Baseline." PLOS ONE 29 January 2014. httg;[[journals.plos.org[plosone/article?id=1O. 1371/iournal.pone.00868S6 7 
Flatten, Mark. "Horror stories show body procurement trade.“ East Valley Tribune 12 July 2004. - 
httpgl/www.eastvalleytribune.com[§_pecial reports/bodymarket/article ffb781Gb-d443-S36f-857e-7d6cd38bd775.html 
© 2015 The Center for Medical Progress 
- 
senie:*i0rmedicalpragras.urg
