Senator Carney and Representative lVloonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
l\/ly name is Susan Pritchard and lam a resident of Searsport. lam here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
l believe this bill is bad for the State of lvlaine because it is discriminatory, 
promotes fallacies, and sanctions our elected ofﬁcials to default on their 
responsibility to our society. 
lt discriminates against pre-birth children, and l am using the designation 
"children" consistent with Governor l\/lill's own website, in the April 23 news 
releasel . The fate of the children is in the hands of others, they do not have their 
own advocates, and their lives are not protected by this law. 
In its mechanics, LD 1619 contains dangerous threats to our society. There 
is no criteria in place for assessing or determining "necessity" , no ethics test to be 
met. It effectively allows Qg abortion, as long as the case is convincingly 
presented. ln practice, the decision could come down to "is this child wanted 
enough?" It is wrong to enact a law that opens that door, that allows any0ne’s 
right to continue living to be determined by whether they are well-enough wanted 
by someone else. 
On her website, Governor Mills suggests that the decision about a late-term 
abortion should be between ”a woman and her doctor— not politicians"? That's 
a cleverly crafted sound bite, but it leaves an important person out of the picture: 
the child. 
lt IS the role of politicians to advocate for the protection and defense of 
those in our society who are vulnerable. Any of our elected officials who support 
this bill on the grounds that the decision to end a child's life is "private" , are
defaulting on their moral obligation to our society by turning their backs on those 
who cannot speak for themselves or defend themselves. The damages and the 
repercussions of such systemic disregard for a segment of the population ought to 
be very fresh in our minds. 
Jane Field, a proponent of this bill, contends that "Abortion is a complex 
hea/th care issue... requirinq nuanced medical... discernment..."3 , and yet the 
legal penalties which should serve as safeguards to ensure qualiﬁed medical care, 
have been speciﬁcally removed in LD 16194 . This not health care, and it is a fallacy 
to claim it as such and to say it represents genuine concern for the mother. 
Thank you for listening to my concerns regarding this very dangerous bill. 
1. Broad Coalition Strongl _y Endorses Legislation Empowering Women & Doctors to Make 
Reproductive Health Care Decisions I Office of Governor Janet T. Mills (maine.govIJ_re 
Dana Pierce 
2. Broad Coalition Strongl _y Endorses Legislation Empowering Women & Doctors to Make 
Reproductive Health Care Decisions I Office of Governorlanet T. Mills (maine.gov)_ 
3. Broad Coalition Strongl _y Endorses Legislation Empowering Women & Doctors to Make 
Reproductive Health Care Decisions I Ofﬁce of Governor Janet T. Mills (maine.govI 
4. LD—1619 
http://wwwmainelegislature.0rg/legis/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=HP1044&item=1&snum= 
131
