 Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland  
 
510 Ocean Avenue     Telephone: (207) 773 -6471 
Portland Maine 0410 3-4936     Facsimile: (207) 773 -0182 
Suzanne C. Lafreniere, JD  
Office of Public Policy  
 
 
 
Comments  of Suzanne Lafreniere, on behalf of the Roman Catholic Diocese  
Written testimony in opposition to 1619  –  
Senator  Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee  on 
Judiciary , my name is Suzanne Lafreniere and  I represent the Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland in 
opposition to  LD 1619 .  The Diocese has a population of over 279,000 Catholics* or one -fifth of the total 
population of the state of Maine.  In addition to its  141 churches organized into  48 parishes, it has 
nine elementary schools,  one private elementary school,  one diocesan hig h school and one private high 
school. It also includes one Catholic college, Saint Joseph's College of Maine in Standish.  Within the 
diocese, there are also  seven subsidized housing units, four rehabilitation and residence facilities,  and 
two child -care centers. There are three Catholic hospitals operating independently of the diocese as well 
as Catholic Charities Maine, the state's largest social service agency, which operates as a separate 
corporation.  
It comes as no surprise to any legislator or any mem ber of the public that the Diocese of Portland 
vehemently  opposes this law.  Respect for unborn human life is the foundation of t he Church's constant 
social teaching  and social justice  ministries .   
However, there are numerous reasons why LD 1 619 is an unprecedented  attack on life.  LD 1619  
would permit abortion  with no re strictions  through all nine months of pregnancy. It goes far beyond 
allowing “medically necessary ,” post-viability abortions.  
 
Maine law already  allows  unlimited abortion before an unborn child attains viability  (subject to 
informed consent and adult  involvement requirements)1. LD 1619  extends that unlimited availability to  
dangerous post -viability abortions.  
 
I have been asked this question hundreds of times since Gov. Mills announced her plans to change 
Maine ’s law: Why wo uld such a law be needed?  Gov. Mills stated, “The legislation is inspired by the story 
of Yarmouth resident Dana Peirce, who ha d to seek an abortion out -of-state after she discovered her child 
was suffering from a deadly form of skeletal dysplasia, a random, rare genetic mutation.”   Based on a 
memo from the Attorney General’s office in 2022, fatal fetal diagnosis are already covered by Maine law.i  
This tragic story about baby Cameron is not fixed if LD 1619 was already the law in Maine.  
 
 It is import ant to note that according to Plan ned Parenthood New England, Maine ’s current 
viability standard is not a red -line rule.  Dr. Andrea Pelletier, the medical director of Planned Parenthood 
of Northern New England, sa id in a Maine Public Broadcasting News article in 2022 that “viability  is a 
gray zone and it depends on the conditions of each pregnancy. ”  "You can't just pull up a website and say, 
'Maine does abortions until a certain number of weeks,'" Pelletier said. "It gives us some flexibility in 
 
1 https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/teens/stds -birth -control -pregnancy/parental -consent -and-notification -laws  - 
N.B. There is NO parental consent  requ ired according to Pla nned Parenthood ’s website.  
Page 2 of 2 what we can offer patients, but it al so does provide some restrictions." ii It is also no teworthy that 
according to that ar ticle, there are no providers in Maine to perform complex, late term abortions . 
Current Maine law is broad and expansive. In Maine, one does not need to be a doctor to perform 
an abortion; one does not need to have an ultrasound; abortion clinics are not required to have safet y 
inspections; taxpayers are forced to pay for abortions; providers are not required to have admitting 
privileges at a hospital, in case something goes wrong; and there is no wait period.  
  There are numerous other abortion  related bills wh ich will be heard and voted on this session .  
Taken in compl ement with each other, Maine will be  a destination state for abor tions.  What a t ragedy this 
would be.  Maine is the way life Should be.  
Please vote LD 1619  as Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration today.  
 
*www.pewforum.org/religious -landscape -study/state/maine/  
 
 
 
 
 
i https://www.maine.gov/ag/docs/Abortion%20Rights%20in%20Maine.pdf  
ii https://www.mainepublic.org/health/2022 -10-17/a -15-week -abortion -ban-would -have -overlooked -these -maine -mothers -
pregnancy -complications  
