Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Tammy Fereshetian, and l'm a resident of Turner. l'm here to testify in opposition to LD 
1619. 
We all have a story! An unintended pregnancy often creates turmoil, and life plans change direction. But 
here’s the thing, most of ail humanity came into the world unplanned! Yet, by allowing this precious gift 
called life, we become co-creators with God, the One Who creates with abandon! We have been sold 
and bought the story that we have control over life because of a right to choose. That is untrue. Abortion 
steals a life that only God knows the potential outcome for. 
My four stepchildren were born from an adopted baby who grew up to be their mom. Though she 
passed away from cancer, her greatest legacy are her children. l was born from a teenage mother. Asl 
grew up, so did she. l was there sixty-three years later as she navigated the end of life. My dad’s 
gratitude for my life was never made clearer. l know women who have had abortions, men who 
supported abortion, and grieve their decision. Many were young and told it was the only or best choice. 
Others I know went to clinics past the viability date and were not eligible for abortion. Babies were 
carried to full term, then given life because limits were set. These limits turned out to be blessings, real 
people with stories of value. What these scenarios share is life wins! People have to be given life to 
ﬁgure out how it works. Let them have a story! 
Help is available in pregnancy centers across Maine. Why are we not pouring all our resources into 
supporting the needs of women and the babies they carry? Unfortunately, we cannot legislate the 
human heart. One day each person will account for how the life they lived was invested. That isa 
sobering truth. As lawmakers creating the history of our state you know, "As Maine goes, so goes the 
nation." Dirigo, I lead. Where will you lead us? Please hear the heart cry of the people you represent. 
Write a story that reﬂects what the majority of Mainers believe, and what the Creator of all of life 
ordained! 
l stand for life and against this extreme legislation, LD1619, that sets no limits on abortion. Please vote 
ought not to pass! Thank you. 
(1 minute) 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Tammy Fereshetian, and l’m a resident of Tumer. I am opposed to LD 1619. 
A baby resulting from an unintended pregnancy often creates turmoil and life changes plans change direction. But 
here’s the thing, most of all humanity came into the world unplanned, myself included. Why are we not pouring our 
resources into supporting the needs of women and the babies they carry? 
Unfortunately, we cannot legislate the human heart. One day each person will account for how the life they lived was 
invested. That is a sobering truth. As lawmakers you are creating the history of our state and you know, "As Maine 
goes, so goes the nation.” Dirigo, l lead. Where will you lead us’? Please hear the heart cry of the people you 
represent. Write a story that reﬂects what the majority of Mainers believe, and what the Creator of Heaven and Earth 
ordained! Our children, our legacy, our future depends on Life! Please vote ought not to pass.
