LD #1619 
Good aﬁternoon; ‘Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and' niernbers*of the judiciary committee; ‘ " " 
My name is Temple Knowles from Strong Maine, I come before you today to speak in opposition of LD #1619. 
I believe it unnecessary to recite an unending list of facts supporting the reality of life starting at conception, the 
evidence is overwhelming. 
Two brief observations will suftice to quell your presumption that I’m deferring: 
In ayrecent articlefkl read of a survey taken of 5000 biologists, 96% agree when one egg cell joins with one 
sperm cell to become one zygote with tmique genetic coding, the DNA reﬂects Homosapien, the offspring of 
mom and dad. 
Second the fascinating developments undertaken in fetal surgery, recognizing these are human being requiring 
medical attention. These operations are absolutely staggering. To name a few: 
1. Heart Tumor removals 
2. Spina Biﬁda repair 
There is overwhelming scientiﬁc data to support the existence of a person in the womb, to substantiate a human 
being a “medical patient” requiring healthcare, and in some cases undergoing medical procedures to forestall 
life threatening circumstances. This a personil 
The evidence shouts down the delusion, communicating that this mass is a “lump of organic matter” and is 
merely an unnecessary inconvenience that can be disregarded at will. - 
I spent several years overseas in east Africa. You may recall the shocking reports coming out of Rwanda in 
April of ‘94. The ethnic cleansing arrested the attention of the world as the Hutus proceeded to.slaughter 
500,000 to 600,000 Tutsis. The killing was brutal, dreadful, savage. It came to the horriﬁc dismemberment by 
machete of ethnically unwanted people.' 
You all are very intelligent here and I don’t think it necessary for me to draw the parallel between unwanted 
Tutsis and unwanted babies. 
The issue here is not one surrounding the undeniable realities of biology and science. It is not cognitive; we 
know the biological truth. 
The issue here is rather moral. Is it morally justiﬁable to extinguish the life of another? Absolutely not. ls it_a 
moral virtue to stand for the sanctity of life? Absolutely yes. V --
_ 
You are the appointed authorities in this state, charged with the responsibility of ensuring, (and I draw this from 
the preambleof our constitution), ensuring: justice, tranquility, mutual defense, common welfare for ourselves 
and our posterig.' 
Additionally, in the preamble, imploring Gods aid and direction in accomplishing this pursuit.‘ 
I plead with you to strike down this evil piece of legislature that presumes killing an unborn unwanted person is 
0K. .. 
Vote no for LD #1619 
74" Facts cw F4;-mt/y) Fm Ltﬁ ﬁsjwmlwi , /'~'1§"' ”/Vlw ROWH 4 -7*/M! / ‘>931’
