May 1, 2023  
Testimony In Opposition of LD 1619  
"An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws " 
Senator Carney, Repr esentative Moo nen, and distinguished m embers of the Judiciary Committee:   
 I contac t you today feeling blindsided by the title of LD 1619, "An Act to Improve Maine's 
Reproductive Privacy Laws."  Upon reviewing the bill, it appears to be the most radi cal abortion policy  
ever attempted in Maine.  The bill would more aptly be  entitled, "A Ra dical Expansion  of Roe v Wade."  
 If enacted, this bill would allow abortion on demand througho ut all 9 months of pregnancy.  
Maine's abortion law would  now be contingent upon a "ph ysician's professional judgment ."   Late term 
abortions could be performed on a healthy mother, with a healthy, viable fetus, at any time, for any reason 
the physician so determines.  We all know what that is:  Infanticide.  
 Maine's long -standing abortion law which proh ibits abortion after viability (except to save the 
health and  life of the mother ) would be trashed.  LD 1619 would, however, permit non-medical  persons 
the unfettered freedom to perform abortions without fear of criminal penalty under these circumstances.  
What happened to safeguarding Maine women's health?  Under t hese conditions a receptionist, a financial 
planner, a dog catcher, a guidance counselor , or a yoga instructor cou ld perform late term abortion s. No 
problem.  
 This sounds more like the w holesale revival of back all ey abortions.  
 If enacted, LD 1619 would not only open Pandora's Box, it would surgically extract  its very 
hinges.  Maine could become an Aborti on Destination for the nation . 
 Maine's  treatment of children has already made national headlines.  You may recall the recent 
study by Maine's Children's Alliance.  Their report indicates Maine's rate of child abuse and neglect is the 
worst in the country.  In fact, it 's twice the nat ional average.  We would be better served to enact true 
love-affirming legislation which supports women  and their children who need love, care , high medical 
standards and resources for their families . This care can be provided by Women's Resource Centers and 
Maine's Pregnancy Resource Centers.  
 We don't need any more notoriety with regard to our children.  Maine's women and children 
deserve our very best support,  care, compassion and love...at all stages in their journey.  No exceptions.   
Please vote with clarity, compassion , and common sense.   
 Passage of LD 1619 would leave a permanent stain on the very soul of our beautiful state.  
 Oppose LD 1619.  Don't be blindsided.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Teresa M. Tumidajski  
Cape Elizabeth, Maine  
Teresa Tumidajski
CAPE ELIZABETH
LD 1619
May 1, 2023
Testimony In Opposition of LD 1619
"An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws"
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee: 
I contact you today feeling blindsided by the title of LD 1619, "An Act to Improve 
Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws."  Upon reviewing the bill, it appears to be the 
most radical abortion policy ever attempted in Maine. The bill would more aptly be 
entitled, "A Radical Expansion of Roe v Wade." 
If enacted, this bill would allow abortion on demand throughout all 9 months of 
pregnancy.  Maine's abortion law would now be contingent upon a "physician's 
professional judgment."   Late term abortions could be performed on a healthy 
mother, with a healthy, viable fetus, at any time, for any reason the physician so 
determines.  We all know what that is:  Infanticide.
Maine's long-standing abortion law which prohibits abortion after viability (except 
to save the health and life of the mother) would be trashed.  LD 1619 would, however,
permit non-medical persons the unfettered freedom to perform abortions without fear 
of criminal penalty under these circumstances.  What happened to safeguarding 
Maine women's health?  Under these conditions a receptionist, a financial planner, a 
dog catcher, a guidance counselor, or a yoga instructor could perform late term 
abortions. No problem. 
This sounds more like the wholesale revival of back alley abortions.
If enacted, LD 1619 would not only open Pandora's Box, it would surgically extract 
its very hinges.  Maine could become an Abortion Destination for the nation.
Maine's treatment of children has already made national headlines.  You may recall 
the recent study by Maine's Children's Alliance.  Their report indicates Maine's rate of
child abuse and neglect is the worst in the country.  In fact, it's twice the national 
average.  We would be better served to enact true love-affirming legislation which 
supports women and their children who need love, care, high medical standards and 
resources for their families. This care can be provided by Women's Resource Centers 
and Maine's Pregnancy Resource Centers.
We don't need any more notoriety with regard to our children.  Maine's women and 
children deserve our very best support, care, compassion and love...at all stages in 
their journey.  No exceptions.   Please vote with clarity, compassion, and common 
sense.  
Passage of LD 1619 would leave a permanent stain on the very soul of our beautiful
state. 
Oppose LD 1619. Don't be blindsided.
Respectfully,
Teresa M. Tumidajski
Cape Elizabeth, Maine

