TERESA HENDERSON
Gardiner
LD 1619
My Name is Teresa Henderson and  I am a Maine Pastor and Music Teacher.  I come 
from a large family of 7 and have lived in Maine all of my life.  
Today I speak in opposition of LD 1619 and in opposition to any pro-abortion 
legislation on the current dockets at our state capital.  
It's very clear to me, that if abortion was easily available when I was conceived 
(having been told by my mother that all first 5 of us children were malfunctions of 
birth control) its very probable my life would not be in existence to even write this 
letter today.   Fortunately, my mother did the right thing, carried me to term and 
allowed me life after her mistake of getting pregnant.
I wonder?  How many of you would not be here today also if your parents decided to 
solve their mistake by casting YOU out of the womb? 
Every life that is created starts with that beginning fetus, formed or not:   Jeremiah 
1:5. Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of
the womb I sanctified thee---Life begins at conception; to abort that life is to cut down
that life.  
There are MANY forms of successful birth control today instead of failing methods 
like the days of my parents.  We should not allow the medical field to defile their oath
(do no harm) to lead and give women tools to abort (murder) these precious lives.  
Before contemporary abortion procedures, abortions were performed in pagan 
cultures but not by God's people.  We are are a nation 'Under God'--his teachings 
declare fetuses are a life--and as also stated in my example; I was a life as a fetus, 
before I was formed that could have been aborted if it was a viable choice at that time.
We should not be carrying out pagan practices just because we now have current 
medicine that makes it easy to do.    
I oppose especially LD 1619 and would hope that our government of the great state of
Maine would stop this legislation (and all legislation for that matter ) that would cut 
down lives in their most vulnerable stages as an answer to a mistake made by another 
adult.
Please do NOT pass this legislation.
Thank you for your time
Teresa Henderson
