Theresa Beaulieu
Gray
LD 1619
Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is 
Theresa Beaulieu and I am a resident of Gray.  I am a mom of three grown children, 
and a grandmother of nine beautiful grandchildren.  I was a former health professional
and public health educator for the Maine Department of Health and Human Services.  
I’ve been a Mainer all my life.  I am submitting this in writing to testify to my strong 
opposition to LD 1619.   
When I first heard of LD 1619, it greatly and continues to disturb me.  Our third 
grandchild, Gianna, was born prematurely at 32 weeks after our daughter was 
hospitalized at 30 weeks.  Gianna weighed slightly over three pounds.  After she was 
born, she was placed in a NICU incubator at Maine Medical Center to be monitored.   
When I was allowed to visit her for the first time, I was struck by the amazing miracle
of life her little body was.   I had delivered three children of my own but she was so 
incredibly tiny.  I remember her leg was the size of my thumb.  She responded to my 
caress and held on tight to my pinky finger when I placed it in her precious little hand 
reaching from one of the side windows of the incubator.  She would suck her thumb if
she found it.  It’s a very precious memory for me.  I marveled at the expertise, care, 
and attention my granddaughter received from the Doctors, Nurses, Chaplain, and 
others who worked in the NICU.  A community surrounded her.  Every baby no 
matter the cost deserves to be given a chance to life and love.  A baby is a human 
being, a person, just like you and I made in the image of God.  A little human being 
with a body and soul with the greatest potential.  They are not a tumor.
This bill would allow Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason.  This is so very 
morally wrong.   This bill would allow a baby like our Gianna (that survived outside 
the womb) to be killed.  Because that’s what Abortion does.  Abortion kills babies.   
Maine would have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the entire country. This 
bill is beyond Abortion.  It’s Infanticide.
In speaking to my family, friends, fellow parishioners in Maine, we are all appalled 
that in our beautiful state of Maine, this kind of legislation would be considered.   
None support this bill.  It’s extreme.  Every Maine citizen born or unborn has a right 
to life and pursuit of happiness. 
Don’t you agree that the state of Maine should offer Moms and their unborn babies 
better options, to empowerment and love?   The physical and psychological risks to 
having an abortion is very high for women. “According to a recent study in a major 
scientific journal, 31% had thoughts of suicide after an abortion. In another survey, 
approximately 60% of women with post-abortion problems reported suicidal 
thoughts, with 28% attempting suicide and half of those attempting suicide two or 
more times.  D. Reardon, Aborted Women, Silent No More (Springfield, IL: Acorn 
Books, 2002).”  Maine already has a significantly higher suicide rate than the national
average.  I understand there can be many complex situations, emotions, fears for 
women of child-bearing age who find themselves pregnant with an unplanned or 
complicated pregnancy.  Yet, there are pregnancy resource centers, adoption services, 
education, counseling, churches, palliative and hospice care services in Maine eager 
to help and give support.  
Gianna is now 7 years old and attended her first Father and Daughter dance last night.
She is energetic, kind, loves to bake, a big sister to her three younger siblings, and 
still loves to cuddle. 
I would like to end with a quote from St. Pope John Paul II,  “The ultimate test of 
your greatness is the way you treat every human being."  Please uphold Maine's 
motto-the way Life should be.
I urge you to please vote NO on LD 1619
Theresa Beaulieu
