Tony Belliveau
Waterville
LD 1619
Why We Don't Need Abortion
Medical experts agree that fetal pain begins at 12 weeks gestation and may even be 
felt as early as eight weeks. But perhaps the best source for firsthand experience with 
fetal pain is an abortionist.
As early as 1976, those performing abortions realized that the procedure is painful for 
the dying fetus. Abortionist John Szenes describes a preborn baby fighting for his life 
during a saline injection, saying: “All of a sudden one noticed that at the time of the 
saline infusion there was a lot of activity in the uterus. That’s not fluid currents. 
That’s obviously the fetus being distressed by swallowing the concentrated salt 
solution and kicking violently and that’s, to all intents and purposes, the death 
trauma.”1
Fetal pain is a reason to end abortion
Saline solution used in this type of abortion causes intense pain when injected under 
the skin. This solution is injected into the fetus’ sac, burning her from the outside and 
poisoning her from the inside. During this slow death, which takes about two hours, 
she thrashes around inside the womb. In spite of the fact that her heart is not 
physically touched by the solution, her heart rate more than doubles as a response to 
it.
She dies solely from the pain.
 
Today’s Abortions Are Just as Violent
Saline abortions fell out of use in the 1990s because of the risk to mothers and the 
frequency of babies being born alive. At the time of Roe v. Wade, saline abortion was
the most commonly used form of abortion after 16 weeks. But although the methods 
have changed, they are no less violent.
Former abortionist Dr. Anthony Levatino confirms this as he describes 1st trimester 
dilation and curettage abortions and 2nd trimester dilation and evacuation 
abortions—two common abortion procedures that tear babies limb from limb, finally 
crushing the skull so that it will fit through the cervix. According to Levatino: “You 
know you did it [the abortion] right if you crush down on the instrument and white 
material runs out of the cervix. That was the baby’s brains.”
Dr. Levatino also describes babies being deprived of shelter and nutrients inside the 
womb by abortion pills and being poisoned with a digoxin injection piercing the 
baby’s head or chest. This causes the baby’s death by cardiac arrest.
In Stenberg v. Carhart, the Supreme Court provides a gruesome description of a D&E 
abortion: “The fetus, in many cases, dies just as a human adult or child would: it 
bleeds to death as it is torn apart limb by limb.”
The ugliness of abortion is not a foreign concept to anyone involved in it.
These inhumane death procedures would not be acceptable for any animal, yet they 
are used regularly to kill the most innocent and fragile human beings.
This is a 6-month-old, who feels pain, moves, is formed...what gives anyone the right 
to abort this child?
A fetus at 6 months
The pro-abortion movement denies that the fetus feels pain, but anyone who performs
an abortion knows this is not true. The uncaring attitude of many abortionists is 
summed up in the words of Anne Marie Keary, the head of Britain’s National 
Abortion Campaign back in 1996: “Pain is a factor in life; could an element of pain be
a justification for no more abortions? I don’t think so.”2
Even Judge Anthony Kennedy, though he voted for a ban of partial-birth abortions, 
argued against the ban of very similar D&E abortions, saying that such a ban would 
“construct a substantial obstacle to the abortion right.”
To the pro-abortion movement, the right to abortion trumps every argument, even that
of fetal pain.
 
When Does a Fetus Feel Pain?
An article from the Charlotte Lozier Institute reviews a 2019 study entitled 
“Reconsidering Fetal Pain” published in the Journal of Medical Ethics. According to 
the organization:
    A new study “Reconsidering Fetal Pain” confirms that babies in the womb can feel 
pain as early as 12 weeks old. Writing in the Journal of Medical Ethics, Stuart W.G. 
Derbyshire and John C. Bockmann state: “Overall, the evidence, and a balanced 
reading of the evidence, points towards an immediate and unreflective pain 
experience mediated by the developing function of the nervous system as early as 12 
weeks.”
Dr. David Prentice, research director and vice president of the Charlotte Lozier 
Institute, responded to the study, saying:
    Unborn babies feel pain. The science has clearly shown for years that unborn 
children can perceive pain in the womb, but this is a significant admission by doctors 
on both sides of the abortion debate, recognizing that even early in human 
development, the unborn can feel pain. And as the authors note, “the mere experience 
of pain … is morally significant.” Science again points to the humanity of the unborn.
3D ultrasound of a baby at about 21 weeks
3D ultrasound of a baby at about 21 weeks
Kanwaljeet Anand, professor of pediatrics, anesthesiology, and neurobiology at the 
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, wrote an expert report on the subject 
of fetal pain in 2004 to assist the Supreme Court in its assessment of the Partial-Birth 
Abortion Ban Act.  Dr. Anand’s report summarizes fetal pain receptor development:
    4 – 6 weeks: The fetus’ cerebral cortex is formed, and she develops reflexes.
    6 – 8 weeks: Brain waves can be recorded, and the nervous system starts to 
develop. The fetus’ lips become sensitive to the touch around seven weeks. By eight 
weeks, she is moving around the uterus to make herself more comfortable. She begins
to react to harmful stimuli.
    10 weeks: Her whole body is sensitive to the touch. She can now swallow, squint, 
frown, pucker her brow, and make a fist if her palm is touched. The most common 
forms of abortion at this age are suction and dilation and curettage. Imagine what an 
uncomfortable, if not painful, death this is on her sensitive little body.
    11 weeks: The fetus will start to swallow more amniotic fluid if it is artificially 
sweetened and less if it is bitter. Saline injection is used after 16 weeks; yet at 11 
weeks the fetus can already respond to taste.
    12 weeks: The fetus’ neurotransmitters can send pain signals to the brain. Her 
cerebral cortex is only about 30 to 40 percent developed, but her response to pain is at
least proportional to that amount, as confirmed by A. William Liley, the “Father of 
Modern Fetology” and Mortimer Rosen, an American researcher.
    13 – 17 weeks: The fetus’ “general sense organs” begin to differentiate into “free 
nerve terminations” responding to pain, temperature and chemicals, “lamellated 
corpuscles” responding to pointed pressure, “tactile corpuscles,” “neuromuscular 
spindles,” and “neurotendinous end organs” responding to light and pointed pressure. 
Her vocal cords and auditory sense are now present, and she may cry if air bubbles 
get in the uterus.
    After 14 weeks: The fetus will cry, wiggle her body, or throw out her arms if her 
mother moves too suddenly or if she hears a loud noise. She must be sedated during 
surgery, just like any other patient. If she is irritated, her heartbeat will increase and 
she will move around, showing this sensation to be unpleasant.
At this point in her development, the fetus weighs only about two ounces and is about 
five inches long. She is small enough to fit in the palm of her mother’s hand, yet she 
can react to outside stimuli just like a grown person can. And even with a developed 
response system, she can legally be killed by chemical burns, dismemberment, 
suffocation, starvation, and worse while her mother is convinced by her killers that 
there is no fetal pain.
If this kind of treatment is illegal for children, adults, and animals, it should be illegal 
for the preborn as well.
