Tracy Sullens
Bucksport 
LD 1619
My name is Tracy Sullens and I am a husband, father of 5 children, special education 
teacher and pastor in Bucksport, Maine. I am writing to strongly oppose LD 1619. I 
understand that Maine already has laws concerning abortion and the governor stated 
during her campaign that she would not support changing the current laws. Therefore,
I see no need for a change in the current laws. With the advancement of ultrasounds 
and medical science, we know that the removing of any restrictions on abortion would
be killing babies within the wound that are able to survive as early as 24 weeks after 
conception. It has also been proven by science, that life begins at conception and a 
child’s heart beat can be detected at 6 weeks after conception. 
I am first and foremost a Christian and a firm believer that only God, who created all 
things, has the authority to determine what is true and right. He has clearly done that 
and revealed it to us in His word, the Bible. He commands that we are not to take 
another person’s life, but instead we are to preserve life. All humans have value inside
and outside of the womb because we are created in the image of God. He also 
instructs us to protect and speak for the weak, helpless, vulnerable, and those who do 
not have a voice. I write to speak for and protect all unborn babies that will not have a
voice and whose lives will be taken by medical professionals who have also pledged 
to save lives. 
Exodus 20:13 You shall not murder.
I remind you that you were placed in the position of authority that you are in by your 
creator, whether you chose to acknowledge it or not. God established government and
authorities to protect citizens and to punish evil doers. It is your responsibility to 
protect the lives of unborn children. Those children have the same rights of life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness that we do. 
Romans 13:1-2 Every person is to be subject to the governing authorities. For there is 
no authority except from God, and those which exist are established by God. 
This may or may not change your position or how you will vote, but it is my 
responsibility to speak for the the unborn babies that do not have a voice. It is also my
responsibility to remind you that you are in the position you are in by God’s authority,
and that you will be held accountable to Him for how you use that authority and how 
you vote on issues. I plead with you to vote NO on LD 1619 and to protect the lives 
of your constituents, even the ones not yet born. 
Sincerely,
Tracy Sullens
Bucksport, Maine
