Trish Morin
Cape Elizabeth
LD 1619
LD 1619
Dear Sen. Carney,  Rep. Moonen and members of Judiciary Committee, 
I am writing today in opposition to LD1619. Mainers are a special type of person. We
know we have a special state and so try to protect it at all cost. This bill would in fact 
go against all that Mainers stand for, life and liberty. Infanticide is not something we 
want to be known for, nor do we want to put our women in a place of compromised 
health. LD1619 would allow people who are non medical doctors to perform 
abortions up until the baby is born, and also allow protections from any penalties of 
malpractice. How is this safe? The bill appears to circumvent any protections for both 
mother and child, other than protecting her name. Why are we not working to affirm 
life and therefore benefit the mother, child and our great state? This in turn would  be 
a great asset for  the whole state and preserve its moral character that we are known 
for. Another consequence of LD1619 is that Maine could become a destination for the
barbaric killing of an innocent child in the womb. That is not the state I care to live in 
or promote as a destination. It sends a message that we care more about the wholesale 
killing of lives than the moral care of our people and protection of the environment 
and resources. Please do not make Maine a killing field; don’t strap  this lovely state 
with the moniker of killing babies at will. Please spend some time finding ways for 
women to become good mothers AND have a career, for instance. It should never 
have to be a choice for a mother, who creates life. We cannot afford to lose more 
people to other states for work. We have one of the oldest populations in the country, 
and that also lessens our workforce. Now you would want to decrease our population 
further and possibly risk the lives of healthy women? Why? There appears to be no 
good reason for this. Maine does not need to be a leader in this gross action of 
infanticide. We must be leaders for a healthy lifestyle and promote women and their 
children at all cost. Bills LD 776 & LD 1343 are equally as destructive for our state 
and I ask you to vote NO on these as well.
Please vote NO on LD 1619.
