Tylene  Bergeron 
Cornville 
LD 1619
I Tylene I Bergeron at a very young age was faced with choosing life or ending the 
life of my unborn child. Addicted to cocaine and drinking alcohol I felt my only 
choice was to terminate my baby.  I sat alone in the abortion clinic crying.  Hated 
what I believed I had done to my baby and hating myself.  A nurse realized that I truly
didn't want to take the life of my baby but I had no money and believed my baby was 
injured by my behavior.  The nurse explained that very likely my baby was just fine 
and I should discuss it with an OBGYN. I had no doctor, no means to get to a doctor 
and no money.  I left there determined to never drink or consume cocaine again.  I 
didn't get prenatal care as there was no way.  Right before her birth my partner beat 
me very badly as he hoped to end her life. My hits were all taken to the stomach.  She 
was born 100% healthy and I was able to get to a pediatrician with my neighbors help.
My nipples were inverted and my baby was hungry. Her pediatrician spoke little 
English and his wife spoke no English.  His wife was able to get her to latch. I used 
my clothing for diapers and washed them in the sink and hung to dry.  My daughter is 
now 31 years old and so healthy. My daughter has achieved way more then I could've 
even dreamed for her. My daughter is a home owner and earns a very good income. 
All mothers should have to watch a 3D video of their unborn baby and hear the 
heartbeat then decide if they can terminate.  I recently sat with a woman after her 3rd 
suicide attempt; heartbroken still years later. She was able to see her baby as they put 
her baby into a specimen bag. She asked for the baby to be removed so she could hold
her and see her. The doctor refused and took the baby in the bag out of the room 
abruptly.  She said she truly didn't realize she was carrying a real baby until she saw a
glimpse of her baby. She said she thought her baby was still just a large blood clot not
a real living baby.  My heart bleeds for her that could've been me.  I struggled as a 
single mother with no job, but we made it.  I couldn't imagine life without my oldest 
daughter; she truly is my heart. 
