Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Victoria Kanagy, and I’m a resident of Dexter. I’m here to testify in opposition to 
LD 1619. 
I am testifying today because I am the mother of two children, a daughter who is in the hands of 
God and a beautiful six-month-old son who is my rainbow after the storm. 
I have also experienced pregnancy complications that have threatened my life. I am here to try to 
help you understand that all life has value. My six-month-old ’s life has just as much value as the 
daughter I lost at seventeen weeks pregnant, and just as much value as I do sitting before you 
today. 
In the fall of 2020, my husband and I found out we were pregnant with our ﬁrst child. Soon after, 
I became very sick with a rare and little-known complication called Hyperemesis gravidarum. 
This illness almost took my life, but I knew no matter what, my baby deserved a chance. 
However, seventeen weeks into an intensely difficult pregnancy, we learned that our baby had 
passed unexpectedly. 
I never left the hospital and after almost forty-eight hours of grueling labor, I delivered the tiniest 
child I had ever seen. The midwife placed our seventeen-week-old daughter on my chest. She 
weighed 2.3 ounces and was seven inches long, and her name is Anya Hope Kanagy. No one in 
that hospital room could have denied what she was, a baby. 
She was well before viability and well in the current legal limit to receive an abortion in this 
state. Due to her age, we received no death certiﬁcate because our county and our state refuse to 
acknowledge that her life mattered. I wish every one of you could have the chance to see and 
hold a baby at seventeen weeks gestation. I wish you could hold their tiny hand in yours the way 
that I did that day; the worst day, because that was the day I lost not a clump of cells, but my 
child. 
My daughter that days earlier had been alive with a heart that beat around 160 bpm, who 
could kick me as she moved around, and who even had her own set of unique 
ﬁngerprints. I think most people if they saw and held a baby that age would realize the 
cruelty of ripping the limbs from that child while they are still alive. That is why I ask you 
to please oppose this extreme bill that dehumanizes the life of my daughter, and all 
preborn children just like her. Please vote ought not to pass. Thank you.
