TESTIMONY in OPPOSITION to LD 1619 May 10, 2023 
Good day, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Victoria Bucklin and I live in Appleton. I'm here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
History is a strange thing. We are told that it is written by the victors and that if we don't learn 
from it, we will repeat it. Today we grapple with the history of slavery in America. Professor and 
economist Glenn Loury writes that slavery is "an American tragedy" which has left ”an indelible 
imprint on our nation's soul." The Dred-Scott Decision of 1857 ruled that the U.S. Constitution 
did not extend American citizenship to people of African descent. its overt racism, perceived 
judicial activism, and poor legal reasoning led Chieflustice Charles Evans Hughes to call it our 
”greatest self-inﬂicted wound". 
Today, you have before you a bill, LD 1619 also known as the Governor's Bill, which would 
extend the right to abortion to a mother for her viable child in the womb. We cannot deny the 
science that tells us that this child is unique, containing DNA from both parents, and that this 
unique human being can survive outside the mother's womb. Just as Dred-Scott ruled that 
black Africans in America could not enjoy the rights and privileges the Constitution conferred 
upon American citizens, this bill would also take away all the rights and privileges of the viable, 
unborn child. 
Today you have to answer a number of questions that will have important ramiﬁcations to 
Maine now and into the future. 
Do you want Maine to be a state that caved to the economic interests of abortion providers 
rather than supporting the physical, mental, and spiritual well-being of all its people? 
D0 you want Maine to be known as a state that called killing a viable child in the womb 
‘reproductive health care’? 
Do you want Maine to have an indelible imprint on our state's soul? 
Today, you are the gatekeepers to a bill that would put Maine on the “wrong side of history”. 
Keep the law as currently written and as was promised to us by Governor Mills during her 
election campaign. Be a champion of life and speak up for those who have no voice now. 
Vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS on LD 1619.
