Vincent Caccese
Bangor
LD 1619
Testimony in opposition to LD 1619
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary:  
My name is Vincent Caccese, a resident of Bangor Maine and I am testifying against 
the bill
entitled LD 1619 (a law that would allow late term abortion). 
As a Maine citizen, I am appalled that the state would consider any legislation of this 
nature. My first thought is that I cannot even take my automobile to be inspected in 
Maine without a licensed mechanic to work on it, yet the State is proposing to allow 
abortions, the taking of a human life, to be conducted without a license and without 
penalty. How ironic, and even worse, how immoral.
 Furthermore, this law would allow a mother and a licensed doctor to terminate a life 
after the point of viability without the requirement that the mother’s life is in 
jeopardy. An individual life has rights that we should protect, no matter what 
environment it exists in, including inside the mother’s womb. Maine should not be 
willing to allow a viable and innocent life to be taken using a decision by a woman 
and her doctor alone. This life is separate from the mother, it has its own unique 
DNA,. It is a unique person and accordingly also has rights that should be protected.  
This is not a matter of choice. This is granting freedom to kill a viable person. 
There are laws in our country restricting killing and we all know it is wrong. When 
someone  kills in self-defense there is a trial by a judge and jury. The person that kills 
in self-defense doesn’t get to decide on their own that it was self-defense. Where is 
the judge and jury for the defenseless unborn? A doctor and the mother being the 
judge and jury is unjust and a violation of the child’s rights. The unborn and young 
are the most vulnerable in our society and if we adopt a moral mindset, it would be to 
protect the unborn and not just eliminate them because they may be malformed or 
even worse may be an inconvenience.   
The State of Maine is quickly turning away from the core values of independence and 
decency it once had, and now it is proposing laws that would kill the most innocent 
and vulnerable in our society.  PLEASE VOTE AGAINST THIS BILL.

