Virginia Pratt
Gray
LD 1619
“Senator Carney and
Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on
Judiciary, my name is Virginia S Pratt, and I am a resident of Gray. I am here to
testify in opposition to LD 1619.”
Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason is too extreme for Maine.
This bill would allow a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed.
 Maine would have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the entire country. 
When I was just 18 years old, I experienced my own abortion. I was going into my 
second trimester I felt lost and hopeless. That day was a day I will never forget. I felt 
life being cut from me I knew that I had made the biggest mistake of my life. I 
remember that Doctor telling the nurse “To get rid of it”.  I wish I had someone to talk
to me, but I felt alone as I know many women feel alone.  As  a mother I knew I 
should have protected my child, but instead I took my child’s life. This would haunt 
me for years until I finally received help and healing from something that was 
supposed to be my right and would make me free. It only caused depression and 
shame.
I have wonderful nephews and nieces whose mothers gave birth at 26 weeks and 30 
weeks.  The child at 26 weeks needed some medical attention, help to breathe etc, but 
nevertheless he did and today he is a thriving part of the community and is himself a 
dad. His sister arrived at 30 weeks gestational age, again she is graduated from high 
school and is loved by her family as the unique human being that she is. 
 
We had twins, a boy & girl, born at 25 weeks gestational age and have a full life. We 
did lose our sweet niece at 19 years old, but her life had so much value and changed 
her family tremendously, Her twin brother continues to live a full life.   
How can we justify this bill taking lives.  With medical technology and the science 
backing up life, how can we say it is ok to terminate a life anytime up to birth? I know
my family appreciates the medical team that saved their children that were born early.
If I could, I would go back and undo the abortion I had if only I could. Women today 
need understanding, love and help when they find themselves in an unplanned 
pregnancy. Not a surgical procedure to take the life of their child up to any stage in 
pregnancy.  This bill is too extreme for the State of Maine who’s motto is “The Way 
Life should be.”
