Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Wendy Munseil, and I am a resident of Livermore. l am here to testify in opposition 
to LD 1619. 
I am not here for political reasons or to support any political party. I am here because I am 
Christian, and as such, I have to speak out against something that I know, with all my heart, is 
horribly wrong. 
LD 1619 expands Maine law to allow abortions to be performed past the time of viability. Not 
just past the previous benchmark of viability, 24 to 28 weeks, but up to the moment of birth! 
Think about that for a moment. The implications are chilling. 
Making late term abortions legal is not moral, ethical, or even needed. Our current abortion law, 
as stated on the Office of the Maine Attorney General website states, 
“Maine law also provides exceptions to the viability restriction to save the life or health of the 
pregnant person or in the case of a fatal fetal diagnosis. ” So why the push to make that 
process easier? Why the push to make Maine have one of the most extreme abortion laws in 
the United States? 
It doesn’t matter what stage of gestation an unborn child is in, whether it be germinal, 
embryonic, or fetal. The fact is, all unborn human beings desen/e to be protected! They havea 
right to live! For those who argue that at the earliest stages an unborn baby isn’t actually a 
human, I refer you to this quote from the American College of Pediatricians, When Life Begins. 
“The predominance of human biological research confirms that human life begins at 
conception —fertiIization. At fertilization, the human being emerges as a whole, genetically 
distinct, individuated zygotic living human organism, a member of the species Homo sapiens, 
needing only the proper environment in order to grow and develop. The difference between the 
individual in its adult stage and in its zygotic stage is one of form, not nature.” 
A couple of weeks ago I watched a sonogram of my first trimester granddaughter. She had the 
hiccups! While I smiled with love and joy, and the incredible wonder of her existence, I was 
uncomfortably aware that not all unborn babies are viewed the same way. It grieved me, 
because I believe that all unborn human babies deserve the right to life. 
Taking life away from human beings should never be made easier. Never. Please let LD 1619 
die... not more unborn babies. 
Maine Attorney General, 
https://www.maine.gov/ag/docs/Abortion%20Rights%20in%20Maine.pdf 
AMERICAN COLLEGE OF PEDIATRICIANS, WHEN LIFE BEGINS. HTTPS://ACPEDS.ORG/ 
POSITION-STATEMENTS/\NHEN-HUMAN-LIFE-BEGINS
