Madam Chair and Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Wendy Merrill and I live in Benton. I am testifying today in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
Governor Mills proposed bill allowing abortion up to 9 months is 
nothing short of wicked. Abortion up to 9 months‘?!! Who are we? Who 
have we become? 
The Governor would have us believe this would be rare. Where have we 
heard that before? Safe. Legal. RARE. Remember that? At least 25% of 
women have aborted. Not rare. The ‘rare’ was a lie perpetuated in order 
to make killing our children palatable. The terminology of LD 1619 does 
not limit to rare cases. As a matter of fact, it erases any stipulation. 
There are no limits at all! 
A New York Times article published on Dec. 31, 2022, quotes Augustine 
Fuentes, an Anthropologist at Princeton University, “We think we are 
having a debate in the U.S. about when life begins, but we are not. We 
are having a debate about when society is going to decide when the 
person counts, & not only when the person counts, but WHICH person 
counts more.” 
Have we come to a place in society where mothers think they count 
more than their child? Every mother I know would take a bullet in order 
to protect her child. She would sacriﬁce her own life in order to save her 
child. This is what mothers are made of. It seems this bills’ focus is on 
the stronger, more powerful, more developed mother. The innocent, 
weak, powerless babyis left with no defense at all. 
This is worth mentioning; after a woman chooses to abort her child and 
the dust has settled, there comes a point where she realizes that instead 
of sacriﬁcing herself for her child, she literally sacriﬁced her child for 
herself. In the deepest places of a woman’s soul, this reality wrecks her. 
I know this from personal experience and from more than a decade of 
helping women heal aﬂer abortion. If aborting a baby in the ﬁrst 
trimester devastates women, imagine what it will do to those that aborta 
baby at 9 months. 
The overwhelming majority of Mainers (including those who approve of 
early abortion) adamantly oppose this extreme legislation that would 
exterminate our most valuable resource: BABIES. 
Should our new motto be “Maine. Our once peaceful state - now 
shrouded in a dark, foreboding cloud, where the shed blood of innocent 
babies ﬂows over our land, coursing through our streams and rivers. 
Where We kill our babies and yours too at our expense while selling our 
souls. No limits. Any reason. Just come. Maine. The Way Life 
Should(n ’t) Be.” 
This is barbaric. Enough is enough. This insanity must STOP! Join the 
overwhelming majority of infant-loving Mainers and vote ‘ought not to 
pass’.
