Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Wendi Clarke, and I live in Buxton. I am testifying today in opposition of LD1619. 
My mom could have aborted me or any one or all of my ﬁve siblings. l‘m so grateful to God and 
to her that she didn't! I am the ﬁfth of her six babies. My Mom suffered from severe depression, 
divorced my dad when the youngest of us was five and fled with us in tow 3000 miles back to 
Maine. I don't know if my Mom ever contemplated getting an abortion; however, since she died 
of emphysema when I was 25, I can't ask her now. 
As a young adult, I recall thinking that I couldn't possibly even imagine having an abortion; 
although, I had compassion in my heart at the thought of someone else, in desperation, taking 
that drastic measure. One day years later, a close friend of mine (with three children) casually 
mentioned that she had had four abortions thus far. My outward reaction was muted; although 
inwardly, I was taken aback at her casualness and mourned the loss of those four babies. 
In the summer of 2000, I professed faith in Jesus Christ as my Lord and Savior. Over time, asI 
contemplated the holiness of God and realized that His perspective is ALWAYS in our best 
interest, His stance on controversial social issues became mine. He knitted each one of us -- 
and EVERY pre-born -- in our mother's womb. We are fearfully and wonderfully made for LIFE. 
I've only been pregnant twice, and I can't imagine my life without our two amazing daughters 
and our three grandchildren. Tragically, our ﬁrst grandchild, Ella, was delivered stillborn at 34 
weeks gestation. She was beautiful upon delivery and I'll see her again. Astonishingly, what 
God brought to my mind a decade or so ago, is that any fertilized eggs that didn't implant (due 
to my use of an IUD as a means of birth control), are PERSONS . . . alive in Heaven . . . and 
that in addition to our granddaughter, they'll greet me upon my arrival! I haven't ‘done the math" 
however, sufﬁce it to say that there will be many new faces at that joyous reunion! 
My husband and I are foster parents of a baby girl, l’ll call her Angel Grace, who turns one year 
old later this month. God protected Angel Grace from being aborted when her mommy was 
driven to a NH abortion clinic by Angel Grace's paternal grandfather. Upon arrival at the clinic, 
her mommy was pressured to get out of the car, go inside with Angel Grace and to exit without 
her. Thankfully, praise God, her mommy didn't succumb to the pressure. 
Despite my deep sadness that abortion is popularized and pushed in Maine AT ALL, it 
is. However, let's not go from bad to worse. Please vote against LD1619. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Wendolyn (Wendi) Clarke 
18 Edgewood Road 
Buxton, ME 04093
