Winnie Lee
Scarborough
LD 1619
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary,  
 
My name is Winnie Lee. I am a resident of Scarborough and a mother of two young 
daughters. I am writing to testify in opposition to LD 1619. I am a child of Chinese 
immigrant parents raised in a tumultuous home environment. We were impoverished 
and my sisters and I were subject to emotional abuse and neglect. Despite such a 
negative upbringing, we each grew up to be successful adults. I worked in corporate 
finance in midtown Manhattan earning a comfortable salary. Because of my 
upbringing, I decided that I would not want to have children. Yet, ten years into my 
marriage, my husband and I were surprised to find out I was pregnant. There were 
many doubts and tears as I struggled emotionally about my pregnancy. My therapist 
at the time brought up the option of abortion. Due to my religious beliefs as a 
Christian, I did not indulge that option. Rather, I knew I was responsible for creating 
this life and I would take on the responsibility of raising my child. Little did I realize 
how my children are my greatest teachers on this side of earth. Becoming a mother 
has been such a healing process. I often reflect on my choice, had I decided to exert 
my will to live “freely” by choosing abortion over the rights of my unborn child, I 
would not have known the joys and sorrows of motherhood. 
Our country provides us with tremendous freedom. However, freedom without 
responsibility is a slippery slope. According to Dr. Viktor Frankl, “Freedom, 
however, is not the last word. Freedom is only part of the story and half of the truth. 
Freedom is but the negative aspect of the whole phenomenon whose positive aspect is
responsibleness. In fact, freedom is in danger of degenerating into mere arbitrariness 
unless it is lived in terms of responsibleness. That is why I recommend that the Statue 
of Liberty on the East Coast be supplemented by a Statue of Responsibility on the 
West Coast.”1 
Please oppose this bill that is extreme and unnecessary since our current law already 
addresses medical necessity abortions.  
 
1. Frankl. V.E. (1992). Man’s Search for Meaning, 4th edition. Boston: Beacon Press,
134. 
