May l, 2023 
Honorable Senator Anne Carney, Chair 
Honorable Representative Matt Moonen, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Room 438 
State House Station I00 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Public Hearing Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 1619: An Act to Improve Maine’s 
I Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of The Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
Hello, my name is Zoe Gottlieb and I am a 15 year old nursing student and a born and raised 
resident of the great state of Maine. I am speaking today in opposition to L.D. 1619, but am also 
against the other two bills you heard today, L.D. 776 and L.D. 1343._ 
Through studying anatomy and basic biology, I have learned about the scientiﬁc fact thata 
developing embryo in the womb is a human being and thus deserves a future and rights. Our 
number one fundamental right as human beings is life. How are we, as a society, able to take this 
fundamental right away from a child before they even have the chance to defend themselves? As 
a society, how are we preying on the most defenseless and innocent people among us? 
Our laws currently state that abortion is legal up to the point of viability, which is considered 
around 26 weeks gestation. A baby of this age has just developed features as delicate as its 
eyelashes in the womb. A baby of this age can open its eyes and see, can hear noises and respond 
toythem, and can even recognize their own mother’s voice. 
Babies have survived as early as 20 Weeks outside the womb, (Curtis Means, Alabama borna 
premature twin survives and is still alive), so, disregarding morals here, who are we to say what 
the age of viability is and base a law off of that? 
Babies of this age can feel pain, and abortions not only cause trauma to the mothers’ body, along 
with their mental state, but horrendous pain and agony to a growing baby. The violent procedures 
we refer to as “life-giving ” and “empowering ” choices, are the exact opposite. Based on polling, 
only 8% of Americans say that abortions should be permitted up until the third trimester, and 
only 6% say that abortion should be allowed up until birth. Eighty percent of Americans say 
abortion should usually be illegal in the third trimester (“Where Do Americans Standon
<
v 
Abortion? Public Opinion Polling on Americans ’ Positions on Abortion. Susan B. Anthony 
Pro-Life America). We are supporting a murderous, inhumane act by allowing mothers to decide 
whether or not to kill their own children.' 
Abortions not only tear babies limb from limb, but carry immense risk to the mother. Duringa 
second trimester abortion, there are severe risks of uterine perforation, cervical laceration, 
infection, hemorrhage, maternal death, and future pregnancy complications. Is this empowering? 
Passing the LD 1619 legislation would be placing the United States on the same level as 
countries like North Korea and China, who have also set these kinds of abortion laws in place 
(along with a few other countries). Do we want to relegate our country to the same level as these 
two repressive regimes? I, along with many Americans, do not believe that passing this bill isa 
pro-woman or empowering decision. This law would propose that we would not only murder 
developing human beings, but murder fully formed people who can feel pain and who need and 
depend on their mothers for life. 
Passing this legislation is supporting a culture of death. A culture where life doesn’t matter. 
Where children are not our future, because we won’t allow them to have one. Passing this bill 
would allow abortionists to legally murder countless more children, and we cannot allow it. 
Thank you.
