 
 
 
January 31, 2023  
 
Hon. Senator  Mark Lawrence , Senate Chair  
Hon. Representative Paige Z eigler , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on E nergy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Comments on LD 177 : An Act to Amend the Authority of the Public Utilities Commission Regarding Special Rate Contracts  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative  Zeigler , and members of the En ergy, Utilities, and Technology Committee :  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, and I am submitting this letter on behalf of the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 large and small employers across Maine . Due to a scheduling 
conflict, I apologize for being unable to deliver our testimony in person, however , we believe it important  to be on record in  
opposition to LD 177.  
 
First, I believe it is important to go on record with indicat ing the amount of respect we have as an organization for the 
Public Advocate and the sponsor of this bill. The Chamber has spoken with both individuals to better understand their reasons  for 
submitting this legislation. And while we do understand why this legislation  has been  introduced, we do respectfully have a few 
concerns that we felt important to raise.  
 
We believe that LD 177 would deny customers and businesses their right to freely choose their lawyers – as it would 
prevent lawyers from reviewing co nfidential information on behalf of one customer and then representing another customer on a 
similar issue. The Chamber has many members who seek Special Rate Contracts, and we believe that it is critical that the busi ness 
community has the free ability to  select whomever to represent their interests in front of the PUC . Furthermore, we b elieve the 
proposed legislation conflicts with the principles inherent in statutes in the bar rules, PUC rules, and the use of protective orders to 
maintain confidentiality.   
To conclude,  we understand why the legislation has been introduced, and respect the Public Advocate’s reason for doing 
so, and we understand that in the Public Advocates position is this would just be giving the PUC the ability to use this tool. But we 
believe that companies who invest a lot of resources into having the best legal representation should be able to do so wit h no 
negative consequences. Limiting the access  of information  to a company’s legal team does not accomplish that and we would 
encourage the committee to strongly consider the negative impacts this could have on the business community who has interest at 
the PUC.  Thank you and I will be available for the work session to answer any questions and provide any additional information that 
the committee may need.  
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
