District 104    Charleston, Dexter, Exeter, Garland, Stetson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
(207) 287-1440
TTY: (207) 287-4469
           Steven D. Foster
     56 Silvers Mills Rd. 
          Dexter, ME 04930
     Residence: (207) 924-4409
        Steven.Foster@legislature.maine.gov
January 31, 2023
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, fellow members of the Committee on Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology, I’m Steve Foster, Representative for House District 32, serving 
Charleston, Dexter, Exeter, Garland, Stetson, and a part of Bradford, here to present 
LD177, “An Act to Amend the Authority of the Public Utilities Commission Regarding 
Special Rate Contracts”.
As you’re aware, Maine electric rates are among the highest in the country. One 
website, Quickelectricity.com, comparing states’ rates from March of 2022, shows 
Maine with the 6th highest residential rate and the 9th highest commercial rate. Other 
listings show comparable results. Maine’s high electricity costs not only take a larger 
portion of our citizens’ monthly budgets, but also put our commercial large electricity 
users at a competitive disadvantage with those located in most other states.
For several years, when a company reaches a point where the cost of electricity in 
Maine may force them to relocate, go through bankruptcy, or cease operations, they are 
allowed to seek relief by negotiating a Special Rate Contract with their utility. As I 
understand it, these negotiations often require the sharing of business information that 
would be considered proprietary, and might put the company at further disadvantage 
should it be divulged to competitors. Information from these negotiations might also 
invite other companies to seek an SRC using similar tactics.
The information shared during these negotiations may come to light when the SRC is 
reviewed by the Public Utilities Commission for approval. Current statute allows the PUC 
to deny access to this information, but the Public Advocate’s Office has concerns the 
language is not as clear as it should be. I’m presenting LD177 which would add language, 
clarifying the ability of the PUC to shield information shared during SRC negotiations.
From my past experiences in regard to proprietary information in industry, I understand 
where protection of this information may be necessary. I look forward to hearing more 
from others regarding their positions on this bill and to the deliberations of this 
committee as we consider its merits. I thank you for your time and would try to answer 
any questions you may have.
Respectfully submitted, 
Steve Foster
State Representative
