PO Box 263 - 254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
RKZHMOND ME 04857 
U I 
I I I I PHONEI207~737~409é - FAXI 207037-7150 
E MAIL gt/ ,3;/\;_@»_g1f_:» _/;. ggg¢i2v~IA 0%; 
MAINE RURAL WATER ASSOCIATION WEBSWE3 WW‘”-MNNERWA-ORG 
To: Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee for Energy Utilities 
and Technology 
From: Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director 
Date: April 26, 2023 
Re: Testimony in Support of L.D. 1655, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Consumer-owned 
Water Utilities 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Cormnittee for Energy 
Utilities and Technology, thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. My name is Brad 
Sawyer, and I am the Deputy Director of the Maine Rural Water Association. 
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-proﬁt organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 300 
members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities ﬁrom around the 
state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy enviromnent through the 
proper treatment of wastewater. 
We appreciate the PUC’s willingness to work on improving the regulatory framework for 
consumer-owned water utilities and we largely support this legislation with one exception. Our members 
support sections one through eight, believing that these changes will assist in streamlining necessary 
steps for water utilities. Particularly important to them are the changes proposed to the notice 
requirements, and the rate adjustment mechanism detailed in section eight. 
Consumer-owned water utilities have long believed that newspaper requirements are not always 
the best way to reach their customers and this legislation recognizes and supports that position. MRWA 
also believes that small and ﬁequent rate increases help support consistent ﬁmding for utilities ina 
changing world while impacting ratepayers in a more manageable way. Section eight allows for utilities 
to slowly and responsibly increase their rates to meet modern demands that fall on them. In our current 
turbulent times 1.5% does not keep up with inﬂation, it is simply an assisting measure. Should the 
committee consider raising the proposed 1.5% limit or allow the PUC to adjust that limit due to current 
economic conditions, we would support that change. V 
Additionally, with respect to rate case ﬁlings for consumer owned utilities, one of the supporting 
documents needed for the initial rate ﬁling is the prior years’ audit. At cmrent, there are many utilities 
that seek rate increases, yet cannot proceed as their audits are not complete. If the Committee would 
please consider authorizing the PUC with the discretion to grant a waiver from the audit requirement, 
this would be exceptionally helpful. Perhaps language could be included to require the utility seeking 
the rate adjustment to ﬁle the audit within 12 months of the new tariffed rate. 
MRWA has concerns with section nine of this bill, although not every idea encompassed in it. 
Section 9, part 2, allows for a bifurcated rate when combining utilities to acknowledge the current state 
of the two or more entities. We believe this is a fantastic idea, and regardless of the outcome of this 
section we urge the committee to include section 9.2. The consolidation process is often a contentious 
and political activity that requires any entity involved to pick a side. The Public Utilities Connnission 
otten declines to weigh in on topics because they may need to adjudicate a challenge at a later date.
While we support their interest in helping utilities, I do not believe that they fully grasp how combative 
this process can become. With most consolidations, the legislative process is not the biggest hurdle. It 
certainly requires steadfast plamiing, coordination, and outreach, but ultimately it is a small section of 
the entire process that relies on elected officials who understand the necessity to make difﬁcult 
decisions. Garnering community support and passing multiple municipal referenda is a protracted 
process and takes signiﬁcant time and expertise. 
This legislation does not address the realities of commtmity involvement, nor the PUC’s 
willingness to engage in that process to get a consolidation over the line. We believe the PUC’s goal is 
to help Willing utilities consolidate but without a commitment to assist utilities essentially lobby 
members of their communities the desired outcome will not be achieved. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this legislation and if you have any questions, 
please do not hesitate to contact me at fg1§j§§_ ‘;v‘}Q;§,gg_g or 207-737-9014.
