. 
_ 15 University Drive
' 
1 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
A » 
. 
. .. . . . 207-623-9511 
K I Maine Water Utllltl€S Association 
I ~ Organized 1925 
April 26, 2023 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Zeigler House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 1 65 5, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Consumer-owned 
Water Utilities 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in 
support of LD 1655, which modiﬁes several areas of Title 35-A to streamline and modernize Public 
Utilities Commission (PUC) regulation of consumer-owned water utilities. Many of these changes are 
long overdue, and we appreciate the PUC’s effort to update some rather outdated regulatory requirements. 
About MWUA. MWUA is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion. Please note our comments on several key sections within LD 1655: 
0 Sec. 1. 35-A MRSA §505, sub-§1. The update of triggering gross revenue amounts is long 
overdue. We fully support this change. 
0 Sec. 2. 35-A MRSA §901. Exempting consumer owned water utilities from approval of 
securities makes sense. Securities are approved through several other processes for consumer 
owned water utilities, the current requirement is redundant at best. We fully support this. 
0 §6104-A, sub-§5, Notice of proposed rate increase and public meeting. We fully support this 
change. In a time when most local newspapers have gone out of business, and many customers 
no longer read a newspaper, publishing the required rate notice in a regional newspaper such as 
the Portland Press Herald costs over $1,000. This is money that could be better spent elsewhere. 
We strongly support allowing the PUC to choose methods of distribution that are more cost 
effective and reach consumers in a far more effective manner. 
0 §6104-B Consumer-owned water utilities; expedited rate adjustments. We suggested that 
rather than a maximum of 1.5%, the PUC be allowed to set the maximum expedited rate 
adjustment annually by considering regional inflationary indexes such as the Consumer Price 
Index or Engineering News Record. Many water utilities utilize funds that should go towards 
infrastructure improvements for operations as they are hesitant to adjust their rates due to the cost
Letter from MWUA re LD 1655 
April 26, 2023 
Page2 
and complexity of the process. Allowing a simple annual inﬂationary rate adjustment makes 
sense and will encourage water utilities to keep their rates current. 
0 Sec. 9. 35-A MRSA c. 64-A Consumer-Owned Water Utility Consolidation. We appreciate 
the Commission ’s attempt to streamline what is often an arduous process. We especially 
appreciate the allowance of differing rates, which is often a barrier to consolidation. We do, 
however, caution that merging charters can sometimes be a very divisive process entailing local 
control disputes between neighboring communities. Those may be better handled in the 
Legislature where elected representatives are making the decisions that will affect constituents. 
Nothing in this bill would prevent utilities from coming to the Legislature for such charter 
changes. 
Conclusion. MWUA enthusiastically supports LD 1655. Many of these changes are overdue as trigger 
income thresholds are outdated and modern effective communications with customers is often not through 
newspaper legal notices and postal mail. We urge the committee to support LD 1655. 
Thank you for your consideration, 
he if>~5/ 
Bruce Berger 
Executive Director, Maine Water Utilities Association 
cc: Roger Crouse, General Manager, Kennebec Water Dist., Chair, MWUA Leg. Comm. 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
