‘ 
STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC "UTILITIES COMMISSION 
.. 
if?-91 $4" 1' 
1J '£l§.i"*fiii§'3>l _i*§5$' 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN , ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
In Support of 
LD 1655, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Consumer-owned Water Utilities» 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying in support 
of LD 1655, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Consumer-owned Water Utilities on behalf of the 
Maine Public Utilities Commission (Commission). 
The bill includes several amendments to Title 35-A intended to reduce the regulatory burden on 
consumer-owned Water utilities. Of the 152 Water utilities regulated by the Commission 66 have annual 
revenues greater than $500,000, 44 between $100,000 and $500,000, and 42 have annual revenues less 
than ‘$100,000. The Commission recognizes that many of Maine’s water utilities struggle to maintain 
their infrastructure and stay in compliance with constantly changing state and federal Safe Drinking 
Water Act requirements. Most are considered “small” to “very small” by the Federal Environmental 
Protection Agency with their ability to raise revenue through rates limited by a small number of 
ratepayers. The Commission has evaluated Title 35-A and has made suggested changes to help reduce 
the regulatory burden and to help small water utilities manage some of the expenses associated with 
compliance, provide a mechanism to help keep rates current with inﬂation and provide an additional 
way to consolidate with other small water utilities to allow the sharing of resources. 
The proposed changes include: 
I Raising the threshold for required annual audits from $250,000 in annual revenue to $500,000 
and raising the threshold for audits once every ﬁve years from $50,000 to $100,000. 
I Exernpting consumer-owned water utilities ﬁom required securities issuance approvals. 
I Changing the requirement for public notices for proposed rate cases ﬁom “newspaper of 
general circulation ” to “in a manner prescribed by the commission ” to allow more modern 
forms of notiﬁcation. 
I Raising the thresholds that define large, medium and small consumer-owned water utilities 
for section 6104-A rate cases to allow more small and medium-sized consumer-owned water 
utilities to take advantage of the larger rate increases allowed by this section. 
I Enacting a new section to give consumer-owned water utilities a simpliﬁed ratemaking 
option to keep up with increasing annual operating costs and inﬂation to avoid larger 
periodic rate adjustments. 
I Enacting a new chapter to give two or more consumer-owned water utilities the option of 
petitioning the Commission to open a proceeding to determine whether consolidation of the 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: l8 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 7ll FAX: (207)287-1039
PUC Testimony — LD 1655 April 26, 2023 
water utilities is in the public interest, allows the consolidating water utilities to have differing rate 
stmctures, includes opportunity for comments and a public hearing regarding the proposed 
consolidation and authorizes the Commission to draft a new charter for the consolidated water 
utilities in accordance with “Standard Water District Enabling Act.” The Commission would 
annually report to the committee of standing who would then report out a bill replacing charters with 
new charters for any consolidating water utilities. 
These changes are intended to reduce the expense of regular audits for consumer~owned water utilities 
operating on limited revenue and eliminate Commission review and approval for the issuance of 
securities which have already been reviewed and approved by lending agencies. The bill creates a new 
rate adjustment mechanism which would allow consumer-owned water utilities small annual rate 
adjustments instead of large rate increases every ten or twelve years which is the current norm and 
makes larger necessary increases available to more water utilities utilizing the streamlined section 
6104-A process. Finally, the proposed amendments to Title 35-A include an additional method for 
consumer-owned water utilities to seek consolidation with other consumer-owned Water utilities with 
the assistance of the Commission ’s utility analysts and attorneys. This is intended to help smaller 
utilities who may see beneﬁts from consolidation but ﬁnd the process of doing so daunting without 
technical and legal support.‘ 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session.
2
