 
225 Douglass Street        P.O. Box 3553        Portland, Maine 04104-3553 
Phone: 207.774-5961       Fax: 207.761-8329      Web: www.pwd.org  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF THE PORTLAND WATER DISTRICT NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
LD 1655 – AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAWS GOVERNING CONSUMER-OWNED WATER UTILITIES 
 
Chair Senator Mark Lawrence, Co-Chair Representative S. Paige Zeigler and Members of the Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Seth Garrison, and I am the General Manager of the Portland 
Water District. I provide this testimony neither for nor against LD 1655.  
 
The Portland Water District (PWD or the “District”) is a utility created by private and special law of the State 
Legislature in 1908 to provide water to the people of greater Portland. Today, PWD provides drinking water to 
over 200,000 people in eleven Cumberland County communities, and wastewater treatment services to six of 
those communities. The affairs of PWD are managed by a Board of Trustees composed of 11 members, all 
popularly elected by a plurality of the voters from the communities they represent. 
 
PWD received an exemption from certain statutory provisions which regulate water utilities from the Public 
Utilities Commission effective January 1, 2016. These exemptions were granted to PWD under the provisions 
of state statute—35-A M.R.S. § 6114. The exemptions received included exemptions from title 35-A M.R.S. 
§6104 and §6104-A. These statutory sections define how water utilities establish water rates. As a result of the 
exemption, the Board of Trustees sets water rates following public notice, a public hearing, and related 
informational communications with public. PWD is the only water utility in the State of Maine which has 
requested and been granted such exemption, and which sets its own rates through its elected governing Board 
similar to how a local municipality would set its property taxes. PWD has been setting rates in this manner 
since 2016. The process is efficient, provides ample opportunities for public and customer input, and ensures 
fair rates. While PWD occasionally receives critical feedback about rate changes, which is healthy and 
expected from an active customer base, we do not receive complaints about the rate setting process. 
 
LD 1655 establishes a rate making process for small rate increases by creating a new statute, 35-A M.R.S. 
§6104-B. While PWD supports this concept and the bill, we request that the bill be amended to recognize that 
if a water utility has already received an exemption from the Public Utilities Commission for the other rate 
making provisions of the statute – namely §§ 6104 and 6104-A, that the utility is also exempt from the 
provisions of the new §6104-B without having to go through a new petition or proceeding before the Public 
Utilities Commission. Such a proceeding costs ratepayers money which are best utilized elsewhere. If a 
consumer owned water utility has already received exemptions for ratemaking, and is using those exemptions 
efficiently and without complaint, it makes sense that it should be allowed to avail itself of the new provisions 
of the law relating to rate making without having to file a request for further exemption from the Commission. 
 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
 
Seth Garrison 
General Manager 
 
 
 

