Abdul Ali
ali@maineyouthjustice.or g
(207) 708-1 11
March 21st 2023
Senator Pinny H. Beebe-Center , Chair
Repr esentative Suzanne Salisbury , Chair
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety
LD 148:
An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for
Certain Acts
Dear Senator Beebe-Center , Representative Salisbury , and Members of the Committee on
Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
My name is Abdul Ali and I am the Advocacy Director with Maine Youth Justice. I reside in
Portland.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to LD 148.
Maine Youth Justice is a nonpartisan campaign fighting to end youth incarceration in Maine and
invest in a range of community-based supports that respond to young people’ s needs, support
families, and build community . We are a campaign led by young people who have been
incarcerated in Long Creek and are directly impacted by the juvenile justice system. We are
calling for the closure of Long Creek Youth Development Center , the end of youth incarceration,
and the reinvestment of the $18.6 million dollars currently being spent to lock up Maine’ s youth.
Maine Youth Justice believes that no young person should be incarcerated or prosecuted in the
criminal legal system. This legislation takes a step-back in responding to the demands of
formerly incarcerated youth and fails to address the violence currently taking place in Maine’ s
juvenile justice system.
Maine Youth Justice is testifying in opposition of LD 148. There is no justification for sending
young people to prisons, traumatizing them for the rest of their lives, and tearing apart
communities. This solution is a band-aid to a failing system that is causing constant violence and
trauma to youth and their families across the state.
In this bill, it states, the criminal justice system will be sending kids to Long Creek (LC) because
they do not have a home or a safe familial environment. In doing that, it would further displace
the toolkits needed to provide solution-based care by incarcerating the individuals that would be
affected by this bill. LC and juvenile prisons across the country and in the history of Maine have

Abdul Ali
ali@maineyouthjustice.or g
(207) 708-1 11
failed to provide the needed support systems that would contribute to youth success and healthy
lifestyles.
Maine needs programs that of fer young people services that include but are not subjected to:
education, proper nourishment, housing/shelter , and support systems for their ultimate
well-being. This bill would incarcerate youth that are crying out for help, and the once-failed
youth are now looking to be punished for not having simple, adequate care. We need to build
support outside of jails and prison systems that result in increased criminality , mental-health
issues, and extend further trauma. Maine also needs to create more job opportunities, and drug
and alcohol rehabilitation programs that aren't prison-like facilities. We must have mental health
services, funded education, and places where kids can go and be children.
This bill is backtracking all the work done forth from the Juvenile Justice Task Force and
neglecting the US Department of Justice (DOJ) response to the findings of Children with
Disabilities. The US DOJ issued a findings letter to the State of Maine concluding that the State
is violating the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) because it fails to “service children with
behavioral health needs in the most integrated setting appropriate to their needs” and fails to
provide a statewide service array as required under the Medicaid Act in June 2022. We must act
accordingly to provide youth with what they need.
Maine Youth Justice encourages this committee to listen to the communities most impacted by
the harms of youth incarceration. We have the answers and it begins with a plan to end the
criminalization of youth and investment into care, support, and resources for young people and
their families.
In summary , LD 148 would increase physical, mental, and socially harm youth and communites
by moving forward and passing. We must continue to create community-based programs and
invest in our youth's future.
For these reasons, we stand firm and request this Committee vote ought to not pass LD 148.
Thank you.
Abdul Ali
Maine Youth Justice

