Dear Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. I submit this testimony in opposition to LD 148. 
My apologies for not being able to be there in person.  
 
LD 148 proposes to add two justifications for allowing the state to incarcerate youth, for 
physical care and for prevention of a future crime.  
 
As a law student at the University of Maine School of Law and student attorney with the 
Youth Justice Clinic at the Cum berland Legal Aid Clinic, I foresee these amendments to the 
Maine Juvenile Code causing significant harm for my clients.  
 
In terms of physical care, the bill proposes to provide physical care for a juvenile who 
cannot return home because there is no parent  nor other suitable person willing and able to care 
for the juvenile . If we refer to the purpose of the Maine Juvenile Code, this justification does not 
serve the juvenile’s best interests, does not preserve or strengthen family ties, does not remove 
the juvenile due to the protection of the public, does not provide the necessary treatment, care, 
guidance and discipline to assist the juvenile in becoming a responsible and productive member 
of society as prescribe d in M.R.S.A. § 3002(1)(A) -(F). The purpose o f detention of juveniles in 
Maine should be to protect public safety and ensure appearance of the juvenile in court for 
pending matters. Instead, this justification serves as  a punitive measure for a juvenile who has 
not committed nor is alleged to have co mmitted a crime, as defined by the Maine Criminal Code.  
 
The Maine Juvenile Justice Systems Assessment , prepared by the Center for Children’s 
Law and Policy, the Juvenile Justice Research and Reform Lab at Drexel University, and the 
Center for the Study of  Social Policy , recommends best practices around youth justice include  
reducing the use of "provide physical care" as reason for detention . To enact a bill to the contrary 
would subjugate the Assessment’s February 2020 recommendations. Instead, the Legisla ture 
should aim to address the shortage of more appropriate programs and services.  
 
The bill further provides that juveniles may be incarcerated for prevention of future 
crimes. By moving to incarcerate juveniles on “future crimes”, this bill again frustra tes the 
purpose of the Maine Juvenile Code. This provision removes juveniles from their home settings, 
from their families, instead of securing more appropriate resources and integrating the juvenile 
into the least restrictive setting. Again, the Maine Juv enile Justice Systems Assessment  
recommends expanding the use of restorative practices and non -residential programming, neither 
of which can be achieved through detention of the juvenile. The lack of appropriate 
programming in the state cannot justify dete ntion of juveniles.  
 
For these reasons, I respectfully request that you vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 14 8. 
Thank you for your time and your consideration.  
 
Respectfully,  
Alicia Rea  
Lewiston (HD 93, SD 21)  
