.! .= r 1-' 
\H' 
David LaFountain THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District l6 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Dave LaFountain introducing 
LD 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Dave LaFountain. I have the honor of 
representing the good people of Senate District l6, including the towns of Albion, Fairﬁeld, Oakland, 
Waterville, and my hometown of Winslow. Today, I am here to introduce LD 148, An Act to Allow 
Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts. 
Residents of Fairﬁeld and neighboring towns have seen a concerning rise in juvenile crime including 
terrorizing, assault, making threats and stealing vehicles for more than a year. This close knit 
community has been feeling uneasy since the middle of 2022. They deserve to live a peaceful, safe 
life, free of threats of violence and behavior amounting to disorderly conduct. 
This bill is all about public safety, and equipping our brave law enforcement ofﬁcers with an extra 
tool to curb the alarming recent spike in juvenile crime. Sometimes, the laws on the books don’t 
match up with what’s taking place in our communities. The proposed changes to the existing statute 
are solely centered on public safety, for both the juvenile and the residents of the town, and are listed 
below: 
~ “To provide physical care for a juvenile who cannot return home because there is not a parent 
or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile adequately; ” 
o “To prevent the juvenile from committing juvenile crimes or criminal offenses if released, 
whether conditionally or unconditionally. ” 
l’ve been aware of this situation and proactively seeking solutions since before I was sworn-in in late 
2022. Working with District Attorney Maloney, the Maine Sheriffs Association, and the Fairﬁeld 
Police Department, I submitted this legislative ﬁx that will allow the District Attorney ’s office to 
resolve these cases and provide care and counseling to youth who don’t have a safe and nurturing 
environment to call home. 
Restoring these deﬁnitions in the law is not the only solution. While public safety and support for our 
law enforcement agencies is a priority, we can also support critical resources that directly beneﬁt our 
children and families, to prevent situations like these from happening. 
Chair, Inland F1'slzerie.s' and Wildlife Conzmiftee * (lriiizirzal .]ustic?e and Pz:b:’2' c Safety Committee 
State House (207) 287-1515 * Fax K207} 287»1585 * T0IiF1‘ee L800-423~6900 * TTY 711 
David. LC11’l 0Zl7Zl‘Clll IZ~l:€gfSl’Glili"€. mama gov * 1e gzsiatzz/ ‘e. maine. gov/senate
I support expanding programs and resources provided by area youth centers throughout my district. 
These organizations offer academic support, ﬁtness and wellness programs, leadership opportunities 
and career exploration. 
That is why, in addition to this bill, I’m sponsoring another bill, LD 147, to help nonproﬁt 
organizations raise more money that goes directly to these programs. Eliminating cost barriers for 
families is key to mitigating reckless behavior like we’re seeing in Fairﬁeld and across Maine. 
The coastal commtmity of Rookland also saw a similar rise in juvenile crime and our law 
enforcement ’s hands are tied. Police Departments across Maine are understaffed as it is, and these 
crime waves are making a bad situation even worse. 
I’m a father, and a grandfather, so I understand the, challenges of raising kids, and keeping them on 
the straight and narrow. I also believe in accountability, and since the 130th Legislature repealed 
language allowing temporary detention, there is no accountability with these juveniles. They are 
aware of the lack of consequences, and take advantage of it. 
In the same vein, I will ensure there is accountability when indeﬁnite detention is utilized in the 
interest of public safety. I have full conﬁdence in Chief Thomas Gould and his ofﬁcers along with 
deputies at the Somerset County Sheriff’s Office to protect this community, including the juveniles, 
and keep the Legislature informed on how we can continue supporting communities with resources 
and tools to end juvenile crime. 
I’m grateful to this committee for allowing me to present this bill, and glad you will have the 
opportunity to hear the testimony of Fairﬁeld residents, and to get a better understanding of what’s 
happening in my district. I urge this committee to vote Ought to Pass on this legislation, as no town 
should have to put up with what’s happening in Fairﬁeld. I’m happy to answer any questions, and 
would defer to Chief Gould for any specifics.
