Dominick Morrison
Portland, ME
LD 148
Date: March 17, 2023
Senator Pinny H. Beebe-Center, Chair 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety
State House, Room 436
Augusta, Maine 04333
Re: L.D. 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
My name is Dominick Morrison and I am a youth steering committee with Maine 
Youth Justice.  I reside in Portland.  I have been a part of Maine Youth Justice for 3 
years now. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to LD 
148.
I am writing in opposition to this bill because I have experience at Long Creek and in 
the juvenile justice system. I want the committee to know that any type of concrete 
cell does not provide rehabilitation. Locking kids in cells is not a bedroom, it's a cold 
room surrounded by white walls and a locked door and barred window and metal sink
and toilet. It's traumatizing the minute you walk into Long Creek, your childhood is 
gone. There is no bigger punishment other than going to Long Creek as a juvenile and
this bill is saying “you're homeless, you have nowhere to go, so we are going to send 
you to a place built to punish. Longcreek is a juvenile prison. It is wrong to be sent to 
a prison “to prevent” crime, when you haven’t done anything wrong.
This bill will leave Long Creek as the only option and push young people further and 
further into the system. Knowing first hand, Long Creek is not intended to 
rehabilitate, it is to further incriminate. This bill would just give the police and judges 
more ammo to incarcerate more youth and incriminate our young people in our 
communities. Maine is going forward in the direction of less incarceration and more 
alternatives, and this bill sends us back. Maine doesnt need more incarceration for 
youth.
The solutions are simple. We need to build programs that allow youth that don’t have 
anybody to turn to, to have a space where they can thrive and feel like they belong. 
We need programs that offer young people a chance to be educated, fed, housed, 
clothed. This bill would incarcerate them because they have no support. We need to 
build supports outside of a prison cell. Sending kids to jail because of family 
conditions is just telling them that we are giving up on them before they've even had a
chance to learn. Maine needs to create more housing, job opportunities, sober houses, 
rehabilitation centers that aren't locked doors. We need mental health services, funded
education, and places where kids can go and feel safe in their communities. Creating 
more reasons to fill the beds at Long Creek is not the answer. 
What I needed instead of Longcreek and long before I was sent there is I needed 
someone to understand why I was so angry and to ask me how I was feeling. I needed 
more learning opportunities with my hands, not just the standard learning with 
textbooks. What I needed was someone who listened to me and actually heard me. 
What I got instead was being tossed around in foster care, to grow up in hospital beds 
and crisis beds and then thrown into Long Creek… to this day I'm still part of this 
system. 
In summary, LD would take away all the in-betweens I stated above and send them 
straight to incarceration. It wouldn't give an opportunity for people to wonder what 
we could do as a community together to help these young people who are crying out 
for help and create something different in its place. For these reasons, I request this 
Committee vote ought not to pass on LD 148.
Thank you for your consideration,
Dominick Morrison 

