POSITION STATEMENT IN OPPOSITION 
LD 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine strongly opposes the 
passage of An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts. Young people involved in the juvenile 
justice system disproportionately represented juveniles with high levels of trauma, emerging mental 
health challenges, and inadequate access to resources and supports. 
When the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) Studies were initially released in 1998, it was found 
that childhood abuse, household dysfunction, and neglect were identified as significant risk factors in 
many chronic medical conditions and death in adulthood. Juveniles involved in the criminal justice 
system, on average, present with three times higher ACEs scores than their non-criminal justice involved 
peers. It is also found that youth with higher ACEs scores are more likely to suffer from higher rates of 
substance use disorders, self-harm, disruptive behaviors, and school related issues. The impact of 
childhood trauma has been significantly studied since the ACEs research was initially released and it has 
been found that by providing trauma-informed, resiliency-based interventions and supports, the lasting 
impacts of these experiences is decreased. 
Research indicates that as many as 70% ofjustice involved youth have a diagnosable mental health 
condition. Limited access to evidence-based treatments often results in many of these young people 
receiving minimal, if any treatment, until they interface with the criminal justice system. The intention 
behind this bill is to look for a solution to the consequences of a failed mental health system while 
avoiding the cause. The young people that this bill will target have been failed by the systems over and 
over again on so many levels. Instead of accepting responsibility and working to rectify the damages and 
failures of depleted services, we are looking to punish young people with no adults able or willing to 
support them. lt is imperative that as a state we support and address the needs of the future of our 
state. 
NAMI Maine appreciates that this is a difficult and complex issue to address. However, investment in 
this high risk population to ensure they are able to receive evidence-based supportive treatment will 
reduce the long-term financial impacts on the state. Looking to provide residential treatment, utilizing 
best practices and treatment modalities is imperative in order to ensure that the root cause of the 
concerns are being addressed, is a far more proactive and forward thinking approach. 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state's largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaine.0rg/advocacy 
(207)622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.org
