 1 
 
           March 13, 2023  
 
 
Submitted Electronically 
 
Senator Pinny Beebe-Center  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
100 State House Station, Room 436 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony in Opposition to LD 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain 
Acts 
 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee,  
 
My name is Jill Ward, and I am a resident of Portland, Maine. I have worked on juvenile justice 
policy and reform for more than 20 years and for the past decade have served as a policy 
consultant on juvenile justice and children’s issues both nationally and here in Maine.  Currently, 
I am Director of the Maine Center for Youth Policy and Law in partnership with the Youth Justice 
Clinic at Maine Law. I also served as one of three co-chairs of the Maine Juvenile Justice System 
Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force. My testimony in opposition to LD 148 represents my 
personal views only and not the position of the University of Maine School of Law or the 
University of Maine System. 
 
One of the main areas of my work has been educating policy makers, stakeholders and the public 
about the harmful effects of justice system involvement, particularly incarceration, on children 
and youth and the ineffectiveness of the youth prison model to reduce recidivism and produce 
positive outcomes for young people and their communities.  LD 148 runs counter to the research 
and best practice in the field about what is effective for youth and for public safety. 
 
The research documenting the negative impacts on youth from both formal juvenile 
justice system processing and subsequent confinement is substantial.  Youth involved in the 
justice system are at increased risk of abuse and violence,1 educational disruption,2 poor health 
outcomes as adults,3 and harmful family and community separation.  Removing youth from their 
homes and communities and placing them in correctional settings disrupts healthy psychological 
development.  It disconnects them from their parents or parent figures, from peers and other 
adults who model and value academic success and positive social behavior, and from 
participation in activities that require critical thinking and independent decision-making.4  
Research also confirms that these harms fall disproportionately on youth of color, girls, LGBTQ 
GNC youth, and youth with disabilities. And, Maine’s system is no exception.  
 
1 See, Maltreatment in Youth in U.S. Correctional Facilities . (2015). Baltimore, MD: The Annie E. Casey Foundation. Available at: 
https://www.aecf.org/resources/maltreatment-of-youth-in-us-juvenile-corrections-facilities . Conditions of Confinement: Findings from the survey of 
youth in residential placement . (2010). Washington, D.C.: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Available at: 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/227729.pdf . 
2 See, Just Learning . (2014). Atlanta, GA: Southern Education Fund.  See also, Juvenile Reentry . (2014) Washington, D.C.: Federal Interagency Reentry 
Council which found that “approximately two-thirds of young people do not return to school after release from secure custody.” Available at: 
http://csgjusticecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Juveniles.pdf. 
3 Barnet, E. et al. (April 2019). What Is the Relationship Between Incarceration of Children and Adult Health Outcomes?  American Pediatrics. Volume 19, 
Issue 3, Pages 342–350, which found, “child incarceration independently predicted adult mobility limitations, adult depression and adult suicidal 
thoughts.” 
4 Reforming Juvenile Justice: A Developmental Approach . (2012) Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences.  
 2 
 
 
Rather than providing a public safety benefit, formal system processing often has the 
opposite result: youth who have had some justice system involvement are more likely to 
reoffend than those who were effectively diverted from the system.5 Re-offense rates are 
similarly higher for those youth who are confined as compared to those who are diverted or 
managed in the community.6  Adjudicating and incarcerating our children is not making us safer 
and is, in fact, contributing to a variety of other harms, including increased risk of abuse and 
trauma, a lack of fairness, harm to families, and negative developmental and educational 
impacts; all at a higher cost than community-based alternatives.  
 
In May of 2019, the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force was 
established to work with the Center for Children’s Law and Policy (CCLP) to conduct an 
assessment of the state’s juvenile justice system.  A final report was issued in February 2020.  
Section F of the report covers the use of detention and found that 53% of youth in detention 
were there “to provide care” simply because there was no appropriate place for them to go.  It 
also found that 47% of detentions lasted three days or less, indicating that detention was almost 
certainly unnecessary for public safety reasons, but still subjected youth to the risks and harms 
of incarceration.7   
 
Detaining youth to provide care is not a best practice and is antithetical to the 
rehabilitative purposes of the Maine Juvenile Code .8  Short-term recommendation #8 in the 
report called for limiting the use of detention to “provide care” and requiring “specific findings 
about why detention is needed.”  Based on this recommendation, this purpose for detention was 
subsequently removed from the Maine Juvenile Code in 2021 through legislation introduced by 
Task Force co-chair Representative Michael Brennan in order to push systems to identify and 
establish more appropriate, more effective, and less harmful responses for these youth.   
 
Additionally, in July 2022, the U.S. Department of Justice issued a letter outlining its 
determination that Maine unnecessarily segregates children with mental health and/or 
developmental disabilities in psychiatric hospitals, residential treatment facilities, and at Long 
Creek Youth Development Center, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).9 
As the letter noted,  
 
“Maine’s juvenile code prioritizes treatment and rehabilitation, and provides that both pre- 
and post-adjudication, i.e., before and after trial, children in the juvenile justice system 
should be placed in the least restrictive setting, typically the family home, with few  
 
 
5 Juvenile Justice Resource Hub, “Community-Based Alternatives: Key Issues,” retrieved at: http://jjie.org/hub/community-based-alternatives/key-
issues/#_edn6 ; citing Anthony Petrosino, Carolyn Turpin-Petrosino, and Sarah Guckenburg, “Formal System Processing of Juveniles: Effects on 
Delinquency,” Campbell Systematic Reviews (January 29, 2010), 38. Available at https://bit.ly/30md72U . See also National Juvenile Justice Network, 
“Emerging Findings and Policy Implications from the Pathways to Desistance Study,” (Washington, DC: 2012). http://bit.ly/14jXkQl .   
6 Richard A. Mendel, “No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing Juvenile Incarceration” (Baltimore: The Annie E. Casey Foundation, 2011), 10. Available 
at: http://www.aecf.org/noplaceforkids   Also see Richard A. Mendel, “Less Cost, More Safety: Guiding Lights for Reform in Juvenile Justice,” 
(Washington, DC: American Youth Policy Forum, 2001), 8, available at http://bit.ly/1DtNfjz , which states that studies of youth sent to large juvenile 
correctional institutions in the past 30 years have found a 50-70 percent recidivism rate within one to two years of release; James Austin, Kelly Dedel 
Johnson, and Ronald Weitzer, “Alternatives to the Secure Detention and Confinement of Juvenile Offenders” (Washington, DC: Office of Juvenile Justice 
and Delinquency Prevention, September 2005). 
7 Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (February 2020). Maine Juvenile justice System Assessment. Section F. Detention, p. 81-91.  
Available at: https://www.mainejjtaskforce.org/ .  
8 The Maine Juvenile Code states that its overall purpose includes securing “care and guidance, preferably in the 
juvenile’s own home” and “preserv[ing] and strengthen[ing] family ties whenever possible, including improvement 
of home environment.” 15 M.R.S. §§ 3002(1)(A)–(B).  
9 The letter and press release are available here: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-finds-maine-violation-ada-
over insƟtuƟonalizaƟon-children-disabilities   
 3
 
 
exceptions. However, even when juvenile justice system actors recommend placement 
outside of Long Creek, children are frequently confined at Long Creek due to Maine’s failure  
to provide more integrated behavioral health services. Long Creek is a secure facility and 
the majority of its young residents have multiple mental health diagnoses. As noted above, 
children with behavioral health needs are routinely incarcerated at Long Creek solely to 
receive behavioral health care. Children who are  held at Long Creek have few—if any—
opportunities to see their families and friends or engage with the community. If behavioral 
health care services were available in the community, children who are appropriate for such 
services could await trial or serve their sentences at home with their families.” 
 
Similar to findings in the 2020 system assessment, the investigation found that “ Maine does not 
ensure access to the community-based services it offers, resulting in needless 
institutionalization and risk of such institutionalization .”  As a remedy, the Department of 
Justice suggests ensuring access to community-based services, addressing waitlists for services, 
providing crisis services instead of a law enforcement response, allocating necessary resources 
to support community alternatives and develop polices and practice that prohibit the refusal of 
these services.  This is where the state should focus its energy and resources, instead of 
reverting back to a reliance on incarceration that is proven to harm children and increase the 
likelihood for recidivism. 
 
Simply put, now is not the time for Maine to re-up its reliance on the use of secure detention. 
 
There are a range of other community-based alternatives to detention that provide 
supervision without incarceration, such as day or evening reporting centers, intensive 
shelter care, group homes, host homes and other proven programs, in the highest 
referring communities .10  Since the release of the system assessment, the Maine Department of 
Corrections has increased its juvenile services budget and partnered with providers and the 
USM system on alternatives to detention like Regional Care Teams, which work to strengthen 
cross-system, provider, and community involvement to inform local resource development and 
increase supports, resources and opportunities for youth through a local community-based 
continuum of care to decrease detention.11 This initiative is now in its third year and has already 
successfully served more than 100 youth, but Maine can and must do more to grow the 
continuum of community-based options available to youth, families and communities.   
 
Detention removes youth from their natural support systems and has been demonstrated to 
have negative short- and long-term consequences, including increased depression, anxiety, and 
other behavioral health issues.  Rather than seeking to expand the use of detention for youth 
who come in contact with the law, the state should work with communities most in need to grow 
and develop appropriate alternatives that best meet the needs of the youth and their 
communities.  I urge you to oppose LD 148.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
Jill M. Ward 
jill.ward@maine.edu  
 
 
10 Alternatives to Detention and Confinement, Literature Review, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Model Program 
Guide (August 2014).  Available at: https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/model-programs-guide/literature-
reviews/alternatives_to_detection_and_confinement.pdf   
11 See more information about Regional Care Teams here: https://placemattersmaine.org/regional-care-teams/ 
