Kyle Bennett
Bangor, Maine
LD 148
Date: 03-21-2023
Senator Pinny H. Beebe-Center, Chair 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety
State House, Room 436
Augusta, Maine 04333
Re: L.D. 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
My name is Kyle Bennett and I am a youth steering committee member with Maine 
Youth Justice. I reside in Bangor, Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to provide 
testimony in opposition to LD 148.
I am writing to you today because I spent 4 years in Long Creek Youth Development 
Center. I was a foster kid with no place to go nor would any more group homes accept
me. I was deemed a system failure at 14 years old. Long Creek did not help me in any
way aside from giving me more trauma and it provided unsafe living situations. 
Long Creek failed to provide the mental health care that I so desperately needed. They
told everyone I was aggressive when in fact I was responding to the guards that would
pick fights over little things, the guards would single out a kid and target them that 
day ultimately the youth would end up in prone restraints. Which have been deemed 
unsafe. Out of all of the times I was restrained in the four years I was there, every 
single restraint was in a prone restraint. As a youth, I was restrained a lot due to being
targeted for being the only committed transgender youth. The guards would go out of 
their way to make my life hell knowing I had no place to go until turning 18. 
Due to my mental health issues which stemmed from childhood trauma and the reason
why I was in foster care, Long Creek failed to be trauma-informed and lacked a safe 
environment. I wasn't given regular therapy nor was I given the opportunity to learn 
healthy ways to regulate my emotions nor did I even know any life skills upon 
release. I didn't know how to open a bank account or even how to sign a signature the 
correct way. I didn't know how to cook upon being released as an adult either.  I 
lacked social skills and still do. 
I am also opposing the bill because it would make Long Creek full of youth again. 
Exposing more youth to harsh conditions and more trauma.  You can't just lock youth 
up due to not having a place to go or to prevent them from committing a crime. It's 
making Long Creek a dumping ground for kids again. You also can't lock up a youth 
who is innocent “to prevent” them from committing a crime. That's against our rights,
we are all innocent until proven guilty.
Instead of locking youth up due to having no home or accountable parents, how about
law enforcement call the youth shelters in Maine, I know we have 3. And if a bed is 
available, provide transport there where the youth will be supervised. If that is not an 
option how about calling a friend's parent and asking if they could provide a spot for 
the youth to stay? And the very last option is calling Maines crisis hotline and having 
the youth speak to a crisis worker to decide where the most suitable place is that is not
a jail for kids. 
This bill, if passed, would greatly affect LGBTQIA+ youth and black/indigenous 
youth. Youth would be targeted and deemed to be suspicious because of skin color 
and to prevent crime in police eyes would be to lock up black/indigenous youth. 
Black/indigenous youth are locked up at a much higher rate than white youth as is, 
this is just giving police another reason.
LGBTQIA+ youth are often not accepted by their family and are kicked out. Their 
home may be unsafe due to coming out and they may not want to stay there, other 
times youth are being abused at home and they run away. I gave three alternative 
choices to lock up due to having no place to go. Maybe somewhere in the budget is 
money for transportation to a youth shelter before locking up youth for no real crime. 
The trauma that youth already face while having no accountable parent is already 
enough, you don't have to add to it by locking them up in a juvenile jail. If the youth 
has no place to go they won't be released until 18 and I can say from personal 
experience it's going to be very harmful to the youth if you do this.
A youth already committed suicide in Long Creek and the numbers are going to rise if
Long Creek becomes a dumping ground for youth with no place to go or to “prevent 
crime”.  
I would for these reasons request this committee to vote ought not to pass LD 148.
Thank you for your consideration, 
Kyle Bennett
