 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 148 (NFNA)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 148, An Act to Allow Detention for Juveniles for Certain Acts  
 
DA: March 13, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LD 148. 
 
 CLAC members did not reach a consensus regarding the merits of LD 148, which would 
amend the Maine Juvenile Code by adding to the purpo ses of detention.  It was noted that Section 1 
of the bill would restore a provision that was recently repealed.   These  purposes assist  the court in 
determining whether a juvenile should be detained prior to final adjudication.   Detention can only 
be ord ered if it serves both the purposes of the Juvenile Code, 15 M.R.S. § 3002, and one of the 
specific purposes of detention listed in 15 M.R.S. § 3203 -A(4)(C).  Detention must be in the “least 
restrictive residential setting that will serve” these purposes.  15 M.R.S. § 3203 -A(4)(C).   
 
 CLAC members have concerns regarding the limited options available for placement of 
juveniles .    It was generally acknowledged that even when detention may be  warranted under  the 
circumstances , placement at the Long Creek Yo uth Development Center may not be the best option  
for responding to the juvenile’s needs .   As a result, there  was some concern about expanding the 
statutory purposes of detention when intermediate placement options  such as local structured 
shelters designed for juveniles  are rarely available .   One member reported that securing residential 
treatment is so difficult that the choice sometimes comes down to releasing a juvenile without 
proper services or detaining the juvenile at Long Creek.   
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar C ounsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute,  
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating t o crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
