 
34 35th Street, Suite 4 -2A, Brooklyn NY 11232   t 212 334 1300  f 212 941 9407  vera.org  
 
 
Testimony of Vera Institute of Justice Submitted to the  
Maine Legislative Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety in Opposition to 
LD148   
 
March 13th, 2023 
 
Good morning. My name is Lindsay Rosenthal, and I am the Director  of the Vera Institute of 
Justice’s Initiative to End Girls Incarceration (EGI). Thank you, Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee Chairs Senator Beebe -Center and Representative Salisbury  and all the 
committee members for your time this morning. I am he re to offer testimony against LD148, 
which represents a step backwards in efforts to bring  Maine’s juvenile justice system in line with 
best practice  for fostering public safety and  advancing  the well -being of girls and gender 
expansive youth .  
 
The Vera Institute is a 60-year-old national nonprofit that brings data, evidence, and solutions to 
transform the criminal legal and immigration systems until they are fair for all.  EGI works to 
zero out the country’s confinement of girls and gender expansive youth. Through partn erships in 
jurisdictions in several states, including Maine, we aim to create reforms and programs that will 
better support the well -being of young people in their communities, address the root causes of 
their incarceration, and permanently close the doors  to girls’ juvenile detention and placement 
facilities.  
From 2018 to 2020 , Vera worked with the  Maine  Department of Corrections (DOC) to wards  
ending girls’ incarceration statewide by working to keep girls and other young people in the 
communit y and provide appropriate services . This approach reduced detention and placement 
admissions by 80 percent and 60 percent respectively, and for nine months in 2020 there were no 
girls at Long Creek Youth Development Center ( Long Creek ).1 This progress built on years of 
success in Maine that reduced youth involvement in the justice system by cutting the number of 
youth committed or detained at Long Creek from just over 130 in 2011 to fewer than 30 at the 
end of 2021.2 In April  of this year , there were only 3 girls detained and 2 girls committed to the 
Department of Corrections.3  
 
LD 148 threatens to reverse this progress  by adding two purposes for detention  to the M aine 
Juvenile Code : 
1. to provide physical care for a juvenile who cannot return home because there is not a 
parent or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile 
adequately,  and 
2. to prevent a juvenile from committing juvenile crimes or criminal offenses if released, 
whether conditionally or unconditionally . 
I would ask the Committee to consider the following:   
1) Decades of evidence, including data on Maine’s juvenile legal system, shows that 
incarcerating young people to “provide care” is both harmful to young people and does not 
2 
 serve  public safety.  Research shows  juvenile correctional facilities are ineffective and 
counterproductive in reducing future unlawful behavior  among youth who do not pose a threat to 
public safety , with studies consistently finding high rates of recidivism in the years following 
release and an increase  in risk levels after incarceration.4 A 2017 study of recidivism rates in 
Maine’s juvenile justice system by researchers at the University of Southern Maine found that 
“low risk committed youth who were reassessed prior to release increased  in risk score, placing 
them at greater risk of recidivating upon release than they were prior to commitment.”5 Given 
these poor outcomes, the National Research Council recommends that youth incarceration should 
be used “sparingly and only in response to serious offenses” and finds that incarceration is “not 
ordinarily needed to hold youth accountable.”6 It certainly should not be used to “provide care” 
for young people who may be facin g homelessness , commercial sexual exploitation , or mental 
health challenges , but do not pose a threat to public safety.  
 
Not only is incarceration in facilities like Long Creek counterproductive for protecting public 
safety, it  also exacerbates mental health challenges and disconnects youth from school and 
family, both of which, research shows, protect against incarceration and many other negative 
outcomes.7 A 16 -year follow -up study published in  Pediatrics found that boys and girls who 
have been detained at any point by the juvenile justice system are respectively 3 and 5 times 
more likely to die from preventable causes before reaching young adulthood.8  
 
2) Adding “provide care” as a reason for detention will increase  the inappropriate 
incarceration of young people in Maine , reversing recent  progress made through LD546, 
An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Maine Juvenile Justice Systems 
Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force , which was supported by the Governor and the 
Department of Corrections . In 2021, a fter a comprehensive review of best practices and  the 
data on youth incarceration in Maine  through the Maine Juvenile Justice Systems Assessment 
and Reinvestment Task Force —including data showin g that 53% of children detained at Long 
Creek were detained to “provide care” —this legislature took the necessa ry, praiseworthy  step of 
passing L D546 to end the practice of detaining youth to “provide care .”9 LD546 also  required the 
DOC  and the Department of Health and Human Services to work together to provide services —
including behavioral health services, family support, housing, and restorative justice —to divert 
young people from the justice system and reduce the rate of youth detenti on and commitment . 
LD546 was supported by  the Governor and the DOC  as a “thoughtful and balanced ” approach to 
juvenile justice reform in Maine.10 Maine needs to hold firm to the path of building the services 
needed to meet young people in the community and  keep them safe  there , rather than resorting to 
the harmful practice of incarcerating them for their own protection. The Committee should not 
only reject LD148’s proposal to reverse progress, but also take proactive steps to ensure the full 
implementation of LD546 and bring Maine’s juvenile legal system in line with best practices and 
evidence on youth incarceration.   
  
3) In July of 2022 , the United States  Department of Justice  (DOJ)  found Maine in violation 
of the Americans with Disabilities Act because of  inappropriate reliance on secure 
institutions, including Long Creek, to respond to young people with disabilities  and mental 
health service needs .11 By using  detention to "provide care ," LD148 would set Maine on a 
path towards further violations rather than remedying the problem. LD148 w ould change 
the juvenile  code  to allow young people to be incarcerated "to provide physical care for a 
3 
 juvenile who cannot return home because there is not a parent or other suitable person willing 
and able to supervise and care for the juvenile adequately ." This would allow  incarceration of 
young people with overlapping mental health and housing needs, including young people  
involved in the child welfare and behavioral health systems,  who do not have a permanent, stable 
living environment because of  their mental health needs. In its findings letter regarding their 
investigation into the state ’s practices , the DOJ stated , "Our meetings with children at Long 
Creek, facility staff, and attorneys representing young people similarly echoed that the State’s 
lack of community -based behavioral health services leads to unnecessary and pro longed 
incarceration…Maine is using Long Creek as a de facto children’s psychiatric facility instead of 
providing more integrated treatment options.”12 This is unacceptable: children experiencing  
homeless and/or who have mental health service needs shou ld not face a different standard of 
justice and  be incarcerated for reasons that other children would not be. Maine’s reliance on 
incarceration to address needs and protect young people’s safety is ineffective and inappropriate. 
LD148 would only serve to worsen the crisis .  
4) LD148’s proposal to revise the juvenile code to allow detention to prevent criminal 
offenses is unnecessary and potentially violates federal law on status offenses. The language, 
as written, is unclear in its purpose. However, it has the potential to significantly expand 
inappropriate use of detention and reverse  the progress Maine  has made in recent years to bring 
detention practices into closer alignment with national best practice. For example, LD148  could 
be construed to permit detention of youth for status offenses in order to prevent crimes, which 
would violate provisions to d einstitutionalize youth charged with status offenses under the 
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act.13   
5) In weighing LD148’s proposal to expand the incarceration of youth in Maine, the 
Committee should bear in mind that this will also exacerbate existing racial disparities for 
young people in Maine.  Black, Native American , and Latinx youth are disproportionately 
harmed by reliance on incarceration nationwide. In Maine, research by Vera and New York 
University  found the per capita r ate of confinement of Black girls is 10.8 times that of white girls 
(2,539 admissions per 100,000 Black girls compared to 218 admissions per 100,000 white girls). 
The per capita rate of confinement of Native American girls is 2.1 times that of white girls (455 
admissions per 100,000 Native American girls compared to 218 admissions per 100,000 white 
girls).14 
 
LD148 would mark a step backwards for public safety, the well -being of Maine’s  girls and 
gender -expansive youth, racial equity, and  the state’s  hard-earned advance s in juvenile justice  
reform  over the past ten years . I strongly urge you to oppose LD148 and would welcome the 
opportunity to discuss the matter further.  
 
Thank you ,  
Lindsay Rosenthal  
Initiative Director  
End Girls’ Incarceration  
LRosenthal@vera.org  
4 
  
1 In 2018, Vera selected a team of Maine stakeholders, led by the DOC and Cumberland County District Attorney’s 
Office, to receive no -cost technical assistance through a competitive process to end girls’ incarceration in Maine. 
Since then, the state has mad e considerable progress towards that goal, which includes cutting total annual 
detention admissions to girls’ units by 80% (from 140 admissions in 2018 to 29 admissions in 2020) and cutting the 
annual number of new commitments for girls by 66% (from nine  admissions in 2018 to three  admissions in 2020). 
Now , each month an average of only three girls are admitted to detention after arrest. In 2020, only three girls 
were committed to residential placement aft er a delinquency finding; there were 9 months in 20 20 with zero 
committed girls. By 2020, the average monthly admissions to detention for girls was an average of 2.7 admissions 
every month and a total of 29 detention admissions throughout the year. In the first two months of 2021, there 
were a total of seven admissions to girls’ detention units. See DOC  (Juvenile Services ), Division Overview: 2020 
Snapshot  (Augusta, ME: DOC, 2020) , perma.cc/B6EC -6PZB.pdf . 
2 DOC , “Juvenile Justice System Overview” (presentation , Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment & 
Reinvestment Task Force meeting, Portland, ME, December 18, 2019).  
3 DOC (Division of Juvenile Services) , April Snapshot Report  (Augusta, ME: DOC, 2022), perma.cc/67BR -EBKC . 
4 A review of the literature on juvenile corrections by the Annie E. Case Foundation concluded that “backed by an 
array of evidence the case against America’s youth prisons and correctional training schools can be neatl y 
summarized in five words: dangerous, ineffective, unnecessary, wasteful and inadequate.” See Richard A. Mendel 
and the Annie E. Casey Foundation, No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing Juvenile Incarceration  (Baltimore, MD: 
The Annie E. Casey Foundatio n, 2011), aecf.org/resources/no -place -for-kids-full-report . For more  additional 
sources , see Samantha Harvell, Chloe Warnberg, Andreea Matei , et al.,  Closing Youth Prisons: Lessons from Agency 
Administrators  (Washington, DC: The Urban Institute, 2020) , perma.cc/S6Y9 -D24T ; Patrick McCarthy, Vincent 
Schiraldi, and Miriam  Shark , “The Future of Youth Justice: A Community -Based Alternative to the Youth Prison 
Model,”  New Thinking in Community Corrections , no. 2  (2015 ), perma.cc/J88N -KAA4 ; and Edward P. Mulvey, 
“Highlights From Pathways to Desistance: A Longitudinal Study of Serious Adolescent Offenders ,” OJJDP Juvenile 
Justice Face Sheet  (2011) , perma.cc/WM59 -QC4U .  
5 Robyn Dumont and Erica King, Youth Recidivism: Diversion to Discharge in Maine’s Juvenile Justice System  
(Portland, ME: University of Southern Maine,  2017), perma.cc/L8EB -QGDT . 
6 National Research Council , Reforming Juvenile Justice: A Developmental Approach , (Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press , 2013),  doi.org/10.17226/14685 . It should be noted that even for youth charged with serious 
offenses there is no evidence that  long periods of  incarceration are more effective than community programs ; see 
Mulvey, “Highlights From Pathw ays to Desistance ,” 2011.   
7 Urban Institute, Closing Youth Prisons , 2020 ; National Research Council , Reforming Juvenile Justice , 2013 ; and  
Mendel and Annie E. Case Foundation, No Place for Kids , 2011 .  
8Linda A. Teplin, Jessica A. Jakubowski, Karen M. Abram, et al., “Firearm Homicide and Other Causes of Death in 
Delinquents: A 16 -Year Prospective Study,” Pediatrics  134, no. 1 , (2014) , perma.cc/XEQ5 -XXMY . Note  that this 
study should not be interpreted to say that detention causes premature death. The study is cited as evidence that 
detention does not provide long -term solutions to the underlying challenges girls and  youth  face.  
9 See Maine Center for Juvenile Law and Policy, Maine Prosecutors Association, and Maine Juvenile Justice 
Advisory Group , “2021 Changes to the Juvenile Code ” (presentation for  legal practitioners on recent changes to 
the juvenile legal code in Maine ), docs.google.com/presentation/d/14Ie4yJf7uJrraIqdblmd05SCa -
3cSgn78OFk8g2SFg8/edit#slide=id.p . Previously, detention was permitted “to provide physical care of a juve nile 
who cannot return home because there is no parent or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care 
for the juvenile adequately ,” a provision repealed in  LD546.  
10 Kevin Miller “ Mills vetoes ‘fundamentally flawed’ bill to close Long Cree k youth prison, ” Press Herald , June 24 , 
2021.  perma.cc/6N6C -N9GW . For text of the Governor’s veto letter describing LD546 as “a more thoughtful and 
balance approach” to reform of the juvenile legal system , see Janet T.  Mills  to the Members of the 130th Legislature 
on LD 1668 , June  21, 2021, cloudup.com/i4XC79LV6NI . 
11 DOJ, “ Justice Department Finds Maine in Violation of ADA For Over -Institutionalization of Children with 
Disabilities ,” Press release, June 22, 2022, perma.cc/EX9G -5ZG9 . 
 
5 
  
12 Kristen Clarke , “Re: United States’ Investigation of Maine’s Behavioral Health System for Children Under Title II 
of the Americans with Disabilities Act ,” U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division  (Disability Rights Section), 
June 22, 2022, perma.cc/A3HP -ARX4 . 
13 Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (Public Law 93 -415; 88 Stat. 1109) as amended by Public  
Law 115 -385, enacted December 21, 2018 , perma.cc/PCV9 -2HP2 . For best practice on status offenses, see The 
Annie E. Casey Foundation, “What Are Status Offenses and Why Do They Matter? ” April 6, 2019, perma.cc/G8ZC -
5252 . 
14 Vera Institute of Justice, Care, Not Confinement: A Better Solution for Maine’s Girls  (New York: Vera, 2021), 
perma.cc/TV8V -96JQ . 
