 
 
 
           March 13, 2023  
Submitted Electronically 
 
Senator Pinny Beebe-Center  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
100 State House Station, Room 436 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony NFNA on LD 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts 
 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee,  
 
On behalf of the Maine Juvenile Justice Advisory Group (JJAG), the following NFNA testimony on LD 
148 provides information for the Committee’s consideration.  Maine’s Juvenile Justice Advisory Group 
(JJAG) was created in accordance with the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 
(“the JJDPA”). The mission of the JJAG is to advise and serve as a resource on state policy and practice 
and to promote effective system level responses that further the goals of the JJDPA. The JJAG is also 
responsible for ensuring compliance with the four core protections of the JJDPA and with administering 
the federal funds that come to Maine annually through the Act, which are distributed largely through 
subgrants to entities performing activities that are aligned with the JJAG’s 3-year plan. For more 
information about the JJAG, our members, and our work, please visit: https://www.jjagmaine.com/. 
 
Members of the JJAG are volunteers appointed by the Governor to fill the required slots identified under 
the federal law. Some JJAG members work in state government; additionally, the Commissioners of the 
Department of Corrections, Education, Health and Human Services, and Public Safety, or their 
designees, serve as ex-officio voting members of the JJAG. When the JJAG takes an action  
related to legislative matters, executive branch employees have decided, as a matter of policy, to 
abstain from these decisions to avoid creating any confusion or the impression that the JJAG is 
speaking for any of the various Departments.  
 
In 2019, the Maine JJAG contracted with the Center for Children’s Law and Policy (CCLP) to conduct a 
comprehensive assessment of the state’s juvenile justice system.  A final report was issued in February 
2020.  Section F of the report1 covers the use of detention and provides an overview of the research on 
its efficacy and documented negative impacts on youth outcomes, including increased behavioral health 
issues, disconnection from school and other natural supports and increased likelihood of future 
delinquent behavior. Best practice in the field dictates that the purposes of secure detention should be 
limited to 1) protecting public safety and 2) to guard against failing to appear in court.2   
 
 
1 Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (February 2020). Maine Juvenile justice System Assessment . Section F. Detention, p. 81-91. 
2 Id at p. 10 and 81.  

 
Below are the findings and recommendations on detention included in the final report, which analyzed 
data from the Department of Corrections on youth in Long Creek from June 2018 through May 2019; 
examined current policies, procedures and programs use in the juvenile justice system; and incorporated 
feedback from stakeholder interviews, youth focus groups, town hall meetings, and a community survey:  
 
Assessment Findings : 
 
1) Detention is used due to a shortage of more appropriate programs and services 
2) Many youth were detained for extended periods while awaiting placement for community-based 
services. 
3) Almost half of detained youth were charged with non-violent offenses and over 80% of detained 
youth scored as low or moderate risk. 
4) More than half of youth were detained to “provide care.” 
5) Maine’s Detention Risk Assessment Instrument (RAI) permits overly broad discretion and 
weights toward detention. 
a. The RAI fails to ensure objective decision-making, creating the potential for inconsistent, 
subjective and unnecessary use of detention 
b. Maine’s RAI contains redundant risk factors that skew toward detention. 
c. Maine’s RAI includes aggravating factors but does not include mitigating factors. 
6) 47% of detentions lasted three days or less, indicating that detention was almost certainly 
unnecessary for public safety reasons. 
 
Assessment Recommendations : 
 
1) Identify and develop options to reduce detention of youth who do not pose a risk of reoffending 
or failing to return to court. 
2) Create additional residential and community programs and services to reduce lengthy detention 
stays for youth who are detained while awaiting placement. 
3) Revise the RAI to require more objective decision-making and align with best practices. 
4) Identify why almost half of detention stays last less than four days and implement targeted 
solutions. 
 
In addition to the findings and recommendations in Section F of the report, the final section of the report 
outlined a series of short-, medium- and long-term goals for Maine.  Below are those goals related to 
detention policy and practice : 
 
Short-Term Goals (6 Months): 
 
 #8 – Limit the use of detention to “provide care” and require specific findings about why 
detention was needed to begin to reduce the high number of youth detained for that reason. 
 #9 – Revise the Detention Risk Assessment with objective criteria, points for only the most 
serious offense, and “mitigating” circumstances that demonstrate youth or family strengths. 
 #10 – Mandate the use of graduated responses and community supports prior to detaining youth 
on technical violations. 
 #13 – Limit the use of detention and commitment for technical violation of conditional release, 
probation, and community supervision. 
 
Medium-Term Goals (6 to 18 Months): 
 
 #2 – Create opportunities and options that allow law enforcement agencies to divert youth 
directly to programs and services. 
 
 #5 – Develop alternatives to detention that provide supervision without incarceration (e.g. day or 
evening reporting centers, intensive shelter care) in the highest referring communities. Ensure 
that any alternatives address the particular needs of vulnerable populations including youth of 
color, immigrant youth, LGBTQ+ youth, disabled youth, and tribal youth. 
 #6 – Develop and formalize and official incentives-driven community supervision model, 
tracking its use and the outcomes associated with it. 
 #7 – Engage and expand the use of Youth Advocate Programs as an alternative to probation, or 
as a supplement to probation for youth with the highest risk factors and highest needs to avoid 
commitment and placement. 
 #8 – Create a presumption of community-based responses for most youth and adopt limits on the 
use of commitment and out-of-home placement in law and in practice. 
 #10 – Plan for and begin to develop options that could better address the needs of the small 
number of youth requiring a secure out-of-home placement because of a risk of public safety. 
 #11 – Designate or create an entity that is charged with training judges, prosecutors, defense 
attorneys, and other juvenile justice personnel on adolescent development, research on effective 
interventions with youth, and the harms associated with out-of-home placement. 
 
Longer-Term Goals (18 to 36 Months): 
 
 #3 – Continue to expand the resources made available directly to communities to work with 
youth who would otherwise be referred to the juvenile justice system through a dedicated 
funding stream. Ensure that programs and services that are funded address the particular needs of 
vulnerable populations including youth of color, immigrant youth, LGBTQ+ youth, disabled 
youth, and tribal youth. 
 #4 – Achieve a 50% increase in the number of youth who are diverted from probation or 
commitment through alternative responses, measuring public safety, victim satisfaction, and  
youth outcomes. 
 #5 – Transition responsibility for diversion from DOC to community-based providers throughout 
the state. 
 #8 – Ensure that all judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and other juvenile justice personnel 
have received a baseline set of training on adolescent development, research on effective 
interventions with youth, and the harms associated with out-of-home placement. 
 #9 – Achieve removal of all youth from Long Creek. 
 
For more details on the findings contained in the assessment and related list of recommendation, please 
refer to the complete report which can be found on the Maine Department of Corrections and Maine 
JJAG websites at: https://www.maine.gov/corrections/juvenileservices  and https://www.jjagmaine.com/  
 
The report and additional information about the Task Force can be found at: 
https://www.mainejjtaskforce.org/   
  
Respectfully Submitted on behalf of the JJAG, 
 
Linda Barry Potter 
Juvenile Justice Specialist  
Linda.Barry-Potter@maine.gov  
(207) 707-2698 
