295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers
       Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, 
Executive Director
Testimony in Opposition to LD 148 
An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts
Sponsored by Senator LaFountain
3.13.2023
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am 
Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident, and the Executive Director of the 
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s safety net community-based mental 
health and substance use treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the 
implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 148, “An Act 
to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts.” This proposal, although well-
meaning, aims to reverse years of evidence-based work done by this committee 
alongside the department of corrections with the goal of reducing the amount of 
youth held at Long Creek. Further, this proposal flies in the face of the warning 
Maine Governor Janet Mills and Attorney General Aaron Frey have received from 
the Department of Justice.1 I’ve included a link to the letter. Committee members 
may find the guidance helpful as you consider additional juvenile justice-related 
bills. 
I would like to turn the committee members’ attention toward the language used 
in this bill. First, the terms "adequately" and "suitable" here represent a slippery 
slope for the government to interfere with parents’ right to raise their children as 
they see fit. The proposal says detention of a juvenile is allowed “To provide 
physical care for a juvenile who cannot return home because there is not a parent 
or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile 
adequately…” Who gets to define what “adequately" and "suitable" mean? Risk of 
harm is terminology already utilized in the statute and should be used as the 
criteria for determination – not the young person’s age. 
Second, the proposal adds as a reason to detain a young person, “To prevent the 
juvenile from committing juvenile crimes or criminal offenses if released, whether 
conditionally or unconditionally.” I ask committee members, who is the one with 
the crystal ball to make this prediction? What criteria will be used to decide if the 
young person needs to be detained to prevent them from committing a crime? 
Where they live? Who their parents are? How much money their family has? The 
color of their skin? I urge committee members to vote ought not to pass on this 
dangerous proposal. 
  DOJ, “Justice Department Finds Maine in Violation of ADA For Over-Institutionalization of Children 
with Disabilities,” Press release, June 22, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/crt/case-
document/file/1514441/download~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

