I Alliance 
h‘J\\?iE 
"' 
Officers "' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
, Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "‘ 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
‘Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, MaineI 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
'Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
l 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
1 Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine 's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 148 , 
An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts 
Sponsored by Senator LaFountain 
3.13.2023 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am 
Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident, and the Executive Director of the 
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine's safety net community-based mental 
health and substance use treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the 
implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 148, "An Act 
to Allow Detention ofJuveniles for Certain Acts." This proposal, although well- 
meaning, aims to reverse years of evidence-based work done by this committee 
alongside the department of corrections with the goal of reducing the amount of 
youth held at Long Creek. Further, this proposal flies in the face of the warning 
Maine Governorlanet Mills and Attorney General Aaron Frey have received from 
the Department ofJustice.1 I've included a link to the letter. Committee members 
may find the guidance helpful as you consider additional juvenile justice—related 
bills. 
I would like to turn the committee members’ attention toward the language used 
in this bill. First, the terms "adequately" and "suitable" here represent a slippery 
slope for the government to interfere with parents’ right to raise their children as 
they see fit. The proposal says detention of a juvenile is allowed ”To provide 
physical care for a juvenile who cannot return home because there is not a parent 
or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile 
adequately... ” Who gets to define what "adequately" and "suitable" mean? Risk of 
harm is terminology already utilized in the statute and should be used as the 
criteria for determination — not the young person's age. 
Second, the proposal adds as a reason to detain a young person, "To prevent the 
juvenile from committing juvenile crimes or criminal offenses if released, whether 
conditionally or unconditionally." I ask committee members, who is the one with 
the crystal ball to make this prediction? What criteria will be used to decide if the 
young person needs to be detained to prevent them from committing a crime? 
Where they live? Who their parents are? How much money their family has? The 
color oftheir skin? I urge committee members to vote ought not to pass on this 
dangerous proposal.E 
1 DOJ, “Justice Department Finds Maine in Violation of ADA For Over-Institutionalization of Children 
with Disabilities, ” Press release, June 22, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/crt/case- 
document/file/1514441/download 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 '" 
Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAIlianceMaine.org
