Disability Rights Maine 
ACLU of Maine 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
Center for Public Representation 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Pinny H. Beebe-Center, Chair 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety 
State House , Room 436 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: L.D. 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety: 
My name is Mary Bonauto and l am the Senior Director of Civil Rights at GLBTQ Legal 
Advocates & Defenders, a litigation and policy organization addressing issues affecting the 
LGBTQ people across communities. I reside in Portland. Thank you for the opportunity to 
provide testimony in opposition to LD 148. The following organizations have signed on to this 
testimony: American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, and Disability Rights Maine, and the 
Center for Public Representation. 
LD 148 revisits an issue addressed in the 130th Legislaturel: whether to place “juveniles ” 
in secure juvenile detention (currently Long Creek) for “care”—without regard to whether they 
pose a risk to themselves, to others, or to public safety—because no suitable parent or other 
person can supervise them at home. (sec. 1) In addition, LD 148 would authorize detention to 
prevent a young person “from committing juvenile crimes or criminal offenses if released, 
whether conditionally or unconditionally. ” (sec. 4) 
We strongly urge the Committee to reject this bill and to move forward rather than 
backwards. There are several important reference points for the Committee ’s consideration of 
both sections 1 and 4. 
First, if a child has no home that can provide care and supervision for them, it is 
extremely likely that the child had an unstable home for some time preceding their pre- 
adjudication detention and may have been entirely homeless. And some of these youth have 
likely been or currently are in the care and custody of the Maine Department of Health and 
Human Services, which assumes that role for the purpose of providing care that DHHS thought 
was otherwise lacking. The child and family may well have been struggling with a constellation 
of issues ranging from parental stresses with mental health, substance use, or separation, to 
community factors like economic hardship and racism, to individual mistreatment or abuse ofa 
child that makes “home life” untenable. In short, we should not further traumatize already 
1 
P.L. 2021, c. 398, Pt. KKK, §1. 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108 g|ad.org
2 
traumatized young people because of their life’s circumstances, whether because they are 
homeless (proposed sec. 1), or because they have been denied the supports and services needed 
to address their trauma and/or mental and behavior health care needs are “acting out” in some 
way. (proposed sec. 4). 
Both sets of circumstances are a call for action to support children and adolescents in 
need, not to remove them to Long Creek’s locked cells and strip searches. The National 
Academies of Sciences tells us that support works. Their 2019 report on adolescence 
demonstrated how young people are remarkably resilient and can navigate out of dysfunctional 
behaviors and patterns when they have the support and opportunity to course correct and heal.2 
We encourage this Committee and the Department to hold the line and instead to continue 
pushing for alternatives to locking up young people. 
As to alternatives, it is important to note the recent example and successes of the 
“Regional Care Teams” (hereafter, “RCT”) developed during Covid and on which Maine can 
build. Together with the Place Matters team at USM and the Maine Center for Juvenile Policy 
and Law, public and private entities came together to address community reintegration for 
system-involved youth. The young people were already in community, were transitioning back 
from Long Creek, or were facing pre-adjudication detention. Through problem-solving 
conversations, information sharing, and supports for youth, young people were kept safely in 
community in each of the three DOC regions. 
Where there is a will, Maine has tried to ﬁnd a way. RCTs started with a small amount 
of unspent Covid money and a large amount of collaboration among the Departments of 
Corrections, Health & Human Services, Education and Labor, including resourceful Juvenile 
Community Corrections Ofﬁcers, and community partners and case workers. The conveners and 
agencies, along with housing or homeless services providers, disability rights advocates, 
community youth-serving providers, amd wraparound providers found ways, shaped by each 
region, to ﬁnd solutions to address the young person’s or their family’s needs.3 
The RCT collaboration assisted young people in staying or reintegrating into their 
communities, even if not their homes and prevented others from ever crossing the threshold at 
Long Creek. Since 2020, the RCT process has resulted in 189 total referrals, 54% of the youth 
served were under community supervision, 15% were in detention, 7% were committed and 25% 
were others.4 An in-depth analysis of the RCT process from July 2020 to July 2021 showed these 
teams making 64 referrals for 52 young people aged 12-21, with housing the most common need 
and rental assistance and short-term hotel costs being the most common support. 5 
These group 
2 
In the words of the National Academies of Sciences, young people can “redirect and remediate maladaptation in 
brain structures and behavior from earlier developmental periods” — even with the burdens of Adverse Childhood 
Experiences - — into “resilience. ” See generally, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
(2019). The Promise of Adolescence." Realizing Opportunity for All Youth. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/25388, at 32, available at: https://www.nap.edu/download/25388. 
3 
Mara Sanchez, Erica King, Jill Ward & Jillian Foley, Regional Care Teams First Year Review: Cross Systems 
Collaboration to Improve Positive Youth Outcomese (hereinafter Place Matters RCT Report), available at 
https://placemattersmaine.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/RCT_Report_WEB1 .pdf. 
4 Regional Care Teams Data Dashboard, available at: https://placemattersmaine.org/regional-care-teamy (2020- 
2023 data). See also Place Matters RCT Report, at 4-5. 
5 
Place Matters RCT Report at 8 (individuals served), 9 (primary needs of referred youth), 10 (housing). Other 
needs included: connections with case management, counseling and medical care, technology including laptops, 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108 glad.org
3 
live independently. “ Signiﬁcantly, eighty-three percent of the young people referred in July 
2020 to July 2021 that year have remained in the community while the remainder have been 
conﬁned or returned to Long Creek for further criminal conduct? ” 
The RCT process was about ﬁnding ways to meet young people’s needs rather than 
default to conﬁnement at Long Creek. Each of the DOC Regional Correctional Administrators 
(“RCA”) engaged in and found beneﬁts in the process. John Coyne, the Region 1 RCA and 
long-time Juvenile Community Corrections Ofﬁcer, noted the need for more resources and the 
beneﬁt of having “the right mix of people at the table.”8 Region 2 RCA Susan Nee saw 
enormous value in this process for prevention and getting more resources to young people and 
their families.9 Likewise, Galan Williamson, RCA in Region 3, speciﬁcally noted the need to 
“divert[] higher needs-low risk youth from DOC supervision. ” They did so by helping families 
and young people “stabilize their life situation by meeting some very basic needs and ke[eping] 
families together. ”l° 
This bill ﬂies in the face of the work Maine’s child-focused agencies have been doing 
with community partners. It also sends a message that Maine is giving up and our youth prison 
will be the “home” for homeless youth and those facing life experiences that would challenge 
any of us——youth Who have already been failed by multiple systems designed to support them. 
We know what it looks like when the Long Creek is used for care of homeless or otherwise 
vulnerable young people. The comprehensive Juvenile Justice System report completed by the 
Childrenis Center for Law & Policy in 2020, an effort funded by the Juvenile Justice Advisory 
Group and led by Commissioner Liberty, Representative Michael Brennan, and the Maine Center 
for Juvenile Policy and Law, concluded: “the Assessment Team found that providing physical 
care for youth was the purpose for 53% of detention cases. Not only are youth in detention at 
Long Creek for purposes beyond the scope of nationally accepted purposes of detention, but they 
constitute the majority of detained youth.”“ 
The June 2022 US Department of Justice Findings Letter. We also oppose this bill 
because Maine is already institutionalizing children with disabilities unnecessarily due to the 
failure to provide timely access to home and community-based services. The CCLP report 
revealed that “72.7% of detention stays lasting longer than 30 days were for youth awaiting 
placement ” in an appropriate community or therapeutic setting. 12 
Inevitably, the majority of the 
6 Place Matters RCT Report at 9. 
7 Place Matters RCT Report at 9. See also Regional Care Teams Data Dashboard, , supra n. 3 (the funds were a mix 
of referrals and funds request. Young people presented with multiple needs: 40% Housing, 40% Family or 
Relationships; 38% Safety or Supervision; 36% Educational Needs; 33% Mental Health Support or Treatment; 33% 
Prosocial Needs; 31% Transportation; 23% Employment or Job Skills; 17% Substance Use Disorder or Treatment; 
15% Legal Assistance; 10% Medical or Health Related Needs). 
8 Place Matters RCT Report at 11. 
9 Place Matters RCT Report at 13. 
‘° Place Matters RCT Report at 15. 
“ Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment Final Report at 84, Center for Children ’s Law and Policy et al. 
(2020) (hereinafter CCLP Report), available at hgps://jrry 
cdn.multiscreensitecom/de726780/ ﬁles/uploaded/Maine%20Juvenile%20Justice%20System%20Assessment%20FI 
NAL%20REPORT%202-25-20.pdf or at www.mainejjtaskforce.org. 
12 CCLP Report, supra at n.l0, at 37. 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders | 18 Tremont St. STE 950 | Boston, MA 02108 g|ad.org
4 
young people facing the prospect of “care” at Long Creek are in need of a home as well as 
mental and behavioral health services. 13 
One dramatic consequence of Maine’s over-institutionalization of youth is that in July 
2022, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) issued a letter outlining its determination that the 
State of Maine is violating the law by unnecessarily segregating children with mental health 
and/or developmental disabilities in psychiatric hospitals, residential treatment facilities, and at 
Long Creek Youth Development Center, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA).14 The DOJ found that Maine children are subjected to unnecessary institutionalization 
when they are “unable to access behavioral health services in their homes and communities- — 
services that are part of an existing array of programs that the State advertises to families through 
its Medicaid program (MaineCare), but does not make available in a meaningful or timely 
manner.” Maine must address the systemic, underlying problem— the failure to provide access 
to home and community-based services —instead of further easing the path to umiecessary 
institutionalization, Whether it be pre-adjudication detention or commitment. 
As the DOJ found last year, “Maine can and must make changes to its service system to 
ensure that children receive the support and treatment they need in their communities and with 
their families. ” In addition, for all of the success of the RCT process, there remain identiﬁed 
needs for (1) transition and community re-integration for justice involved young people and 
young adults, (2) transition planning that is about permance, not placement, (3) expanded 
availability of ﬂexible funding, and (4) a statewide data management system and development of 
shared performance metrics. 15 
In sum, LD 148 would send the message that it is appropriate to institutionalize youth 
who are homeless as well as youth who have been failed by multiple systems that are meant to 
protect them and to connect them with necessary services in the most integrated settings. It tells 
them that it’s easiest to deposit them in Long Creek despite the success of the RCT process. For 
these reasons, we respectfully request that this Committee vote ought not to pass on LD 148. 
Sincerely, 
Mary Bonauto, Sr. Director Civil Rights GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 
Atlee Reilly, Legal Director Disability Rights Maine 
Carol Garvan, Legal Director, American Civil Liberties Union of Maine 
Kathryn Rucker, Sr. Attorney, Center for Public Representation 
13 
Proﬁle of Youth Committed at Long Creek Youth Development Center as of July 1, 2016, Maine Department of 
Corrections (2017), available at 
https://digitalmaine.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir'=1&article=1032&context=doc_docs. 
‘4 The July 2022 DOJ Letter of Findings is available here: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justicedepartment- 
finds-maine-violation-ada-over-institutiona1ization-children-disabilities. 
'5 
Place Matters RCT Report at 18-20. 
GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders 1 18 Tremont St. STE 950 1 Boston, MA 02108 glad.org
