Michael Brennan
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brennan@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
March 13, 2023
Testimony of Repr esentative Michael Br ennan in opposition to
LD 148, An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts
Befor e the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety
Senator Beebe-Center , Representative Salisbury , and members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety
Committee. I am Representative Michael Brennan, and I represent District 1 15, part of the City of
Portland. I am submitting testimony against
LD 148,
An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for
Certain Acts.
LD 148 would add into the Maine Juvenile Code two additional purposes for the detention of juveniles:
1.
To provide physical care for a juvenile who cannot return home because there is not a
parent or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile
adequately , and;
2.
To prevent the juvenile from committing juvenile crimes or criminal of fenses if released,
whether conditionally or unconditionally
Prior to 2021, the Maine Juvenile Code included the provision of care for a juvenile as a purpose for
detention. The Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force, which was convened
in 2019 and for which I served as co-chair , worked with the state Juvenile Justice Advisory Group and
the Center for Children’ s Policy and Law (CCLP), on a comprehensive review of Maine’ s system. At the
end of that process, the CCLP  report issued a report with a number of findings, including evidence that a
majority of youth (53%) were being detained at Long Creek Youth Development Center to “provide
physical care” due to a shortage of more appropriate programs and services in the community . Because of
the harms associated with detention, including increases in behavioral health issues, increased the
likelihood a youth will not return to school and an increased likelihood of recidivism, best practice limits
the use of detention of youth to two main purposes: to protect public safety and guard against failing to
appear in court.
In order to better serve the needs of youth and ensure youth are detained in a manner consistent with the
recommendations of the report and best practice with respect to juvenile detention, I introduced
District 115: Part of Portland

legislation in 2020 that included a statutory change to remove “provide care” as a purpose for juvenile
detention in Maine. The Legislature approved this change in 2021 and the Department of Corrections
was in favor of the change at that time.
I would caution my colleagues on this committee against moving our State backwards by reintroducing
this language back into the Juvenile Code, as it would certainly lead to an increased inappropriate use of
detention, resulting in harm to those youth and to public safety . Housing insecurity is a significant issue
for justice-involved youth in Maine, and not having a safe home or appropriate services in the
community does not justify detaining a youth at Long Creek.
Instead, I would encourage you to work with the Department of Corrections and the Department of
Health and Human Services, and build on the work of the past several years related to juvenile justice
system improvements by continuing to develop the continuum of community-based alternatives and
services that result better outcomes for youth and public safety .
Backgr ound on the Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task For ce
The Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force was formed in the spring of 2019
to review the current juvenile justice system and identify recommendations for reform. Chaired by Jill
Ward of the Maine Center for Juvenile Policy and Law , Commissioner of Corrections Randall Liberty ,
and myself, we met monthly until February of 2020 when a final report was issued.
The Task Force held our regular monthly public meetings across the state and held public forums in
Portland, Lewiston, Augusta, and Bangor . Six youth focus groups, plus another with detained and
committed youth at the Long Creek facility were conducted and over 100 interviews were held with key
stakeholders.
The Center for Children’ s Law and Policy (CCLP), a Washington, DC-based non-profit, was engaged to
support the Task Force and provide a comprehensive and independent assessment of the juvenile justice
system. They analyzed data from the Department of Corrections and the Of fice of Children and Family
Services on youth in custody at the Long Creek Youth Development Center , including needs, risk scores,
and MaineCare behavioral diagnosis and treatment data, and they conducted a comprehensive review of
current policies, procedures, and programs used in the juvenile justice system.
It was a lengthy and thorough project, and we are still working to fully implement many of the
recommendations made by the Task Force.
One of the major findings was that a majority of youth would be better served by being diverted to
supervised community care, treatment, and restorative justice programs, and that Maine should invest
additional resources into community-based services.
District 115: Part of Portland
