1       
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                            
              
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION
ADA TANYA PIERSON, JUVENILE PROSECUTOR
                                                                                                              
LD 148
“An Act to Allow Detention of Juveniles for Certain Acts” 
Public Hearing Date: March 13, 2023
March 13th, 2023
Madame Chair, Senator Anne Beebe-Center
Madame Chair, Representative Suzanne Salisbury
Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee
Testimony in support of LD 148
My name is Tanya Pierson, I am an Assistant District Attorney; I have been a prosecutor for over 
30 years, with the vast majority of my time handling the juvenile docket in York County. I am 
actively involved with a variety of groups committed to improving juvenile justice in the State of 
Maine.  I am one of approximately eight prosecutors statewide who primarily handle a juvenile 
caseload.  I am here before you today on behalf of the Maine Prosecutors Association, specifically 
the District Attorneys, to provide testimony in support of LD 148.
Section 1 of LD 148
This bill would add back into the juvenile code the previously eliminated Section 2 of the purposes 
for detention: “To provide physical care for a juvenile who cannot return home because there is not 
a parent or other suitable person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile adequately.”  
(Emphasis added)(Title 15, Section 3203-A(C)).  The elimination of this purpose stripped out an 
incredibly important tool Juvenile Community Corrections Officers (JCCOs), prosecutors and 
judges had to keep high-risk youth safe and to try to prevent them from committing further offenses 
when their families were unable to do so. 
It is my understanding that the original reasoning behind the repeal of section 2 was to incentivize 
the Department of Corrections and the Department of Health and Human Services to create viable 
alternatives to detention.  This is an extremely important goal. The removal of purpose #2 was an 
attempt to follow the recommendations of the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment report      STATE OF MAINE144 SwedStreet
Caribou, ME 04736-2353
207-498-2557
FAX 207-493-3493   _____
27 Riverside Drive
Presque Isle, ME  04769-2730
207-764-0504
FAX 207-764-2046  _____
25 School Street
Suite 210
Houlton, ME  04730KATHRYN SLATTERY
DISTRICT I
JACQUELINE SARTORIS
DISTRICT II
NEIL MCLEAN
DISTRICT III
MAEGHAN MALONEY
DISTRICT IV
R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY
DISTRICT V
NATASHA IRVING
DISTRICT VI
ROBERT GRANGER
DISTRICT VII
TODD R. COLLINS
DISTRICT VIII
2(often referred to as the “CCLP Report”), which came out of the Maine Juvenile Justice Assessment 
and Reinvestment Task Force in 2020. 
I have tremendous respect and admiration for many who will speak against this bill – in fact, I serve 
on a variety of workgroups with them, including the Juvenile Justice Advisory Board, among 
others. On many occasions, we have worked collaboratively to propose joint legislation to improve 
the juvenile justice practices in Maine.  The prosecutors are in complete agreement that a best 
practice for youth involved in the juvenile justice (“JJ”) system is to keep them out of secure 
confinement whenever possible. The very first purpose of Maine’s Juvenile Code is “to secure for 
each juvenile such care and guidance, preferably in the juvenile’s own home, as will best serve the 
juvenile’s welfare and interests of society.” (Title 15, Section 3002(1)(A)).  I am well aware that the 
CCPL report as well as the Annie E. Casey Foundation identify only two recommended criteria for 
detention: to prevent a juvenile from committing new offenses and to ensure a juvenile’s presence 
in court.
It is laudable to work towards a system that supports youth in their communities without detention, 
but for the youth who are simply unsafe, or commit offenses that make the public unsafe, we need 
this important tool.  We who work directly in the JJ system are frequently witnesses to tragedy.  
Juvenile prosecutors across the State were horrified when we learned that purpose #2 was removed,  
not because we want to detain youth, but because JCCOs, prosecutors and judges lost an important 
tool for youth who are at significant risk in their communities, because simply put, there is no other 
safety net.
Most states have what is known as a CHINS or PINS system – Child/Persons In Need of Services.  
Essentially this system functions in between the juvenile justice system and the child protective 
system.  In a CHINS system, youth (and their families) who are struggling with lower level 
offenses, are overseen by a magistrate or judge in a family court model.  Services are provided in 
the community or in a residential program and a judge oversees the cases.  Maine has no such 
system.  Moreover, the Maine Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) operates under a 
legal standard of “abuse and neglect” – an extremely high standard according to DHHS.  DHHS 
very rarely becomes involved with our juvenile justice youth, much to the acute frustration of 
prosecutors across the State.  The cold hard truth is that at-risk adolescents in Maine, those who end 
up in the JJ system, are rarely served in the DHHS system.  Since there is no “middle ground” in 
Maine, the juvenile justice system often functions as both a JJ system and quasi CHINS system.  I 
have spoken about this situation to the Legislature in previous testimony.
Suicide and overdose deaths are at record highs.  Suicide has now surpassed automobile accidents as the 
number one cause of death for youth under the age of 18.  These are sobering statistics.  I would venture to 
suggest that there is not a person in Maine who does not know of someone who has died of a drug 
overdose.  We are just beginning to grapple with the reality of exploitation of youth in Maine, with both 
drugs and human trafficking. It is not my intent to sensationalize or overdramatize.  These are the facts and 
admittedly we do not have enough appropriate alternatives to detention for some of our most at-risk 
juveniles. From 2011 until relatively recently, we lost the bulk of residential and community based services 
for juveniles.  As a State, we are diligently working to rebuild programs to support youth and families in 
their communities where we all agree they are best served. However, there is still a huge void for juveniles 
who are at greatest risk of harm to themselves and of committing new offenses.  When forced with the 
undesirable choice of detention or release of a juvenile who we consider at immense risk in the community, 
those of us on the ground do choose to argue for detention and a judge should have purpose #2 returned to 
the juvenile code.  
Finally, one must read the purposes of detention under Section 3203-A(C) along with Section  
3203-A(D).  A juvenile cannot be detained simply because there is no parent or other suitable 
3person willing and able to supervise and care for the juvenile adequately.  Under Section D there 
must also be a determination that there is probable cause to believe that a juvenile has committed a 
felony charge, or has knowingly or intentionally violated a condition imposed as part of a 
conditional release, or has refused to participate voluntarily in a conditional release placement. 
Obviously, a youth only ends up in the juvenile justice system if they have been charged with an 
offense.  The Department of Corrections diverts away from court at least 80% of the juveniles who 
are charged with offenses.  The number of youth who end up in court is a much smaller percentage 
than those charged.  The criteria for detention is already incredibly limited and sparingly used (the 
number of youth at Long Creek is at an all-time low, something we should indeed celebrate). If a 
youth is detained, a judge must review that detention within 48 hours, and from that point forward a 
district court judge oversees that youth’s case closely. Purpose #2 was previously utilized by 
JCCOs, prosecutors and judges only in extreme cases and when deemed imperative by the juvenile 
court. 
No one would suggest that detaining youth is ideal, nonetheless, it is necessary at times to actually 
protect youth from harm and from committing new offenses.  While we do not have a CHINS 
system in Maine, we do have a robust juvenile justice system with conscientious JCCOs, 
prosecutors, defense attorneys and judges. The Department of Corrections Juvenile Services is 
filled with incredibly caring individuals who are committed to serving youth in Maine.  Long Creek 
is not managed like an adult facility.  We have judges who are expressly committed to overseeing 
juvenile dockets. We are a State with an abundance of individuals who are committed to youth in 
our JJ system.
Section 2 of LD 148
This section would create a new “purpose” for detention: “To prevent the juvenile from committing 
juvenile crimes or criminal offenses if released, whether conditionally or unconditionally.”  We can 
agree that the central purpose for detention of a juvenile should be to prevent the commission of 
another offense.  Section 2 of LD 148 creates that purpose.  However, once again, the “purposes 
section” (Section 3203-A(4)(C)), must be read in conjunction with the “probable cause section” 
(Section 3203-A(4)(D)).  Both prongs must be met, in order for a juvenile to be detained.  Section 
D requires a juvenile to have violated a conditional release or to have refused to abide by a 
conditional release if offered.  The MPA supports the language and criteria established under 
Section D, and for this reason, we would recommend striking the words contained in section 2 
“whether conditionally or unconditionally” (Emphasis added).
We may not always agree on how we get there, but we can certainly agree that we want to support 
youth and families with appropriate services, and ensure public safety.  We can work together to 
create a better system for JJ youth.  Maine is a unique state with many players committed to 
creating a fair, safe, appropriate and a model juvenile justice system.  I am reminded daily of the 
incredible people and the work they are doing to make this happen, and I am humbled to be part of 
that process.
Thank you for your attention and time.  
