HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
A AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Morgan Rieuy TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
l6 Blue Spruce F ann Road, Apt #6 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Phone: (207) 228-5767 
Morgan.Rjelly_@,Qgislature.maine.gov 
May 24, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Morgan Rielly presenting 
LD 1573, “An Act to Provide Financial Relief for Certain Volunteers Under the 
Corporation for National and Community Service, the Maine Service Fellows and the 
Maine Climate Corps” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Good morning Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation. My name is Morgan Rielly, and I represent House District l27, 
which includes part of Westbrook. I am here today to present LD 1573, “An Act to Provide 
Financial Relief for Certain Volunteers Under the Corporation for National and 
Community Service, the Maine Service Fellows and the Maine Climate Corps.” 
In the Fall of 2022 when the CEO of AmeriCorps visited Maine, Volunteer Maine, members of 
the Executive Branch, and I met with him and his staff. At this meeting, I heard from several 
AmeriCorps members sewing in the state who were living on food stamps and struggled to make 
ends meet because of the high cost of living and small stipend. Our AmeriCorps members 
shouldn’t have to choose between skipping meals and serving the communities in this state. 
There shouldn’t be any ﬁnancial barriers for service. Every person who wants to serve should be 
able to do so and be compensated appropriately for it. This bill seeks to provide some ﬁnancial 
relief for our volunteer service members by not taxing the award they were promised upon 
completion of their service, along with adding incentives to continue their service in state 
government. 
The ﬁrst part of the bill looks at making the Segal AmeriCorps Education Award tax exempt. 
I’ve forwarded a report and slides to the committee clerk and OPLA analyst that were 
commissioned by Volunteer Maine on the feasibility of this proposal. Service members, after 
completing their AmeriCorps term of service and have enrolled in the National Service Trust, are 
eligible to receive the Segal AmeriCorps Education Award. Former members can use this award 
District 127: Westbrook
to repay qualiﬁed student loans. The award can also be used to pay current educational expenses 
at eligible institutions of higher education and training programs. 
The report “found that, even in the most extreme circumstances, state revenue would decrease by 
no more than $100,000 in a given year” if Segal Awards were not counted as taxable income in 
the state of Maine.‘ This is a small price to pay to assist those who desperately need relief and 
would be made up by our volunteer service members staying in-state. I also want to note that 
national service programming, like AmeriCorps, has a high retum on investment. I’ve shareda 
fact sheet from AmeriCorps with the committee clerk to share with members of the committee. 
Maine’s Conservation Corps, even during the pandemic, had a return on investment of $3 for 
every $1 of federal monies invested into the program. Any costs for the tax exemption should 
easily be made up by the return on investment. 
Additionally, this report found that even if out-of-state AmeriCorps members were to qualify for 
in-state tuition at public universities and colleges, every college would take a loss, but it was 
speculated that the loss could possibly be recuperated if such a policy change would incentivize 
more students to come to Maine, among other policy changes? Maine already attracts many 
volunteer service members from other states. We need talented service-oriented and 
civic-minded young people relocating who will grow our economy and bring the in-demand 
skills our communities need. 
The other part of the bill adds a check box on state hiring forms for those who served under the 
Corporation for National and Community Service, the Maine Service Fellows, or the Maine 
Climate Corps programs. These members, through their service, have acquired a wide variety of 
crucial skills in many sectors from substance use prevention and energy efficiency to fundraising 
and community economic development. 
In the case of the Maine Service Fellows programs, one of the goals was to retain recent 
graduates with college or community college degrees in the state, speciﬁcally in our most rural 
and underserved communities after their time of service. There are many job openings currently 
in our state government that aren’t being ﬁlled. As of the writing of this testimony, there are over 
250 jobs available. Adding a checkbox on state government hiring forms will let those hiring 
know an applicant is a former volunteer service member. This will also hopefully incentivize 
members to apply for positions and lead to Maine retaining them in the state long-term. Further, 
this will have a positive benefit in our local civic life and also beneﬁt our state ﬁnancially as 
workers With in-demand skills continue to live and work in our state. 
1 
Analysis of Segal AmeriCorps Education Awards in the State of Maine between 1996-2016 Patrick F. Bloniasz, 
Bowdoin College Prepared for: The Maine Commission for Community Service and Department of Education June 
3rd, 2020 
2 
Analysis of Segal AmeriCorps Education Awards in the State of Maine between 1996-2016 Patrick F. Bloniasz, 
Bowdoin College Prepared for: The Maine Commission for Community Service and Department of Education June 
3rd, 2020 
District 127: Westbrook
Every Mainer should have the opportunity to serve their community. There shouldn’t bea 
ﬁnancial barrier for service. We in the legislature, along with the Executive Branch, must take 
steps in addressing this problem. This bipartisan bill is a modest but crucial step forward in 
providing support and already has the research to show its feasibility. 
Thank you very much for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions 
or to provide you with any information for your upcoming work session. 
District 127: Westbrook
rm AmeriCorps Member Beneﬁts 
Living Allowance 
Receive a modest living allowance to 
cover basic expenses during your 
service term. 
Loan Deferment and 
Interest Forbearance 
Individuals in approved AmeriCorps 
positions are eligible for forbearance 
for most federally-guaranteed student 
loans. in addition, interest payments 
that accrue during service may be 
eiigible for repayment by AmeriCorps. Your Beneﬁts 
We provide living allowances, 
education awards and access toe 
host of beneﬁts during and after 
your service. 
l;lPt€}HE mm >;£HeF4?a 
Money for College and 
Trade School 
The Segal ArneriCorps Education 
Award is offered to individuals who 
complete a term of service and can be 
used to pay for a range of educational 
expenses, like repaying qualiﬁed 
student loans or future tuition 
payments. You can earn up to two full 
Education Awards with multiple 
service ternls. 
Professional Development 
Jump-start your career and gain 
transferable skills employers value 
including leadership, teamwork, and 
problem-solving. Once you complete 
your service, leverage the Employers 
of National Service network, which 
connects you with hundreds of 
employers from the private. public, 
and nonproﬁt sectors who are 
committed to hiring alumni. 
Segal AmeriCorps 
Education1Award 
After successfuiiy completing your 
term of service and enroiling in the 
National Service Service Trust, 
NnenCorps members are eligible to 
receive the Sega! Ameriﬁlorps 
Education Award. You can use the 
award to repay qualiﬁed student 
ioans and to pay current educational 
expenses at eiigibie institutions of 
higher education and training 
programs 
(QM) OUT MORE
D \______i_ 
a ' ' 
‘i"‘=-?Ivewsr~%*>§» -»;~w .~-
Ways You Can Use Your Educational 
Award 
Pay Educational Expenses 
You can use your education award to paycurrent 
educational expense: at eligible school: and at 
certain GI Bill-approved educational programs 
(or veterans. 
Eligible schools are higher educational 
institutions, both domestic and foreign, that 
currently participate i n the Department et 
Education ’: ‘ﬁtle lV student aid program. This 
category includes most put-ucenclary colleges, 
univeuitiee, and technical schools, 
Elnd.¢u.tmeLe > Repay Gualifle ﬂ Student Loene 
The Sega! AmeriCorps Education Award can only 
be used to repaythe qualiﬁed student loam 
listed below: 
e Loans backed by the federal government under 
Tide IV of the Higher Education Act (except 
PLUS Loans to parents of students) 
e Loans under ﬁtle: Vll or Vlll of the Public 
Service Health Act 
' Loans made by: state agency, including etate 
institutions oi higher education 
Things You Should Know 
Extending Your 
Award's Use Period 
You must use the Education 
Award within a seven year 
period. In special cases, an 
alumnus can extend the use 
period for the Education 
Award, limitations apply. Transfer Your Award 
Education Awards can be 
transferred from alumni to 
family members under speciﬁc 
conditions. Read more about 
how to transfer your Education 
Award. 
> Tax Implications 
All payments made using the 
Segal AmeriCorps Education 
Award are subject to federai 
tax in the year each payment 
mad§.
>
> 
httpgzi//am"qggg5ps.gcu[r31emhers-voluntegrsfsegakarnerigcrps;Qduca§_i§negriag 
Maine Facts 
‘A’ Education Awards are earned, not granted. Since 1994, more than 7,400 Maine residents have served 
approximately 11 million hours and earned education awards totaling more than $26.0 million. 
https:l/americorps.govlsites/default/ ﬁles/upload/state_profiles/pdf_2023/ME%20Combined.pdf 
‘Ir In the same period, over 1,500 people moved to Maine and served in AmeriCorps, spending 1.08 
million hours helping Maine residents. 
National Senrice Trust enrollment data for Maine, 1997-2022. 
‘A’ Maine post-secondary education institutions received $7.4 million for tuition and related expenses 
through education award payments. 
‘k Maine educational loan holders received $607,462 in educational loan payments. 
!. ‘_‘1'2§i!(€i.§E§.:; ‘.FY!_§L*9° .. S-9°Y rn 
Current llllaine service assignment examples 
* Support children in pre-school classrooms who are impacted by adverse childhood experiences. 
* Help communities plan and implement services that will support people who want to age in their 
communities. 
* Work with community health leaders to reduce chronic health conditions among residents through 
education and physical activities. 
* Increase academic achievement and engagement in middle and high school students through 
mentoring and extended learning opportunities. 
* Decrease energy costs for residents through weatherizing homes and education about conservation.    
