My name is Pamela M. Proulx -Curry, I live in Old Town . This testimony is in reference to LD 1573.  
 
As the Executive Director of the Wisconsin Campus Compact, a small nonprofit organization associated 
with institutions of higher education I oversaw a 36 member AmeriCorps*VISTA program which placed 
AmeriCorps volunteers in communities (both rural and urba n) throughout the state of Wisconsin.  As the 
Academic Dean at Eastern Maine Community College,  I helped to design and oversee a 12 member 
AmeriCorps program  which provided wrap -around support services to low-income  individuals in the 
greater Bangor area w ith the goal of helping them achieve economic stability.   
 
In both capacities I had the opportunity to observe firsthand  the role that AmeriCorps programs can play 
in helping move communities to greater social and economic stability.  I have witnessed dra matic 
increases in student performance and success at all K -12 levels due to AmeriCorps tutoring and mentoring 
programs.  I have seen measurable reductions in prison recidivism due to an AmeriCorps re -entry 
program.  I have seen a boost in food-security in  communities where AmeriCorps members helped build 
community gardens while establishing food pantries and nutrition education programs.   Whether in poor 
urban neighborhoods or in resource strapped rural communities, the AmeriCorps activity, almost without 
fail, results in significant positive impacts for the communities served.  
 
AmeriCorps is able to achieve these results because of the generous  and committed  individuals  who 
dedicate a year ( sometimes more) of their lives to service to their country.  In re turn they receive a stipend  
that allows them to survive at poverty level in the community they are serving (e.g. the living allowance 
for VISTA volunteers this year , before social security tax deductions,  ranges from $675.08 biweekly in 
most of the state t o $791.70 biweekly in the greater Portland area).   You can imagine the challenges this 
poses for meeting just basic needs for housing and food.  Rent alone, even a studio or room, can eat up 
half or more of the month ’s income leaving precious little for fo od, transportation, and other basic needs.  
With rent prices soaring and food prices going up as well, it has become increasingly difficult to attract 
good candidates to fill the volunteer positions.  Young people from well -off families who can provide 
additional support are able to serve, but many low income individuals simply cannot afford to do so.   
 
The Corporation for National and Community Service, the federal agency that oversees the AmeriCorps 
programs, attempts to make the prospect more appealing b y offering the Segal AmeriCorps Education 
Award upon completion of the service year.  That award currently stands at $6895 and can be applied to 
either government guaranteed student loans or can be paid to a college or university to cover direct 
educationa l expenses (e.g. tuition, books, etc.).  Considering that tuition alone at  the various Maine 
University system campuses ranges from $7350 - $9,240, one can see that the AmeriCorps education 
award does not go far.  
 
LD 1573 proposes to make service in AmeriC orps a little more attractive and affordable by including a 
check -box on employment applications that would let employers know that the applicant had devoted at 
least a year of their life to serving their country (similar to the Veteran check off) thus all owing for some 
extra consideration for that service, as well as exempting the education award from Maine income taxes.  
The impact of the exemption would be negligible for the State of Maine, but significant on an individual 
basis.  It would also send a me ssage to past and potential AmeriCorps members, and to employers in the 
state, about the value the State places on their service.   
 
For these reasons, I urge you to support LD 1573.  
