Brad Farrin 131st MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station
Senator, District 3 Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony of Senator Brad Farrin
In Support of L.D. 881, Resolve, Directing the University of Maine System to Study 
Development of a Course Regarding the Use of Manufactured Wood Products
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee
March 15, 2023
Senator Libby, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: I am Brad Farrin and I have the honor of representing the people 
of Senate District 3, which includes towns in Kennebec, Somerset and Penobscot counties. I am 
before you today as a cosponsor to speak in support of L.D. 881, Resolve, Directing the University 
of Maine System to Study Development of a Course Regarding the Use of Manufactured Wood 
Products.
As stated in the title, this Resolve would direct the University of Maine System (UMS) to conduct 
a study on the development of a course that would aim to incorporate manufactured wood products 
into the work of architects and engineers. As part of the study, the UMS would examine market 
demand for manufactured wood products and various climate-friendly building materials. 
According to the 2019 Statewide Economic Contribution of Maine’s Forest Products Sector data, 
Maine lost approximately 18% of forest products jobs from 2014-2019. In my home county, 
Somerset, the forest products industry was greatly impacted with a loss of 45% of jobs during that 
same time frame. I know it can be hard to imagine the impact when we aren’t directly involved; 
however, the loss of these jobs is very real for many Maine families who are struggling to get by 
due to the lack in demand for Maine forest products. 
While the Legislature and State of Maine has taken strides to help the forest products industry by 
supporting things such as the Forest Opportunity Roadmap / Maine (FOR/Maine) initiative and 
L.D. 229 from the 130th Legislature, there is much more we can do to promote this industry and 
help those whose livelihoods are directly impacted by industry demands. I believe the passage of 
this Resolve is a simple step, we can take as legislators, which could result in a positive outcome. 
Maine is a state filled with creative, outside-the-box thinkers – and the University of Maine is 
known for its innovative research and the development of products that have a world-wide impact, 
particularly in the engineering sector. The cross-laminated timber sector is rapidly growing thanks 
in part to UMS, and we must keep the momentum going for this industry. 
I believe UMS is well-equipped to conduct this study, and again, I feel that the development of 
such a course as this could lead to an economic boost in our forest products industry and the many 
lives in Somerset County and throughout the State of Maine that demand on it to succeed and 
thrive. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
