STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
March 15, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,  
I am writing on behalf of the Department of Economic and Community Development (DECD) in support 
of LD 881, Resol ve, Directing the University of Maine System to Study the Development of a Course 
Regarding the Use of Manufactured Wood Products.  It is our understanding that the sponsor will be 
submitting an amendment to broaden the study to include an examination of th e barriers to CLT use and 
to make recommendations.  
The University of Maine’s School of Forest Resources already offers a strong forestry curriculum, and 
contemplating the addition of a course focused on manufactured wood products will complement that 
offering. 
Educating architects and engineers on the use of manufactured wood products also aligns with Maine’s 
10-year Economic Development Plan. The plan identified four thematic areas in which Maine has current 
strengths, global demand is growing, and the po tential exists for job creation. One of those opportunity 
areas is the forest products sector.  
A changing climate, and the need for new, more efficient technologies offers tremendous opportunities 
for Maine’s wood products sector. Maine is poised to be a leader in innovative construction products. The 
development of new building materials that sequester carbon and make buildings more energy efficient 
leverages Maine’s forest resources and forest -based economy to respond to consumer demand for more 
sustaina ble products.  
Strategy C  of the 10 -year plan , Promote Innovation, states in part:   
 “The University of Maine, with world -class wood composites, climate change, food, and aquaculture 
research programs, is based in the Greater Bangor region, but is a statewide asset... Throughout the 
state, advancements in renewable generation, storage and access will facilitate growth across regions.”  
Focusing education efforts on the safety, beauty, durability, health benefits, and positive climate impacts 
of buildin g with manufactured wood products is an important step to keep Maine at the forefront of 
developing solutions to meet global demand for these climate -friendly products. It will also support 
continued economic growth and job creation in our state.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Heather Johnson  
Commissioner  

