Testimony of Kelt Wilska, Energy Justice Manager, Maine Conservation VotersBefore the Education and Cultural Aﬀairs CommitteeIn Support of LD 881A Resolve Directing the University of Maine System to Study the Development of a Course Regarding theUse of Manufactured Wood ProductsMarch 15, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Raﬀerty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and CulturalAﬀairs Committee. My name is Kelt Wilska and I am the Energy Justice Manager at Maine ConservationVoters, a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to protecting Maine’s environment, democracy, and climatefuture.
LD 881 represents a unique opportunity to mitigate the eﬀects of climate change while advancing thecareers of students in the University of Maine System, an institution known for its excellence in climateinnovation. By developing a course for mid-career architects and engineers focused on incorporatingmanufactured wood products into their work, the University System can help foster a truly homegrownindustry in Maine that reduces carbon emissions, from manufacturing to transportation.
Manufactured wood products, such as cross-laminated timber (CLT), generate far fewer carbon emissionsin the manufacturing stage than other traditional building materials such as concrete and steel. Becausetrees sequester carbon from the atmosphere, manufactured wood products are a climate-friendly buildingmaterial, locking carbon into useful building applications, from the expansion at the Portland Museum ofArt to new buildings at the College of the Atlantic in Bar Harbor and Bowdoin College in Brunswick.
While manufactured wood products are beginning to catch on in Maine, these products are stillpredominantly manufactured and shipped from other parts of the country and world, which increases thisbuilding material’s carbon footprint. By educating our state’s mid-career architects and engineers aboutthe beneﬁts of using manufactured wood products, the University System can continue to build a thrivingconstruction workforce while sending a positive market signal to companies looking to develop laminatewood manufacturing sites right here in Maine, a state renowned for its expansive and unique forestproduct resources. The University of Maine has for years now been using federal funding to research CLTmanufacturing. This existing program can go hand-in-hand with new eﬀorts to stimulate demand for theseproducts.
Maine Conservation Voters strives to lift up legislation that fosters a future where our children andgrandchildren have access to good-paying jobs that protect and enhance our climate and environment. Forthis reason, Maine Conservation Voters urges you to support LD 881. Thank you for your time.

