‘ 
Marines 
Public 
A Universities 
UNIVERSITY OF MAINE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
In Support of LD 881, Resolve, Directing the University of Maine System to Study the 
Development of a Course Regarding the Use of Manufactured Wood Products, March. 15, 2023 
Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education & Cultural Affairs: My name is Samantha Warren and I amthe Director of Government 
Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS). _ . 
Building on long-standing signature strengths in forestry, engineering, advanced materials and 
climate adaptation, the R1 University of Maine has increasingly established itself as a global leader in 
forest products research and innovation. 
In 2016, UMaine partnered in the foundation of FOR/Maine, an industry-driven, cross-sector 
collaboration supported by federal funding secured by Maine’s congressional delegation to chart the 
future of Maine’s forest economy. Currently an $8.5 billion industry for Maine, a global market 
analysis showed potential for growth to at least $12 billion in the short-term, largely through 
university-led innovation to diversify and add value to existing and emerging forest products while 
increasing efficiencies throughout the supply chain. 
Among those new wood products identified as a growth opportunity for Maine was cross-laminated 
timber, or CLT, which is part of a category of exceptionally strong yet lightweight engineered wood 
products known as “mass timber” that offer a low-carbon construction alternative to steel and 
concrete. In 2017, UMaine launched the Maine Mass Timber Commercialization Center, through 
which we have worked with industry partners, trade organizations, construction firms, architects and 
other stakeholders to develop innovative new products, applications and design practices for mass 
timber. Last year, UMaine’s Advanced Structures and Composites Center (ASCC) announced it had 
qualified two new .grades of CLT derived from Maine-sourced lumberfor use in construction of. 
buildings as high as 18 stories. '' 
l would also note our System is leading by example by utilizing CLT in campus construction. The 
transformative Career & Student Success Center that will open at the University of Southern Maine’s 
Portland campus later this year incorporates mass timber as will ASCC's cutting-edge Green= 
Engineering & Materials Factory of the Future, for which ground will soon be broken at UMaine. 
Unfortunately, the CLT we are using will not come from Maine, the most forested state in the nation, 
because there is not a CLT manufacturer here. 
Despite this progress and these high-profile projects, CLT's potential in construction is far from fully 
realized. As amended, LD 881 enlists the university to explore the reasons, and recommend State 
policy and investment to break the logjam to widespread CLT usage. As the Committee knows, UMS 
typically does not support legislation that directs our education and research activities. However, 
given UMaine’s extensive activity already related to mass timber R&D and commercialization and the 
opportunity mass timber manufacturing and utilization presents our state's economy and forest- 
dependent rural communities, we are committed to undertaking the study proposed by LD 881. 
We thank Rep. Zager and the supporters of this bill for their recognition of UMaine’s leadership and 
entrusting us with the opportunity to elevate CLT and further grow Maine's dynamic forest products 
sector. 
Thank you for ongoing support of the University of Maine System. 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent - 
University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque Isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
