 
District 111: Falmouth (part)      February 14 , 2023  
    Testimony of Rep. Amy Kuhn in support of   
LD 68, An Act to Exempt Certain Nonprofit Organizations from the 
Sales and Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and esteemed me mbers of the Taxation 
Committee. My name is Amy Kuhn and I represent House District 111, which is most of 
Falmouth. I regret that a committee conflict keeps me from testifying in person today, but I am 
pleased to submit these written comments in support of  LD 68, An Act to Exempt Certain 
Nonprofit Organizations from the Sales and Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax .  
Maine’s nonprofit organizations help make life better in all of our communities by providing 
access to educational opportunities, preserving our environment, promoting the arts, supporting 
access to health and human services, and so much more. They also employ more than 100,000 
Maine workers and contribute $14 billion to the state’s economy annually1. Unlike other 
organizations, Maine’s nonprof its are not driven by the pursuit of profit, but by a mission to 
serve the public good.  
Right now, when it comes to tax status, nonprofit organizations in Maine are on unequal 
footing2. Some are paying sales tax and others are not, depending on whether the y have 
successfully navigated the legislative process. This bill proposes to level the playing field, 
granting all nonprofit organizations tax -exempt status so they can invest those funds back into 
their mission -directed work. Affording all nonprofits tax -exempt status is an efficient and 
equitable solution to the patchwork of obligations that exists today.   
 
Exempting nonprofit organizations from sales tax would acknowledge the unique and critical 
role they play in our state, and would enable them to direc t more resources towards their 
missions. I hope you will vote Ought to Pass on LD 68.   
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
                                                           
1 Maine Association of Nonprofits:  https://www.nonprofitmaine.org/resources -nonprofit -advocacy  
2 Current law: https://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/36/title36sec1760.html   
Amy Kuhn  
20 Old Powerhouse Road  
Falmouth, ME 04105  
(207) 939 -6903  
Amy.Kuhn@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 

 
District 111: Falmouth (part)   
