Testimony to the Committee on Taxation, February 2023 
By Daniel Nitsch, Executive Director, Bowdoin international Music Festival 
Re: LD 68 An Act to Exempt Certain Nonprofit Organizations from the Sales and Use Tax and 
the Service Provider Tax 
Good afternoon members of the committee, 
I am here today to support LD 68. 
My name is Daniel Nitsch, and l am the Executive Director of the Bowdoin International Music 
Festival. Our organization has operated in Brunswick since 1964, and we are now one of the 
largest annual gatherings of chamber musicians in the United States. Our Festival brings 
together 300 students, 100 faculty, and 10,000 audience members from nearly every state and 
dozens of countries. We produce nearly 100 performances each summer, and 80 of these are 
completely free. We also bring free concerts directly to communities such as retirement 
centers, libraries, museums, and children's centers. We award more than $500,000 in 
scholarships each year. And for Maine students, application fees are waived, and tuition is fully 
subsidized. These are all deliberate efforts to provide cultural experiences and education to 
Mainers, regardless of their financial ability. Our organization and the performing arts 
throughout Maine exist to enrich our civic life and, getting to the point here, they deserve the 
same tax exemptions as other Maine arts nonprofits. 
The current categories of nonprofits exempt from sales tax are seemingly arbitrary. For 
example, ”youth scouting organizations" , churches, and the visual arts receive exemptions, but 
the performing arts do not. To an outsider, these classifications are obscure, and beg the 
question: is there a compelling reason for only some nonprofits to be exempt from sales tax? 
Or is this the result of case-by-case exemptions at the expense of equality? 
Nonprofits, by definition, provide a public benefit. In support of this service, they are exempt 
from income tax. But the sales tax exemption, on the other hand, is only granted to a select 
group of nonprofits, and the delineation of who does and does not receive this exemption lacks 
any clear guiding principle. 
The solution is a blanket sales tax exemption. An exemption for all nonprofits creates equality, 
simplifies the tax code, and strengthens Maine's cultural life. 
I appreciate your consideration of this proposal. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
