Testimony on LD 68: An Act to Exempt Certain Nonprofit Organizations from the Sales and 
Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Jeff Romano. I appreciate this opportunity to provide testimony on behalf of Maine Coast 
Heritage Trust (MCHT) in support of LD 68.
Maine Coast Heritage Trust conserves and stewards Maine's coastal lands and islands for their 
renowned scenic beauty, ecological value, outdoor recreational opportunities, and contribution 
to community well-being. We provide statewide conservation leadership through our work with 
land trusts, coastal communities, and other partners. Over the past four decades, we have 
conserved more than 150,000 acres in Maine.
MCHT and nonprofit land trusts provide invaluable public services to the people of Maine. We 
conducted a survey in 2019 of more than 80 land trusts located throughout the state. 
Collectively, Maine’s land conservation community:
Maintains more than 1,250 miles of recreational trails for hiking, snowmobiling, 
mountain biking, and ATV riding;
Provides public access to over 2.3 million acres for traditional uses, including hunting 
and fishing;
Manages over 250 water access sites for recreational boating, swimming, and 
commercial fishing;
Conserves more than 2.1 million acres of working forestlands and nearly 40,000 acres of 
productive farmlands; and
Offers educational programming each year to about 30,000 students of all ages. 
In addition to these highlights, Maine’s land trusts are partnering with local governments to 
improve infrastructure at municipal parks, collaborating with community leaders to enhance 
water quality, and hosting a variety of events each year welcoming tens of thousands of people 
to enjoy the health benefits realized from time spent outdoors. And, despite being eligible for 
property tax exemption, most land trust conserved lands (more than 94.5%) remain on the local 
tax rolls to help pay for municipal services.
Despite these clear public benefits, Maine’s land trusts fall outside the current list of nonprofits 
whose activities are eligible for the state’s sales tax exemption. LD 68 would remedy this, by 
correctly treating all nonprofits the same.  This change could not be timelier as nonprofits take 
up a growing list of responsibilities once delivered by state, federal, and local governments. For 
example, amid the recent pandemic, even as some state parks and public lands shut down, land 
trust preserves welcomed Maine families. We continue to see record numbers of people 
exploring these wild places near their homes and across the state.
We encourage the Taxation Committee to support LD 68. This change is not only fair, but would 
free up resources for nonprofits like land trusts to make more investments to further our 
charitable activities and provide additional benefits to the people of Maine.
