Q) E B S C At lhl: lliS§LlI'l(" Bangor Opera llmlse l:3l Main Street, Bangor, MI‘; l.”H—'*l4'll 
TH EAT RE CO M PA N Y Box €)ll‘ n;l»: *.?<1"-’.$IH»‘J 3-tit??? or El-iW'iA» ’_1'le'ifliil-Wt)!//!(?£I{Hi ﬁﬂg 
Feb. 14, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Taxation 
Committee, thank you for giving me the opportunity to address you today. I'm 
here in support of LD 68. 
For 49 years, PTC has been committed to inspiring individuals, educating our 
young people, generating income for our surrounding businesses and. 
strengthening our community. Access to culture and the performing arts is proven 
to be an important element of economic growth and community renewal. 
We are an institution that provides great beneﬁt to our community in several ways 
- through our high quality productions which are beautiful and generate jobs, 
pump money into our local economy and feed the mind and the soul; through our 
Dramatic Academy that offers education programming for preschoolers up to 
adults. Our 33 year old Dramatic Academy brings students to - the historic 
Bangor Opera House - and they send teachers and working artists to schools in 
Penobscot, Hancock and Waldo counties. 
We provide an incalculable public benefit by making Bangor a more connected, 
more engaged, more fulfilled place for families and individuals to call home. PTC 
has helped to usher in a thriving downtown where neighboring businesses 
beneﬁt from the nearly 40,000 audience members we welcome annually. 
We share so many similarities with non proﬁts that are exempt from sales taxes. 
Like a church we're a place to gather and exercise empathy towards ourselves 
and our fellow human beings, like a historical society - we share stories of where 
we were to open our minds about where we want to go, or like a school - we’re 
place that prizes thought, education and offers the space for those discussions. 
We estimate that we are responsible for nearly $20,00 in sales tax each year. 
There are so many things that we would like to do to further serve our mission, 
but that we can”: due to budget constraints. 
(cont’d) 
Pioducmg high—quality, professional theatre works that inspire the imagination and cultivate a lifelong passion for the art form.
- Those funds could go directly to building maintenance, the 
upkeep of our 100 year old historic Bangor Opera House- 
(Yearly tuckpointing fees alone come to $10,000.) 
- Providing commissions and royalties for more Maine based 
playwrights to debut their work. (A typical royalty is around 
$8,000 per show and an average commission is between 
$7,000 and $10,000.) 
- The singular focus of our budget is the creation of and 
support of 12 productions a year - 5 mainstage, 4 DA 
productions and 3 additional productions. hile theater 
continues to slowly revive post COVID, any part or our 
revenue that goes to income tax, is money that we don’t 
have to support the important work we do to engage with 
and build our community. 
We urge you to recognize the necessary work we are doing within our 
community, and exempt us from sales tax. 
Sincerely, a‘ 
/J nnifer Shepard Jonathan Berry 
Executive Director Artistic Director
