Q t F e k k Q if S LE) 68, An Act to Exempt Certain Nonprofit Organizations from 
the Safes and Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax 
Kate Elmes, Director of Development of Trekkers 
Testifying in Support 
Date of Public Hearing: February 14, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation: My name is Kate Elmes, I'm the Director of Development at Trekkers and 
l’m grateful for the opportunity to be here today to voice our support of LD 68. 
Trekkers is a long-term youth mentoring nonprofit based in Rockland. We leverage 
mentoring relationships as a way of helping young people from rural Maine navigate the 
transition to adulthood. Our direct youth program sen/es 7"» through 12»- graders from 
our six-town service area including Rockland, South Thomaston, Thomaston, Cushing, 
Owls Head, and St. George. Our Training lnstitute is our vehicle to scale our model 
statewide to ensure that all young people growing up in Maine have access to high- 
quality mentoring programs. 
Young people are in crisis. We have seen this firsthand in our programs and we hear it 
from families, teachers, and partners across the Midcoast and beyond. This crisis is also 
reflected in data, which is why in Qctober 2021, a coalition of the nation's leading 
experts in pediatric health, including the American Academy of Pediatrics, issueda 
declaration of a national emergency in child and adolescent mental health, followed by 
the U.S Surgeon General’s Advisory on Protecting Youth Mental Healthw . Here in Maine, 
according to our lntegrated Youth Health Survey 36% of students said they felt sad or 
hopeless almost every day for two weeks or more — an increase from 32% in 2019, the 
last year the survey was conductedm 
This is alarming, but what gives us hope is knowing high-quality, long-term mentoring is 
one of the most effective strategies to build strength and resilience in young people. 
Trekkers is a data-informed program and so we know we're having an incredibly positive 
impact on key indicators of social and emotional wellness, such as relationships with 
peers and adults, school bonding, empathy, resiliency, community connections and 
optimism. 
We believe that supporting youth development programs, like Trekkers, is one of the 
best return on investments Maine can make in ensuring the next generation has the 
aspirations and confidence to graduate high school, pursue post-secondary education, 
and live a healthy, happy, economically self-sufficient life. 
6 YEARS. 369° OF SUPPORT. WWW.TREKl<EF2S ORG
Trekkers 
Maine's current tax laws offer sales exemption to nonprofit youth organizations whose 
primary purpose is to provide athletic instruction. lf Trekkers were a disc golf club or an 
ice-skating organization, we would be exempt. As a youth mentoring organization, much 
to the general public and our vendors‘ confusion, we are not exempt. We paid nearly 
$6,000 in sales tax in 2022. This includes taxes on the granola bars, band aids, 
marshmallows, chocolate, and graham crackers we buy at Hannaford and taxes on the 
canoe rental fees we pay when we take our students to Acadia. Our resources are 
extremely limited, and we work hard to ensure no student is ever turned away because 
of inability to pay. We maximize every dollar and never buy brand name marshmallows. 
For context, we spend about $700 per week on food while on expedition. If we were 
exempt, that $6,000 we paid in 2022 is equivalent to two and a half months of our meal 
budget to feed our students. 
We ask that this committee support this legislation and remove the classification of 
which nonproﬁt youth organizations are, and are not, excluded from sales tax. Doing so 
would have a significant impact on our budget and thus our ability to ensure Maine's 
youth have relationships, experiences, and opportunities to dream big and reach their full 
potential. 
Thank you for your time and your leadership. l’m happy to answer any questions. 
1-» https://wwvv.aap.org/en/advocacy/child-and-adolescent —healthy-mental-development/aap-aacap-cha —declaration — 
of—a-national-emergency-in-chiId —and-adolescent-mental-health/ 
whttps:/ / www.maine.gov/ miyhs/ sites/ d efault/ ﬁles/ 2021 _ Reportsl Co re_Reports/ HS/ MlYH S2021_Core_Repo rts_HS_ 
State/Maine_2021_MlYHS_High_School_Report.pdf 
Kate Elmes 
l<ate@trekkers.org 
207.594.5095 
Trekkers 
325 Old County Road 
Rockland, ME 04841 
6 YEARS. 360° OF SUPPORT. WWW.TREKKERS QRG
