Testimony in Support of LD68  
Presented by Lisa Thomas -Willey  
On behalf o f Ruth’s Reusable Resources, a 501(c)(3) non profit  
 
Introduction  
My name is Lisa Thomas -Willey. I am the Assistant to the Executive Director at Ruth ’s Reusable 
Resources  (3Rs)  in Portland . I am spe aking to you  today in support of LD 68 which would make 
all 501(c)(3) nonpro fits exempt from s tate sales and use tax when purchasing property or 
services  to be used primarily for the purposes for which  the nonprofit was organized.  
I have worked in the nonprofit sector  for six years , specifically at 3Rs. Before  I started working 
at 3Rs I assumed all nonprofit organizations were exempt from paying Maine state sales tax.  I 
soon learned that, in fact, only certain nonprofits enjoyed such an exemption , a fact that make s 
little sense and seems to unfairly favor some nonprofits over others.    
 
Brief Overview of Ruth’s Reusable Resources  (3Rs) 
3Rs was founded nearly 30 years ago to collect unwanted office supplies from bus inesses and 
distribute them to teachers fo r use in their classrooms. What started in the basement of our 
founder Ruth Libb y’s small home has grown to fill a 27,000 square foot warehouse , plus offsite 
storage and the 7,000 square foo t teacher resource center whe re teachers can pick up 
materials for their classrooms. 3Rs distributes around $3 million worth of new and reu sable 
school and office supplies, STEM1 and art materials, books, furniture and other materials to 
teachers and students thro ughout Maine every year . 3Rs also distribute s 5,000 backpacks to 
needy students every fall . In short, schools in Maine directly benefit from the  supplies 3Rs 
collects from donors. The environment also benefits because  this program keeps tons of 
perfectly good, usable materials out of the landfill .  
 
Why We Support LD 68  
At 3Rs we see this issue from two perspectives.   
1. 3Rs i s a 501(c)(3) nonprofit that is not exempt  from paying sales tax ; and 
2. 3Rs transacts with other nonprofits , some of which are exempt from  paying  sales tax and 
others which  are not .   
 
1 STEM is short for Science, Technology , Engineering and Math. It sometimes  includes art and is then  referred to as 
STEAM .  
1. 3Rs i s a 501(c)(3) nonprofit that is not exempt  from paying sales tax   
As a nonp rofit subject to sales and use tax, 3Rs finds itself at a disadvantage compared to other 
nonprofits. 3Rs is a small nonprofit with a relatively modest operating budget . We do not 
receive any state or federal funding, despite the direct benefits we confer on the ed ucational 
system in Maine.  Although many organizations say “every  dollar counts ”, the fact is that every 
dollar counts even more for small and medium nonprofits  with tight budgets.  
3Rs receive s a $10,000  private  grant each year to purchase new school supplies to fill 
backpacks. The backpacks are then distributed to need y students through schools  and social  
workers. Of that $10,000 dollars, $550 goes to  paying sales  tax instead o f to additional school 
supplies. With the $550  paid in sales tax,  3Rs could fill an additional 50 backpacks for students 
who may otherwise start school without the basic sup plies they need to be ready to learn.  
It is hard to understand the justification for the current system, which favors some nonprofits 
over others, even though  their mission s may be substantially the same. On the case of 3Rs,  our 
teacher resource  center  serve s schools with students from pre -kindergarten through high 
school.  This means that those serve d by 3 Rs are exempt  from paying sa les tax, but 3Rs is not.   
Additional examples that are difficult to reconcile wit h the fact that 3Rs is required to pay sales 
tax include:  
• Organizations that provide free medical supplies or pet food assistance are exempt from 
paying sales tax, but 3Rs which provides free school supplies is not exempt from paying 
sales tax.  
• Dyslexia and Literacy assistance organizations are exempt, but 3Rs which gives away 
30,000 books each year is not exempt.  
• Organizations fulfilling the wi shes of children with certain illnesses  are exempt, but 3Rs 
which provides needed school supplies  and backpacks  directly to disadvantaged 
students every year is not exempt.  
We are not suggesting that any of the types of organizations tha t fall under the current 
exemption scheme should be required to pay sales tax. We simply beli eve that it is unfair to 
exempt some, but not all 501(c)(3) nonprofits from sales tax  when all no nprofits fill needs in the 
community  that may otherwise go unmet.  
In short, the current system unfairly favors certain nonp rofits over others and does so with no 
obvious  rationale as to why. It also creates an in centive for individual nonprofits to petition to 
be exempted from sales tax. Granting sales tax exemptions to individual or specific types of 
nonprofits on an ad hoc basis is inefficient and continues to favor some nonpr ofits over  other.  
 
 
2. 3Rs transacts with other nonprofits , some of which are exempt from  paying  sales tax and 
others which  are not.   
We are a small organization  with a small staff and few resources to efficiently track which of 
our nonprofit customers are required to pay sales tax and which are not. This has created 
confusion among 3Rs staff. For th is reason, we typically err on the side of caution and collect 
sales tax unless we are transacting with a school or the one nonprofit for which we have a tax 
exemption certificate on file. This means we are potentially taking funds away from other 
nonprofits in the form of sales tax  because we don ’t have their exemption certificate  on file and 
we obviously can not accept unsubstantiated claims th at an organization is exempt.   
 
Conclusion  
I ask  that you support LD 68 providing a blanket exempt ion from sales tax to all 501(c)(3) 
organizations. LD 68 would be more fair than  the current system that picks and chooses among 
nonprofits, wo uld be less confusi ng and easier for retailers to administer.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration in this matter.   
 
 
