Martin Lodish
Portland Stage
LD 68
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Taxation Committee,
I am here today speaking in favor of LD 68.  I am Martin Lodish and the Managing Director of 
Portland Stage, a 50 year old professional NFP theater located in Portland.  This is the fifth 
NFP that I have worked at in Maine – at all of them, when we purchase an item vendors will 
ask about our IRS forms showing we are a 501c3 so that they don’t have to charge sales tax 
– not a single vendor that I have worked with in 17 plus years living and working for NFPs in 
Maine has asked if we are on a particular list of approved NFP businesses.  Paying sales tax 
is very confusing –we have to explain to vendors that in Maine, even though we are a 
501c3/NFP, we pay sales tax – I was unaware that all NFPs were not exempt until I started at
Portland Stage.  I would assume, I am not alone – as the law as it is currently written is 
complicated, and clearly unevenly enforced.  Please support LD 68.
Annually, Portland Stage pays about $17k in sales tax for supplies that we use to put on 
plays, educate school children, and otherwise fulfill our mission.  The current laws of Maine 
make it clear that the state values some NFPs more than others, as it exempts certain 
categories of NFPs from sales tax and not others.  This bill would correct that injustice.
The lines are not always clear between NFPs, yet the state’s law as it currently stands draws 
lines  – at Portland Stage we put on plays for the community – but we also are in schools, 
reaching upwards of 10,000 students annually.  We pay sales tax on supplies we use to teach
children because we are classified as a theater.  We annually receive funding through the 
Maine Arts commission to support our educational programming, some of which is paid back 
to the state in the form of sales tax – which is rather inefficient process.  When we go into the 
schools, we provide the same exact service than other NFPs that are exempt from sales tax.  
That means that when we purchase supplies to teach kids we are taxed, but other 
organizations that purchase the same exact supply for the same exact purpose are not taxed.
That doesn’t make sense.
Arts are central to making us human and to connect the community, and they also contribute 
financially to the community.  In FY19, our last full year prior to the pandemic, we had almost 
44,000 people attend our shows – which only paid half of our expenses – the rest made up by
donations and other sources.  However, our patrons are often eating in restaurants before or 
after performances.   According to a study done in CT by the Americans for the Arts 
(https://portal.ct.gov/-/media/DECD/Arts_Culture/Creative-Economy/CT-AEP4-Impact-Study-
Final-Report.pdf), the average attendee to a NFP arts and culture event in CT spent an 
average of $23 excluding the cost of admission.  I would assume that theater goers in Maine 
are similar – that would mean that PS alone in FY19 generated $1M to the local economy – 
that benefits restaurants, bars, parking lots, etc – and generates more jobs and revenue for 
the state as a result.
We also bring artists from away to Portland, housing them while they prepare for and put on 
our plays.  They too contribute to the local economy, and our employees also contribute to 
the local economy.  All of this is hampered as we use some of our funds to pay state sales 
tax.   If we were released from that burden, we would better be able to fulfill our mission and 
contribute to the local economy.  We are a lean organization – our highest paid FT employee 
earns less than 3 times the lowest paid FT employee.
Postpandemic – the needs to build connections in our community has never been as high.  
NFPs across the state have more needs to fill – and we are facing high inflation and other 
stressors.  However, performing arts organizations were especially hard hit.  We were the first
industry to close our doors in March 2020, and we will likely be the last to fully recover.  Prior 
generous federal stimulus was key to keeping us solvent, but that is unlikely to occur similarly
in the future.  Now is the time for the state to provide relief for NFPs and to correct the 
confusing nature of this confusing and unfair portion of the tax law.
