Mill Maine Association 
of Nonproﬁts 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Taxation Committee: 
My name is Mary Alice Scott (she/her), and I am the Public Affairs Manager at the Maine Association of 
Nonproﬁts. MANP is a growing membership organization made up of over 1,000 nonproﬁt members from all 
16 counties. Since 1994, MANP has grown to become Maine's comprehensive resource for the tools, 
knowledge, and connections nonproﬁts need to be effective and well-run. 
I am testifying in support of LD 68: An Act to Exempt Certain Nonproﬁt Organizations from the Sales and Use 
Tax and the Service Provider Tax. This bill would exempt 501c3 nonprofits from paying sales tax on tangible 
personal property or taxable services, if the tangible personal property or taxable services sold are to be used 
primarily for the purposes for which the nonprofit organization was organized. 
As you all know, nonprofits are vital to Maine's economy and quality of life. You may not know that nonprofits 
employ 1 in 6 Maine workers and mobilize more than 400,000 volunteers each year. Most Maine nonprofits 
are very small and community-based. 88% have annual budgets less than $500,000. 61% have annual 
budgets under $50,000. Every dollar makes a difference for these organizations. 
Charitable nonprofits embody and sustain the fundamental social, cultural, and spiritual values of trust, 
compassion, justice and moral behavior that bind us together. For this reason, we as a society give them 
special status as tax-exempt entities. This exemption is good economic and social policy. 
In general, 501c3 nonproﬁts are exempt from income and property taxes. Many organizations therefore 
assume that they are also exempt from sales tax. In most states, and in every other state in New England, they 
are. 
But in Maine, there is a patchwork system of sales tax exemptions which includes over one hundred separate 
statutory exemptions, and more than forty distinct types of nonprofits. New exemptions are regularly added 
on a case-by-case basis. 
By definition, 501c3 nonprofits offer a public beneﬁt. By attempting to list distinct exemptions, the State 
creates an unfair system in which some nonprofits are exempt and others are not, despite having the same 
IRS tax status. As a matter of principle, MANP opposes tax initiatives that would result in dividing 501(0) (3) 
organizations based on subject matter and philosophy. 
LD 68 would simplify administration for the State, for businesses, and for nonprofits themselves. 
Every year, we conduct a member survey, and attempt to categorize nonprofits into separate mission areas, 
and every year, 15-20% of the responding organizations do not fit neatly into the categories we provide. This 
demonstrates the difﬁculty of classifying nonproﬁts with an individualized list. 
Because the current list of exemptions includes those nonprofits with the biggest ﬁscal impact on the State's 
budget, we are reasonably assured that LD 68 will have a limited impact on the State's budget. But it will have 
a big impact on many nonprofits and their ability to channel funding directly into the communities they serve. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, and I'm happy to answer any questions. 
‘§J‘Z$“§§J.'§*<§ €”z§Ep{G‘g§%@’§£1§i’i&-X3
