ﬁg HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Melanie Sachs TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
84 Kelsey Ridge Road 
Freeport, ME 04032 
Residence: 207-299-6825 
Melanie.Sachs@legislature.maine.gov 
February 14, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Melanie Sachs, sponsor of 
LD 68, An Act to Exempt Certain Nonproﬁt Organizations from the Sales and Use Tax and 
the Service Provider Tax 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, my name is Melanie Sachs and I represent House District 102, which includes 
Freeport. I am pleased to submit this testimony in support of LD 68, An Act to Exempt Certain 
Nonproﬁt Organizations from the Sales and Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax. 
I had the great honor of serving on the Taxation Committee during the 130"‘ Legislature. We 
spent quite a bit of time considering bills that proposed a sales tax exemption or carve out fora 
deserving 501(c)(3) nonproﬁt organization. These often passed with bipartisan support and 
would end up on the Appropriations table where they may or may not be funded. If they were 
not, I was told, they would come back again the next session, if the nonproﬁt could again 
successfully COI1Il6C1Z with a legislator. 
This led me to do more research. If you look at the exempt organization list on Maine.gov, you 
will note the patchwork of organizations. Only certain veterans ’ service organizations are 
exempt. Only some nonproﬁts serving children qualify. It was not until last session that Area 
Agencies on Aging were exempt, while the exemption for nonproﬁt organizations whose 
primary purpose is to obtain, medically evaluate and distribute eyes for use in comeal 
transplantation, research and education have been in effect since 1993. Both worthy, but no 
rubric as to why one took precedence over the other. This patchwork approach is incredibly 
inefficient and inequitable. 
District 102: Freepolt
A bill presented in the l29“‘ Legislature sought to resolve this inequity using language that 
mirrors the one presented today. It sought to grant a state sales tax exemption to nonproﬁt 
organizations that have been determined by the United States Internal Revenue Service to be 
exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Code, “if the tangible 
personal property or taxable services sold are to be used primarily ” for the purpose which the 
nonproﬁt organizations were organized. I note that these items must be used primarily for the 
purposes for which the nonproﬁt Was organized- to further their mission and good work. At the 
time, Dr. Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner with Maine Revenue Services, indicated that 
“Maine is the only state in New England with a sales tax that does not broadly exempt all 
501(c)(3) organizations. In fact, Maine is one of only a few states nationally without such an 
exemption. ” Despite receiving an excellent reception, this bill was left unaddressed when the 
Legislature ’s operations Weresuspended due to the pandemic. 
I offer this same bill today for your consideration, as we all personally know nonproﬁts here in 
Maine who do amazing work. As noted by the Maine Association of Nonproﬁts, l in 6 workers, 
or over 100,000 employees, work for nonproﬁts. They contribute $14 billion dollars to our 
Maine economy. Nonproﬁt organizations are steadfast and vital service providers of education, 
care, enrichment, and comfort, who often perform miracles with incredibly limited resources. We 
have an opportunity to acknowledge the work and contributions of these organizations who do so 
much with so little, and to allow every dollar they spend to go to services, not to state sales taxes. 
I urge you to support LD 68. 
District l02: Freepoit
