TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: February 14, 2023 
LD 68 - “An Act to Exempt Certain Nonproﬁt Organizations ﬁcom the Sales and 
Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Neither For Nor Against 
LD 68, “An Act to Exempt Certain Nonproﬁt Organizations ﬂom the Sales and 
Use Tax and the Service Provider Tax.” 
Sections 1 and 2 of this Bill would exempt from the sales, use, and service 
provider taxes sales to nonproﬁt organizations determined by the IRS to be exempt 
under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code if the property or services 
sold are to be used primarily for the purposes for which the nonproﬁt entity was 
organized. 
Many nonproﬁts are already exempt under current Maine law, but there is 
not a blanket sales and use tax exemption in Maine law for nonproﬁt organizations 
that have received an exemption determination from the IRS under Section 
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Instead, Maine sales and service provider 
tax has more narrowly tailored exemptions addressing particular situations. Of the 
114 separate statutory sales tax exemptions, 34 are for nonproﬁt organizations, 
exempting 52 distinct types of nonproﬁts.
1
Although the distinction between the existing speciﬁc sales tax exemptions 
versus a broad exemption for all 501(c)(3) organizations not infrequently results in 
some confusion among nonproﬁt organizations, moving to a broad 501(c)(3) 
exemption would itself present transition challenges, its own risks of confusion for 
nonproﬁts, and of course ﬁscal cost. To appraise more fully all three of those 
elements, and the ability to provide that information to this Committee, the 
Administration recommends ﬁrst completing the study required by Section 3 of the 
Bill before the Committee turns to the exemptions proposed by Sections 1 and 2. 
Section 3 of this bill would require the Office of Tax Policy to study the 
existing sales and service provider tax exemptions, and to report to the Committee 
no later than December 6, 2023, suggested legislation repealing or modifying any 
duplicative or unnecessary exemptions. The caveat we wish to point out there, 
however, is that the proposed deadline may not leave enough time for Maine 
Revenue Services to accomplish a full review of the 52 relevant exemptions, 
verifying that all nonproﬁt organizations already issued exemption certiﬁcates by 
MRS have also been granted 501(c)(3) status by the IRS. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Com1nittee ’s questions.
2
