 
 
State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Ann Tucker  on behalf  of Portland Community Health Center Dba Greater 
Portland Health  
May 8 , 2023  
Supporting:  
LD 1768 “An Act to Update the Alternative Base Year Payment Method for  
Federally Qualified Health Centers”  
 
Sponsored by Representative Gattine  
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services , I am  Ann Tucker, CEO of Greater Portland Health , one of Maine’s 
20 community health centers (CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), 
and part of the largest independent primary care network in the state.  
Greater Portland Health has 15 health centers in Portland, South Portland and Westbrook. Our 
175 team members provide high  quality care  to over 13,000 patients.  We provide medical, 
mental health, substance use treatment, oral healt h, and recuperative care  services  to 
members of our community, regardless of their health insurance status or ability to pay. 
Additional support provided to our patient s includes :  transpor tation, interpreting,  financial 
assistance counselors, case management, community health work ers and peer  support.  
 
We strongly support  LD 1768  and thank Representative Gattine and the other cosponsors  for 
bringing this important legislation forward .  
 
We are extremely grateful to the Legislature for the passage of LD 1787 during the 130th 
Session which supported a collaborative process between DHHS and the health centers to 
recalculate our rates for the first time in over twenty year s. Greater Portland He alth, like many 
others is still being impacted by the effects of the COVID pandemic , workforce shortages, 
higher salary and benefit expe nses, inflation, and increased need for additional primary care 
access  in our community.  The rate increase will assist with the financial gap we are facing due 
to increased costs of providing exceptional care in our community.   
 
To avoid a nother delay in the future, this bill would require the Department to further update 
the bas e year of that alternative system no later than June 30, 2026, and every 3 years 

thereafter.  MaineCare payments for FQHC services must be increased on a regular basis to 
reflect the current costs of providing services.  Supporting this bill is necessary for the long -term 
viability of Maine’s health care safety net and our FQHCs , who are leaders in delivering 
innovative and integrated primary care that Maine people need and deserve .  
 
On behalf of Great er Portland Health , thank you for the opportunity to speak about the 
importance of LD 1768 . Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at  
atucker@greaterportlandhealth.org  with any follow up questions.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Ann Tucker  
Chief Executive Officer  
 

