 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of  Darcy Shargo  on behalf of  Maine Primary Care Association  
May 8, 2023  
 
Supporting:  
LD 1768 “An Act to Update the Alternative Base Year Payment Method for  
Federally Qualified Health Centers”  
 
Sponsored by Representative Gattine  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am  Darcy Shargo, Chief Executive Officer at Maine Primary Care 
Association.  
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers 
(CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). Maine's CHC s make up the 
largest independent primary care network in the state, providing high quality and equitable 
primary and preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 
people . Together, these health centers serve roughly 20% of ou r state’s population and are 
present in all four corners of this beautiful state. They’re truly the backbone of our health 
system.  
On behalf of those FQHC s, I come to you in support of LD 1768. The top line is that this bill 
provides much needed security for health centers; in fact, for FQHCs to continue to offer the 
level of services they currently provide AND to serve in a transformational role (including 
building capacity to meet pent -up demand), both stability and predictability are essential. LD 
1768 t akes an important step in that direction.  
Primary care can, and should, lead the recovery of our health system —especially one that is 
now further fragmented and stressed post -pandemic. That is why it is imperative that the State 
ensure stable funding supp ort for FQHCs by establishing a regular cycle of rate adjustments, 
thus eliminating the requirement that health centers carry the burden of underpayment for 
decades or more . 
For us, this bill rounds out a collaborative process that we’ve invested in for years, in 
partnership with OMS. We are very grateful for recent  adjustments  to our rates , which came  
for the first time in over twenty years ; we also know with certainty that w e cannot go another 
twenty years. As the State continues to transform its health care system, FQHCs need 
predictable access to resources  that support increased integration of services like behavioral 
health and dental care. Ongoing adjustments —which consider the changing dynamics of the 
system an d the unique issues in our state —will also support expansion and reimagining of 
health care models in preparation for more value -based payments, which aligns with the State’s 
goals .  
 
 
 
 mepca.org  I would be remiss if I didn’t point out that this bill is not an “end run ” around the State or its 
rate setting process. We support that work  and the goals OMS is trying to achieve. It is simply a 
continuation of our discussions to build in the necessary supports for our work. As we move  
into the next phase of health care deliv ery, let’s not forget the pioneering health centers here in 
Maine who have shouldered some of the heaviest burden and continue to perform and 
innovate – we’re a sure bet when it comes to both long - and short - term investment. As such, I 
urge you to support  this bill.  
We thank Representative Gattine and the other cosponsors for bringing this important 
legislation forward.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers,  thank you for considering our comments. 
Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at  dshargo@mepca.org  with any follow up 
questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Darcy Shargo, MFA  
Chief Executive Officer  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
