 
HealthReach supports LD 1768 . 
Our Community Health Centers  serve our most rural and vulnerable – 
healthcare reimbursement rates should track with real -world costs and 
realized inflation  so we can continue to serve Maine’s rural communities . 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services – my name is Ed Molleo, and I am  the Director of Communications for HealthReach  
Community Health Center s. The HealthReach  organization  is one of Maine’s 20 federally qualified health 
centers , who together compose  the largest independent primary care network in the state . 
 HealthReach strongly supports LD 1768 , “An Act to Update the Alternative Base Year Payment Method for  
Federally Qualified Health Centers” . We thank Representative Gattine and other co -sponsors for bringing this 
important legislation forward.  
 HealthReach is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit network of 12  Community Health Center s (CHCs) , located throughout 
Central and Western Maine. On an annual basis, our 275 staff  serve more than 26,000 patients  through  
services that run the gamut of general preventative healthcare, dental care, and behavioral health services.  
Our locations are situated by mandate in medically underserved communities . Our clinics span a large 
service area , bounded by Albion and Whitefield to the east, Bingham to the north, Rangeley and Bethel to the 
west, and Richmond to the south.  We serve patients that come from 9 of Maine’s 16 counties, and our 
Connector Program further provide s Marketplace health insurance  support for clients statewide . 
 
It is in this context that I can confidently state : our positive impact on Maine is truly outsized when compared 
to our lean, efficient operations . Despite this, t he last 3 years have seen a great number of shocks across the 
healthcare system, both  in Maine and globally.  The recent economic situation has been defined by its tumult. 
As members of the  same  communities we serve, we are acutely aware that our services stand as  a lifeline for 
many rural peopl es all the time  – especially  now  and for the foreseeable future . 
 
The bill before you  can begin to address  the ongoing financial anxiety  that all of our state’s non -profit CHCs 
regularly  experience . We are extremely grateful to the Legislature for the passage of LD 1787 during the 130th 
Session, which required a rate recalculation for CHCs for the first time in over twenty years –  and – at a time PR@HealthReach.org  
DATE: May 2023  
 Contact: Communications Department  
Tele:        ( 207 ) 660 - 9913 
 

when CHCs were feeling the most profound effects of the  COVID -19 pandemic. Over the past few months, we 
have been working closely with  both  the Maine Primary Care Association and the Department of Health and 
Human Services on the implementation . Completion of that process is close . 
 
We attest that these rate i ncreases will help bring greater payment equity to CHCs (as compared to all other 
healthcare provider types) when it is needed most.  That said,  we cannot continue to operate without a 
framework for scheduled rate recalculations . The current situation  puts considerable undue burden on our 
health centers and staff , and ultimately does not promote the quality of care we need  in Maine.  
 To avoid another delay, this bill would require the Department to further update the base year of that 
alternative system  by no later than 30  June, 2026, and every 3 years (triannually) thereafter. MaineCare 
payments for C HC services must be increased on a regular basis to reflect current costs of providing 
services  – costs borne by our nonprofit CHCs . This is the foundation for developing a value -based payment 
model for C HCs, and ensuring that there is capacity for the work that care transformation requires.  
 Simply put, CHCs are leaders in delivering innovative and integrated primary care  to our most rural 
communities , and t his bill is necessary for the long -term viability of Maine’s healthcare safety net . 
 On behalf of HealthReach and our 26,000 patients , I thank you for your consideration of this important bill  and 
our testimony . LD 1768  will provide  consistent and dependable funding, allowing us to continue serving Maine 
in the way that all Mainers deserve. Please choose to support our local, rural healthcare services  with this bill.   
 
Should you have any questions or seek further insight, please do not hesitate to reach out to me.  
 
Edward Molleo (he/they)  
Director of Communications , HealthReach  
( 2 0 7 )  6 6 0 –  9 9 1 3  
Edward.Molleo@HealthReach.org  
 
 
 
-END- 
