P.O. Box 2490 
Augusta, ME 04338 
 
1-800-965-7476 
www.mainecahc.org 
consumerhealth@mainecahc.org  
 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers.
Testimony In Support of: 
LD 1768, An Act to Update the Alternative Base Year  
Payment Method for Federally Qualified Health Centers 
May 8, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services, thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony in support of LD 
1768 An Act to Update the Alternative Base Year Payment Method for Federally Qualified 
Health Centers. 
My name is Kate Ende and I am the policy director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care, a 
nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care for 
all people in Maine. CAHC serves as Maine’s Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program 
and as such operates a toll-free HelpLine staffed by certified application counselors who help 
people understand their health coverage options and apply for health insurance, including 
Marketplace coverage. We also serve as Maine’s MaineCare ombudsman program and provide 
assistance with applying for and navigating MaineCare. In addition to insurance, we help 
connect people to non-insurance programs, such as free and sliding-scale care programs. It is 
with this experience that we offer the following testimony in support of LD 1768.  
Through our HelpLine, we often hear from people who are uninsured or underinsured and are in 
need of health care, including primary care services, mental and behavioral health care, chronic 
disease management, and oral health care. We frequently refer these callers to their local health 
centers. For people who can’t qualify for or afford health coverage, or who have coverage but 
can’t afford to access care due to a high deductible or expensive cost-sharing requirement, 
federally qualified health centers provide an invaluable service and, in some cases, can be the 
difference between someone accessing services or going without the care they need. In addition 
to medical care, we also refer people to FQHCs for help applying for and accessing other types 
of services and benefits, such as in-person assistance applying for health coverage.  
In many areas of the state, provider shortages also create significant barriers to accessing medical 
care, including access to primary care, mental and behavioral health care services, and dental 
care. This is especially true in rural areas. Investments in Maine’s health care infrastructure, 
especially in FQHCs, are necessary to ensure all Mainers have access to the health care they 
need. FQHCs operate 70 sites throughout the state and provide much needed access to medical 
care in rural and underserved communities, serving approximately one in six Mainers. FQHCs 
are an integral component of Maine’s health care infrastructure, and they play a vital role in 
helping Maine people access health care services, regardless of their income, insurance status, or 
where they live. For these reasons, we urge the Committee to ensure the continued viability of 
FQHCs so that they can continue providing these critical services to Maine people.  
Thank you.   
