 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
www. maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy Kilrain del Rio  
Advocacy & Programs Director  
kkilraindelrio @mejp.org  
 
  
MEJ Testimony in Support of  LD 1768, An Act to Update the Alternative Base Year Payment 
Method for  Federally Qualified Health Centers  
 
May 8 , 2023  
 
Good morning , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, I use she/her pronouns, and I’m 
the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic secu rity, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am 
speaking today in support of LD 1768. 
 
 The Federally Qualified Health Center s (FQHCs) provide essential care to man y of Maine ’s lowest -
income residents. They provide this care regardless of th e ability of a patient to pay . They also see 
many MaineC are patients for a wide range of health care needs . MaineCare reimbursement rates  
have a large impact on the sustainability of the F QHCs and in turn on the pe ople who need to access 
care through th ese providers.  
Access  to an FQHC has been shown to increase the likelihood  that low -income people have a regular 
source of care and to have seen a physician in the past year.1 Geographic proximity to  FQHCs can 
reduce the use of more expensive care options like emergency departments.2 They provide a wide 
range of care , including  vaccinations , primary care , mental health care , treatment for SUD, and 
denta l care .3 FQHCs  are a vital part of our health care safety net.  
In the  last legislative session, Maine took a huge step forward by creating a system for regular review 
and adjust ment of rates across the services MaineCare covers. Over  time, this s tructure will result  
in consistent adjustments to rates in a systematic  way so that no rates languish for years  without 
review. For the same reasons that it was important to create that system , it is important to make 
the changes laid out in LD 1768.  
To maintain an adequate provider ne twork for low -income Mainers  for a range of health  care needs , 
FQHCs are necessary . Ensuring they have adequate funding and that their funding is reviewed 
regularly is imperative. For these reas ons we urge you to support LD 1768. Th ank you.  
 
1 https://bmchealthservres.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12913 -022 -07685 -0 
2 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go v/pmc/articles/PMC7714363/  
3 https://bphc.hrsa.gov/about -health -centers/health -center -program -impact -growth  
