Andrew Stevenson
Belfast
LD 586
Statement from Andrew Stevenson in support of LD-586
 
Hello and thank you for the opportunity to testify in favor of LD-586, An Act to Protect Maine 
Fisheries from the Effects of Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations. 
My name is Andrew Stevenson and I live in Belfast, Maine. I appreciate the work that
Senator Beebe-Center and her co-sponsors Senator Reny and Representative 
Salisbury have put into this initiative. 
I support the overall intent and design of LD-586 because I believe it gives this 
legislature, Maine communities, and Maine businesses the opportunity to implement 
one of the very first “Third Wave” regulatory programs in the country. 
Here’s what I mean by “Third Wave.” 
The “First Wave” was the establishment of our national parks and public lands, 
started in Teddy Roosevelt’s time. 
The “Second Wave” was the passing of the environmental protection laws in the 
1970s and 1980s. I had a small part to play in that. 
The First Wave was about conservation. 
The Second Wave was about protection. 
The Third Wave is about restoration. 
Maine is ready for the Third Wave. Setting up a regulatory scheme for land-based 
aquaculture facilities is our first opportunity to show others what that could look like. 
We need regulatory regimes that permit sustainable facilities, not degrading ones. 
This committee has an opportunity to craft a set of regulations to bring in land-based 
aquaculture operations that have no — or nearly no — pollution, that produce healthy 
products, and that generate jobs a worker can be proud to tell his children or her 
grandchildren about. 
We know what the alternative to restorative regulations is: programs that attempt to 
limit resource over-exploitation and passing the costs of pollution cleanup from the 
polluter to the taxpayer. We had to start somewhere but we can’t stop. 
We must take the next step. 
We must establish restoration and sustainability as our regulatory objectives. 
I spent the first 20 years of my professional life in environmental protection. I worked
in U.S. EPA’s Office of Water, directed technical services for the Association of 
Metropolitan Sewerage Agencies, ran a political affairs program for the Water 
Pollution Control Federation, and joined the Boston-based environmental engineering
firm of Camp, Dresser & McKee when they opened FPC — the Federal Programs 
Corporation — to conduct Superfund clean-up projects around the country. 
Strong, sound, and transparent regulatory programs benefit everyone. Set them up. 
Fund them well. Monitor the activities conducted under them. And enforce their 
provisions. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 

