 
  
17 March 2023  
 
The Ecological Aquaculture Foundation LLC  (EAF) , with offices in Maine  and three  additional, 
international locations , strongly opposes LD 586  “An Act to Protect Maine Fisheri es from the Effects of 
Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations” . 
 
Our business support s the development of scientifically -based regulations and standards that fulfill the 
highest international metrics for  the pro duction of sustainable seafoods in the USA and internationally. We 
assisted the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization  (FAO) to develop the FAO “Ecos ystem 
Approach to Aquaculture ”, and this month our international team will rel ease a comprehensive study on 
aquaculture’s contribution to the United  Nation ’s Sustainable Development G oals ( SDGs ). We share with 
the world the progress that Maine has made as a  global  leader in the research, development , and 
commercialization  of many types of aquaculture which have had demonstrable publi c benefits , especially 
to fishing communities, diverse, women -owned businesses , and Maine ’s rural communities where the 
development of aquaculture has its greatest pot ential.  EAF is involved in both small scale and large  
commercial businesses , from seawe eds and shellfish to salmonids in recirculating aquacultur e systems 
(RAS ) in Norway, the Midd le East,  and the USA , and we  were planning to expand our business here in 
Maine.  
 
This bill includes outdated , non-scientific , and very inflammatory  language . There are no definition s or 
explicit  metric s for any regulatory agency regarding “industrial ” aquaculture , or “zero impa ct”, or “carbon 
neutral ”. The bill’s prescription on “feed use ” is out of date as the RAS and allied feed industries such as 
Skretting here in Maine have moved rapidly away from  the use of ocean resources, with many conservation 
groups such as TNC, EDF, and the WWF praising RAS and aquaculture feed innovations . The RAS 
industry has a great awareness  of its responsibility  to steward wisely  ocean  resources  in feeds . In addition , 
no form of existing  food production system or wastewater treatmen t facility i n Maine or anywhere else in 
the world could meet the zero-discharge  demand as stated in this bill. The Maine Department s of Marine 
Resources  and Environmental Protection  do not need the addition of such unrealistic , technical ma ndates 
that this bill requires.  
 
This bill is an unnecessary , very radical  measure  led by single -minded, scientifically  illiterate  interest 
groups that will directly impact Maine in so many ways, as we ll as our business development plans , and 
for job cr eation in Maine.  The Ecological Aquaculture Foundation LLC  strongly opposes LD 586 .                 
 
 
                                                                           Barry A. Costa -Pierce, Ph.D., Fellow, AAAS  
                                                                                              President/CEO  
                                                   Ecological Aquaculture Foundatio n, LLC 
                                            Professor , Faculty of Biosciences & Aquaculture  
                                                                                    Nord University , Bodø , Norway  

