Maine may legislate to restrict 
the development of RAS 
aquaculture  
 foodmate  2023- 03-06 
On Feb. 14, U.S. Rep. Pinny Beebe -Center (D -Maine) introduced "SP 254," which seeks to "protect 
Maine fisheries from industrial circular aquaculture operations." The bill will be heard on March 16, 
inviting the Maine Marine Resources Commission to attend and comment.  
SP 254 requires that as of January 1, 2024, all RAS projects in Maine must not cause deterioration in 
water or air quality, or increase overall carbon emissions. Feed sources must be free of wild Marine 
life and polluting substances, including but not limited to wild finned fish, wild krill, genetically 
modified ingredients, PCBS and mercury. In addition, RAS projects must not have any adve rse impact 
on the local lobster, shellfish, seaweed and fish fishing industries.  
So far, the new bill has the support of other Democrats, who control both houses of Maine.  
Tom Sorby, general manager of Kingfish Maine, a local producer, expressed concern be cause his RAS 
project is located in Jonesport, Maine. Sorby posted on linkdIn: "The new bill threatens U.S. food 
security and sustainable protein production by fundamentally restricting any type of land- based 
farming in Maine. This has nothing to do with p rotecting fisheries in Maine. They just want to stop 
land-based aquaculture in Maine."  
Sorby noted that several of the requirements set forth in the new bill are already included in Maine's 
current license, and that it took Kingfish Maine three years to obtain all the required licenses, a 
process that was apparently rigorous enough.  
As for feed requirements, Sorby says, "It is simply not feasible for the current mariculture industry not 
to use feed that does not contain Marine life. The feed industry is wor king hard to reduce the use of 
Marine raw materials, but it is still too early to be completely free of Marine life."  
 
RAS aquaculture ; RAS aquaculture -  ECHEMI  
 
 Disclaimer: ECHEMI reserves the right of final explanation and revision for all the 
information.  
 
carrie peabody
jonesport
LD 586
Testimonial attached with x-reference to recent article relating to SP 254.
I am unfortunately not available to attend via Zoom or in person due to work 
obligations.
Please accept my comments for the record.  
Thank you. 
Carrie Peabody
