 
 
Main Office: 7 Ames Way , Machias, M E 04654   
Calais Office: 330 North Street , Calais, ME 04619  * Milbridge Office: 87 Maine Street, Milbridge, ME 04658  
Tel: 207.255.0983  * Fax: 207.255 .4987 * www.sunrisecounty.org  
 March 16, 2023  
 
Committee on Marine Resources  
State House, Room 206 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Testimony against LD 586 128 An Act to Protect Maine Fisheries from the 
Effects of Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations  
 
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , Distinguished Members of the Committee 
on Marine Resources : 
 
The Sunrise County Economic Council (SCEC) respectfully submits t his 
testimony in opposition to  LD 586 An Act to Protect Maine Fisheries from the 
Effects of Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations .  SCEC opposes LD 
586 because it creat es a standard regarding carbon emissions  for recirculating  
aquaculture that no natural resource based industry could meet  and would set  a 
precedent  regarding feed that would threaten future inves tments in our county’s 
salmon industry .  More generally, t he preced ents set by LD 586  would chill 
investment in the natural resour ce industr ies that provide a livelihood for 
thousands of Washington County families.  
 
SCEC is a non -profit organization that works to create jobs and prosperity in 
Washington County; we are also the economic de velopment arm of Washington 
County Government .  SCEC strongly supports King fish Maine’s proposed  
recirculating  aquaculture facility in Jonesport and welcomes the over 70  
permanent , year-round jobs it will create .  Recirculating aquaculture  represents 
an opportunity for our region  that complements our existing  natural resource 
industries  of wild blueberries , hardwood pulp and tissue, and commercial  fishing .  
Recirculating aquaculture facilities  in Maine are alrea dy regulated by s eventeen 
federal, regional, and state agencies as well as the ir municipalit y.  The existing  
laws balance  our commun ities’ need for investment and j obs with protecting the 
health  of our environment  and our quali ty of life .   
 
LD 586  states that a recirculat ing aquaculture  operation may not  “increase 
overall carbon emissions ”; this a standard that no natu ral resource in dustry could 
meet  including my o wn famil y’s small  farm .  This will essentially cut off 
investment in recirculating aquac ulture and  send a message that undermine s 
Washington County ’s natural resource  industr ies as they compete for investment 
in the global economy.    
 
 
Board of Directors  
 
Megan Sorby  
Chair  
Kingfish Maine  
 
Scott Beal  
Vice Chair  
Woodland Pulp  
 
Lucas Morris  
Treasurer  
Machias Savings Bank  
  
April Norton  
Wyman’s  
 
Ardis Brown  
Town of Danforth  
 
Brian Frutchey  
RH Foster, Inc  
 
Charlie McAlpin  
Eastern Maine Electric 
Cooperative  
 
Dee Sabattus  
United South and Eastern Tribes  
 
Renee Gray  
Town of Lubec  
 
Susan Mingo  
Washington County Community 
College  
 
 
Ex-Officio  
 
Betsy Fitzgerald  
Secretary  
Washington County  
Commissioners  
 
Representative Tiffany Strout   
Washington County Legislative 
Delegation  
 
 
 
 
 
 LD 586’s prohibition  on feed containing “wild marine organi sms” will make it impossible for Maine based 
recircul ating aquaculture companies to compete while doing nothing to safeguard the world’s oce ans.  The 
prohibition w ould also s et a prece dent that could threaten Washington County existing  salmon in dustry that 
support s over 100 jobs in its hatcheries, oce an fa rming, and process ing.   
 
SCEC opposes LD 586 because it threatens investment and jobs in recirculating aquaculture without any 
benefit to our communit y and through  its extreme  approach, undermine s invest ment  in the natural resource 
industries  that thousands of Washing ton County famil ies rely on . 
 
Thank you for your consideration of the economic impact of LD 586 to Washington County and your 
support of our communi ty. 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Charles J. Rudelitch, Esq.  
Executive Director  
 
 
cc: Senator Marianne Moore  
Representative Kenneth Davi s 
Representative Anne Perry  
Representative Tiffany Strout  
 

