 
 
Testimony of the  
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)  
 
Hearing of the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Committee on Marine Resources   
March 1 6, 2023  
 
Senator  Cameron Reny , Chair  
Representative Allison Hepler , Chair  
Marine Resources  Committee  
Maine Legislature  
Cross Building, Room 2 09 
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
Re:  In Opposition to  LD 586, An Act to Protect Maine Fisheries from the Effects of Industrial 
Recirculating Aquaculture Operations  
 
I submit this testimony today on behalf of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) in  
opposition to LD 586, “An Act to Protect Maine Fisheries from the Effects of Industrial Recirculating 
Aquaculture Operations .”  BIO specifically objects to the provision on page two, line 13 ban ning   
the use of aquaculture feed containing genetically modified ingredients . 
 
BIO is a Washington, DC -based trade group representing more than 1,100 biotechnology companies – 
including some in Maine  - academic institutions, state biotechnology centers, and related organizations 
across the United States and 31 other nations tha t are involved in the research and development of 
healthcare, agricultural, industrial, and environmental biotechnology products.  
 
Maine ’s biotechnology sector is comprised of 575 establishments, employing 10,374  people who  
earn an average annual salary of $ 89,095.  Bioscience industry employment in Maine grew by 20  
percent from 2018 through 2021 . 
Aquaculture feed is often soy and corn based  and, according to the U.S. Department  
of Agriculture  (USDA) , more than 90 percent of the corn and soybeans grown in the United States  
are genetically modified.   LD 586 arbitra rily limits the choice of aquaculture ope rators to use the cheapest 
and most plentiful feed.  Moreover, BIO is not aware of a genetically engineered or modified animal   
that is used as aquaculture feed;  however, it would be subject to FDA approval  prior any such use.  
 
Most importantly, i t is important to note that crops and food derived from modern  
biotechnology (GMOs) are safe.   Since being introduced to U.S. markets in 1996,  
 
 
not a single person or animal has become sick from eating biotech foods or feeds because the  
product was produced by biotechnology.  The USDA , U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ,  
and U.S. Food and Drug Administration  have all found biotech crops to be safe for humans,  
animals, and the environment.  The American Medical Association  agrees and believes  
biotech plants have the potential to improve nutrition and prevent and cure disease, and the  
World Health Organization  says biotech crops can help developing nations overcome food security 
problems.  
 
The comprehensive federal regulatory review process - that includes the U.S. Food and  
Drug Administration, USDA, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency - has determined  
that foods produced using genetic engineering are safe and not materially different in any  
way from those made using other methods. This is consistent with scientific research conducted and 
reviewed by both federal agencies and private entities. As such, there is no justification for arbitrarily 
banning genetically modified aquaculture feed.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to present te stimony in opposition to  LD 586.  I respectfully  
ask that you oppose this legislation , as it is contrary to  science and real-world  experiences  
from the last 25 plus years. Please do not hesitate to contact me at (202) 365 -6436  
or gharrington@bio.org  if you have any questions regarding this matter.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Gene Harrington  
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)  
 
 
 
About BIO  
BIO is a national trade organization, based in Washington, DC, representing more than 1,100  
biotechnology companies, academic institutions, state biotechnology centers, and related  
organizations across the United States and 31 other nations.  BIO members  are involved  
in the research and development of healthcare, agricultural, industrial, and environmental  
biotechnology products. Biotechnology researchers expand the boundaries of science to  
benefit mankind by providing better healthcare, enhanced agric ulture, and a cleaner and  
safer environment.  
www.bio.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
