188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
    
 
March 16 , 2023  
 Senator Reny  
Representative Hepler 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine R esources   
100 State House Station Augusta, Maine 04333   
 
RE: AGC Maine in Opposition  to LD 586, “An Act to Protect Maine Fisheries from the Effects of Industrial Recirculating 
Aquaculture Operations ”  
 
Senator Reny , Representative Hepler , and Distinguished members of the Education and Cul tural Affairs Committee , my 
name is Matt Marks, a nd I am a  Principal at Cornerstone Government Affairs . I’m  submitting comments on behalf of my 
client  Associated General Contractors of Maine (AGC Maine).  
 
 The advancement  of regulate d aquaculture  in Maine  provides  opportunities  for Maine  residents  and sustai ns or adds  
construction  careers  during the initial phase  of development  and ongoing operations . NOAA  reported  in 2020 that 
aquaculture  supports  sustainable  earth  citing  the assimilation  with  the United  Nations ’ seventeen  point s for 
sustainability  goals . In the NOAA  publication1, it states  “Although oceans cover 70 percent of the Earth, they account for 
less than 2 percent of human food production. Luckily, the number of sustainable aquaculture farms continues to 
increase to meet the demands of our growing population ,” and “Aquaculture creates ye ar-round jobs, supports resilient 
working waterfronts and coastal communities, and can provide sustainable economic growth. Across the United States, 
aquaculture production is valued at $1.5 billion .” 
 
AGC Maine represented the construction industry  on the Maine Climate Council and is please d the Council adopted 
provisions that recognized  both  the economic and environmental benefits of aquaculture. In the December 2020 report, 
“Maine Won ’t Wait ” aquacu lture is specifically addressed within the document as an op portunity for Maine  even citing, 
“State support for the growing aquaculture sector can  serve to increase Maine seafood production, provide  important 
economic  opportunities for coastal communities …”  
 
Both state and federal regulators are well equipped under the current permitting process to ensure compliance with 
environmental standards. The continued resistance  to econo mic development that creates benefits for food resources in 
a regulated econom y places reliance on count ries like China  where they produce about 2/3 of the market . In Maine, new 
laws became effective in September 2021 for licensing and le asing statutes  and our process is both extensive and pu blic-
facing .   
 
The need for US  and World food production continues to outpace production. The World Economic Forum stated that 
product ion must grow 60% over the next few de cades to meet the demand. Maine can be  positioned as a leader in  
aquaculture  and ensure we continue to balance our environmental goals.  
 
We urge Maine ’s legislature to embrace sustainable aquaculture for  our economic and environme ntal priorities  and vote 
no on LD 586 .  
 
1 NOAA Fisheries September 2020: https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/feature -story/aquacultur e-supports- sustainable -earth  
