Steve Eddy
Trenton
LD 586
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Marine Resources.  My name is Steve Eddy, and I am a resident of Trenton, 
Maine with over 25 years of experience working in the aquaculture profession as a fisheries 
and marine scientist.   I am testifying in opposition to LD 586 “An Act to Protect Maine 
Fisheries from the Effects of Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations”.
Although I find many aspects of this bill troubling, the section prohibiting the use of wild 
marine organisms in aquafeeds is especially problematic. Fisheries management and 
utilization of herring, menhaden, krill, seaweed, and other marine species for fertilizer, bait, 
animal feeds, aquafeeds, and other useful products is a complex topic.  Most of the fisheries 
for these species are considered well managed, but there is currently no scientific consensus 
regarding the sustainability of marine sourced ingredients vs terrestrial sourced ingredients. 
They both have their pros and cons, and I don’t believe legislation prohibiting the specific use 
of marine ingredients in aquafeeds would be wise or useful at this point. The aquaculture 
industry is working very hard to find alternatives to marine ingredients and much progress has
been made. However, some level of marine ingredients in aquafeeds remains essential for 
the health and welfare of cultured marine organisms. Marine species are adapted to digest 
marine diets and some nutrients such as omega 3 & 6 fatty acids are difficult to source from 
terrestrial crops. Prohibiting the use of marine sourced ingredients in aquafeeds would cause 
serious animal welfare issues for many of the fish species being considered for land-based 
aquaculture in Maine. 
More broadly, I believe LD 586 could deter and maybe even completely stop further 
development of land-based aquaculture as a sustainable food production system in Maine. I 
support the work the Maine Aquaculture Association and others, including this committee, are
doing to find constructive solutions that address public concerns while allowing Maine 
aquaculture businesses to grow.  Thank you for your consideration.

