Susie O'Keeffe
Montville
LD 586
Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations are massively complex systems. So 
much so that Norway has placed a moratorium on any new land based system. 
Maine's DMR, IF&W and DEP currently struggle to complete the tasks they already 
have before them. The are not staffed or trained in this extremely fast evolving 
industry. Furthermore, the climate and extinction crises demand that we create and 
support highly efficient industries that do not use Maine's waters as dumping grounds 
for nutrient rich, waste waters that also contain numerous chemicals and viruses, or 
require enormous amounts of electricity and fresh water. The fact that Nordic 
Aquafarms CEO, Eric Heim left that corporation and is now proposing a small, closed
loop system on a brownfield site, should raise very serious questions for all 
governmental officials concerning any current or future proposition for flow through 
systems. Closed loop systems are the best available technology and are the very least 
that Maine must demand. Finally, and of extreme importance, is the issue of fish feed.
This is an mindbogglingly destructive industry that is literally taking fish out of the 
mouths of people who need it most in India, Latin America and Africa. These forage 
fish populations are also essential for marine ecosystem health. It's a toxic product 
containing known carcinogens. And, there are no real alternatives for carnivorous 
fish, despite the PR behind this industry. Maine must put on hold all forms of 
industrial aquaculture while it really learns about this industry and the many 
alternatives that could support our economy and the restoration and protection of our 
marine and fresh water environments. Good strong laws that protect the marine 
environment, our fishing communities and our coming generations will bring us the 
RIGHT corporations and discourage the destructive ones. Thank you for you time. 
Please take a moment to read this short piece on fish feed. 
https://www.upstreamwatch.org/post/8-things-big-aquadoesn-t-want-you-to-know-ab
out-fish-feed
  
