1 Written Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 586 
An Act to Protect Maine Fisheries from the Effects of 
Industrial Recirculating Aquaculture Operations 
March 16, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Marine Resources: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am 
submitting this written testimony Neither for Nor Against L.D. 586, An Act to Protect 
Maine Fisheries from the Effects of Industrial Aquaculture Operations.
FAME is a quasi-independent state agency that provides financial solutions that 
help Maine people achieve their business and higher education goals. We create business 
and educational opportunities through our willingness to invest at greater risk based on 
public benefit. FAME’s mission is to provide financial solutions that help Maine people 
achieve their business and higher educational goals. Our vision is to help create a Maine 
workforce with good paying jobs by focusing on the nexus of economic and educational 
development. 
This bill directs the Department of Marine Resources (DMR) to ensure that new 
industrial recirculating aquaculture operations (RAS facilities) do not contribute to the 
degradation of water quality or air quality or increase the state's overall carbon emissions 
and that aquaculture feed sources do not include certain wild marine organisms, 
pollutants, and contaminants. The Department also would have to ensure that industrial 
recirculating aquaculture operations do not adversely impact native lobster, shellfish, 
seaweed, or finfish operations. 
FAME administers various business finance programs such as loan guarantees, 
direct loans, bonds, and tax credits to support business financing. Much of our work helps 
to support Maine’s natural marine resources industries, whether it be lobster and other 
fishing boats and gear, mussel and oyster farming, bait companies, wharves, and supply 

2 companies. Supporting aquaculture projects is part of Maine’s ten-year strategic 
economic development plan and a priority for FAME.  
Some of the aquaculture-related companies we support include Kingfish Maine, 
Inc. (yellowtail kingfish farm based in Franklin); American Unagi, LLC (eel farm based 
in Waldoboro), and Springworks Farm, LLC (aquaponic lettuce farm in Lisbon). Our 
understanding from working with these companies is that Maine already has in place 
strict environmental requirements for such facilities, which balance the need for a clean, 
safe environment with the needs of the industry and economic development. As you 
know, under existing state law, land-based aquaculture facilities require both a license 
from DMR and permits from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). 
FAME requires that such licenses and approvals be in order prior to approving such 
project financing. 
We are keenly aware and supportive of the great interest in aquaculture and the 
need to protect our water quality and environment; however, we are concerned that this 
bill as written so broadly could potentially have unintentional, detrimental effects on the 
growth and success of this business sector and Maine’s stated strategic goal of embracing 
aquaculture as a valued sector of our economy. Some of the proposed requirements of the 
bill such as adopting regulations pertaining to water and air quality seem duplicative to 
the work being done already by DMR, DEP, and other agencies. Other requirements, 
such as whether a proposed project would increase overall carbon emissions, seem costly 
and difficult to evaluate, as well. We urge you to pause in careful consideration as you 
analyze the proposal to consider whether what it proposes is duplicative, unnecessary, 
onerous, or targets unfairly land-based aquaculture projects. 
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. We can be available for the 
work session if helpful, as well. 
