AARON M. FREY 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 
-4'!-AI;-ii_ 
STATE or MAINE 
OEEIcE' oE THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
TEL‘ (2°7)626 ‘8B°° 6 STATE I—IoUsE STAT1oN REGIONAL OFEIcEs 
84 HARLOW ST. ZND FLooR 
BANGOR, MAINE 04401 
TEL: (207) 941-3070 
FAX: (207) 941-3075 
125 PRESUMPSCOT ST., SUITE 26 
PORTLAND, MAINE 04103 
TELZ (207) 822-0260 
FAX: (207) 822-0259 
14 AccEss HIGHWAY, STE.l 
CARIEou, MAINE 04736 
TELI (207) 496-3792 TTY USERS CALL MAINE HELAY 711 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0006 FAX1 (207)496-3291 
Testimony in Support of L.D. 258 An Act to Make Biennial 
Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditure of State Government, 
General Fund and Other Funds and to Change Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years 2023 and 2034 
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Judiciary Committees and Senator Carney and Senator 
Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Aaron Frey, and I have the 
privilege to serve as Maine’s Attorney General. I appreciate this opportunity to present the Office 
of Attomey General’s (hereinafter “OAG”) FY2024-25 Biennial Budget and its new initiatives 
before you today. 
The budget for the OAG appears on Page A-l07 with the actual ﬁscal year 2022, current 
year 2023, and baseline ﬁscal year 2024 and 2025 budgets. Following that are the OAG’s requests. 
The Attorney General is the chief legal officer for the state. All litigation involving the 
State must be prosecuted or defended under the direction of the Attomey General unless the 
Attorney General otherwise approves in writing. The OAG (a) appears in all civil actions and 
proceedings in which the State is a party; (b) directs the investigation and prosecution of homicides 
and other major crimes, including major drug cases and frauds against the State; (c) renders legal 
services to State ofﬁces, boards and commissions in matters relating to their ofﬁcial duties; (d) 
issues written opinions upon questions of law submitted pursuant to statute; (e) administers and 
enforces the State’s tmfair trade practices and antitrust laws; (t) enforces proper application of 
endowments to public trusts and charities; and (g) consults with and advises the District Attorneys. 
The Attorney General also serves as an ex-ofﬁcio member on many State authorities and 
Commissions.' 
The OAG is organized by 5 M.R.S § 191 with the Attorney General as its chief executive. 
The OAG includes the following divisions: 
The Consumer Protection Division enforces state antitrust and consumer protection laws, 
the state merger statute and the Unfair Trade Practices Act. The Division also discharges the 
Attorney General's mandate to oversee charities and is responsible for the investigation and 
prosecution of the unauthorized practice of law. The Consumer Mediation Program uses trained
volunteers to mediate consumer complaints, and the Lemon Law Arbitration Program administers 
the State's lemon law. 
The Criminal Division has exclusive responsibility for the prosecution of homicide cases, 
handles numerous criminal appeals to the Supreme Judicial Court, advises the District Attorneys, 
and prosecutes major drug cases across the State; prosecutes white collar and ﬁnancial crimes, 
welfare fraud, Medicaid fraud, computer crimes, tax crimes, and securities violations; and brings 
enforcement actions under the Maine Civil Rights Act. 
The Investigation Division investigates fraud against the State and provides direct 
investigative services for other divisions in the Department. The Division is responsible for 
investigating police-involved fatalities, certain crimes against public officials, hate crimes, and 
ﬁnancial exploitation of elders. The Division serves as a resource for other law enforcement 
agencies, participates in law enforcement training and conducts investigations for the Medical 
Board, the Osteopathic Board and the Tobacco and Substance Abuse programs. 
Three (3) divisions represent the offices Within the Department of Health and Human 
Services (DHHS). The Child Protective Division represents the State in child protection matters. 
The Child Support Division represents the State in child support enforcement matters. The Health 
and Human Services Division represents all other ofﬁces Within DHHS in complex litigation in 
state and federal courts, in contract and rule review, in administrative hearings and in providing 
routine legal advice. The Division provides legal advice regarding a variety of topics including 
MaineCare, adult protection, guardianship, mental health, physical health, rules, contracts, 
licensing, and public beneﬁt programs. The Division also represents DHHS in enforcement 
actions designed to protect public health and safety. 
The Professional and Financial Regulation Division represents the Department of 
Professional & Financial Regulation, which includes the Bureaus of Insurance, Financial 
Institutions and Consumer Credit Protection, the Office of Securities and numerous professional 
and occupational licensing boards. It also represents the Maine Port Authority and the Property 
Tax Review Board and liquor and lottery regulation Within the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. 
The Natural Resources Division provides comprehensive legal services to the State's 
enviromnental and natural resource agencies. The Division represents these agencies in both 
affirmative and defensive litigation, including judicial enforcement actions and appeals of agency 
actions. It also provides legal advice to client agencies on a Wide variety of issues including 
administrative decision-making, rulemaking, constitutional law, property law, contract law and 
enforcement of judgments, among others. 
The Litigation Division handles tort claims against the State, tax litigation, and other 
complex litigation in state and federal courts. This Division also represents the Departments of 
Labor, Education, Corrections, Administrative and Financial Services, the Commission on 
Governmental Ethics and Election Practices, and the Secretary of State. This Division has primary 
responsibility for matters involving unfair labor practices, elections, state contracts and leases. 
izl
The Administrative Services Division provides staff support in the areas of human 
resources, budget, ﬁnancial management and information technology and includes front desk 
reception, the Civil Rights Team Project and the Victims’ Compensation Program. 
The ﬁrst program may be found on page A-108 under the heading ADMINISTRATION ~ 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 0310. This program name is rather a misnomer as the program 
encompasses all but a few of the activities of the OAG. This program is funded by a mix of 
General Fund, Federal Funds and Other Special Revenue Funds. 
There are twenty-ﬁve (25) initiatives for this program in this budget document. 
The ﬁrst initiative establishes one Research Assistant MSEA-B Information Support 
Specialist position dedicated to the Administrative Services Division and allocates the costs of the 
position to 55% General Fund and 45% Other Special Revenue Funds Within the program. Due to 
increased complexity of Information technology (IT) needs over time, the OAG is in need of 
additional IT support to successfully meet the needs of the organization. While different sources 
vary when identifying the ideal IT staff number based on dollars spent by the organization or 
number of employees in the organization, according to an IT service provider "A number you'll 
see batted around as far as an 'ideal' end user to IT service desk worker ratio is Gartner Research's 
70:1.” Gartner Research is the foremost global IT advisor. With 230 Attorney General resources 
supported, this would equate to 3.5 IT resources. Adding this additional resource will bring the 
OAG's IT group to three (3), allowing the OAG to better serve current agency needs while also 
allowing IT management to project future projects or foreseen upgrade/replace/manage 
requirements. 
The next initiative, also on page A-108, provides funding for Department of Administrative 
and Financial Services, Ofﬁce of Information Technology rate increases, computer replacements 
and other information technology needs. This includes items such as laptop device replacements, 
network services charges, email costs, emergency hours support and the like, and will be seen 
again on pages A-l 14, A-116, and A-119. 
Still in the Administration Program, the next ﬁve (5) initiatives can be found on page A- 
109. The ﬁrst reallocates one Research Assistant MSEA-B ﬁnance position from 100% General 
Fund to 55% General Fund, 45% Other Special Revenue Funds. Public Law 2003, chapter 20 
allowed for the allocation of positions to mirror the Department's cost allocation (DICAP) plan. 
With the agency's recent adoption of the Maine State Time and Attendance Management System 
(MSTAMS), positions were able to be directly allocated via the budget system. This position was 
omitted from that process. 
The next initiative reallocates one Deputy Attomey General position from 60% General 
Fund, 40% Other Special Revenue Funds to 100% General Fund, and one Assistant Attorney 
General position from l00% General Fund to 60% General Fund, 40% Other Special Revenue 
Funds within the same program. This action essentially swaps the funding between two positions. 
I33
The next initiative establishes one Assistant Attorney General position dedicated to the 
Criminal Division Drug Task Force and provides funding for related All Other costs. The OAG’s 
Drug Task Force is a direct result of the formation of the Maine Drug Enforcement Agency 
(MDEA) as part of the Maine Drug Enforcement Act of 1992. Historically, the OAG has fulﬁlled 
this obligation through Assistant Attorneys General handling matters in all but three counties in 
the State: Aroostook, Somerset, Hancock and Washington counties, where prosecution of drug 
cases is handled by the local district attorney. For the past several years, the lack of a Drug Task 
Force prosecutor has been a constant problem in Prosecutorial District VII, which consists of 
Hancock and Washington Counties. As a result there have been low sentences (inconsistent with 
other counties) on negotiated plea agreements, early disclosure of conﬁdential informants, and 
minimal communication between prosecutors and law enforcement agencies. While a number of 
different solutions have been tried without success, the pre/post pandemic increase in the number 
of serious drug cases, the quantities of drugs being seized, and a marked increase in drug-related 
violence and their resulting multiple homicides, non-fatal shootings, and other violent incidents, a 
Drug Task Force prosecutor is now needed in Prosecutorial District VII. Although prosecution 
alone will not solve the problems of Washington County, it is hoped that a specialized prosecutor 
who can dedicate their time to serious drug offenses would alleviate some of these persistent 
concerns. 
The following two (2) initiatives stem from the Maine Elder Justice Roadmap. 
The next initiative establishes one Research Assistant MSEA-B Victim Witness Advocate 
position dedicated to the Criminal Division and provides funding for related All Other costs. 
Victim Witness Advocates assist victims and witnesses as a criminal case proceeds through the 
criminal justice system. Currently, there are extremely limited advocacy services for victims of 
white-collar crime in the OAG. On very rare occasions, the advocates who are dedicated to 
homicide cases are able to assist but it is entirely insufficient. Many of our white-collar cases 
involve elder victims who have complex needs and concerns. White collar cases may include 
multiple victims, many of whom are older, who need to be notified and prepared for trial. In the 
event of a conviction, these people also need assistance for impact statements. Without an 
advocate devoted to white-collar cases, these responsibilities fall to the prosecutor and 
investigator, who have too many other responsibilities to fully assist the victims. White-collar 
victims have frequently lost thousands of dollars and in some circumstances, their life savings. It 
is anticipated that this position will assist prosecutors and investigators within the OAG and 
provide training and assistance to advocates in the District Attorney's offices who are dealing with 
similar issues. As the Maine Elder Justice Roadmap points out developing a position dedicated 
solely to elder abuse cases would help ensure advocates have the training, expertise and time to 
best serve older victims of crime. In addition to older victims of crime, this particular position will 
also assist other victims of white-collar crimes prosecuted by the OAG and serve as a resource to 
advocates in the District Attorney's ofﬁces. 
The last initiative on page A-109 establishes one Auditor III position dedicated to the 
Criminal Division and provides funding for related All Other costs. This establishes a forensic 
auditor to support law enforcement in investigating ﬁnancial exploitation cases. Financial crimes 
prosecutors and investigators in the OAG are in desperate need of a paralegal or forensic auditing 
resource who can devote their time to compiling and analyzing ﬁnancial records, and that need           
goes beyond elder ﬁnancial exploitation to include other ﬁnancial crimes within the OAG. On 
occasion, Prosecutors in the OAG have been unable to successfully prosecute cases because of the 
lack of a person who can analyze and explain the ﬁnancial trail of theft and exploitation. Following 
the money trail is a specialized skill that also requires training and the ability to testify to a jury or 
judge about the money trail. As the Maine Elder Justice Roadmap accurately points out: By 
having an accounting professional analyze the ﬁnancial records, we will have more effective 
prosecutions. More effective prosecutions would encourage reporting by victims and the 
investment of investigative resources by law enforcement agencies. Effective prosecutions should 
deter others who might be tempted to take advantage of older relatives or other older victims for 
ﬁnancial gain. The Roadmap also stated that the most logical lead agency for this position would 
be the Investigations Division of the OAG, recognizing that the OAG has an existing dedicated 
elder fraud investigator and prosecutor. The OAG handles the most complex of the elder ﬁnancial 
abuse cases and provides assistance and consultation to other law enforcement agencies. 
Accounting support would beneﬁt ﬁnancial exploitation cases across the State. 
Turning now to page A-110, the next initiative continues and makes permanent one 
Secretary Associate Legal position established and continued by Financial Order dedicated to the 
Litigation Division and provides funding for related All Other Costs. Funding for this position is 
from the Department of Corrections, the Department of Labor, and the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services. The position provides administrative support for attorneys 
in the Litigation Division, including word processing, document preparation, court ﬁlings, 
correspondence, mail, managing ofﬁce-wide databases (case tracking, appeals etc.), answering 
telephones, photocopying, ﬁle management, archive and records management, scheduling, travel 
arrangements, tickler system management, coordination with agencies, and basic Information 
Technology assistance. 
The next initiative continues and makes permanent of one Research Assistant MSEA-B 
paralegal position established and continued by a Financial Order dedicated to the Criminal 
Division and provides funding for the related All Other Costs. The position provides administrative 
support for attorneys in the Criminal Division, including word processing, document preparation, 
court ﬁlings, correspondence, mail, managing ofﬁce-wide databases (case tracking, appeals etc.), 
answering telephones, photocopying, ﬁle management, archive and records management, 
scheduling, travel arrangements, tickler system management, coordination with agencies, and 
basic Information Technology assistance. 
The next initiative provides funding for annual case management software maintenance. 
Maine prosecutors statewide have adopted the use of Odyssey Attorney Manager by Tyler 
Technologies. Administered and managed by the Maine Prosecutors Association's Information 
Technology group, the platform is allocated across all prosecutorial districts and the Attorney 
General’s Criminal Division. 
Still on page A-110, the next initiative provides funding to replace data storage servers at 
end of life. Information technology industry best practice recommends that storage hardware have 
a useful life of ﬁve to seven years, after which models are no longer sold or maintained by the 
manufacturer. This up-to-date replacement includes maintenance and support as needed. 
Isl
The next initiative provides funding for increased paper costs. While State of Maine offices 
strive to transfer as much functionality to electronic formats as possible, unfortunately much of 
what the OAG does remains paper-intensive. Over the course of and post-pandemic, the cost per 
case of paper has gone from $24.00 to $36.48. This initiative will be seen again on pages A-114, 
A-120, and A-122. 
The next initiative, now on page A-111, provides funding for software upgrades to the 
OAG’s Filemaker database management system. Filemaker is an easy-to-use database 
management system used by many of the OAG personnel. Its drag and drop abilities, ease of 
report generation, and phone application make its efficiency and use beneﬁcial for attorneys and 
support staff alike. This upgrade will assure that the OAG continues to run on the most recent and 
risk-free version of the system available. Because F ilemaker is utilized by many office resources 
funded by various programs, this initiative will be seen again on pages A-114, A-120, and A-122. 
The next initiative adjusts funding for the increased hours of one Research Assistant 
MSEA-B complaint examiner position from 40-hours biweekly funded by General Fund to 80 
hours biweekly and eliminates another 40 hour biweekly Research Assistant MSEA-B position 
funded by Other Special Revenue Funds to combine into one Research Assistant MSEA-B position 
and reallocates the costs of the position to 50% General Fund and 50% Other Special Revenue 
Funds within the same program and provides for related All Other costs. This initiative essentially 
combines two part-time Research Assistant MSEA-B positions into one position by increasing the 
hours of a position from 40 to 80 hours biweekly and eliminating a position that is currently at 40 
hours biweekly. It also reallocates the cost of the position to 50% General Fund and 50% Other 
Special Revenue Funds within the same program. One employee currently ﬁlls both part~time 
positions and it would be more efficient for time reporting to combine them into one position. 
The next initiative provides funding for the replacement of 15 multifunction copier/printers 
across the OAG locations. The OAG has had several multifunction office‘ machine leases expire 
over the last year. While we have reached out to several vendors for quotes and selected the best 
price for the highest efficiency offered, the new lease costs are an increase over previous lease 
amounts. Because the leases are funded by multiple OAG programs, this initiative will be seen 
again on page A-115. 
The next initiative provides funding for the increased All Other expenses for OAG positions. The OAG projects annual All Other costs spending for billing purposes so that customer 
agencies may project costs for their annual budgets. This initiative reﬂects the increase in non- 
personal services per person costs such as information technology costs, employee insurances, 
supplies, and software upgrades. 
The next seven (7) initiatives, still in the administration program, appear on page A-112. 
The ﬁrst initiative on this page provides funding for parking services in Cumberland 
County. Historically, free parking in the Cumberland County Parking garage has been granted to 
Investigations Division Attorney General Detectives assigned to the United States Attorneys ’ 
Office. Recently modiﬁed garage operations and updated lease arrangements have necessitated a 
charge for this service by the County. 
l6l
The next initiative provides funding for increased leased space costs. The OAG currently 
rents space in four (4) satellite offices in Augusta, Bangor, Caribou, and Portland. The Division 
of Leased Space in the Department of Administration and Financial Services has recently executed 
a new ﬁve-year lease with the Bangor landlord which includes annual increases of 2%, 5%, and 
7%. Our Capitol Street office space is currently leasing on a month-to-month status as a new lease 
is drafted. The Division of Leased Space has also initiated a minor rate increase, the ﬁrst in ten 
years, for their management services. We have used these statistics to anticipate lease increases 
for the four satellite locations in future years. This initiative will also appear on page A-120. 
The next initiative establishes one Research Assistant MSEA-B position which is required 
in order to fully realize with Public Law 2021, chapter 460, An Act to Implement the Attorney 
General's Recommendations on Data Collection in Order To Eliminate Proﬁling in Maine and 
provides funding for related all other costs. The Planning and Research Associate position would 
also contribute time to the Deadly Force Review Panel as needed, as well as the Maine Elder Death 
Analysis Review Team. 
The next initiative provides iunding for an Electronic Legal Research Subscription 
Contract. This contract was rebid in the spring of 2021. The successful bidder resulted in a contract 
price increase of approximately $7,000 per year - an average annual increase of 18%, with an 
extension from four to eight-year duration. The current appropriation level for this account is 
insufﬁcient to absorb the change for this vital service. 
The next initiative establishes one Assistant Attorney General position dedicated to the 
Litigation Division and provides funding for related All Other costs. Funding for this position is 
from the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Office of Cannabis Policy. This 
position will provide legal services including: reviewing and commenting on rules; reviewing, 
explaining, and advising regarding legislation; responding to subpoenas served; case evaluation, 
preparation, and presentation for both enforcement of Office of Cannabis Policy laws and defense 
of those laws; case preparation to include reviewing case ﬁles and evidence, preparing all pre- 
hearing submissions, identifying and addressing legal and factual issues; drafting legal memoranda 
and documents; and providing legal advice throughout the legal process including appeals. The 
position will also provide legal services with respect to Freedom of Access requests, as well as 
other consultation as needed. 
The next initiative provides funding for the approved reorganization of one Director of 
Investigations Position to a Research Assistant Position and provides funding for all related all 
other costs.
\ 
The next initiative provides furiding for Uninterrupted Power Supply server battery 
replacements. Industry standards/best practices recommend updating UPS regularly to avoid data 
loss and service outages. These battery replacements will address the OAG‘s primary and backup 
servers, storage servers, virtual environment, and data switches. 
The next initiative, on page A-l 13, provides funding for virtual server environment support 
and maintenance. The *OAG's virtual environment runs on Cisco Smartnet Hardware systems, 
EYE
which run on a ﬁve-year refresh cycle. The physical servers do not require replacement at this 
time. 
The next initiative establishes one Attorney General Detective position to investigate 
Medicaid ﬁnancial crimes and provides funding for related All Other costs. In federal ﬁscal year 
2017, pre- Medicaid expansion, MaineCare had a $2.7 billion-dollar budget and Maine's Medicaid 
Fraud Control Unit (MFCU) had 9 staff, including 4 detectives. In federal ﬁscal year 2021, 
MaineCare's budget had expanded to $3 .5 billion and Maine's MFCU staff remained at 9, including 
4 detectives. Comparable Medicaid programs for federal ﬁscal year 2021 include the District of 
Columbia at $3.6 billion and a MFCU staff of 16, Utah with a $3.7 billion Medicaid program and 
a MFCU staff of 16 and Nebraska with a $3 .3 billion Medicaid program and a MF CU staff of 11. 
There is currently approximately $875 million in MaineCare spending per Maine MFCU detective. 
This can be reduced to approximately $700 million per detective if we add one detective. There 
are approximately 350,000 MaineCare and Child Health Insurance Program members, or 87,500 
members per detective at current MFCU stafﬁng levels. MFCU detectives carry approximately 
15-20 open cases each, plus commonly have several fresh allegations and MFCU-mandated 
referrals for review to see if full investigation is warranted. MF CU cases range from million-dollar 
healthcare fraud allegations to patient sexual assault and patient endangerment up to, and 
including, death. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget and the initiatives for the 
ADMINISTRATION — ATTORNEY GENERAL 0310 program. 
The next program appears on Page A-114 under the heading CHIEF MEDICAL EXAMINER — OFFICE OF 0412. The Ofﬁce of Chief Medical Examiner (hereinafter “OCME”) is headed by the Chief Medical Examiner, currently Dr. Mark Flomenbaum, who is appointed by the Governor for a term of seven (7) years. The OCME is responsible for determining the cause 
and manner of death in all deaths due to other than natural disease or that camiot be certiﬁed bya 
private attending physician. The goal of the OCME is to provide thorough investigations and 
support to the judicial system, public health and public safety. The OCME monitors cases to 
identify public health-related concerns and to report contagious and infectious disease deaths to 
the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Additionally, the OCME continuously 
conducts surveillance for drugs, elder and child abuse and neglect, and other public health matters 
related to violent deaths and suicides. Medical Examiner cases include: deaths due to trauma or 
poisoning, unexplained deaths of children under the age of three, and deaths occurring under 
suspicious circumstances. The OCME needs a budget that allows for supplying timely reports to 
government agencies, families and other interested parties on the circumstantial and medical 
factors that caused a death for the purposes of prosecution, departmental action, estate settlement, 
and statistical information for governmental recordkeeping and policy decisions. 
There are eight (8) initiatives for this program in this budget document. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding for Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services, Ofﬁce of Information Technology rate increases, computer replacements and other 
information technology needs. Previously described on page A~l08, this initiative also appears on pages A-115, A-116, A-118, A-120, and A-122.             
The next initiative provides funding for increased paper costs, as was previously discussed 
on page A-110. The initiative also appears on pages A-120 and A-122. 
The next initiative provides funding for software upgrades to the Filemaker database 
management system, as was previously discussed on page A-111. The initiative also appears on 
pages A-120 and A-122. 
As we tum to page A-115, the next initiative provides funding for the replacement of 15 
multifunction copier/printers across OAG locations, as previously discussed on page A-111. 
The next initiative, also a repeat, provides funding for the increased All Other expenses for 
OAG positions, as previously discussed on page A~111. The initiative also appears on pages A- 
116, A-118, A-120, and A-122. 
The next initiative provides funding for the after-hours telephone answering service 
contract with the OCME. This contract was rebid in the summer of 2021. The successful bidder 
resulted in a contract price increase of approximately $77,000 per year for the ﬁve-year contract. 
The current appropriation level for this account is insufficient to absorb the change for this critical 
after-hours service. 
The next initiative provides funding for annual maintenance, usage and hosting services 
for the MDI Log case management system hosted by Occupational Research and Assessment. 
This software has previously been funded by the OCME document account, which charges for 
cremation releases and death reports. Because cremation releases have become electronic per the 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention, revenue in this account providing the ftmding 
has declined. Additionally, amiual increases have been over ten percent as the amount of data 
being maintained increases. 
The next initiative provides funding for increased operating costs in the OCME. While 
caseloads falling under the jurisdiction of the OCl\/IE have risen by 40% since 2017 (2,391 in 2021 
over 1,704 in 2017), budget ﬁgures have not followed suit. Instead, appropriation in this account 
has risen by only 11.8% between the 2016-2017 and 2020-2021 biennial budgets. As a cost 
savings measure, the ofﬁce has increased OCME (75 from 28 in the previous year) transports to 
reduce funeral home pickup costs, but additional recovery funds are needed. This initiative will 
address the increased caseload's resulting examination fees, transportation fees, toxicology, 
histology, and autopsy supplies. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget and the initiatives for the CHIEF 
MEDICAL EXAMINER — OFFICE OF 0412 program. 
The next program is found on Page A-116 under the heading CIVIL RIGHTS 0039. 
The mission of the Civil Rights Team Project (hereinafter “CRTP”) is to increase the safety 
of elementary, middle, and high school students by reducing bias-motivated behaviors and 
191
harassment in schools. There are Civil Rights Teams in over 180 Maine schools and training is 
provided to thousands of students and faculty. 
The CRTP trains, encourages and empowers high school, middle school and elementary 
school students to be leaders within their school communities on issues relating to confronting 
bias, prejudice and harassment. Faculty in-service trainings increase the knowledge and 
responsiveness of faculty and administrators to these concerns. The program works with local 
police and schools to foster collaboration in addressing incidents of bias and harassment and 
increase awareness of parents and community members. The goal of the program is to improve 
the school experience for members of targeted groups (racial, religious, national origin, sexual 
orientation, etc.) 
There are two (2) initiative for this program in this budget document, both on page A-1 16. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding for Department of Administrative and Financial 
Services, Ofﬁce of Information Technology rate increases, computer replacements and other 
information technology needs as was previously discussed on page A-108. The initiative also 
appears on pages A-114 and A-119. 
The second and final initiative for this program provides funding for the increased all other 
expenses for OAG positions, as previously discussed on page A-l l l. The initiative also appears 
on pages A-115, A-l 18, A~l20, and A-122. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget and the initiatives for the CIVIL RIGHTS 
O03 9 program. 
The next program is found on Page A-117 under the heading DISTRICT ATTORNEYS 
SALARIES 0409. The State is divided into eight prosecutorial Districts, each headed by an elected 
District Attorney. All eight (8) District Attorney ofﬁces are responsible for the prosecution of the 
majority of all criminal offenses occurring in their district, with the exception of homicides, as 
well as traffic infractions and some civil violations. This caseload is carried statewide with a staff 
of 102 Assistant District Attorneys and 8 elected District Attorneys. When trafﬁc infractions and 
civil violations are factored in, as well as probation revocations and appeals to the Superior Court 
and Law Court, each Assistant District Attorney handles caseloads averaging several hundred 
cases per prosecutor. 
Each District Attomey office spends many hours preparing criminal complaints, motions, 
memoranda of law, legal briefs, and other pleadings. A great deal of time is spent reviewing 
thousands of police reports in order to determine whether sufficient evidence exists for the issuance 
of criminal complaints. Time consuming activities such as trial preparation and hearings, Grand 
Jury presentations, meetings with police officers, witnesses and victims, as well as being on call 
24-hours-per-day, keep all prosecutors extremely busy. In many prosecutorial districts, District 
Attorneys cover courts in several distant locations. In addition, all District Attorney ofﬁces 
sponsor police training classes, offering continuing legal education to law enforcement in order to 
enhance the quality of investigations to achieve successful prosecutions.             
There are two (2) initiatives for this program in this budget document, both on page A-1 17. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding to restore Personal Services related to the reduction 
for attrition savings in the District Attomeys Salaries program. This initiative removes the 1.6% 
attrition rate and associated beneﬁts reductions from positions in the District Attorney Salaries 
program accounts. Due to unrealized attrition, allotment/appropriation, transfer ﬁnancial orders 
have been processed each of the last several ﬁscal years to compensate for this shortfall. 
The second initiative provides funding for the increased hours of one Assistant District 
Attorney position from 40 hours to 80 hours biweekly funded by General Fund and eliminates 
another 40 hours biweekly Assistant District Attorney position funded by Other Special Revenue 
Funds to fund the change. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget for the DISTRICT ATTORNEYS 
SALARIES 0409 program. 
The next program is found on Page A-118 under the heading FHM ATTORNEY 
GENERAL 0947. This program provides funding to enforce the Tobacco Manufacturer ’s Act and 
the Tobacco Distributor ’s Act. 
There is one (1) initiative for this program in this budget document. 
Found on page A-l 18, this initiative provides funding for the increased All Other expenses 
for OAG positions, as previously discussed on page A-111, A-115, and A116. It also appears on 
A~12O and A-122. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget and the initiatives for the FHM 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 0947 program. 
The next program is found on Page A—1 19 under the heading HUMAN SERVICES 
DIVISION 0696. This program is broken down into three (3) divisions within the OAG. The 
Child Support Enforcement Division represents the Department of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS) in the area of child support enforcement. The Child Protection Division represents DHHS 
in the area of child protection. The work of these two divisions is done out of four ofﬁces-Portland, 
Augusta, Bangor, and Caribou. The Health and Human Services Division provides legal 
representation for every other program in DHHS, including legal work for the MaineCare program, 
involuntary mental health commitment hearings, defense of lawsuits against the Department and 
its employees, public guardianship/conservatorship issues, estate recovery, licensure of homes for 
both adults and children, enforcement of the State's health laws, enforcement of adult protective 
laws, representing DHHS's interest in federal beneﬁts programs such as MaineCare and TANF, 
and providing legal counsel in the AMHI and Community Consent Decree cases. 
There are eight (8) initiatives for this program in this budget document. 
Found on page A-119, the first initiative provides funding for Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services, Office of Information Technology rate increases, computer 
E111
replacements and other information technology needs as was previously discussed on page A-108, 
A-114,andA-116. . 
The next initiative continues and makes permanent of one Research Assistant MSEA-B 
Victim Witness Advocate Coordinator position continued by Public Law 2021, chapter 398 and 
provides funding for DICAP costs. Funding for this position is from the Department of Health and 
Human Services ‘ Federal Victims of Crime Act grant. The purpose is to enhance prosecution in 
Maine and improve access to crime victim rights and services. This position provides technical 
assistance and training for victim witness advocates in Maine statewide. 
The next initiative continues and makes permanent one Assistant Attomey General position 
continued by Public Law 2021, chapter 29 dedicated to the Child Protective Division and provides 
funding for the related All Other Costs. This position will provide legal services including 
litigation, settlement review and negotiation, rulemaking assistance and review, and other 
consultation as needed. 
The next initiative continues and makes permanent of one Secretary Associate Legal 
position established and continued by a Financial Order dedicated to the Child Protective Division 
and provides funding for related All Other Costs. This position is assigned to the Child Protective 
Division, with approved funding from the Department of Health and Human Services. There are 
currently 2.5 administrative staff supporting a caseload of 800 litigated by nine Assistant Attorneys 
General across four counties. Support required includes electronic and printed mail processing, 
share ﬁle downloading and e-ﬁling, discovery management, data entry, paper ﬁling, copying, 
scanning, calendaring, schedule management, archiving, communication with court clerks, 
caseworkers, witnesses, and opposing counsel. This volume of work has Assistant Attorneys 
General increasingly doing their own administrative Work. 
The next initiative appears on page A-120 and provides funding for increased paper costs, 
as previously cited on page A-1 10 and A-144. It will also appear on page A-122. 
The next initiative provides funding for software upgrades to the Filemaker database 
management system, as previously cited on page A-111 and A-114, as it relates to several 
department programs. It will also appear on page A-122. 
The next initiative provides funding for the increased All Other expenses for OAG 
positions, as previously cited on page A-111, A-115, A-116 and A-118. It will also appear on 
page A-122. 
The final initiative for this program provides funding for increased leased space costs, as 
previously discussed on page A-112. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget and the initiatives for the HUMAN SERVICES DIVISION 0696 program. 
The next program, the Maine Recovery Council was discussed at public hearing on 
February 21, 2023..             
There are no initiatives for this program in this budget document. 
The next program, the Abandoned Road Commission Fund, was discussed at public 
hearing on February 17, 2023. 
There are no initiatives for this program in this budget document. _ 
The next program is found on Page A-122 under the heading VICTIMS’ 
COMPENSATION BOARD 0711. This program offers ﬁnancial reimbursement for losses 
suffered by victims of violent crime and their families and reimburses hospitals for sexual assault. 
Funding for this program comes from assessments levied against perpetrators as well as a federal 
grant. 
There are five (5) initiatives for this program in this budget document. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding for all other costs for the Victims’ Compensation Fund 
starting on July I, 2024. The Victims’ Compensation Board reviews claims and determines 
compensation, up to $15,000, of documented losses incurred by victims of violent crime. Funding 
for the program consists of grant funds awarded by the US Department of Justice and State match 
funds. The grant's award mechanism is such that future grants are calculated based on past years’ 
match spending. Match funds are transferred to the account by the Judicial Branch from a portion 
of fees assessed to perpetrators of felony, misdemeanor, and sex trafficking crimes. While grant 
funding had begun to decline in the past several years, the shutdown of the court system upon the 
outbreak of Covid substantially reduced fee assessments received, thereby additionally reducing 
the annual program budget. Working with the Department of Health and Human Services, 
program staff were able to re-allocate $94,000 for program needs, shifting Sexual Assault Forensic 
Examiner (SAFE) spending to the Department of Health and Human Services ‘ Victims of Crime 
grant. Projections show, however, that trends will not improve over the short term. As a result, 
the Victims‘ Compensation Fund would like to transfer another piece of SAFE spending, the 
reimbursement of victims of gross sexual assault for forensic examinations, to the General fund. 
Pre-Covid, the program reimbursed for 200-300 kits annually, but delayed Covid-period requests 
are anticipated. 
The next initiative provides funding for increased paper costs, as was previously discussed 
on pages A-110, A-114, and A-120. - 
The next initiative provides funding for software upgrades to the Filemaker database 
management system, as previously cited on page A-111 and A-114 and A-120. 
The next initiative provides funding for the increased All Other expenses for OAG 
positions, as previously cited on page A-111, A-l l5, and A-118 and A-120. 
The ﬁnal initiative provides funding for annual maintenance and hosting services for the 
Victim Compensation Program's (VCP) claim application management system. The OAG's 
Victims‘ Compensation Program was awarded a federal grant to develop portions of the Heart4 
:13:
Victims VCP Online claims application management system. Additional federal funding fora 
forensic module will be available for application in spring 2023.‘ This initiative provides funding 
for annual software maintenance and data hosting services for the system, which will begin on 
October 1, 2024. 
This concludes the review of the baseline budget and the initiatives for the VICTIMS’ 
COMPENSATION BOARD 0711 program. 
Also included in the Department ’s budget are three (3) pieces of updated language: 
Part EE removes the OCME within the OAG ﬁom the commuting exclusion clause 
associated with the use of state vehicles. In the OCME, ﬁeld workers are scheduled for on call 
duty on a staggered basis. As a result, one ﬂeet vehicle was removed from the budget for savings 
purposes and the remaining vehicle is to be used for commuting by the employee on call only. 
Part FF requires the Attorney General approve the compensation set for OCME’s ofﬁce 
administrator. 
Part GG increases the ﬁnes assessed against perpetrators in support of the Victims’ 
Compensation Fund. 
This concludes the review of OAG’s FY2024-25 Biennial Budget and its new initiatives 
before you today. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 
Thank you.                 
