 
 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915                    207.338.6575                              mainefarmlandtrust.org  
 
Testimony of Abby Farnham, Senior Policy and Research Associate, Maine Farmland Trust, to the 131st 
Legislature’s  Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and  Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
March 3 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of both the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Abby F arnham and I am testifying today on behalf of Maine 
Farmland Trust (MFT) in support of the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry’s 
(DACF) Bureau of Agriculture requests within LD 258 —An Act Making Unified Appropriations and 
Allocations  from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 . 
 
MFT is a member -powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, and 
advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently protect 
more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland  in farming. In 2022 alone, MFT 
supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 
hours of technical assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their 
profitability. Our main  program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm 
Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research.  
 
MFT understands that climate change is one of the most daunting challenges of our time, and will have  
significant impacts on Maine’s agricultural sector. Maine farmers are already experiencing climate 
change impacts, and are needing to adapt to the increasing frequency of extreme weather events, 
including excessive precipitation and drought. Protecting so ils and building soil health are important 
climate mitigation and adaptation strategies. We are very excited to support proposed funding for the 
Maine Healthy Soils Program, a program MFT helped to champion in 2021, and the Farmers Drought 
Relief Program, both of which will help farmers become more resilient to climate change impacts and 
support their ability to run viable businesses in these unpredictable conditions. These important 
programs were established because of their vital role in the resilience of  Maine’s agricultural sector, but 
they have not yet been fully set up or implemented due to a lack of funding.  
 
1. Maine Healthy Soils Program  - This program creates a hub for critical information, tools, and 
assistance to help more Maine farms use practices  to build soil health and benefit from the 
climate change resilience and mitigation as well as the economic benefits that healthy soils can 
provide. The proposed funding for this program includes $3 million for FY 2023 -24.   
2. Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program  - This program would help alleviate risks associated with 
drought conditions by providing farmers with grants to establish a sustainable and affordable 
source for irrigation water. This funding would provide essential support to Maine farmers as  
they adapt in the face of climate impacts that are already affecting their livelihoods. The 
proposed funding for this program includes $2 million in FY 2023 -24.  
 
2 
 MFT supports robust funding for these two programs , which is critical to their ability to me et the needs 
of Maine’s farming community, support the state’s agricultural economy, and advance the agricultural 
goals contained in the State’s updated climate action plan.  
 
There are two items that are not in the proposed biennial budget that we believe  are critically needed 
for farmers in Maine and want to raise for this group’s consideration. We hope that these urgent needs 
can be considered as the budget is further refined.  
First, the Maine dairy sector is in an acute crisis and needs emergency relie f funding.  Since 2017, 
Maine has lost 122 dairy farms, and the Maine Milk Commission recently reported to the ACF 
Committee that many more dairy farms are perilously close to going out of business . We were glad to 
see the inclusion of the Maine Milk Commission Study in the approved supplemental budget, but more 
needs to be done, urgently, before more Maine dairies are forced to close. Costs of production have 
skyrocketed due to dramatic increases in grain and energy costs, a decreased labor pool, and supply 
chain disruptions. Farmers have not received Tier Program payments over the past 13 months because 
milk payment prices have exceeded the outdated cost of production rates that are established in 
statute. It is critical that emergency relief funding reaches Maine dairy farmers for income losses they’ve 
already incurred so that they are able to stay in business. Dairy farms are often described as “anchor 
farms” because they provide the necessary thres hold of business for veterinarians, feed suppliers, and 
machine suppliers to set up shop in the towns containing these farms. In doing so, these dairy farms 
contribute to the success of farms of all types and sizes. Providing emergency relief for dairy far ms is 
therefore important for Maine’s entire agricultural sector and for rural communities across the state.  
Another item that is not in the proposed budget, but that we recognize the need for is a solar -focused 
staff position at DACF . As renewable energy  development has increased in the state, so too has our 
understanding of the impacts that these projects can have on the amount of farmland taken out of 
agricultural production, the loss of important agricultural soils, and the competition for land that 
farmers need to lease in order to support their operations. MFT believes that solar generation and 
agriculture can co -exist symbiotically in Maine as long as solar siting is structured to balance these 
important interests. We suggest a new staff position at DACF to help promote the coexistence of solar 
development and agriculture. This position could share resources, respond to questions and concerns 
from farmers, and provide guidance to municipalities on solar ordinance development. Additionally, as 
legislat ion hopefully moves forward to implement a dual -use pilot program to study and create uniform 
standards for this type of solar development, as was recommended by the State’s Agricultural Solar 
Siting Stakeholder Group, this position could help plan for and  analyze the results of that pilot so that 
dual -use projects that support the coexistence of solar expansion and agriculture in Maine can be 
expanded throughout the state.  
All of the initiatives discussed above would contribute to the economic viability o f Maine’s agricultural 
sector. Given that agriculture is a key component of Maine’s economy, contributing over $3.6 billion in 
economic impact and supporting over 27,000 jobs statewide,1 providing support for Maine’s agricultural 
sector is an important ste p towards solidifying a critical segment of Maine’s economy.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today to share our support of LD 258 as well as some additional 
ideas. I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.  
                                                 
1 Farm Credit East, “Northeast Economic Engine: Agriculture, Forest Products and  Commercial Fishing,” (2020), available at: 
www.farmcrediteast.com/resources/Industry -Trends -and-Outlooks/Reports/2020 -Northeast -Economic -Engine#2020ec onomicengine   
 
