Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable 
members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Taxation: my name is Adam Zuckerman and I am the lobbyist for the Maine People’s Alliance. 
MPA is Maine’s largest community action organization with over 32,000 members across the 
state. Our mission is to create a world where everyone has what they need, contributes what they 
can, and no one is left behind.
That’s why we believe in paying for things that benefit all of us — like schools, roads, parks, 
public safety, and clean water — by coming together and using our tax dollars. The revenue we 
raise through taxes allows us to make sure all people, families, and communities have what they 
need and that no Mainer is left behind.
We are still digging ourselves out of the hole that former Governor LePage created with his tax 
cuts and the resulting drag it had on Maine's economy. Doubling down on his regressive tax cuts 
would be hugely irresponsible, especially in the face of unprecedented need in our state. Today 
we face growing inequality, a surging housing crisis, an overdose crisis coupled with months-
long wait lists for beds in recovery centers, and a care economy in serious need of investment to 
help Maine families as they struggle to care for their loved ones. 
With all of these pressing needs, we cannot afford to double down on tax cuts for the wealthy 
and our most profitable corporations. We should instead ensure that they are paying their fair 
share. 
If we want to help Maine families, we can do so by reforming our state-level child tax credit to 
better serve the needs of Maine families. By making the existing $300 credit refundable, we can 
ensure that the lowest-income families are not excluded from this income boost. Making the 
CTC refundable would benefit nearly 90,000 Maine  children, giving their families greater 
financial stability to afford necessities,establishing an income floor. When working families can 
afford necessities like groceries, child care, and car repairs, that lifts up Main Street small 
businesses, helping to grow local, regenerative economies.
Budgets are moral documents. Our budget is the clearest synthesis of what we value as a state 
and as a society. We have a golden opportunity to invest in our state and truly create a place 
where everyone has what they need, contributes what they can, and where no one is left behind. 
Thank you.
Adam Zuckerman
The Maine People's Alliance
LD 258
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs and Taxation: my name is Adam Zuckerman and I am the lobbyist 
for the Maine People’s Alliance. 
MPA is Maine’s largest community action organization with over 32,000 members 
across the state. Our mission is to create a world where everyone has what they need, 
contributes what they can, and no one is left behind.
That’s why we believe in paying for things that benefit all of us — like schools, 
roads, parks, public safety, and clean water — by coming together and using our tax 
dollars. The revenue we raise through taxes allows us to make sure all people, 
families, and communities have what they need and that no Mainer is left behind.
We are still digging ourselves out of the hole that former Governor LePage created 
with his tax cuts and the resulting drag it had on Maine's economy. Doubling down on
his regressive tax cuts would be hugely irresponsible, especially in the face of 
unprecedented need in our state. Today we face growing inequality, a surging housing
crisis, an overdose crisis coupled with months-long wait lists for beds in recovery 
centers, and a care economy in serious need of investment to help Maine families as 
they struggle to care for their loved ones. 
With all of these pressing needs, we cannot afford to double down on tax cuts for the 
wealthy and our most profitable corporations. We should instead ensure that they are 
paying their fair share. 
If we want to help Maine families, we can do so by reforming our state-level child tax
credit to better serve the needs of Maine families. By making the existing $300 credit 
refundable, we can ensure that the lowest-income families are not excluded from this 
income boost. Making the CTC refundable would benefit nearly 90,000 Maine  
children, giving their families greater financial stability to afford 
necessities,establishing an income floor. When working families can afford 
necessities like groceries, child care, and car repairs, that lifts up Main Street small 
businesses, helping to grow local, regenerative economies.
Budgets are moral documents. Our budget is the clearest synthesis of what we value as a 
state and as a society. We have a golden opportunity to invest in our state and truly create a 
place where everyone has what they need, contributes what they can, and where no one is 
left behind. Thank you.

