Adam Zuckerman
Maine People's Alliance
LD 258
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services: my name is Adam Zuckerman and 
I am the lobbyist for the Maine People’s Alliance.
MPA is Maine’s largest community action organization with over 32,000 members 
across the state. Our mission is to create a world where everyone has what they need, 
contributes what they can, and no one is left behind.
We do not have a budget surplus. I repeat that–we do not have a budget surplus. 
When you look at all the unmet needs in our state, we in fact have a massive deficit. 
However, this budget is an opportunity to correct that. Here are three investments that
are especially crucial:
Ensuring that everyone has access to health care, regardless of where they come from
Ensuring access to child care
Investing in treatment for substance use disorder
Closing the discriminatory health care gap
This pandemic has underscored that all Mainers need access to affordable, accessible health
care, regardless of our income or immigration status. It is clearer than ever that our collective 
safety and our economic recovery are tied to each person’s ability to get to the doctor or fill a 
prescription. In this budget we have the opportunity to close a discriminatory loophole and 
restore health care access for all Mainers, regardless of where they come from. 
Closing the health care gap had positive societal impacts. Medicaid access reduces 
hunger, poverty, and evictions, and improves credit scores. Children are also much 
more likely to be enrolled if their parents have coverage and parents’ health impacts 
wellbeing and financial stability of the whole family. The 130th legislature voted to 
close that gap for pregnant people and people under 21. Now you have the 
opportunity to fully right history. 
Supporting child care workers
This pandemic has given so many of us a new appreciation for the importance of quality, 
affordable child care. Too often the workers who care for our children are undervalued and 
undersupported, unable to pay their own bills, experiencing some of the lowest wages in the 
state to do some of the most important work in our children’s lives. We also need to invest in 
affordability to ensure that all families are able to access quality child care.
Investing in mental and behavioral health, including treatment for substance use disorder
Last year we lost a record 716 Mainers died of drug preventable drug overdose. That is two 
friends, neighbors, and family members every single day. We commend the Mills 
administration for proposing investments in recovery. We urge you to see them as a starting 
point, not as the ceiling. We need to expand access to medically monitored withdrawal, harm 
reduction, inpatient treatment, recovery housing with wraparound services, and community 
support programs for those on their journey to recovery.
