February 21, 202 3 
Chairwoman Rotundo , Chairwoman Sachs , Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Chairman Baldacci , Chairwoman Meyer, and Distinguished 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live  in Orono. I am the parent of two young adult children, one of whom 
has autism and significant functional limitations.  He is on the Section 21 Home and Community Based 
Services (HCBS) waiver but still went seven months without any waiver -funded support bec ause of the 
ongoing work  force crisis and inadequate wages —issues you can address if you amend the budget . 
I am testifying Neither For Nor Against LD 2 58 the biennial budget.  
I’d like to speak to two issues in Adult Developmental Services: wait lists  and work force . 
Wait Lists  
Wait list data  and projections are presented in the figure in my testimony.  
• Section 29 Wait List.  Please support the excellent initiative on page A -321 (and associated 
initiatives on page A -360 and A -365) to take up to 50 members per  month off the wait list for 
the Section 29 “supports waiver”  for people with autism and intellectual disability . Even under 
the conservative assumption that the Section 29 wait list could grow by about 100 members 
beyond its current level of 185 people by  June 30, this initiative would still be sufficient to 
eliminate the wait 
list shortly after 
the start of FY 
2025 —and keep 
the Section 29 
wait list 
eliminated 
through the end 
of the budget 
biennium. Thank 
you to the Mills 
Administration 
for proposing this 
excellent 
initiative . 
• Section 18 Wait 
List.  I regret that 
the budget lacks 
any initiative to 
address the 
Section 18 wait 
list on which 170 
Mainers with 

brain injuries current ly languish . This wait list has grown steadily from near zero since  the 
beginning of 2019. At that long -term trend, it would hit 311 people by 06/30/2025. Given the 
very short -term trend in the three months from 9/30/2022 through 12/31/2022, it is possible 
that this wait list could shrink to 31 people by 06/30/2025. But t hat is highly speculative. Please 
ask DHHS Office of Aging and Disability Services to produce solid projections for  the Section 18 
wait list through the budget biennium. Absent strong evidence that the Section 18 wait list will 
disappear without interventi on, please add an initiative to the budget to eliminate the Section 
18 wait list . This wait list has been ignored for four years . It’s past time to address it.  
• Section 20 Wait List.  There also appears to be no plan to eliminate the wait list for Section 20  
services to Mainers with “other related conditions” such as spina bifida and cerebral palsy. 
Please query DHHS Office of Aging and Disability Services as to their plans to clear this wait list 
(currently 16 people) and add an initiative to eliminate the S ection 20 wait list  if they do not 
have solid plans to eliminate it without additional funds.  
• Section 21 Wait List.  There are no direct plans in the budget to eliminate the wait list for the 
Section 21 comprehensive waiver for people with autism and intell ectual disability. There are 
currently almost 2 ,000 Mainers on this wait list. The Administration hopes that the “lifespan 
waiver ”, currently under development, will present a solution for this population.  
Work Force  
LD 258 has initiatives to fund continue d compensation to direct care workers at 125% of minimum 
wage. While I appreciate the strong support the 130th Legislature had for similar important initiative s, 
they merely implemented a pre -pandemic recommendation that has proven woefully inadequate in the 
current labor market.  
Even where capacity may have emerged in southern Maine, it remains inadequate where I live in the 
Bangor area and beyond.  
I have a son on the  Section 21 waiver. (He’s not on the wait list. He has the Section 21 “golden ticket”.) 
He nevertheless went fully seven months without any Section 21 support whatsoever . If not for private 
health insurance, my family would have been in deep crisis. Insura nce reimbursed a t rate sufficient to 
pay well above 125% of minimum wage (it was about 157% —$20/hour last year ). Because people with 
disabilities still suffer through unstaffed and understaffed programming even when they’re not on a wait 
list, please add i nitiatives to substantially increase direct care worker pay. I suggest at least 157% of 
minimum wage in order to compete in the labor market.  
The labor market is a free market. It smacks of the failures of centrally planned economies to attempt to 
artifici ally hold down worker pay instead of responding to the forces of the labor market. Add a budget 
initiative to pay market rates. The direct care workers deserve it, and the people with disabilities who 
they support deserve it.  
 
