 
Testimony of Allyson Perron Drag, Government Relati on Director, Senior Regio nal Lead, Americ an He art 
Asso ciation  for p ortions of LD 258 “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the 
General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for th e Fiscal Years 
Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025”  
 
Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative Meyer, members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Allyson Perron Drag , and I am the Government Relations Director , Senior 
Regional Lead for the Ame rican Heart Association .  The American Heart Association  is the nation’s oldest 
and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be 
a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives.  The American Heart Association is offering 
testimony  on portions of the Governor’s biennial budget proposal related to cardiovascular  disease.  
There is an estimated 2,400 deaths are caused by smoking each year  in Maine i and s moking  is estimated 
to cost Maine $942 million in direct health care costs, including $281 million in Medicaid costs annually.ii  
Due to sharp increases in youth tobacco use in recent years, largely due to skyrocketing rates of e -
cigarette use, the decades of pro gress that has been made in reducing tobacco use rates is now in 
jeopardy. Here in Maine, nearly 1 in 5 high school students used some form of tobacco product in the 
last 30 days . iii More than one in 20 Maine high sch ool students smoke cigarettes.iv Nearly one in 20 male 
high school students smoke cigars in Maine.iv One in 3 Maine high school students and 1 in 10 middle 
school students have used e -cigarettes.v Nearly 20 percent of high school students are current users of 
e-cigarettes.vi Due to historical and ongoing patterns of tob acco industry marketing to targeted 
populations, tobacco use and tobacco -related disease tend to disproportionately impact some groups 
more than others. Maine youth tobacco use rates are highest among high schoolers who identify as 
bisexual or transgender,  as well as Native American high schoolers. Overall, female high school use rates 
are higher than male use rates. According to polling of likely Maine voters conducted by Campaign for 
Tobacco -Free Kids, three -quarters of Maine voters are concerned, with ne arly half “very concerned” 
about young people in their community becoming addicted to tobacco products.vii In the over 50 years 
since the first Surgeon General’s report on tobacco use was published, scientists and policymakers have 
learned a lot about what  works to reduce tobacco use. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) fact -based recommendations for a comprehensive tobacco control program provides states with 
the needed framework to educate people on the dangers of tobacco use as well as c onnect people who 
are already addicted to tobacco to resources to help them quit. When appropriately funded in 
accordance with CDC recommendations, comprehensive tobacco control programs are able to reduce 
tobacco use.viii The A merican Heart Asso ciation was pleased to see the Gov ernor’s biennial budget 
proposal including funding for the state tobacco control program at the US CDC recommended level of 
funding of $15.9 million/year. ix This level of funding was achieved through the actions taken by the 
Legislature over the past few  sessions, which demonstrated a clear prioritization of adequate, 
sustainable funding for tobacco prevention and treatment. These efforts restored cuts made to program 
funding and further increased the funding through the passage of LD 1868 last session. L D 1868 was a 
bipartisan bill passed with unanimous support out of the HHS committee, unanimous support of the 

Appropriations committee in voting on the “table,” and the more than 2/3 support of the Legislature 
needed to pass it into law on emergency basis.  This state tobacco control program is funded through 
part of the revenue the state receives from the tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, a portion of the 
excise tax on non -cigarette tobacco products, and federal funding. The increased level of funding is  
being used to increase investments in tobacco cessation, targeted interventions to communities that are 
disproportionately impacted by tobacco use and a needed increased investment in surveillance and 
evaluation, which will further allow the program to en sure evidence -based interventions are being 
carried out in the most effective and efficient manner possible.  
Lastly, i f revenue is needed to support budget initiatives, the American Hea rt Association  recommends 
consideration of increasing the cigarette excise tax by $2.00/pack. The 2014 U. S. Surgeon General 
Report, The Health Consequences of Smoking – 50 years of Progress concludes that increases in the 
price of tobacco products, including those resulting from excise tax increases, prevent initiation of 
tobacco use, promote cessation, and reduce the prevalence and intensity of tobacco use among youth 
and adults.ix This conclusion reaffirms findings from previous Surgeon General’s reports on tobacco use 
that raising the price of tobacco is one of the most effective tobacco prevention and control strategies, 
and that increasing the price of cigarettes and  tobacco products decreases the prevalence of tobacco 
use, particularly among youth and young adults.x Despite the clear evidence -base for this policy, Maine 
has not increased its cigarette excise tax since 2005.xii When a $2.00/pack increase of the c igarette tax 
was considered during the 130th Maine Legislature, it was estimated that the proposal would generate 
nearly $48 million in new annual revenue, decrease youth smoking by nearly 20%, and generate $3.4 
million in state savings to the Medicaid pro gram over the next five years.xiii Increasing Maine’s cigarette 
excise tax will result in even more revenue as Maine statute ties all tobacco taxes together so as not to 
create loopholes in our tax code. Raising tobacco taxes can help reduce tobacco -related health 
disparities. Big Tobacco has successfully targeted marketing of their products to low -income 
communities, and, as such, low -income populations are more likely to use tobacco and, thus, bear a 
larger share of the burden of cardiovascular disease  and other tobacc o-related illnesses. Increasing the 
tax counteracts industry price reduction strategies and provides a strong incentive to quit or to never 
start in the first place, especially for those who are most price sensitive. Increased quitting saves those 
who use tobacco money, reduces disease, and helps decrease health disparities.  
We appreciate your time and consideration of our comments. I would be happy to answer any questions 
about this testimony.  
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director , Seni or Regional Lead  
Allyson.perron@heart.org  
 
i Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids. The Toll of Tobacco in Maine. Updated Feb. 17, 2023, 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/facts_issues/toll_us/maine  
ii Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids. The Toll of Tobacco in Maine. Update d Feb. 17, 2023, 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/facts_issues/toll_us/maine  
iii Maine CDC, 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS), https://www.maine.gov/miyhs/2021 -results . 
iv Ibid.  
 v Ibid.  
vi Ibid.  
 vii Ibid.  
viii Lake Research Partners poll conducted on behalf of Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids of 800 likely 20 22 voters in Maine, December 2021, poll 
has a margin of error of +/ -3.5%  
ix Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs, 2014.  
x This funding is included as part of the ME CDC appropriatio n (Account 0143), p. A -345.  
xi Throughout this section, women refers to individuals assigned female at birth.  
xii HHS, 2014. xxvii Campaign for Tobac co-Free Kids, CIGARETTE TAX INCREASES BY STATE PER YEAR 2000 -2021, March 15, 2021, 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/0275.pdf . 
xiii American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids, and Tobacconomics, Ne w Revenues, Public Health 
Benefits & Cost Savings from a $2.00 Cigarette Tax Increase in Maine, January 12, 2021.  
