AMANDA E. BEAL 
COMMISSIONER  JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
 
HARLOW  BUILDING  
18 ELKINS LANE 
AUGUSTA , MAINE  
 PHONE : (207)  287-3200  
FAX: (207)  287-2400  
WEB: WWW .MAINE .GOV/DACF TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE S ON APPROPRIATIONS 
AND  FINANCIAL AFFAIRS , AND STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
IN SUPPORT OF  LD 258 
An Act Making Unified  Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State Government, 
General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the 
Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 202 4, 
and June 30, 2025  
February 17, 202 3 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government, I am Amanda Beal, Commissioner  
for the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , submitting testimony  in supp ort of  
LD 258, the Governo r’s proposed fiscal  year 2024 -2025 biennial budget bill . This testimony will 
highlight three Office of Information Technology initiatives that are crucial to the Department’s 
work and provided services.    
 
The Governor ’s budget has three Geographic Information System (GIS) related initiatives . The first 
initiative, found on page A -22, request s General Fund support of $500,000 for each fiscal year to 
conduct aerial imaging  acquisition , processing , and Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)  for state 
agency projects.  GIS tools and digital spatial imagery are fundamental to managing important daily 
work  activities , including land conservation . For example, t he Bureau of Parks and Lands  (BPL)  
stewards more than 700,000 acres of State Parks and Public Lands and monitors more than 500,000 
acres of conservation easements.  GIS tools are used in nearly every aspect of land management, 
including mapping forest types ; planning  and monitoring harves ting operations ; designing roads ; 
and delineating stream buffers and rare habitat types . Most BPL foresters have hand -held iPads or 
iPhones that enable them to use and update GIS layers efficiently  and in real time.    
This initiative will also provide spatial data to BPL for the timely completion of the statutorily 
required  detailed  forest inventory of public lands . In recent years numerous large forestland managers 
have adopted LiDAR to streamline estimates of forest stocking and grow th using algorithms that 
convert imagery to biomass.  As a result, LiDAR will effectively replace  or complement the cost ly 
and time -intensive methods of assessing forest stocking through field data collection . BPL staff 
have incorporated LiDAR in specific  pilot projects involving mapping  deer wintering habitats , 
vernal pools, and ecologically important older -growth forests.     
 
The second initiative  for imagery  is on page A-30 and requests ongoing General Fund support for high-
resolution  orthoimag ery aerial images . Accurate and up-to-date imagery is utilized by the Department’s 
Bureau of Resource Information and Land Use Planning  to maintain the Conservation Lands Registry 
(Title 33 MRS §479 -C, and Title 5 MRS ch. 353 Section 6206 1.D. ), and complete a statewide 
mapping updat e of coastal bluffs, shoreline change, and the coastal submerged lands boundary . The 
Land Use Planning Commission  uses imagery to fulfill  certain statutory requirements such as  track ing 
state and regional trends in future land use development patterns ( Title 30 -A §4331 ), and track ing 
locally designated growth areas in Comprehensive Plans ( 4349 -A, subsection 1, paragraph A or B ).  
The Maine Geological Survey relies on this imagery for compiling  thousands of geologic geospatial 
data points each year ( Title 12 MRS §542 ).  And our interagency PFAS work utilizes GIS data to 
identify and map areas properly.   
The third initiative on page A -29 establishes two positions supporting  the MEGIS  and GeoLibrary  
teams . MEGIS requires additional staffing to support the increased utilization of this technology.   
The additional capacity will reduce  implementation delays and allow for upgrad e support .  
In summary, t he applications of GIS are vast and critical to DACF operatio ns. Current data are 
incomplete , and additional staffing is necessary  to respond to program needs . The support for 
MEGIS and GIS centralized data is essential for enabling the Department to serve and inform  its 
many constituents , including the legislature, state agencies, municipalities , and the general public.  
Thank you for your time  and consideration . 
 
