Testimony of Amanda E. Beal, Commissioner 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry 
Before the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
LD 258 “An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, 
June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025” 
Hearing Date: March 3, 2023 
Good morning, Senators Rotundo and Ingwersen, Representatives Sachs and Pluecker, and 
Members of the Joint Standing Cormnittees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Amanda Beal, and I am the Commissioner 
of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF). I am here today to testify 
in support of LD 258, the Governor ’s Biennial Budget proposal for State ﬁscal years 2024 and 
2025. This testimony addresses each item and proceeds sequentially from pages A-59 through A- 
104. 
This budget advances the Govemor’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more prosperous state 
where opportunity is available to all, then We must invest in the infrastructure that supports the 
people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is Why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on every day 
to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted budget and the last legislative 
session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, making sure 
that -— even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — We lived Within our means. This budget 
proposal continues that practice. 
We look forward to the discussions over the next several months as We outline each initiative and 
impact of the proposed investments. 
DACF is charged with promoting and advancing Maine’s agricultural resources; protecting and 
enhancing nearly 18 million acres of forestland: managing more than 700,000 acres of state 
parks and public lands; and administering numerous science-based programs focused on resource 
management, land use planning, and conservation. The impact of our Work is also quite 
extensive and supports a large part of our overall natural resource-based economy, as our 
agriculture, forestry, and outdoor recreation sectors combined to contribute more than $20 billion 
to our state’s economy annually and support approximately 140,000 jobs. 
Our Department staff oversee and carry out a wide range of duties, from protecting the food We 
eat, preventing and ﬁghting Wildﬁres, mapping the ocean floor, keeping our parks and public lands
l
pristine and accessible, ensuring wise land utilization and conservation, and providing regulatory 
oversight and technical assistance to forest and farmland owners and managers. We take collective 
pride in our efforts to provide excellent customer service through our hundreds of activities and 
programs, which are carried out by 747 employees, where 437 are year-round positions and the 
remaining are seasonal positions. 
In the past year, our Department has continued to see high demand for our services, both straining 
resources while also reinforcing the need for the time, talent, and expertise of our staff. Maine’s 
State Parks continue to see strong demand, with approximately 3.3 million visitors in 
2022. Meanwhile, our Maine Forest Rangers are still responding to an increased number of 
wildﬁres. Over the last ﬁve years, on average, we have seen approximately 688 wildﬁres annually, 
burning 533 acres per year. In the work of the Land Use Planning Commission, building permit 
applications continue to exceed pre-pandemic levels by approximately 25%. And our Bureau of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources staff continue to respond to increased food insecurity 
across our state, impacted by inflation and soon to be further exacerbated as COVlD-era SNAP 
beneﬁts are set to end this week. Additionally, we have seen a signiﬁcant increase in consumer 
interest in accessing Maine- grown food at the same time that producers are navigating input supply 
disruptions, increased costs, and food system bottlenecks. These are just some examples of how 
the Department has been navigating complex and extraordinary issues on a daily basis. 
As we now move toward reviewing speciﬁc DACF Biennial Budget initiatives for FY 24/25, there 
are a few overarching aspects that it may be helpful to note before moving into discussing speciﬁcs: 
Q All of the initiatives listed reﬂect the fundamental needs of the Department. Many are 
tied to the health and safety of either state employees or the public, while others have 
direct ties to economic impact, whether it be resolving inspector bottlenecks that inhibit 
business growth or ensuring that our State Parks provide a safe, enjoyable setting for 
those who visit them and keep people coming back year after year. 
Q Of the 93 initiatives and eleven language items you will be asked to Vote on in this 
budget, 27 initiatives and most language pieces are generally housekeeping in 
nature. These items include reallocating positions between accounts, funding reclasses 
approved in the Supplemental budget, and establishing capital allocation in the current 
biennium for many Other Special Revenue accounts. 
Hopefully, these introductory comments provide helpful background information as you consider 
the following initiatives. 
Animal Welfare Fund 
The baseline budget for Animal Welfare Fund may be found on page A-60. This program ensures 
the humane and proper treatment of animals. Staff are responsible for investigating animal cruelty, 
abuse, and neglect complaints, training animal control ofﬁcers while also inspecting and licensing 
boarding and breeding kennels, animal shelters, pet shops, and research facilities. It is also 
responsible for the “Help Fix ME” spay/neuter program for feral cats as Well as dogs and cats 
owned by low-income residents of Maine and administers the statewide dog-licensing program in 
cooperation with municipalities, including the successful online licensing program.
2
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-60 provides funding for increased rates from Central Fleet 
Management (CFM) due to increased fuel and vehicle purchase prices. This initiative is the ﬁrst 
of several you will see throughout our budget for increased CFM rates. 
The second initiative continues and makes permanent one Public Service Manager I position 
funded by Other Special Revenue Funds to manage critical animal welfare response planning and 
deployment. The legislature approved the limited period position in PL 2021 c. 398 per the 
recommendation of the Committee to Review Maine Animal Cruelty Investigations. This 
initiative is a combined allocation of $117,659 in FY24 and $123,832 in FY25. 
Bureau of Agriculture 
The baseline budget request for the Bureau of Agriculture is on page A-61. This program is 
responsible for animal and plant health, farm and consumer quality assurance, and agricultural 
product marketing. It also helps to promote rural educational events and seeks to develop the 
public understanding of Maine agriculture ’s importance to the state’s economy, the vitality of rural 
communities, and Maine’s quality of life. This program includes the Divisions of Agricultural 
Resource Development, Animal and Plant Health, and Quality Assurance. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-61 provides funding in the General Fund for $94,058 in FY24 and 
$117,109 in FY25 and increases the allocation in Other Special Revenue Funds by $11,767 in 
FY24 and $14,552 in FY25 for increased Central Fleet Management (CFM) rates, as mentioned 
in the previous program. 
The next initiative at the top of page A-62 provides an annual appropriation of $1,000,000 for 
PFAS expenditures in the Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources. BAFRR anticipates 
a continued need to assist PFAS-impacted farms for the foreseeable future. Assistance will 
continue to include robust and ongoing testing of on-farm media (water, soils, muscle tissue, 
vegetative tissue, milk, etc.), installation and maintenance of water ﬁltration systems, farm 
viability ﬁnancial support (paying for clean feed, equipment and inputs necessary to grow PFAS— 
safe crops, upgrades to existing on-farm buildings), livestock serum and muscle sampling, and 
more. 
The following two initiatives on page A-62 are related to the VISTA Ending Hunger program. 
These initiatives will transfer and reallocate one Volunteer Services Coordinator position and the 
existing funding for the program from the DACF Administration to the Bureau of Agriculture 
program and establish a baseline allocation in the Other Special Revenue Funds account. You will 
see corresponding decreases in the DACF Administration program on pages A-68 and A-70. This 
program began as a pilot, which draws in over $500,000 in federal funds to support the ongoing 
work of 25 VISTA members working across the state to address hunger in Maine, and provide 
capacity to implement the state’s Roadmap to End Hunger in Maine by 2030. The success of this 
pilot program has resulted in an ongoing stream of revenue; this program long-term is best housed 
in the Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources. 
The next initiative continues one limited-period Planning and Research Associate II position 
previously continued in Public Law 2021, chapter 29. This position works with The Emergency 
Food Assistance Program (TEFAP) and the Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) and 
will end on June 7, 2025. Food administered through these programs has increased by nearly
3
250% over the past few years, so this additional position will continue to be critical to meet 
program needs. This role is essential to ensure the efﬁcient and consistent distribution of 
approximately 6,000 CSFP boxes to over 8,000 seniors across the state each month and helps 
facilitate critical partnerships with USDA and state stakeholders who assist in making TEFAP and 
CSFP successful. 
The next initiative on page A-62 establishes one Consumer Protection Inspector position in the 
General Fund due to increased demand to inspect legal recreational cannabis products and shops. 
This initiative provides a total appropriation of $100,887 in FY24 and $105,890 in FY25. Since 
legalizing recreational camiabis, Quality Assurance has processed an estimated 2,400 retail 
licensing applications, many of which require annual calibration certiﬁcation.V 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-63 establishes one Consumer Protection Inspector position in the 
General Fund due to increased demand for food safety inspections. There is an increase in retail 
food businesses requiring inspection of cannabis-related products. This initiative provides a total 
appropriation of $100,887 in FY24 and $105,890 in FY25. 
The next initiative provides a one-time appropriation of $1,500,000 in FY24 to upgrade our 
severely outdated Cony Road facility. Proposed upgrades to the “west wing” of the 60-year-old 
building include original window replacement, additional insulation measures, energy-ef ﬁcient 
LED lighting, asbestos ﬂoor tile remediation, and restroom modiﬁcations for ADA compliance. 
The modiﬁcations will also improve ofﬁce, storage, and training space functionality. 
The third initiative on page A-63 provides a one-time appropriation of $1,500,000 in FY24 to 
replace our very fragile database used by Quality Assurance and Regulation for licensing and 
inspection that does not meet current regulatory needs. The system will accommodate new 
licensing and inspections, generate renewal applications and licenses, and track complaints and 
administrative actions for over 7,000 businesses, streamlining processes to improve efficiency and 
accuracy for the public and staff. The current system cannot access historical information in usable 
form, and reporting capabilities are severely limited. This initiative includes an ongoing 
appropriation of $150,000 for hosting and maintenance costs for the new system. 
The next initiative on page A-63 establishes one Consumer Protection Inspector position funded 
50% by the General Fund and 5 0% by the Federal Expenditures Fund. Maine meat and poultry 
facilities requiring state inspection continue to set records, with nearly 1,3 80,000 lbs. of red meat 
processed in the last year. This is a 50% increase over the past four years. Given this ongoing 
demand for local meat and poultry, some Maine livestock and poultry producers continue to wait 
months, if not longer, for an appointment to have their animals harvested and processed at facilities 
in Maine. These processing bottlenecks have hindered growth in this sector; however, recent 
federal grants have provided key ﬁnancial support to businesses seeking state inspection, and the 
recent Agriculture Infrastructure Investment Program (AIIP) offers necessary funding for several 
local processors to expand capacity to meet sustained increased demand. The Cooperative 
Interstate Shipment program also continues to grow market share for participating processors, with 
three processors recently asking for more days of state inspection services. This position will 
provide needed state inspection services to meet increasing demand and reduce wait times for 
livestock producers.
4
The next initiative provides an appropriation of $400,000 each year of the biennium for the Soil 
and Water Conservation Districts (SWCD) to increase annual funding for each of the 16 Districts 
from $25,000 to $50,000. District Funding has been ﬂat for over a decade and has not kept pace 
with increasing costs. The increased funding will allow SWCD to Work cooperatively with DACF 
to provide continued critical technical assistance to fanns and producers for soil and Water 
conservation purposes. 
The last initiative provides an appropriation of $50,000 each year of the biennium to supplement 
the cost of the amiual surveys for Pale Cyst Nematode, a pest that threatens crops such as potatoes 
and tomatoes. 
At the top of page A-64, the ﬁrst initiative allocates $250,000 in Other Special Revenue Funds to 
establish a baseline allocation in this account to administer the Agricultural Development Fund. 
The Fund will support the Agricultural Development Grant (ADG), which is an annual grant 
program DACF has historically offered that helps provide cost-share grants to conduct market 
promotion, market research and development, value-added processing, and new technology 
demonstration projects. The ADG is very popular, and applicant demand has always exceeded the 
available funding. This request will provide an allocation to allow the Agricultural Development 
Fund to continue to support the vital and impactful grant program with existing funds. 
The following three initiatives address a revenue shortfall in the Milk Commission by transferring 
a percentage of three positions funded in the Milk Commission program to the General Fund. 
Declining revenue in the Milk Commission program, coupled With increased expenses, has 
continued to deplete the cash balance in the OSR account for the past ﬁve years. Reallocating the 
positions to the General Fund will allow the Milk Commission program to meet expenses. You 
will see the corresponding decrease for these three initiatives in the Milk Commission program on 
page A-91. 
The ﬁnal initiative on page A-64 transfers and reallocates the cost of one Entomology Technician 
from the Federal Expenditures Fund to Other Special Revenue Funds to realign the position with 
the appropriate funding source. The initiative also increases the technician ’s biweekly Work hours 
from 48 to 80 hours to the necessary capacity for the apiary program. 
The ﬁrst initiative, on page A-65, transfers and reallocates three positions and related All Other 
costs from the Board of Pesticides Control program, Other Special Revenue Funds, to the Bureau 
of Agriculture program, General Fund. These positions were established in Public Law 2021, 
chapter 673, and remain vacant due to insufficient funds in the Other Special Revenue Funds 
account. You will see a corresponding decrease in the Board of Pesticides Control program on 
page A-102 and a request for associated technology costs for these positions on page A-71. 
The next initiative on page A-65 establishes one seasonal Entomology Technician position in the 
Federal Expenditures Fund and provides funding for related All Other costs. This position will 
eliminate the need for contracted labor for the Cooperative Agriculture Pest Survey (CAPS) 
program. This provides a combined allocation of $42,458 in FY24 and $44,716 in FY25. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program, on page A-65, provides a one-time allocation of $1,500,000 in 
F Y24 to fund grants for durable greenhouse structures and associated siting and installation costs 
to schools, community centers, and other eligible public entities for shared educational uses and
5
to enhance community-based opportunities for food production. The accompanying language is 
found in Part DD. 
Certiﬁed Seed Fund 
The baseline budget request for the Certiﬁed Seed Fund is on page A-66. The program ensures 
the high quality of seed potatoes by conducting ﬁeld and shipping point inspections in Maine for 
regulated diseases, and also certiﬁes seed oats and barley, and issues phytosanitary certiﬁcates for 
agricultural and forest products destined for export to other countries. 
The only initiative in this program provides an allocation for increased CF M rates. 
DACF Administration 
The baseline request for DACF Administration is at the top of page A-67. This program provides 
leadership, oversight, and operational direction for the Department. This program is responsible 
for the centralized budget for the Ofﬁce of Information Technology, Natural Resources Service 
Center, and the Attorney General’s Ofﬁce. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-67 provides an allocation for increased CFM rates. 
The next initiative on page A-67 is the ﬁrst of six initiatives in this program, providing funding 
for the associated technology costs for positions referenced in other programs in DACF. I will 
discuss this position later in my testimony for the Maine Land Use Planning Commission program 
on page A—89. 
The last initiative on page A-67 provides funding for the submitted reclassi ﬁcation of a Public 
Service Manager I position to a Public Service Manager II. This position is partially funded in 
this program, and the other portion is located in the Land for Maine’s Future program on page A- 
82. 
The ﬁrst initiative at the top of page A-68 continues and makes permanent one Public Service 
Coordinator I position previously continued in Public Law 2021, chapter 398. This position 
coordinates DACF’s ongoing Work to implement the state climate action plan, supports 
conservation and soil health activities, and engages with key department stakeholder groups and 
organizations. 
The next initiative continues and makes permanent one Volunteer Services Coordinator position 
previously continued in Public Law 2021, chapter 398. This position supports Maine’s Ending 
Hunger by 2030 initiative. This initiative provides a total allocation of $106,654 in FY24 and 
$108,718 in FY25. 
The next initiative continues and makes permanent one Agency GIS/Technology Coordinator 
position previously established by financial order. This position is a department-wide resource 
supporting Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and related core technology for programs to 
streamline critical processes and program needs. This initiative provides a total allocation of 
$114,178 in FY24 and $116,239 in FY25.
6
The next initiative on page A~68 establishes one Public Service Coordinator I position to ensure 
the Department complies with OSHA requirements by coordinating annual staff training, 
inspecting safety equipment, and reviewing accident/incident tracking. The position will also 
implement safety plans, standardize policies across the Department, and manage safety training 
and certiﬁcations. This initiative provides an appropriation of $3,292 in each year of the biennium 
and a total allocation of $1 14,733 in FY24 and $120,971 in FY25. 
The last initiative transfers the previously mentioned Volunteer Services Coordinator position and 
associated funding for Maine’s Ending Hunger by 2030 initiative from this program to the Bureau 
of Agriculture. This initiative corresponds to one mentioned earlier in the Bureau. 
The next initiative at the top of page A-69 increases allocation by $29,949 each year of the 
biennium for additional costs of printing various publications available for purchase through the 
Department. 
The next initiative on page A-69 increases allocation by $41,731 in FY24 and $69,050 in FY25 
for increasing costs of ﬁnancial, accounting, and human resource management services provided 
by the Department of Administrative and Financial Services through the Natural Resources 
Service Center. 
The next initiative on page A-69 provides an appropriation of $63,052 in FY24 and $82,569 in 
FY25 for increased expenses for services provided by the Attorney General’s Ofﬁce. 
The next initiative on page A-69 provides funding for increased service rates by the Ofﬁce of 
Information Technology for current services provided to DACF. This initiative provides an 
appropriation of $447,453 in FY24 and $454,886 in FY25 and an allocation of $79,-514 in FY24 
and $80,834 in FY25. 
The next initiative on page A-69 provides funding for increased technology provided by the Office 
of Information Technology. This initiative provides an appropriation of $354,440 in each year of 
the biennium and an allocation of $62,985 each year. 
The last initiative provides an appropriation of $50,000 annually to continue connecting additional 
Maine State Parks and Historic Sites to the state’s network. 
The first initiative at the top of page A-70 also relates to the transfer of the Ending Hunger by 2030 
program. This initiative transfers the total All Other appropriation from the DACF Administration 
to the Bureau of Agriculture. The corresponding initiative was mentioned earlier on page A-62. 
The ﬁnal ﬁve initiatives all fund technology costs associated with positions mentioned in each 
program budget. 
Division of Forest Protection 
The baseline budget request for the Division of Forest Protection is on page A-72. This program 
provides forest ﬁre and forest resource protection to Maine’s 18 million acres of forest land. The 
Division protects landowners through wildﬁre readiness, prevention, detection, suppression, and 
natural resources law enforcement.
7
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-72 provides an appropriation for increased CFM rates. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation of $25,326 each year of the b161’1I‘11LlI‘I‘1 for annual 
health screenings for Forest Rangers due to exposure to hazardous chemicals. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation of $20,000 each year of the biennium for annual 
training required for all pilots. 
The first initiative at the top of page A-73 provides an appropriation of $85,657 each year of the 
biennium for increased insurance rates for aircraft coverage. Risk Management purchases 
commercial insurance for this coverage and passes the cost to the agency. 
The next initiative on page A-73 provides an appropriation of $3,904 each year of the biennium 
for increased insurance rates for a recent property revaluation. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation of $5,011 in FY24 and $12,433 in FY25 for dispatch 
services provided by the Department of Public Safety. 
The fourth initiative provides an appropriation of $175,000 each year of the biennium to fund All 
Other aircraft maintenance. 
The ﬁfth initiative provides an appropriation of $200,000 in FY24 and $125,000 in FY25 for 
repairs to Forest Protection facilities. 
The final two initiatives provide an appropriation to fund reclasses approved by the Bureau of 
Human Resources for four Ranger Pilots and one Ranger Pilot Supervisor. The reclasses were 
approved in the F Y23 Supplemental Budget, and this initiative Will fund the ongoing portion. 
The ﬁrst initiative at the top of page A-7 4 provides an appropriation to fund a reclass approved by 
the Bureau of Human Resources for one Office Associate II position to a Forest Service 
Mobilization Coordinator. This reclass was also approved in the FY23 Supplemental Budget, and 
this request will ftmd the ongoing portion. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation in both years of the biennium to fund a proposed 
reorganization of one Ofﬁce Associate II position to a District Forest Ranger position to align Work 
functions with the appropriate classiﬁcation. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation in both years to increase the weeks of one seasonal 
Laborer II position from 32 to 52 weeks providing added capacity for ﬁre preparedness, quick-ﬁre 
response, and assisting with fuel truck operations for air missions. 
The ﬁnal initiative for this program on page A-74 provides an appropriation to fund another reclass 
approved by the Bureau of Human Resources for one Forest Fire Prevention Specialist position to 
change the range for this position. This reclass Was also approved in the FY23 Supplemental 
Budget, and this initiative Will fund the ongoing portion of this reclass. F
8
Emergencv Food Assistance Program 
The baseline budget request for the Emergency Food Assistance Program is on page A-75. This 
program supports the emergency food assistance program administered by the Department. There 
are no new initiatives for this program. 
Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program 
The baseline budget request for the already established Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program is 
on page A-7 6. This program was established to assist Maine farmers facing the adverse effects of 
drought conditions. The program will provide grants to support the installation of irrigation 
systems to alleviate the risk of crop losses due to insufﬁcient rainfall and drought conditions. The 
source of irrigation Water must be sustainable, enviromnentally sound, and affordable. 
There is one initiative for this program on page A-76, providing a one-time allocation of 
$2,000,000 in FY24 and an ongoing appropriation of $300,000 in FY25. There is also 
corresponding language in Part CC. 
Forest Resource Management 
The baseline budget request for Forest Resource Management is on page A-77. This program 
preserves the overall health of Maine’ s forest resources by protecting forest, shade, and ornamental 
tree resources of the state from signiﬁcant insect and disease damage and providing pest 
management and damage prevention. The program conducts an inventory of Maine’s forest 
resources on a ﬁve-year cycle. Technical assistance, scientiﬁc and economic information, and 
educational services to Maine’s family forest owners, the forest industry, landowners, and the 
public are also provided by this program. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-77 provides an appropriation for increased CFM rates. 
The next initiative provides funding to increase the weeks of six Entomology Technician positions 
from 5l to 52, establishing these positions as year-round to fulﬁll program needs and provide staff 
with beneﬁt continuity. 
The ﬁrst initiative at the top of page A-78 provides an appropriation to fund reclasses approved by 
the Bureau of Human Resources for 13 Forester Ipositions to Forester II positions. These reclasses 
were also approved in the FY23 Supplemental Budget, and this initiative will fund the ongoing 
portion. 
The next initiative provides a one-time appropriation of $58,000 in FY24 to replace two ATVs, 
two snowmobiles, and two trailers for Forest Policy and Management to facilitate access to remote 
timber harvest permit sites for compliance inspections and investigations. The current equipment 
is no longer safe or dependable, and repair costs are high.
9
The ﬁnal initiative on page A-7 8 provides a one-time appropriation of $ 12,000 in FY24 to purchase 
an ATV to survey forested land for damage symptoms from regional forest pests such as spruce 
budworm and emerald ash borer and to access forest inventory plots in remote areas. 
Fund to Address Food Insecuritv/Provide Nutrition Incentives 
The baseline budget request for the Fund to Address Food Insecurity/Provide Nutrition Incentives 
is on page A-79. This program provides incentives to federal participants to purchase locally 
grown ﬁ'uits and vegetables at existing retail markets, including retail stores and fanners’ markets, 
and supports outreach for and administration of programs that offer nutrition incentives to 
participants of federal food and nutrition assistance programs. 
There is one initiative for this program on page A-79, providing a one-time appropriation of 
$600,000 each year of the biennium to capitalize the Fund, allowing the Department to provide 
incentives to federal food and nutrition assistance programs. These funds will be matched with 
federal funding. 
Geology and Resource Information 
The baseline budget request for Geology and Resource Information is on page A—80. This program 
includes the Maine Geological Survey, Floodplain Management, and Municipal Planning 
Assistance. The Maine Geological Survey focuses on groundwater (the source of drinking water 
for more than 50% of the state’s citizens), aquifer analysis, coastal geology, including coastal 
hazards, and mapping the geologic framework of the state. Furthering the mission of hazard 
mitigation, Floodplain Management carries out the objectives of the National Flood Insurance 
Program under the Federal Emergency Management Agency by assisting municipalities and 
individuals with assessments of ﬂood risks and protection options. The Municipal Planning 
Assistance Program implements speciﬁc elements of the Growth Management Act, including 
providing municipal technical assistance and emphasizing climate adaptation. It acts as the State 
liaison with regional planning organizations. It also coordinates across State programs to ensure 
growth and economic development while balancing the use and protection of the state’s natural 
resources. 
The only initiative in this program is on page A—80 providing an appropriation for increased CFM rates. 
Harness Racing Commission 
The baseline budget request for the Hamess Racing Commission is found on page A-81. This 
program provides oversight, support, and promotion for Maine’s harness racing industry to ensure 
the integrity of live racing and wagering at facilities in Maine. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-81 reorganizes one seasonal State Racing Steward position into two 
intermittent State Racing Steward positions to provide better coverage for the Harness Racing 
season. The seasonal position is currently vacant. 
The next initiative is related to one previously discussed on page A-64. The initiative moves the 
headcount from one of the positions transferred and reallocated earlier. The position is currently
10
split-funded between the Harness Racing Commission and the Milk Commission, and when the 
funding for the Milk Commission was reallocated between Other Special Revenue Funds and the 
General Fund, the headcount shifted to the Harness Racing Commission in alignment with current 
budgeting practices. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program increases the allocation by $5,384,425 in FY24 and $5,378,343 
in FY25 to reﬂect changes approved in the December 2022 Revenue Forecasting Committee report 
for projected increases in gambling revenue. 
Land for Maine’s Future 
The baseline budget request for the Land for Maine’s Future (LMF) Program is on page A-82. 
This program coordinates and ﬁnances the acquisition of land and easements for conservation, 
water access, outdoor recreation, wildlife and ﬁsh habitat, farmland, and working Waterfront 
conservation.. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-82 provides an appropriation of $15,000 each year to maintain an 
online grant application and public-facing management tool. The new application is shared 
between LMF and Parks. You will see a similar increase for this system in Parks General 
Operations on page A-100. 
The other initiative in this program provides an appropriation for the proposed reorganization of 
one Public Service Manager I position to a Public Service Manager II position. This position is 
split-funded between Ll\/[F and DACF Administration. The ﬁrst half of this initiative was 
discussed on page A-67. 
Land for Maine’s Future -— Communitv Conservation Projects 
The baseline budget request for the Ll\/[F — Community Conservation Projects is on page A-83. 
This program coordinates and ﬁnances the acquisition of lands and easements for community 
conservation projects with $40 million received from unappropriated General Fund surplus in 
ﬁscal year 2021. 
The only initiative for this program is on page A-83 and provides an , appropriation for a proposed 
reorganization of one limited-period Paralegal Assistant position to a Secretary Specialist position. 
The program has tried to ﬁll the position three times but has been unsuccessful. The proposed 
change will broaden the candidate pool. 
Land Management and Planning 
The baseline budget request for Land Management and Planning is on page A-84. This program 
manages the state’ s public lands and performs sustainable timber management under the principles 
of multiple-use, and is Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) and Forest Stewardship Council (F SC) 
certiﬁed. 
The first initiative on page A-84 provides an allocation for increased CFM rates.
11
The next initiative provides funding to increase one seasonal Park Ranger position from 26 to 52 
weeks to keep up with growing recreational demands on Public Lands in the winter and shoulder 
seasons in the eastern region. 
The next initiative on page A-84 provides capital allocation of $3,000,000 each year of the 
biennium for construction materials, improvements to bridges and roads, and other improvements 
to recreational trails and sites used by the public. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program increases allocation by $52,443 each year of the biennium to 
cover increased travel and legal costs associated with the Federal Forest Legacy Program grant. 
Maine Conservation C0l‘Q§ 
The baseline budget request for the Maine Conservation Corps is on page A-86. This program 
provides job skills training While supporting and preserving Maine’s natural resources and 
encouraging youth volunteerism, and it is closely aligned with the national AmeriC0rps program. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-86 provides an allocation for increased CFM rates. 
The other initiative in this program increases allocation for an increase in the federal grant award 
received from AmeriCorps. 
Maine Farms for the Future Program 
The baseline budget request for the Maine Farms for the Future Program is on page A-87. This 
program provides technical assistance and grants to farmers for developing business plans and 
implementing those plans in a two-phase process. There are no new initiatives for this program. 
‘ 
Maine Forestrv Operations Cleanup and Response Fund 
The baseline budget request for the Maine Forestry Operations Cleanup and Response Fund is on 
page A-87. This program collects permit fees, ﬁnes from civil penalties, and other fees to offset 
expenses incurred by the Bureau of Forestry to mitigate and remediate damages or potential 
damages to the waters of the state created by forest practices violations. This is a revolving fund, 
and the balance is limited to $20,000. There are no new initiatives for this program. 
Maine Healthv Soils Fund 
The baseline budget request for the already established Maine Healthy Soils Fund is on page A- 
88. This program was created to improve the health, yield, and profitability of the state’s diverse 
agricultural soils and commodities by expanding the use of best practices among farmers and 
farmland owners in Maine. 
The one initiative for this program on page A-88 provides a one-time allocation of $3,000,000 in 
FY24 and an appropriation of $500,000 in FY25. There is also related language for this initiative 
in Part BB. 
Maine Land Use Planning Commission
12
The baseline budget request for the Maine Land Use Planning Commission (LUPC) is on page A- 
89. This program serves as the planning and zoning board for the 425 unorganized townships, 27 
plantations, seven organized towns, and over 300 unorganized coastal islands, which cover 10.4 
million acres — about half the state. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-89 provides an appropriation for increased CFM rates. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation to establish one Enviromnental Specialist III position 
to staff a new Land Use Planning Commission Enforcement Unit and provides funding for related 
All Other costs. This initiative provides a combined appropriation of $93,776 in FY24 and 
$98,803 in FY25. Increased permitting activity continues post-pandemic, creating an increasing 
backlog of enforcement investigations. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation to increase the hours of one Senior Planner from 60 
to 80 hours biweekly. LUPC has a backlog of policy and planning projects, including solar energy 
facility development standards, short-term rental rules, and dark sky standards. Increasing the 
position hours will beneﬁt recruitment and retention issues with this part-time position. 
The fmal initiative for this program provides an appropriation to cover the increased cost for 
statewide property leases supplied through the Department of Administrative and Financial 
Service’s Division of Leased Space. 
Maine Working Farmland Access and Protection Program 
The baseline budget request for the Maine Working Farmland Access and Protection Program is 
on page A-90. This program provides funding to protect Maine’s productive and economically 
signiﬁcant agricultural lands. There are no new initiatives for this program. 
Milk Commission 
The baseline budget request for the Milk Commission may be found on page A-91. This program 
sets the minimum wholesale and retail price of milk. The Commission staff manages daily 
operations, conducts audits of daily product processors to ensure proper payment to farmers, and 
conducts studies required by statute to establish retail milk prices. 
The ﬁrst three initiatives on page A-91 address a revenue shortfall in the Milk Commission and 
were discussed earlier in my testimony in the Bureau of Agriculture and Harness Racing programs. 
These three initiatives move a portion of three positions funded in the Milk Commission program 
to the General Fund. The initiatives decrease allocation and correspond to increased general fund 
appropriations mentioned earlier when you saw the ﬁrst portion of these highlighted on page A- 
64. 
The fourth initiative increases allocation in Other Special Revenue Funds All Other by 
$4,946,570 in FY24 and $9,835,101 in FY25 to recognize revenue changes approved by the 
Revenue Forecasting Committee in December 2022 for projected increases in the milk tier 
program.
13
Natural Areas Program 
The baseline budget request for the Natural Areas Program is on page A-93. This program collects, 
maintains, and disseminates ﬁeld-based inventory information on habitats of statewide 
signiﬁcance to guide natural resource management and acquisition. In addition to tracking the 
status and trends of at-risk species and habitats, this program also serves as the central repository 
for information on the identiﬁcation and management of Maine’s terrestrial invasive plants. The 
program Works proactively with developers to avoid and minimize impacts on Maine’s unique 
natural areas, potentially heading off costly conﬂicts and delays. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-93 provides an allocation for increased CFM rates. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation of $5 0,000 each year of the biennium for increased 
costs to support invasive species ﬁeld operations. 
The next initiative at the top of page A-94 transfers and reallocates one Biologist H position from 
50% Federal Expenditures Fund and 50% Other Special Revenue Funds to 100% General Fund. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation for the approved reclassi ﬁcation of a vacant Biologist 
I position to a Biologist II position. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation for the submitted reclassi ﬁcation of a Public Service 
Manager I to a Public Service Manager II position. 
The next initiative allocates the approved reclassi ﬁcation of a vacant Biologist I position toa 
Biologist II position. 
The fnal initiative in this program increases allocation by $15 0,000 each year of the biennium for 
increased operational expenses related to ongoing projects. 
Off-Road Recreational Vehicles Program 
The baseline budget request for the Off-Road Recreational Vehicles Program is on page A-96. 
This program plans, develops, and maintains snowmobile and ATV trails directly and through 
grants-in-aid to clubs and municipalities; manages approximately 300 miles of state-owned or 
leased multi-use rail trails; purchases, builds, and maintains state-owned public boat launch sites; 
is responsible for marking navigational hazards in selected lakes; and provides grants and technical 
assistance to municipalities and others in developing and maintaining locally owned boat launch 
sites. Studies have shown that these recreational activities have a positive economic impact on 
Maine’s economy, including the 2020 University of Maine study, which found that snowmobiling 
alone contributed $600 million annually. 
The ﬁrst initiative for this program on page A-96 provides an allocation for increased CFM rates.
14
The next initiative provides an allocation of $1,000,000 each year of the biennium to construct 
new and renovate existing recreational boating facilities. 
The next initiative allocates $205,277 each year to provide grants to support public boating 
facilities. 
The next initiative provides an allocation of $20,000 annually to replace aging ATVs. 
The ﬁnal initiative on page A-96 increases allocation by $39,072 each year for increased 
operational expenses in the Snowmobile Trail Fund. 
The next initiative at the top of page A-97 provides an allocation of $20,000 each year of the 
biennium to replace two snowmobiles. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program decreases allocation in Other Special Revenue Funds All Other 
by $380,422 in FY24 and $378,424 in FY25 to recognize revenue changes approved by the 
Revenue Forecasting Committee in December 2022 for projected decreases in gas tax revenue. 
Parks — General Operations 
The baseline budget request for Parks—General Operations is on page A-98. This program 
manages approximately 100,000 acres, including 48 state parks and historic sites. Parks staff 
service over three million visitors each year and offer many public service activities such as the 
Take It Outside (TIO) program, an initiative to bring kids and their families into the outdoors for 
recreation year-round. This program also provides recreational opportunities and the construction 
and management of ﬁre-safe public campsites in the West Branch Penobscot River Corridor. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-98 provides both an appropriation and an allocation for increased 
CFM rates. 
The following six initiatives provide a total appropriation of $606,636 each year of the biennium 
to cover increased operational costs for Maine State Parks and Historic Sites locations across the 
state. Fuel, electricity, septic pumping, unifonn, and cleaning supply costs have increased 
signiﬁcantly over the last several years. 
The next initiative on page A-98 provides an appropriation to fund reclasses approved by the 
Bureau of Human Resources, increasing the pay range of two Public Service Manager II positions. 
These reclasses were also approved in the FY23 Supplemental Budget, and this initiative will fund 
the ongoing portion. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation to fund another reclass approved by the Bureau of 
Human Resources for one Park Manager II position to a Park Manager I11 position. The reclass 
was also approved in the FY23 Supplemental Budget, and this initiative will fund the ongoing 
portion. 
The ﬁrst initiative at the top of page A-100 provides an allocation in the Federal Expenditures 
Fund to maintain an online grant application and public-facing management tool. This is the
l5
second half of the initiative mentioned on page A-82 for a system shared with the Land for Maine’s 
Future program. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation to cover the increased cost for statewide property 
leases offered through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of 
Leased Space. 
The third initiative provides an allocation of $430,000 each year of the biennimn for the 
maintenance of infrastructure and capital improvements at State Park facilities. 
The next initiative provides an allocation for the maintenance of infrastructure and capital 
improvements in the Allagash Wilderness Waterway. 
The next initiative provides an appropriation to purchase new equipment and replace aging capital 
equipment in State Parks. _ 
The sixth initiative provides an appropriation for increased credit card fee expenses resulting from 
increased visitor usage. 
The next initiative provides an allocation for increased lnforME expenses and credit card fee 
expenses resulting from the higher volume of campground reservations and corresponding 
increased revenue. 
The fmal initiative for this program can be found at the top of page A-101. This initiative reduces 
All Other allocation in the Allagash Wildemess Waterway account to comply with Title l2, section 
1889, stating that only capital expenditures are permissible in this account. 
Pesticides Control-Board of 
The baseline budget request for the Board of Pesticides Control is on page A-102. This program 
was established to protect public health and safety and the public interest in the soil, water, forests, 
wildlife, agricultural and other resources of the state by assuring scientiﬁc and proper use of 
chemical pesticides. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-102 provides an allocation for increased CFM rates. 
The next initiative allocates $295,759 in FY24 and $305,540 in FY25 for increased information 
technology system costs related to the pesticides licensing system. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program transfers and reallocates three positions and related All Other 
costs from the Board of Pesticides Control program, Other Special Revenue Funds to the Bureau 
of Agriculture program, General Fund. This is the fnal portion of the initiative ﬁrst seen on page 
A-65 and also on page A-71 for related technology costs. 
Statewide Hunger Relief Program 
The baseline budget request for Statewide Hunger Relief is on page A-103. This program was 
established by Public Law 2019, chapter 514, and provides funds to contract with a nonproﬁt
l6
organization allowing that organization to engage in statewide hunger relief services, including, 
but not limited to, the purchase of food from Maine food producers and processors, to provide 
grants to local hunger relief programs, and to pay the operational and distribution expenses of the 
organization. There are no new initiatives in this program. 
Submerged Lands and Island Registry 
The baseline budget request for Submerged Lands and Island Registry is on page A-104. This 
program administers 2.3 million acres of submerged lands and 1,333 coastal islands that belong to 
the State. There are no new initiatives in this program. 
LANGUAGE 
Part T on pages 24-25 clariﬁes and codiﬁes the Forest Protection Division ’s carrying authority 
for this account. The carrying authority was originally granted in Public Law 1979, chapter 164, 
and has been exercised since that time. 
Part U on page 25 clariﬁes that activities undertaken by the State of Maine Animal Response 
Team may include providing adequate care for animals in state custody as the result of an 
investigation leading to seizure and holding of animals until any corresponding court action is 
completed. 
Part V on page 25 changes the Deputy Director position from serving at the pleasure of the 
Commissioner to a classiﬁed, conﬁdential position. The proposed change will be consistent with 
other positions at this level Within the Department and provide better stability for the continuity of 
operations and retention of institutional knowledge amongst administration changes. 
Part W on page 26 clariﬁes that with the Governor ’s approval, the Commissioner has the authority 
to accept giﬁs identiﬁed as services or other assets not readily identiﬁed as personal or real 
property. 
Part X on page 26 authorizes unrestricted funds in the Land for Maine’s Future Fund to be used 
for administrative costs and consulting services. q 
Part Y on page 27 changes the reimbursement rate for the Land for Maine’s Future Board to align 
with the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) rates, as it is exceedingly outdated. 
Part Z on page 27 revises the deﬁnition of the Director of the survey to be consistent with changes 
made to the requirements for the Maine Geological Survey in Public Law 2021, chapter 398, which 
removed the requirement that the Director of the Bureau of Resource Infonnation and Land Use 
Planning be the Director of the survey. 
Part AA on page 28 authorizes a transfer in each year of the biennium of all funds in excess of 
$200,000 from unencumbered balance forward in the Personal Services line category, and all funds 
in excess of $300,000 from unencumbered balance forward in the All Other line category in the 
Division of Forest Protection, General Fund account to the Capital Expenditures line category 
within the same account to carry out the mission of the Division of Forest Protection.
17
Part BB on pages 28-29 authorizes a transfer of $3,000,000 in ﬁscal year 2023-24 from 
unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Maine Healthy Soils Fund, Other Special 
Revenue Funds account to improve the health, yield, and proﬁtability of the state’s diverse 
agricultural soils and commodities; protect native biological and microbiological diversity, vitality 
and health and increase the greenhouse gas drawdown provided by the state’s agricultural soils; 
promote healthy soils agricultural practices based on indigenous knowledge, current 
understanding, and emerging soils science as determined by the Department; and promote and 
expand the use of healthy soils best practices among farmers and farmland owners in the state. 
Part CC on page 29 authorizes a transfer of $2,000,000 in ﬁscal year 2023-24 from 
unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Farmers Drought Relief Grant program, Other 
Special Revenue Funds account for a grant program to assist farmers in the state to overcome the 
adverse effects of drought conditions by providing grants in accordance with Maine revised 
Statutes, Title 7, section 220-A.4 
Part DD on pages 29-30 authorizes a transfer of $1,500,000 in ﬁscal year 2023-24 from 
unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Community-based Greenhouse — Bureau of 
Agriculture Other Special Revenue Funds account, to allow the Department to make grants for 
community-based greenhouses to schools, community centers, and other eligible public entities 
for shared educational uses, and to enhance community-based opportunities for food production. 
This concludes my presentation on our 2024-2025 Biennial Budget. I, along with my team here 
today, would be glad to respond to any questions you may have.
18
" 
[\,/]C;, ‘ ;;@'5 THE UNIVERSITY or 
Fuolzt ~“ 
* MAINE \_q t as 
Universities 
univsrisnv or MAINE. svsrsu I 
C°0Pe1‘aTiV9 Extensiﬂn 
Testimony of Behalf of the University of Maine System 
Presented by Hannah Carter, Dean of University of Maine Cooperative Extension 
In Support of Extension-Related Appropriations (Page A-648) 
of the Governor ’s Proposed FY24-25 Biennial Budget (LD 258) - Feb. 28, 2023 
Senators Rotundo and lngwersen, Representatives Sachs and Pluecker, and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations & Financial Affairs andt 
Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry: 
My name is Hannah Carter and l am Dean of University of Maine Cooperative Extension. l 
am also a proud County native and a product of the Extension system through my early 
years in 4-H and later as a summer insect and disease scout when l was an undergraduate 
student at the University of Maine Presque Isle. l am here today on behalf of the University 
of Maine System to encourage your support of the General Fund appropriation and 
Special Revenue allocation that advance the statewide activities of UMaine Extension, 
which you will find on Page A-648 of the Governor ’s biennial budget proposal. 
Extension brings research, education and outreach from Maine’s R1 university to homes, 
schools, farms, and communities in your legislative districts. Breeding more resilient potato 
varietals. Partnering with wild blueberry producers to improve the shelf life and quality of 
fresh packed berries. Providing food safety planning assistance to help new meat 
processors pass inspection. These are just some of Extension ’s statewide activities that 
strengthen and grow Maine’s agricultural economy and dependent rural jobs, and 
protect public, plant and animalhealth. _ _ 
Tick Laboratory & Pest Management Fund (A-648) 
ln 2014, the Legislature and Maine voters generously funded the construction of the 
University of Maine Extension Diagnostic and Research' Laboratory (DRL) to bring Extension 
scientists — including students — together to do research that matters to Maine and to 
provide unique diagnostic and testing sen/ices that matters to Mainers. Thank you. 
Today, the DRL supports aquatic animal health research necessary to the 
development of the state’s aquaculture and biotechnology sectors; veterinary 
diagnostic services vital for vets, game wardens and pet owners; plant disease 
testing that farmers depend on for crop management; and as Mainers increasingly 
appreciate, testing of ticks and other insects. 
Extension is generally supported within UMaine’s existing budgetary resources and by other 
local, state and federal competitive and formula funds and our own program revenue. 
However, in recognition of the DRL's critical importance to our state, the 129"‘ Legislature 
established a 15—cent container fee on registered pesticide products charged to consumers 
at the point of sale, with a large portion of the proceeds benefiting the lab. Given the 
complexity of administration, with the full support of the University of Maine System and 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent 
University of Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque lsle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
Maine retailers, the 130*" Legislature and Gov. Mills repealed the fee and instead provided 
this more predictable source of ongoing operating resources for the DRL’s ever-expanding 
education, outreach and research activities, including testing each year of thousands of tick 
samples, more than one-third of which are positive for Lyme. 
There is no new initiative proposed for the DRL in the upcoming biennium. 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension (A-648) 
There is aiso no new initiative forthe Extension integrated pest management (IPM) and 
pesticide safety education programs on Page A-648, which are funded by special revenue. 
IPM is a science-based approach to pest management that reduces the use of pesticides 
and their impact to public and environmental health while preserving the crop being treated. 
Extension leverages the State's investment to attract external funding to further extend the 
positive impact of our proven IPM programs on Maine farms. We estimate that each year, 
our IPM recommendations generate more than $10 million in increased croplyield 
and reduced pesticides costs just for Maine’s potato industry and more than $5 
million on Maine’s apple industry. There are similar success stories for the state's 
strawberry, cranberry and sweet corn growers, and with this flat-funded allocation, we can 
continue this important work to grow Maine’s agriculture economy. 
Additionally, as reported to the ACF Committee earlier this session, the pesticide safety 
expert supported in part by this initiative provides regular research-based trainings to those 
licensed — or seeking to become licensed ~— in pesticide application. In 2022, in-person 
training included sessions at the Agricultural Trades Show in Augusta that provided credit 
opportunities for more than 1,400 attendees and online sessions that collectively trained 
446 applicators. Topics included, but were not limited to, IPM, safety, labeling, forestry and 
rights-of-way, greenhouse best practices and worker protection standards. 
l want to thank you for your continued commitment to University of Maine 
Cooperative Extension and to Maine’s public universities. Your investment allows us to 
help Maine’s people help themselves through education and research. lt also enables us to 
strategically partner with many of the other organizations you’ve heard from today, including 
the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, the Wild Blueberry 
Commission of Maine and the Maine Potato Board, all of which are equally deserving of 
your support and are vital to the future of Maine’s agricultural-dependent economy and 
communities. 
Thank you, and I look forward to taking your questions. 
Page 2 of2
