 
 
 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee s on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
and Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
in support  
LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the 
Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 , and 
June 30, 2025  (p. A -59ff)  
 
Amy Winston  
Amy.Winston@ceimaine.org  
3 March  2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Distinguished M embers of the Committee on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs, and Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pleucker , and Honorable M embers of the 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry:   My name is Amy Winston, and I am the Senior Director of State Policy at Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI). I 
am testifying  today on behalf of CEI , in support of the biennial budget related to important w ork at the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation  and Forestry  (DACF) to promote and support local and regional 
agricultural and food system development.  
 
Initiatives proposed  in this budget  continue the implement ation  of key policy objectives that were 
advanced  by the last 2 legislatures . The Department’s  work is supported by and aligned with the goals  
identified in the Maine Won’t Wait  climate action plan and Maine’s focus on building talent and 
innovation in the 2020 -2029 state economic development plan.  
 
The Commissioner’s Office and Bureau staff have been working diligently with industry stakeholders and 
legislators to implement the recommendations of working groups on subjects from ending hunger to 
siting solar systems responsibly and  mitigating PFAs to protect Maine farmers  and farmland . The 
department has  hired staff and consult ed experts to address food insecurity,  support community -based 
food production, and agricultural infrastructure , including meat and poultry processing and  food 
manufacturing facilities.  They have added capacity to carry out  licens ing, food safety and quality 
inspections  effectively .  
 
CEI is appreciative of the opportunity we have had to  work with the Department and industry l eaders 
and stakeholders on several of t hese recent policy and programmatic initiatives , including the 
establishment of the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund  in the 130th 
legislature . (This fund was proposed in LD 1565 and passed in LD 1733  (PartKK) .)  
 
This session, w e look forward to working with  Speaker Talbot Ross and  the Commissioner’s Office  to 
support  LR 651, An Act to Strengthen Maine’s Agriculture, Food  & Forest Economy . This bill appropriates 
$20 million per fiscal year to capitalize this fund , which is not included in the budget  as proposed . The  
 
DACF and DECD will collaborate with the  fund ’s advisory board and other appropriate agencies and 
organizational partners to  establish grant, loan and equity -like financing  and ensure that investment 
objectives are appropriately targeted and not duplicative .  
 
For those who aren’t familiar, CEI is a st atewide, non-profit, mission -driven community development 
financial development institution (or CDFI). We work to build a just , vibrant and climate -resilient future 
for people and communities in Maine and rural regions. We do this by integrating finance, b usiness  
expertise and policy solutions to make the economy more equitable. Established in 1977  with an 
investment in cold fish storage , CEI has  invested $32,682,424 in agriculture and food economy and 
$9,092,591 in the forest products sector. Our focus on natural resource -based  businesses and 
commitment to value chain development in Maine’s heritage industries has only grown over the last 4 
decades.  Since FY 2018, CEI has provided $17,513,606 in financing to food and  agriculture related 
enterprises and  $1,922,500 in the forestry sector.   
 
While the proposed budget supports  myriad components of Maine’s agricultural and natural resource 
economy,  from farmland access and soil health to food insecurity, it does not address the demand for 
critical processing and manufacturing infrastructure . Developed with input from industry and additional 
stakeholders, and through the careful assessment conducted by the  DACF with  the Maine D epartment 
of Economic and C ommunity Development , the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest  Products  Investment  
Fund  reflects outstanding need  for capital  to expand Maine’s value chain. This need has been  
demonstrated through research and analysis and, most recently, by the inundation of the Maine  DACF’s  
Jobs and Recovery Act A griculture Infrastructure I nvestment Program  with applications from over 800 
Maine food processors and manufacturers . 
 
Thank you for this opportu nity to comment on the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry section of the biennial budget.  While highlighting the need to support the Maine Agriculture, 
Food and Forest Products  Investment Fund , we highly recommend the committees vote to pass this 
section of the biennial budget.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Amy Winston  
Senior Director  
State Policy  
  
  
  

