Testimony to the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
in support 
LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the 
Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and 
June 30, 2025 (p. A-59ff) 
3 March 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Distinguished Members of the Committee on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs, and Senator lngwersen, Representative Pleucker, and Honorable Members of the 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry: 
My name is Amy Winston, and l am the Senior Director of State Policy at Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI).l 
am testifying today on behalf of CEI, in support of the biennial budget related to important work at the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF) to promote and support local and regional 
agricultural and food system development. 
Initiatives proposed in this budget continue the implementation of key policy objectives that were 
advanced by the last 2 legislatures. The Department's work is supported by and aligned with the goals 
identified in the Maine Won't Wait climate action plan and Maine's focus on building talent and 
innovation in the 2020-2029 state economic development plan. 
The Commissioner's Office and Bureau staff have been working diligently with industry stakeholders and 
legislators to implement the recommendations of working groups on subjects from ending hunger to 
siting solar systems responsibly and mitigating PFAs to protect Maine farmers and farmland. The 
department has hired staff and consulted experts to address food insecurity, support community-based 
food production, and agricultural infrastructure, including meat and poultry processing and food 
manufacturing facilities. They have added capacity to carry out licensing, food safety and quality 
inspections effectively. 
CEI is appreciative of the opportunity we have had to work with the Department and industry leaders 
and stakeholders on several of these recent policy and programmatic initiatives, including the 
establishment of the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund in the 130"‘ 
legislature. (This fund was proposed in LD 1565 and passed in LD 1733 (PartKK).) 
This session, we look forward to working with Speaker Talbot Ross and the Commissioner's Office to 
support LR 651, An Act to Strengthen Maine's Agriculture, Food & Forest Economy. This bill appropriates 
$20 million per fiscal year to capitalize this fund, which is not included in the budget as proposed. The 
DACF and DECD will collaborate with the fund's advisory board and other appropriate agencies and 
30 Federal Street Suite. I00 Brulmviclc, Maine. 01.011 M/\ W|,,ks, 
,____i__i_____-. 
2o7.5o4,59o<:> 877.§;4,c>.:;64r9 Qo7.88:z.73<:>8 www.<:eimajnr:.o1 ‘g CHARTERED Nina“
organizational partners to establish grant, loan and equity-like financing and ensure that investment 
objectives are appropriately targeted and not duplicative. 
While the proposed budget supports myriad components of Maine's agricultural and natural resource 
economy, from farmland access and soil health to food insecurity, it does not address the demand for 
critical processing and manufacturing infrastructure. Developed with input from industry and additional 
stakeholders, and through the careful assessment conducted by the DACF with the Maine Department 
of Economic and Community Development, the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment 
Fund reflects outstanding need for capital to expand Maine's value chain. This need has been 
demonstrated through research and analysis and, most recently, by the inundation of the Maine DACF’s 
Jobs and Recovery Act Agriculture infrastructure investment Program with applications from over 800 
Maine food processors and manufacturers. 
Thank you for this opportunity to comment on the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry section of the biennial budget. While highlighting the need to support the Maine Agriculture, 
Food and Forest Products investment Fund, we highly recommend the committees vote to pass this 
section of the biennial budget. 
Sincerely, 
all/lill/ill/i/ ‘/i/'l~l€/s
l 
Amy Winston 
30 Pecler:-11 S11‘(ft‘.E Suite 100 Brunsv\-'ick, i\'Iaine 01.011 
2o7_504..59<;>0 877.3<i.<;>.Q64.9 Q<37.8S2.73<>8 www.Cei111'1i11a=:.01 ‘g 
-€|T‘i~1;EE-6-<k-Eig ﬁ
