 
 
 
125 Manley Road   •  Auburn, ME 04210  •  Phone: (207) 783 -9186  •  Fax: (207) 783 -5211  •  Web: www.avcog.org  
 
Testimony of the Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments in Support of  
the Community Resilience Partnership Program  
a part of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 
30, 2024, and June 30, 2025.  
 
February 1 3, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
Committee, and Senator Nangle , Repres entative Stover  and members of the State and Local 
Government Committee : I, Amy Landry, Executive Director of Androscoggin Valley Council of 
Governments (AVCOG), urge the full funding for Community Resilience Partnership Program, contained 
in the Gover nor’s biennial budget.  
 
Established in 1962, the Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments is a regional planning agency 
serving Western Maine communities in Androscoggin, Franklin, and No. Oxford Counties.  AVCOG is a 
not for profit, 501(c)(3) agency est ablished pursuant to MSRS Title 30 Section 2311 as a Council of 
Governments , exclusively owned,  and operated by member municipalities who join on a voluntary basis, 
AVCOG serves 51 municipalities and 3 counties. AVCOG is a leader in the coordination and de livery of 
regional planning and municipal services concentrated in four targeted areas: Economic Development, 
Land -Use Planning, Transportation Planning and Environmental Management.  
 
In 2022, AVCOG joined the Community Resilience Partnership and is a two-time recipient of the Service 
Provider Grant program and serves as the Regional Coordinator for Western Maine including AVCOG’s 
three counties, as well as the counties of Somerset and Kennebec. In February of 2022, AVCOG received 
its first service pr ovider grant for the towns of Carthage, Chesterville, Greenwood, and Jay to enroll in 
the partnership. AVCOG assisted these communities to successfully enroll which includes conducting a 
town self -evaluation, holding community engagement meeting s, and pass ing a resolution  for the 
Partnership . In addition, we assisted three of these towns in applying for their first Community Action 
Grant. The towns of Carthage, Greenwood, and Jay applied for and received funding for a variety of 
climate action projects. The  town of Cart hage received $36,940 to undertake a wide range of efficiency 
projects including upgrading the appliances in the food pantry and the emergency shelter , host ing a 
community energy fair, and build ing window inserts for 30 low -income households. Th e town of 
Greenwood received $28,649 to implement energy efficiency projects, host an energy fair in the 
community, insulate the community building, and will implement VRF systems in multiple municipal 
buildings . The town of Jay received $50,00 0 to insulate the roof of the town office.  
 
AVCOG also applied to assist five more communities including the towns of Eustis, Kingfield, Phillips, 
Rangeley and Wilton to enroll. Currently staff is in the process of assisting towns in the enrollment  
 
 
 
125 Manley Road   •  Auburn, ME 04210  •  Phone: (207) 783 -9186  •  Fax: (207) 783 -5211  •  Web: www.avcog.org  
 
process and will assist those communities that are ready to apply for a Community Action Grant (CAG) in 
March.  
 
As a Regional Coordinator we have focused on supporting towns and their service providers to fund and 
implement priority climate and energy pro jects that reduce emissions and address climate impacts. In 
the five -county region covered, there are 31 communities engaged in the partnership, with 20 
communities enrolled and eligible for CAGs. Of those enrolled 13, or 65% applied for and were awarded 
CAGs. Examples of those grants include solar installation on a municipal building; creating a resilience 
committee; heat pumps for municipal buildings in seven towns; roof insulation; EV charging; updating a 
watershed protection guide; creating greenspace; and building  window inserts.  
 
In addition, as regional coordinator we are helping to facilitate a series of winter webinars to showcase 
the work of our communities and service providers, which covers the basics of joining the partnership, 
share experience s from towns that have had funding for their projects, and host timely sessions with 
grant funding organizations to prepare towns for upcoming opportunities that align with other resilience 
tools. The goal is to bring together new and existing program participants to inspire and connect 
projects and grants, and help towns leverage the upcoming resiliency grant opportunities.  
 
All of these efforts are helping to build environmental, societal and en ergy resilience in communities 
throughout the region who otherwise would not have the resources and/or expertise to do so . The 
community resiliency initiatives can be large undertakings for communities, and many cannot 
successfully complete them  without adequate s upport  or funding .  
 
The funding contained in the Governor’s budget will enable AVCOG and the communities we serve to 
continue the work that has been started , implementing tangible actions that have immediate positive 
impact on individual communities, the region, and  the state as whole. With the full funding proposed we 
are confident that our municipalities will have the support they need to implement actions and policies 
that make meaningful progress toward climate resiliency. With increased opportunities for federal  
climate and  energy funding , these dollars are critical to help communities leverage those dollars to 
address climate impacts.  The Partnership will allow c ommunities to be prepared for these programs 
which give s them a tremendous opportunity  to invest in t heir infrastructure and disaster  resiliency . 
 
For all these reasons we urge you to vote in support of full funding for the Governor’s Office of Policy 
Innovation and the Future’s Community Resilience Partnership program. Thank you for the opportunity 
to te stify, please let me know if I can be of further assistance.                                  
     
 
