Amy Larkin
Arundel 
LD 258
Amy Jane Larkin
Arundel 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs and Labor and Housing: my name is Amy Larkin and I live in 
Arundel. 
I’m one of Maine’s many family caregivers. Five years ago, my husband and I moved
in with my grandmother Eva, who had been living alone since my mother passed 
away. Eva marked her 100th birthday last June and we so enjoyed celebrating her and
the incredible life she’s lived. Unfortunately, she fell getting ready for bed at 12:15 
a.m., just minutes after her birthday officially ended. She had broken her hip and 
needed surgery and rehabilitation. In our time living together, my grandmother has 
suffered various ailments and required extra care, like a broken wrist just weeks after 
I moved in or a series of mini-strokes after a change in medication. But nothing had 
prepared me for the time she would need from me last summer. She stayed at an acute
rehab hospital in Portland for 12 days where she learned to use a walker and move 
around on her healing hip. After that, she needed my help with everything. I had to be
there anytime she moved around the house, watching her and making sure she used 
her walker correctly. I applied ice packs, administered new pain medication, set her 
up with extra pillows in bed to keep her leg elevated, and led her through her 
exercises on the 5 days a week we didn’t see her physical therapist. Due to the 
staffing shortage, we weren’t able to access a CNA provided by Medicare, who would
have assisted with bathing and dressing. So, I learned from her occupational therapist 
and took these things on as well. 
The first month was a total blur and either my husband or I had to be home at all 
times. By mid-September, two and half months later, Eva was able to do most 
everything by herself thanks to a lot of hard work and determination. I am so 
fortunate that I work for myself so I didn’t have to ask for that time off. I’m an 
illustrator and it’s flexible work, but those were missed hours which means very little 
income and clients lost. Caregiving isn’t easy work, and it’s devastating to know you 
might struggle to pay your own health insurance while focusing on the wellbeing of 
someone you love. 
It’s my honor to care for my grandmother the way she helped care for me as a child. 
But it doesn’t have to be this hard. Like me, the majority of Mainers don’t have 
access to any extended paid leave benefits that allow them to care for themselves or 
loved ones when something big comes up. Something big ALWAYS comes up, for 
each and every one one of us. I urge you to set aside funds in the budget to cover the 
necessary start-up costs to make paid leave a reality for all Maine workers and their 
loved ones. Thank you so much for your time. 
