Ill"E Maine Equaljustice Andrea Steward Augusta, ME 04330-6822 Policy Advocate 'lTY/Voice: (207) 626-7058_ 
Fax: (207) 621-8148 People Policy solutions (ml 626'7°58.X236 
www.maineequaljusticeorg a5teward@me]p'°rg 
Testimony on behalf of Maine Equal Justice in Support of the Housing Sections of LD 258, ”An 
Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
' 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" 
February 9, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Senator Pierce, Representative Sachs, Representative Gere, 
distinguished members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the 
Special Committee on Housing l\/ly name is Andrea Steward, I use she/her pronouns, and I am 
a policy advocate at Maine Equal Justice. We are a civil legal services organization, and we 
work with and for people with low incomes seeking solutions to poverty through policy, 
education, and legal representation to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity 
for people in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 258. 
Maine Equal Justice is testifying in support of the allocation of funds set forth in line 0442 in the 
amount of $30M to provide one-time funding to l\/laine State Housing for the Rural Affordable 
Rental Housing Program and the Low-income Housing Tax Credit Program. 
WHY MAlNE EQUAL JUSTICE SUPPORTS THE FUNDING PROPOSAL SET FORTH AT LINE 0442 
This Funding is One of the Needed Steps Required to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Gap 
Lack of Affordable Housing Units 
Home is where opportunity begins; to learn, work, and build a life. No matter our race, gender, 
or income we all want to need a roof over our heads. According to MaineHousing's 2020 annual 
report, Maine needs about 25,000 more affordable housing units to respond effectively to this 
lack.1 Maine has the oldest housing stock in the country and new development has not kept up
1 
http s;[/bangordailynewscom/2021/OZ/26/news/the-pandemic;made-maines-affordable-housig_g;problem-worsel 
#:~:text=Maine%20needs%20about%2025%2C000%20more,to%20MaineHousing ‘s%202020%20annual%20report.
with the demand. The funding set forth in line 0442 is necessary to begin building homes so 
every person in Maine has a safe and affordable home. 
Other Housing Needs 
While l\/laine Equal Justice is in support of the allocation of these funds, we would be remiss if 
we did not mention that those most in need still cannot afford a Low-Income Tax Credit (LIHTC) 
or Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program unit if it is not subsidized. Even if the housing 
supply outpaces the demand, this will never drive down rental prices enough to be affordable 
for many of our low-income neighbors. This is not due to an unwillingness of landlords. It is 
because of the ﬁxed rates they are beholden to in their mortgages, and that wages have not 
kept up with the increasing rents. To get to the root of the complex housing problems before us 
we must address all aspects of the challenge with a multi prong approach, including availability, 
affordability, eviction prevention, discrimination and enforcement, and support services. 
Affordability 
Even before the pandemic, Maine's rental housing market was among the least affordable in the 
nation, and our state has not done enough to protect people who are being priced out oftheir 
homes. Nearly 60% of extremely low-income households pay more than 50% of their monthly 
income towards rent, a threshold which HUD deems severely rent burdened. The end of federal 
emergency rental assistance has left many Mainers without help or affordable options. These 
families continuously face the threat of eviction for non~payment. Finding affordable housing 
has become so difﬁcult, many Mainers become homeless because they simply cannot find an 
apartment that meets their budget. Once they become unhoused, Mainers’ lives become 
immensely more challenging and the impacts to their economic security are often long~last1' ng. 
ln addition to the creation of more housing it is necessary to create a rental assistance program 
to make the housing actually affordable to Maine's most vulnerable residents. 
Discrimination 
The lack of affordable housing is a racial equity issue as well. In Maine as in the rest of the 
country, people of color are disproportionately harmed due to the lack of affordable housing. 
According to Pine Tree Legal Assistance, between 2017 and 2019, 12% of households they 
represented in eviction court were non-white, though less than 6% of Maine's population is 
non-white. Signiﬁcantly, according to a study conducted by the Maine State Housing Authority 
in 2022, 34% of Maine's homeless population is Black or African American even though they 
make up less than 2% of l\/laine ’s population?
2 
https://www.mainehousing.org/docs/default-source/housing-reports/2022-point-in-time-survey---statewide.pdf?sf 
vrsn=laa6861S_7#:"':text=Note%3A%2OThe%20PlT%20reported%203%2C455,110%20in%20domestic%20violence
In Maine, the joint Section 8 waiting list which covers most of the state has over 15,000 
households on it. These families will wait years for needed assistance. But even when these 
families do get vouchers, many will still struggle to ﬁnd safe, affordable housing. T00 often, 
tenants face the unfair stigma that comes with participation in rental assistance programs. 
Maine must enact protections to prohibit discrimination based on low-income tenants’ 
participation in rental assistance programs. 
Tenant Protections 
Rising evictions are devastating families ’ ﬁnances, uprooting kids, causing job loss and stress, 
and increasing hunger and homelessness. Many of these evictions are for ”no cause." It is 
deeply unfair that these families and individuals should lose their home and risk becoming 
homeless if they have not done anything wrong. Finding affordable housing in Maine has 
become so difficult that many Mainers become homeless simply because they cannot ﬁnd an 
apartment that meets their budget.E 
When a tenant gets a 30 day no—cause eviction notice, they are put in the impossible position of 
ﬁnding a new apartment and moving with only 30 days’ notice, or risk going to eviction court 
and being forcibly removed from their home. 
Eviction ——or the forcible removal of a family from their home—is often a traumatic and highly 
consequential event, especially for low-income families. The Eviction s 
Lab at Princeton 
University, a leading team of researchers working to highlight the prevalence, causes, and 
consequences of evictions nationwide, describes the fallout of eviction this way: 
Eviction causes a family to lose their home. They often are also expelled from their 
community and their children have to switch schools. Families regularly lose their 
possessions, too, which are piled on the sidewalk or placed in storage, only to be 
reclaimed after paying a fee. A legal eviction comes with a court record, which can 
prevent families from relocating to decent housing in a safe neighborhood, because 
many landlords screen for recent evictions. Studies also show that eviction causes job 
loss, as the stressful and drawn-out process of being forcibly expelled from a home 
causes people to make mistakes at work and lose theirjob. Eviction also has been shown 
to affect people's mental health: one study found that mothers who experienced 
eviction reported higher rates of depression two years after their move. The evidence 
strongly indicates that eviction is not just a condition of poverty, it is a cause of it. 
%20shelters.&text=%E2%80%9COutside%20Maine%E2%80%9 D%20regions%20de ﬁned%20by%20the%20U.S.%20C 
ensus.
Clearly, eviction causes ﬁnancial losses to families who often lose their possessions and lose 
their jobs when they're forced from their homes and communities? It also causes enormous 
personal trauma with signiﬁcant repercussions to economic and personal well-being. Research 
in the wake of the foreclosure crisis has tracked how housing instability negatively inﬂuences 
adult and children's physical and mental well-being including increasing the risk of depression in 
mothers. “ Eviction also increases suicide and anxiety.5 For children, it results in emotional and 
educational decline? 
People who have been evicted go on to be shadowed by an eviction judgment on their record 
and damaged credit that prevents them from moving forward and rebuilding their ﬁnances. 
Evidence shows that many housing providers screen prospective tenants out of the application 
process based on the existence of an eviction ﬁling in a tenant's name, regardless of the basis or 
the legal outcome.7 As a result, families who have been evicted are often forced into poorer 
neighborhoods and substandard housing. 
No tenant in Maine should have to suffer these consequences. But it is especially unfair to 
tenants whose landlords evict them with 30 days’ notice without cause. Though these tenants 
have done nothing wrong except fail the impossible task of ﬁnding a new home and moving 
within 30 days, they can suffer devastating ﬁnancial and health fallout from eviction and be 
barred from future housing opportunities. 
All the evidence shows that Mainers’ health and well-being starts with having a stable home 
and the opportunities that come with it. Maine should prevent all unnecessary evictions to 
ensure housing stability for Mainers. 
Maine Must Take Steps to Address Changes in Maine's Real Estate Market Resulting from the 
Pandemic 
The pandemic has pushed Maine's housing affordability problems to a tipping point. 
While Maine's low-income tenants have been suffering in the recession and the pandemic, 
business has been booming in Maine's real estate market. Throughout the pandemic, property 
values have increased in every county across the State. The Maine Association of Realtors 
reported a 22% increase in median sales price between Fall 2019 and Fall 2020, with a 27% 
3 
Matthew Desmond & Carl Gershenson, Housing and Employment Insecurity Among the Working Poor, 63 Soc. 
Prob. 46, 46 (2016). 
4 
Matthew Desmond et al., Eviction's Fallout: Housing, Hardship, and Health, 94 Social Forces 295, 300-301 (2015). 
5 
Yerko Rojas & Sten-Ake Stenberg, Evictions and Suicide: A Follow-Up Study Of Almost 22,000 Swedish Households 
In The Wake Of The Global Financial Crisis, 70 J. of Epidemiology & Comm. Health 409 (2016). 
6 
See Matthew Desmond, Unaffordable America: Poverty, Housing, and Eviction, U. Of Wis.: Inst. For Res. On 
Poverty (Mar. 2015), https://www.irp.wisc.edu/publica ﬁons/fastfocus/pdfs/FF22-2015.pdf. 
7 
Matthew Desmond & Monica Bell, Housing, Poverty, and the Law, 11 Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 15 (2015); Paula A. 
Franzese, A Place to Call Home: Tenant Blacklisting and the Denial of Opportunity, 45 Fordham Urb. L.J. 661 (2018).
increase in the number of units sold.8 Gains are expected to continue, fueled in part by 
out-of-state buyers moving to Maine? 
Despite the prospering real estate market, many of our community members are struggling to 
stay in their homes and we must consider strategies to fund needed housing programs. While 
MEJ testified on tax provisions in the budget yesterday, we wanted to include a suggestion 
today that directly ties to housing. Even a modest rate increase in the Real Estate Transfer Tax 
("RETT") will go a long way to fund programs to aid low-income renters, and it will do so 
without harming Maine’s real estate market and without requiring the use of general revenue 
funds. Increasing the RETT rates to raise revenue for a rental assistance program can capture 
some of this growth without harming the real estate market. And it is an equitable way to 
ensure our State is not leaving anyone behind. To have the biggest impact for Maine renters, the 
increased revenue should be designated for rental assistance. 
While so many people are buying new l\/laine homes, many Mainers are struggling to stay in 
theirs. Increasing property values are linked to gentriﬁcation. Gentriﬁcation is a process which 
displaces low-income community members, usually renters, when more afﬂuent people move 
in. Gentriﬁcation is spurred by speculation in the real estate market which incentivizes landlords 
to raise rents and/or evict tenants to pursue higher-end development. This is occurring not only 
in Maine's cities, but also in rural parts of the State.“ 
CONCLUSION 
As I have mentioned, there are other crucial steps needed to address our housing crisis, and we 
will be talking more with your committees about critical legislation, including LR 833, ”An Act to 
Enact the Housing Opportunity for |\/laine Act (The HOME Act). The proposed funding contained 
in the biennial budget is also a key step to providing l\/laine's most vulnerable residents witha 
chance to have a warm and safe place to call home. 
While this bill is not the answer to everything, it is one of the critical ﬁrst steps in ensuring at 
least a fraction of housing security for our State's most vulnerable residents. 
8 
See Glenn Jordan, lkfaine Home Sales Continue to Break Records Despite Pandemic, Portland Press 
Herald (Dec. 22, 2020), 
https:[/www.pressherald.com/2020/12/22/maine-home-sales-continue-to-break-records-despite~nande 
_nE[; Maine Association of Realtors, State of Maine Single Family Home Sales, 
https:ﬂwww.mainerealtors.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/StateofMaine2OData.pdf (last updated 
Dec. 31, 2020). 
9Ial. 
‘° See University of Maine School of Marine Sciences, Fishing Comniunities Need to Prepare For 
Gentrification Challenges (Aug. 23, 2016), 
https:[/umaine.edu/marine/2016/O8/23/ ﬁshing-communities-need-prepa re-gentri ﬁcation-challenges-sa 
y-umaine-researchers-21; Megan Mayhew Bergman, ‘We Have N0 Market But Lots of Lobsters A Maine 
Lobsterwoman Fights F or Her Livelihood, The Guardian (July 23, 2020), 
https:Uwww.theguardian.com/environment/2020[jul/23/maine-lobsterwoman-coronavirus-climate-cha 
_|1g§.-
