Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee,
I am submitting testimony for LD 258 in support of the appropriation in the Governor's Budget 
to the Nutrition Incentive Fund. It is my understanding that this is a one-time allocation and 
while I applaud the inclusion into the Governor’s Budget, I am also urging consideration to 
make this allocation continuous. The $600,000 allocation will provide needed support for 
important farmers market programs across Maine and solidify nutrition-based programs like 
the Maine Harvest Bucks, matching SNAP dollars with vouchers for fresh fruits and vegetables. 
I am a board member and vendor at the Houlton Community Market and have been involved in 
the market since it began in 2009. In 2016, with grant funding through the Maine Federation of 
Farmers Markets (MFFM), Houlton Community Market began accepting SNAP benefits and 
participating in a corresponding grant program for Maine Harvest Bucks (MHB). Since then, the 
market has expanded its customer base within the community and both programs grow each 
year. For a general comparison, in 2019 Houlton Community Market had $2,557 in SNAP sales 
and $2,279 MHB vouchers redeemed. 2022 saw $6,049 in SNAP sales and $4,465 vouchers 
redeemed. This valuable program not only provides fresh and local produce to those members 
of our community who are in need but also supports the market gardeners and bakers at the 
market, strengthening the market as a whole. MFFM has been supportive of this program in 
Houlton and has been creative in finding ways to assist the market in paying for a staffed 
information booth, which provides a central location for any customer to go to for information 
or card processing. Houlton Community Market also combines nutrition education activities 
that are targeted to children, establishing a connection between farmers markets and fresh 
produce from an early age. More importantly, going to a farmers market tends to be a family 
affair and relationships are built between vendor and customer - whether that is a senior, 
young parent or child. Past surveys at Houlton Community Market have indicated SNAP 
shoppers who would not be able to purchase at the farmers market, or would have to reduce 
those purchases, without SNAP and MHB programs. As a vendor who is at the Houlton 
Community Market each Saturday during the summer and fall months, I’ve gotten to know 
many of our SNAP customers and know that each of their stories are different. Many families 
who began coming to market using their SNAP benefits are now in a position that they are no 
longer in the program while others, many of them seniors, rely on the program each year. I 
cannot stress how valuable the SNAP and MHB programs are to Houlton Community Market 
and the Southern Aroostook community, and it is my hope that the committee will incorporate 
the funding into the budget and also make it continuous funding. In a time of division over so 
many issues, this is a program that really brings a community together with one thing in 
common: spending a Saturday morning shopping at the local farmers market. 
Angela Wotton Houlton Community Market 
