l§2tilllall§tZZe§30_6822 An" Danfmth 
TIY/Voice: (207) 626-7058 (207) ';‘;';°_l;Qgg";°2i ‘1‘§ 
Fax‘ ‘2°7)621'8 “‘8 People Policy Solutions adanforth@mejp.org www.me3p.org 
Testimony on Behalf of Maine Equal Justice in support of the taxation section of LD 258, An Act Making 
Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures 
of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations 
of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
February 8, 2023 
Good morning Senator Rotundo, Senator Grohoski, Representative Sachs, Representative Perry, and 
members ofthe Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Taxation Committees. My name is Ann Danforth 
and I use she/her pronouns. I'm a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of the tax-related portions of LD 258. 
Families in Maine are struggling 
l\/laine Equal Justice has seen ﬁrst-hand that families across the state, and in particular, families with low 
income, are still suffering from the economic impacts of the pandemic. According to the most recent 
Census data, more than 1 in 10 (11.5%) Mainers were in poverty in 20211 —that is, a family of four living 
below $27,479 annually. ’ That's a little over $500 a week. 
Record high inﬂation coupled with high energy costs,a pre-existing and worsening housing crisis, rising 
food costs coupled with the imminent loss of SNAP emergency allotments, and and the upcoming 
unwinding of continuous enrollment for MaineCare members are huge factors stretching Maine families 
and their budgets?4 
State relief measures can help address unmet needs 
Relief provided by the federal and state governments over the past years delivered through the tax 
system — including the Child Tax Credit payments, the state $850 and $450 relief payments — have shown 
us the positive impact of targeted, direct relief to Mainers. As Maine Equal Justice has worked with 
partners to ensure families across the state receive their federal Child Tax Credit and state relief 
‘ https1//datacensus.govItable?q=poverty+maine&tid=ACSST1Y2021.S1701 
2 https1//www.census.govlcontent/dam/Census/Iibrary/publications/2022/demo/p60-277.pdf 
°https://www.newscentermaine.comlarticle/money/business/maine-daily-cost-of-in ﬂation-gas-stations-coffee-shops-gr 
ocery-stores-greenhouses-during-covid19-pandemic-ukraine-war/97-d2e93f51-49b7-4d50-b4e2-8c2bfOb2677b 
4 https1//www.mainepublicorglbusiness-and-economy/202211-29/maine-heating-oil-prices-dip-from-record-highs
payments, we have heard many stories about how these direct payments have helped struggling families 
stay on their feet. 
With the expiration of the enhanced federal Child Tax Credit (or CTC), Maine has an opportunity to 
improve our own state CTC through legislation this session — LR 1661, An Act to improve Economic 
Security for Maine Children by Establishing the Maine Child Tax Credit (Rep. Terry). As this committee 
makes decisions about tax provisions in the budget, we encourage you to consider the CTC and the ways 
it would reduce child poverty; strengthen our current and future workforce; and boost our economy, 
reaping a high return on investment for the state. Data on the CTC highlight the positive impacts ofthis 
smart, targeted policy that will help meet some of the unmet needs of low-income l\/lainers: 
0 The 2021 expanded federal CTC cut Maine's child poverty rate nearly in half while it was in effect. 
0 Investing in children in low~income families by expanding programs like the Child Tax Credit has been 
shown to improve outcomes for those children over their whole lives, including higher educational 
attainment, better health, and higher earnings as adults.5 The expanded federal CTC has an 
estimated 1,000% return on investment per year (roughly $10 for each dollar spent), pointing to 
the downstream benefits of investing in children through the CTC.“ 
0 The CTC allows people to afford things like child care so they can work, take care of their family, 
and do their part to keep growing our economy. 
0 Families used the CTC payments to cover basic expenses, such as food, utilities, rent, and diapers.7 
The CTC helps ease the burden of inﬂation, wage stagnation and rising housing costs, which are 
limiting families ’ abilities to pay for these basic necessities. 
A state-level CTC would build on the proven effective federal policy, providing beneﬁts to our economy 
and targeted ongoing relief to Maine families of low and moderate incomes. It would further Maine's 
economic goals while investing in and helping to bring families with young children to the state. 
A targeted CTC is a smart and equitable investment in Maine's future. We urge you to focus on targeted 
solutions like the CTC rather than an across-the~board tax cut. We also recognize that there will be 
discussion around the Property Tax Stabilization Fund. While we are not prepared to speak today to the 
best path forward for that program, we do believe there are ways to better target property tax relief to 
the households who most need it. Targeted tax credits can reduce rather than exacerbate income 
inequities in our state. 
Conclusion 
We appreciate the opportunity to submit testimony on LD 258. l look forward to talking with you in the 
coming weeks about our state-level CTC bill and how it would beneﬁt our state's families and economy 
now and into the future. 
5 
https://www.cbpp.org/bloglmany —states-are-creating-or-expanding-tax-credits-to-help-families-afford-the-basics 
6 This is based on an analysis of making the enhanced federal CTC permanent and comparing the cost to generated 
social benefits: Researchers at the Center on Poverty and Social Policy at Columbia University predict thata 
permanently expanded credit would cost taxpayers $97 billion per year but generate “social beneﬁts" with a value of 
$929 billion via future earnings and tax contributions, decreased infant mortality and other negative health outcomes, 
and reductions in child protection and law enforcement involvement. 
‘ntips:!§w~am;_oovenvcenter.columbiaeduinews-internali202ifchlid-allowanceicosi-bene ﬁtanalysis 
7 https://www.mecep.orglbloglmecep-report-shows-the-child-tax-credit-made-a-tangible-difference-for-maine-familiesl
