Testimony of Anna Korsen, Full Plates Full Potential
In Support of LD 258
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Education and 
Cultural Affairs. My name is Anna Korsen, Advocacy and Implementation Director with Full Plates Full 
Potential, a statewide non-profit working to address childhood food insecurity by providing technical 
and financial assistance to schools and communities to help feed kids now, while advocating for the 
systemic changes necessary to ensure that all Maine children have consistent access to nutritious 
meals. Our strategy is to maximize access to USDA Child Nutrition Programs - commonly known as 
school lunch, school breakfast, afterschool meals, and summer meals.
Today, we’re submitting testimony in support of LD 258. We want to thank Governor Mills for her 
commitment to Maine’s children in her budget proposal and the important investment to feed every 
child at school. 
Thanks to the leadership of Governor Mills and Senate President Jackson, and the broad bipartisan 
support of the 130th Legislature, Maine made history last session by becoming one of the first states in 
the nation to pass a law to permanently provide school meals at no cost to all students. This proposed 
budget continues that commitment to Maine’s future.
Maine has the highest rate of childhood food insecurity in New England, with 1 in 6 kids lacking 
consistent access to nutrition.  For many students, school meals are the only reliable source of food and 
the most nutritious meals they receive.  However, prior to Maine’s policy to give every child access to 
school breakfast and lunch at no cost, school meals were the only part of the school day that some kids 
were expected to pay for. Charging for a meal at school meant that many children didn’t eat due to 
stigma, restrictive income guidelines and unnecessary bureaucracy. 
We know that a hungry child can’t learn, and studies show that school meals enhance child 
development and school readiness and support learning, attendance, and behavior.  School meals also 
provide critical nutrition for developing children.  A recent study found that school meals are the 
healthiest meals that many children have. Additionally, they improve child health and wellness.  
Providing school meals for all children at no cost helps to advance equity in our schools and supports 
food access for Black, Indigenous and students of color who experience food insecurity at much higher 
rates than their white peers.  And ultimately, childhood food insecurity results in high costs to society so 
investing in School Meals for All makes fiscal sense. 
Maine’s historic School Meals for All policy is already having a positive  impact on Maine students and 
schools. Preliminary numbers from the Maine Department of Education show an increase in school meal 
participation compared to the pre-Covid fall of 2019. So far this school year, the number of total 
students eating lunch everyday has increased by 16% and the total number of students eating breakfast 
everyday has increased by 23%.  This demonstrates that the stigma surrounding participation in school 
meals is beginning to go away. We’re also hearing reports from some schools that more students with 
full bellies has caused a reduction in hunger related visits to the school nurse and fewer behavior 
disruptions in classrooms.
Alongside California and Colorado, Maine is leading the nation by ensuring that no child goes hungry at 
school ever again, and the momentum is picking up across the country.  At least 24 other states are 
working on similar legislation.  We continue to advocate for the expansion of federally funded free 
school meals, but until that happens Maine’s investment in School Meals for All kids is critical.  States 
will need to lead the way and demonstrate to Congress and the USDA that School Meals for All should 
become a permanent federal policy.
We thank you for your continued support of this important policy, and urge the committee to pass this 
budget with the inclusion of $55 million in funding for School Meals for All.  Thank you for your time and 
consideration.
Anna Korsen
akorsen@fullplates.org
207.653.6301
 
