Testimo ny, LD 258  
February 9, 2023  
Anne B. Gass  
 
Good afternoon  Chair Rotundo, Chair Sachs,  Chair Pierce  and Chair Gere, and distinguished members 
of the AFA and Housing Committee s.   
I am writing to support LD 258 , and in particula r a proposed $30 million appropriation for affordable 
housing.  
Further, I am requesting that funding be set aside for use by Maine community land trusts (CLT) and 
housing trusts (HT).  
CLTs/ HTs have existed in Maine since the 1970s. The y are nonprofits that remove land from the 
speculative real estate market, and provide housing owners with a 99 -year, inheritable ground lease.   
 
There is growi ng interest in this model because it creates permanent affordable housing, most often 
for homeownership but it can also be used for rental.  This can be thought of as “attainable ” housing, a 
midway  point between rental and conventional homeownership. It provides almost all of the 
advantages of conventional homeownership, except that there are restrictions on re sale and on equity 
appreciation. Still, nationally, a bout 60 % of CLT/HT homeowners are able to save sufficient  funds to 
buy into the conventional real e state market.  
 
While I unequivocally support efforts to incr ease affordable rental housing in  Maine there are many 
working people who are priced out of the curre nt real estate market, and there simply isn't enough 
public subsidy to help them.   
 
With public subsidy growing ever scarcer, CLTs/HTs are the most efficient way to ensure that subsidies 
are used to benefit not just a lucky few, but many people over ti me.  
 
Maine's CLTs/HTs are looking for recognition of the validity and necessity of this model as one tool in 
the affordable housing "toolbox" of programs, and for operating and development resources.   
 
To strengthen their capacity, Maine's CLTs/HT s have begun working together to form a statewide 
entity  to provide resources and technical assistance to new and existing organizations.   
 
As you consider uses of the $30 million in housing assistance under discussion today, we request that 
CLTs/HTs b e included as eligible applicants , or that you appro priate addit ional funding to support the 
CLT/HT providers in Maine.  
 
Thank  you for your attention.  
 
