2/28/23
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs; Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plueker and members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee,
My name is Annie Watson. I am here today speaking on behalf of the Maine Dairy Industry 
Association, of which I currently serve as President, and as a first-generation dairy farmer, myself.
 My husband and I co-own and operate Sheepscot Valley Farm, an organic dairy milking 65 
Holsteins and shipping to Organic Valley. We purchased our farm in 2013 from a retiring dairy farmer, 
and we have made major capital investments into the infrastructure and equipment on our farm in the 
last ten years, in order to become more efficient and sustainable. While the farm has seen many 
changes in those ten years, the most unsettling change has been to the market. 
The organic milk market was once considered a strong market for small farms, with a stable, 
sustainable pay price, but that is no longer the case. The organic dairies in our state are up against a rock 
and a hard place, many are facing the end of their farm businesses, as we weigh the financial 
implications of the last year. Rising costs of feed, energy, labor and interest, while the price to the farm 
has stayed well below the cost of production, have left many of us without any sort of safety net. What 
little savings some of us had, has been used to help support our farm during this time of record high 
inflation and skyrocketing costs. Many of us are at the end of the road. This is not an issue that has only 
impacted the organic dairies in our state, our conventional neighbors are facing this crisis, as well. In 
January of 2022, we had 180 dairy farms in the state, today, that number is down to 161. In 2022 we lost 
20 farms in our state, 6 organic and 14 conventional. In January of 2023, we lost 4 farms, today we are 
faced with the reality that several others on the brink of selling out. 
I appreciate the time many of you gave myself and my colleagues during the Supplemental 
Budget discussion, and the funds that were allocated to the Milk Commission for the Cost of Production 
Study are very much appreciated. The Study is an important tool to understand the true cost of 
producing the top quality milk Maine is known for. In this moment in time, however, our farms are in 
crisis and need a lifeline. Yes, some would say it is only a band-aid, but a band-aid is used to help stop 
the bleeding. That is what our dairy farms need now, if we are going to continue to offer the economic 
stimulus our farms provide, not only for our agricultural community, but for all of those whose jobs rely 
on our industry- three processing plants in our state, our veterinarians, feed mills, milk supply 
companies, and every small business in between that our dairy farms support, plumbers, carpenters, 
welders, mechanics, and more. 
When we talk about our dairy farms, we aren’t just talking about our own farm families, we are  
talking about the greater agricultural economy within our state. Any investment made into our farms is 
an investment into our rural economy, and I think we all understand how important our rural economy 
and communities are to our state. 
Thank you for your time today, and I welcome any questions.
