Hello, I am writing to you today on my own time with concern regarding rising fuel costs, electricity, and 
the general cost of living. I currently work for the Maine Department of Transportation out of Presque 
Isle. 
 
Every day expenses have been rapidly increasing for everyone these days. The burden of increased cost 
weighs heavily on already significantly underpaid state employees. Some states and special groups have 
received several forms of payments due to covid issues and increases in living e xpenses. Several 
municipal organizations have distributed bonuses for workers who continued to do their jobs during the 
covid pandemic. To date I have not heard any mention of the governor issuing payments to state 
employees for their continued service dur ing the covid pandemic. A 4% raise during 2022 was like 
offering someone who is drowning a glass of water. Other positions within the department of 
transportation include stipends to keep those roles filled. We need a significant increase in 
compensation, or a stipend immediately.  
 
 
Many hundreds of employees in my bargaining unit travel with our personal vehicles to projects that we 
are assigned to. It isn’t a choice, it is required as part of the job. The mileage reimbursement is currently 
at 45 cents per  mile, well below the industry standard. Fuel costs since last summer have already more 
than doubled, and some folks including myself have over 130+ mile daily commutes (Aroostook County). 
Overnight and daily per diems are suddenly laughable, when folks wh o are travelling now have to pay 
1.5 to 2 times as much for a meal than a year or two ago. Paying more than double fuel costs to travel to 
jobsites that we are required to be at, with our own vehicles that cost twice as much to operate, to work 
a position that is already significantly underpaid in comparison to private sector alternatives is a slap in 
the face to us, and a recipe for disaster for infrastructure in Maine. Things are getting crazy and anything 
less than a significant increase in pay as well a s addressing the mileage reimbursement amount to at 
least meet the current federal standard of 62.5 cents per mile will be un -acceptable and I believe will 
truly be the end of many employees time with the State of Maine. We have people leaving the 
departme nt to work for consultants who are then just hired back by the state at a much higher cost. In 
the end, people who pay taxes in Maine are the ones who suffer when we leave to go work for 
consultants at $30 -40 per hour, and the state pays the consulting fir m over $100 per hour to have the 
same people on our projects.  
 
 
Most of us spent several years in college and worked for several years in the field learning our trades. 
Just in our office in Presque Isle alone we have 2 vacant assistant technician position s. These “entry 
level” jobs require 3 years of experience in civil engineering or a closely related field OR a degree in 
engineering! The starting pay is $16.20  per hour! An oversight in my position could cost the state 
SEVERAL MILLION DOLLARS. An oversight at McDonalds could result in having to make a 3$ 
cheeseburger a second time. These vacant positions have been advertised and no hires occurred as a 
result of their advertisement. This is a direct result of the pay offered, and nothing else. The last round 
of hiring resulted in one individual interviewed, who was significantly under -qualified for the position. 
These technical positions will not be filled if some thing does not happen soon to end this lack of fair 
compensation. Lowering the requirements of the positions will result in inadequate personnel filling the 
positions, which will cost the state money in repairs due to their lack of knowledge, and not filli ng the 
positions will cost the state money in costs paid to PRIVATE SECTOR CONSULTING FIRMS that are hired 
to do THE SAME ROLES as we do, for 3 -5 times the cost. Some folks in the Maintenance and Operations 
sector (Transportation Operations Manager positio ns) receive double the pay that technicians receive. 
The requirements to be a TOM? 6 -8 years of experience driving a plow truck. The requirement to be a 
Technician? 5 years of experience in civil engineering, or a bachelors degree in engineering. Those of us 
in this role see over and over again people in that position screw up their jobs - costing the state money, 
and several times those of us in the technician series have to come up with a solution to repair their 
errors and teach their people how to do th e job correctly and fix their mistakes. These people drive state 
vehicles, from their houses, and the state pays for their fuel. Entry level plow drivers that are hired at 
the State of Maine come in with no CDL often times, receive free training for their CDL and are offered 
$18.31  hourly starting pay. Even they then leave to go work for private companies where they also 
receive 20 -30% more money to do the same job. Things like this are infuriating and can only be made 
right with fair compensation. The gene ral economic status, as well as the already existing pay gap for 
our series leaves myself and many others wondering how much longer we can AFFORD to work for the 
department, which for myself and many others is a job that we do truly care about and enjoy.  Not 
staffing transportation workers results in immediate changes that will be obvious such as roads not 
being plowed, patching not being done, etc. The technicians and engineering staff are the ones that 
deliver large scale infrastructure improvement projec ts, lack of staffing on our end will be a leave a 
much longer lasting and more painful void that taxpayers and visitors who travel on Maine roads will 
feel.  
 
What is being done to improve the employment conditions for those of us in the professional/techni cal 
bargaining unit, specifically the technician series? What is being done to address the mileage rate in this 
atmosphere of astronomical fuel and vehicle costs? What is being done to keep hard working folks like 
myself from leaving the state and taking o ur skills to private opportunities that will result in 30 -50% 
compensation increases? This cannot wait. How many more studies need to be performed before we 
can fix the real problem? Workers stay at their place of employment when they feel that they are fa irly 
compensated for their work. It really is that simple.  
 
