   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony on LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from 
the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025.”     
   
February 2 2, 2023   
Arthur Phillips, Economic Policy Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Policy    
   
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Jo int 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Baldacci, 
Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services. My name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economi c Policy.   
  
I am here to voice support for the Governor’s budget proposal regarding services for  older 
Maine residents , and to urge you to make far deeper investments to ensure people across 
out state have the resources they need to live healthy , dignified  lives.  
 
The Governor’s proposal  includes  wise  investments in Meals on Wheels and Area Agencies 
on Aging, rate increases for adult d ay programs, funds to implement parts of the Elder 
Justice Roadmap, and increased funding to ensure nursing home workers  are getting paid 
at least 125% of the minimum wage.  These are a few examples of how this budget 
recognizes the need to invest in  supports for older Mainers.  
 
However, we must highlight how much more work the re is to do. As we all know, there is a 
chronic under -supply of direct care workers to provide supports and services to older 
Mainers  and people with disabilities. While the causes are myriad, low pay and 
reimbursement rates for direct care are the fundame ntal source s. 
 
The impact of undervaluing care work is , of course, felt most directly by care workers 
themselves and the clients they serve . Workers struggle to piece together manageable 
schedules and sufficient income, while clients struggle to access qua lity care and maintain 
it in the face of high turnover rates. But these dynamics  reverberate throughout our  entire  
economy , as the impossible task of juggling work and care responsibilities pulls people 
away from work  they would otherwise choose to continue pursuing. The employment 
impacts harm families, employers, the broader health care sector, the State’s revenue base, 
and our overall economic prosperity.  Next month, the Maine Center for Economic Policy 
 
   
 will release a report that will illustrate the enormous cost s of undervaluing our direct care 
workers, which we would be glad to  share with you.  
 
We hope legislators this se ssion  will build on the Governor’s proposals by pursuing  
initiatives to enhance the  value we place on direct care work , and to provide  older 
residents with the resources they need to live with dignity. Doing so will have critical, far -
reaching impacts not only on those workers and their clients, but on families, other 
workers, employers, and our state’s long -term economic vitality.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions.  
