Testimony of Barbara Kerr Hamilton (University of Maine Class of 1982), 
Senior Director of Corporate Technology, Packaging Corporation of America, 
ln Support of Funding for the University of Maine System as Proposed in LD 258 
February 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Senator Rotundo, Representative Brennan, Representative 
Sachs, and the esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and Education and Cultural Affairs, my name 
is Barbara Kerr Hamilton, and I am a Sr. Director of Corporate Technology for 
Packaging Corporation of America and a 1982 graduate of the University of 
Maine. I am here today to speak in strong support of the investment proposed in 
Gov. Mills’ biennial budget (LD 258) for our public universities and Maine talent 
development and innovation for the future. 
PCA is the 3"’ largest producer of containerboard and corrugated products in the 
United States. We look to UMaine for both technical talent and primary research. 
Many members of our senior leadership team, of which lam a part, graduated 
from the University of Maine. PCA has donated generously to UMaine — over $2M 
in the past few years alone ~— to both the Ferland Engineering Education and 
Design Center and the UMaine Pulp and Paper Foundation. 
The executive management of PCA is impressed with the University of Maine 
because there is an emphasis on experiential learning. Mainestudents can 
participate in research, development, and scaling of technology. They can work as 
interns at industrial facilities between semesters. PCA needs that kind of talent, 
people who are ready to innovate, to do impossible things in what many outsiders 
see as an "old" industry. 
The collaboration between the University of Maine and the Pulp and Paper 
Industry is more than a partnership — it is a community. And I have been a very 
passionate member of that community for over 40 years. 
My late parents, John and Joan Kerr of Oakland, were both graduates of William's 
High School. My dad went on to obtain an associate degree in automotive 
technology from what was then Southern Maine Vocational Technical Institute. 
My mom, despite being the 1956 class valedictorian, did not continue past a high 
school diploma. There were no resources to support her secondary education, 
neither internally nor externally.
When I was a senior at Messalonskee High School, I was offered a full tuition 
scholarship to study engineering at the University of Maine. I was the first person 
in my family — but by no means the last —- to graduate with a four—year degree. I 
have enjoyed an amazing career that has included working for paper producers, a 
l\/laine based engineering company, and three multi-national manufacturers. I 
appear here beforeyou today as a testament to the impact of this university and 
that amazing community. 
The governor's proposed funding is an opportunity to keep this story going. The 
rural areas of this state have amazing individuals with incredible experiences— 
and I want those folks, high school students and non-traditional students alike, to 
know that the University of l\/laine system has a pathway for them to grow, to 
thrive, and to contribute. No mind should be left behind in the state of Maine. 
We need to keep tuition affordable and primary research accessible to tap into 
this incredible pool of talent. 
If you are looking for an investment in the l\/laine economy that will pay dividends 
for years to come, this is it. 
Barbara Kerr Hamilton is a senior director of process technology at Packaging Corporation of 
America (PCA), a corrugated packaging company that is headquartered in Illinois and employs 
more than 15,000 people. Barbara lives in Maine and travels to PCA mills to support automation 
and process control projects. She has experience as an engineer, manager, and leader in the 
industrial automation and energy space. In her current role, she leads PCA’s corporate 
automation and controls experts, promoting new technologies and optimization. Barbara retains 
deep ties to the University of Maine, her alma mater, and is a past chair of the UMaine Pulp and 
Paper Foundation Board of Directors and a current member of the UMPPF's executive 
committee. She also serves on the UMaine Board of Visitors.
