 
Children’s Oral Health Network | Becca Matusovich | becca@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org  
  Testimony of Becca Matusovich, Executive Director Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine Biennial Budget CHANGE PACKAGE to LD 258  An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State Government,  General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025. Before the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs Public Hearing: May 17, 2023  Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services.  My name is Becca Matusovich and I am the Executive Director of the Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine.  Our Network is a collaborative effort, funded primarily by philanthropic dollars, which aims to create a Maine where no child suffers from preventable dental disease.    I came here and testified back in February to ask you to add funding into the biennial budget to complete the expansion of the state’s School Oral Health Program, a priority that was unanimously supported by both of these committees last session. At the end of my written testimony you will find some key background points I provided last time, in case you are looking for a refresher on the history behind this push to expand the School Oral Health Program.   The Legislature took a huge step forward last session in deciding that the School Oral Health Program is an asset with great value for every community in Maine and therefore it should be available to all schools statewide.  We were concerned when the funding for the remaining steps of the expansion was not included in the Governor’s proposed budget for FY24-25, but we are thrilled to see it on p. 63 in the change package, and we applaud the administration for taking the step to add it.  We remain very committed to supporting and assisting and collaborating with the Department to ensure the expansion is the huge success our children need it to be.  The handout attached to my testimony provides a partial snapshot of the many organizations who are united in this effort to expand the School Oral Health Program.  This hearing came up quickly so it is difficult for many partners to get here on such short notice, but I have included with my testimony a list of the people who testified in support of adding this funding back in the February hearing and I would encourage you to go back and revisit their testimony if you need a refresher about all the reasons why the School Oral Health Program is important.  The bottom line is that there is no opposition to this effort; it is truly a win-win-win for everyone.  All you have to do now is make sure that this funding stays in the budget when it passes.  I am happy to answer any questions. Thank you very much for your attention and support on this important issue! 
2 Additional background from my February testimony:  
In the 130th legislature, LD 1501, sponsored by Rep. Lori Gramlich, passed unanimously in 2021 and 
was carried over by the Appropriations Committee, which then in 2022 incorporat ed both the language 
and the funding from the fiscal note into the FY 2023 supplemental budget.  The language enacted into 
statute (https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/22/title22sec3174 -S.html ) required the Maine CDC’s School Oral 
Health Program to expand to all schools by 2025 (note: LD 1837 which is in the HHS Committee now 
would clarify th at th is expansion is to apply to all public schools) .  The fiscal note had projected a 
gradual ramp-up of funding in order to reach the full amoun t of funding needed to serve all schools by 
FY2025.   
We were grateful to both the HHS and AFA committees for your understanding of why the expansion 
of the School Program and the restoration of the State Oral Health Coordinator position were so 
important, and we celebrated the inclusion of both in the FY2023 supplemental budget.  This initial 
increase was an essential first step to ge t the expansion started on a 3-year ramp-up.  However, we 
were very disappointed to see th at the subsequent increases for FY 2024 and 2025, as outlined in the 
original fiscal note, did not appear in the Governor’s proposed biennial budget.  
The School Oral Health Program will not single-handedly solve the crisis of dental disease and lack of 
access to care that plagues our state.  However, it is an absolutely essential part of the solution; it will 
increase the efficiency and effectiveness of all of the other efforts to improve oral health in Maine. 
 3 People who testified in support of adding SOHP funding into budget in February 2023: Teresa Alley  Washington County Children’s Program https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011111  Becca Boulos Maine Public Health Association https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011457  Kate Ende Consumers for Affordable Health Care https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=167553  Lyvia Gaewsky From the First Tooth https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011084 Lori Gramlich Maine House of Representatives https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=167551  Morgan Hynd Bingham Program https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011099  Kathy Kilrain del Rio Maine Equal Justice https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=167548  Lorraine Klug Maine Dental Hygienists Association https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011044 Becca Matusovich Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=167552 Stephen Mills Pediatric Dentist https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011073 Jeff Stone Maine Chapter, American Academy of Pediatrics https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011067 Courtney Vannah Independent Practice Dental Hygienist, MCD Global Health  https://legislature.maine.gov/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=10011109   
 
February 2023  The following partners are unified in their support of ensuring the 
Maine CDC’s School Oral Health Program  has the necessary 
funding in the biennial budget to expand to all schools by 2025, 
as enacted in 22 MRSA §3174 -S, sub -§2-A: 
 
 
 
                  
                       
                               
      
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All Maine children deserve oral health care so they can stay healthy, 
be free from pain, and show up at school ready to learn.  
 
22 MRSA §3174 -S, sub -§2-A: https://le gislature.maine.gov/statutes/22/title22sec3174 -S.html  

Imagine the possibilities: 
improving children's oral 
health in Maine
343 out of 564 State of Maine                      Population age 0-20 in 2021: 299,008
 Data sources: Maine Kids Count, Maine CDC School Oral Health Program, 
Maine Department of Education school database, From the First Tooth, 
Maine Health Data Organization All Payer Claims Database, CMS Medicaid 
Child Core DatasetPublic schools in Maine not  
currently served by the state's    
School Oral Health Program 
(2022-23)
Not currently served by the 
School Oral Health Program 61%
  Working together to ensure that all Maine children 
  can grow up free from preventable dental disease.
  For more info: www.mainecohn.org Key opportunities in 2023:
LD 258 Biennial Budget
LD 1837 An Act to Increase Oral Health Services
Percentage of 
MaineCare-insured 
children <21 
receiving preventive 
dental care 48th
out of 50 states 
on Medicaid's national "PDENT" 
performance indicator 
measuring preventive care access
The Maine CDC's School Oral Health Program provides screenings, 
fluoride varnish, and sealants for children regardless of insurance*34% of children in Maine had either no dental 
benefits or were covered by MaineCare or 
commercial dental insurance for only part of the 
year in 2021.
*For children to be eligible for SOHP services, parents must return consent forms.Maine ranks42% of children with MaineCare 
had at least one preventive dental 
claim in 2021
 
58% had 0 preventive dental claims
Number of dental offices statewide taking new 
pediatric patients with MaineCare, with less than 
a 6-month wait for an appointment:
 
(Fall 2022) 
21*
 
  
 
*some with age or
geographic restrictions
 
 

