Testimony presented to the Joint Committees on Appropriations 
& Health and Human Services 
SUPPORT: PART A, p. A-134, Item 0798 
Other Special Revenue placeholder for MCT Tax Check-Off Donations 
Presented by: MAINE CHILDREN ’S TRUST 
February 21, 2023 
Senators Rotundo & Baldacci, Representatives Sachs and Meyer and members of the Joint 
Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health & Human Sen/ices, my name is 
Ben Gilman and I am the Board Chair of the Maine Children's Trust. We are the second oldest 
authorized recipient of taxpayer donations made via the tax-check- off option on the Maine 
Income Tax return. We are here today to strongly support our tax check off on the Maine 
Income Tax Form. Item 0798 is the placeholder for the donations made by Maine citizens 
through our tax check-off to help prevent child abuse and neglect. 
Information on the Maine Children ’s Trust 
The Maine Children's Trust is the only statewide non-proﬁt organization whose mission is to 
prevent child abuse and neglect. The Trust was created by the Maine Legislature in 1985, and in 
1994 legislation was enacted that established the Children ’s Trust as a separate non-proﬁt 
organization outside of state goverrmient. The 1994 legislation also established some 
govemance rules, activity requirements and guidance on the use of our tax check-off revenue. 
Some requirements of the Trust statute (Title 22, chapter 1058) include but are not limited to: 
v Develop, initiate, propose or recommend ideas for innovations in rules, laws, policies 
and programs conceming child abuse and neglect to the Governor, the Legislature, 
state executive agencies, the business community and other entities 
Q Develop and administer a granting program for community based organizations doing 
child abuse prevention 
History of the Tax Check-Off Funding Since Inception 
The Trust was one of the original tax check-off recipients, appearing on the Maine income tax 
form in January of 1985, slightly later than the Maine Endangered and Nongame Wildlife Fund, 
which was created in 1983. Since that time, the tax check-off has been an important to providing 
direct funds to community based programs addressing the prevention of the abuse and neglect of 
Maine’s children. Over the past few years, following the tragic deaths of several children in high 
proﬁle cases, Maine taxpayers have increased their donations through the check-off.
2 
Our statute requires 10% of our annual check-off receipts are placed into an escrow account. 
The remainder of these taxpayer donations is available to be utilized in direct grants made to 
community organizations for the support of child abuse prevention pro gramming. 
Other Considerations for the Agpropriations & Human Services Committees 
0 We are annually appointed by the Governor to apply for and administer one Federal 
Grant, the Community Based Child Abuse Prevention grant (CBCAP). Maine Children ’s 
Trust receives $175,000 annually based on Maine’s population, plus an additional 
amount of about $140,000 in leveraged funds. There is a 20% match requirement, which 
each state must fulﬁll. The Federal Government allows the Children ’s Trust to count 
tax check-off revenues toward the State match. This funding is also used for granting and 
is woven into all of the prevention programs and efforts that the Trust oversees. 
0 This is a convenient way for Maine Taxpayers to support child abuse prevention. Now 
included as part of most automated tax preparation software, it is extremely easy to use, 
and we believe provides greater donations than we would otherwise receive should 
taxpayers have to remember to write and mail a tax deductible check prior to year end. 
We have also presented along with this testimony a copy of the Trust’s Annual Report to the 
Governor and the HHS Committee. There is a long history for the tax check-off program. The 
check~off donations are very important for the Maine Children ’s Trust because these funds, so 
generously donated, help us to leverage critical and beneﬁcial federal funds to address child 
abuse and neglect in Maine. 
Thank you for your time. 
Ben Gilman, Esq. 
Drummond Woodsum 
Portland, ME 
bgilman@dwmlaw.com
