Testimony of 
Commissioner Benjamin Mann, Deputy Commissioner of Finance, 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
LD 258 “An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
V Hearing Date: March 1, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Bailey, Representative Peny, Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services; my name is 
Benjamin Mann and I am the Deputy Commissioner of Finance at the Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS). I am here today to speak in support of LD 258, the Govemor’s 
Biennial Budget proposal for State ﬁscal years 2024 and 2025. 
Overall Budget 
This budget advances the Governor ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more prosperous state 
where opportunity is available to all, then We must invest in the infrastructure that supports the 
people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on every day 
to succeed. It builds on the strong success of the currently enacted budget and the Work done in 
last legislative session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, making sure 
that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — we lived within our means. This budget 
proposal continues that practice. 
Highlights from Department of Health and Human Services 
Governor Mills’ budget proposal for the DHHS FY24-25 biennial budget continues policy 
efforts that were initiated at the beginning of her Administration, such as expanding access to 
health care and child care, as Well as rebuilding critical parts of State government, such as the 
Maine CDC. This budget makes historic investments in behavioral health, increases supports for 
older Mainers, and supports a transformation of services for adults With intellectual and 
developmental disabilities (IDD). The budget also provides funding for cost-of-living 
3/ l/2023 Department of Health and Human Services — Biennial Budget Page 1 of4
adjustments in numerous MaineCare and related provider payment rates in the wake of high inﬂation, consistent with Public Law 2021, chapter 398, Part AAAA as Well as MaineCare rate reform as codiﬁed in Public Law 2021, chapter 639. 
My testimony today will focus on four initiatives related to Maine’s Health Insurance' 
Marketplace Trust Fund program. As background, Governor Mills’ Made for Maine Health Coverage Act, which was unanimously passed by the Maine Legislature in 2020, authorized the creation of a State-run marketplace. The State-run marketplace, or CoverME. gov is operated by the Ofﬁce of the Health Insurance Marketplace, or OHIM. 
I am including the full summary of the DHHS FY24-25 biennial budget in my testimony for your reference, but I do not plan on reading it here. I’ll proceed to the budget initiatives. 
For the Departments budget as a whole, the Governor is proposing funding of $638 million ($316 million General Fund) for ﬁscal years 2024 and 2025. This would be partially oﬂset by $59 million in one-time deappropriations and lapse of prior year carrying balances to ensure that we are being ﬁscally prudent and living within our means.' 
The biennial budget proposes to invest $23 7 million ($94 million GF) in behavioral health services over the coming biennium. The primary initiative behind this historic investment is a1 
$166 million ($63 million GF) increase in MaineCar"e and related behavioral health rates. The new rates support mental health and substance use disorder services and targeted casel 
management. Many of these rates have not been updated for years. These changes help MaineCare members access and coordinate mental health, medical and social services in their communities. Also included in the $23 7 million investment is $1 7 million ($10 million GP) to bolster children ’s behavioral health services in light of a pressing need to ﬁll gaps in the continuum of services.i 
This budget proposes to provide $144 million ($72 million GF) to expand and improve home based care, the safety of older Mainers, and continues to invest in long term care facilities, including nursing homes. Included in this $144 million is $4 million to implement several recommendations ﬁom the Elder Justice Roadmap, $48 million ($30 million GF) to make community living sustainable for older adults such as supporting home-delivered meals and sustaining the expansion ofhome-based care (Section 63 ) enacted in last year ’s budget, and $9] million ($3 7 million GP) for Maine ’s nursing homes and residential care facilities (PNM1Cs) and to support reform in how MaineCare pays ﬁar long-term care. 
The biennial budget proposes $84 million ($27 million GF) to support access to services for individuals with IDD and brain injury, including $34 million ($11 million GF) to ensure there is no wait ﬁar Section 29 services at the start of 2025 by requesting support for an additional 900 people, and $3 million ($1 million GP) to fully fund enrolling people served on an emergency basis under Section 21. The budget proposes $5 million ($2 million GF) to transﬁarrn service delivery by creating a new Lifespan waiver, which will address multiple levels of need over an individual ’s 
lifetime within a single program. As the Governor said in her budget address, this initiative ﬂips the system to focus on the services individuals need, not on the bureaucracy that provides those 
3/ l/2023 Department of Health and Human Services — Bl6I11"1l8.l Budget Page 2 of4
services. This will help give individuals with disabilities, and their caregivers, the peace of mind 
of a system of aajustable, adaptable, and individualized support. 
The majority of the cost of the Department ’s budget is for policies that are already in current 
law. The budget provides funding for cost-of-living aajustments in numerous MaineCare and related provider payment rates in the wake of high inﬂation, consistent with MaineCare rate 
reform as codiﬁed in P. L. 202] ch. 639. This includes planned rate reform for hospitals and nursing facilities. It proposes ongoing ﬁtnding for rates that support J 25 percent of minimum wage for direct care workers. And it ﬁilly funds initiatives that were partly funded in the previous 
budget such as the rate rebasing for Federally Qualified Health Centers. 
Similarly, the Department ’s budget proposal continues investment in child care and child 
welfare. Specifically, the budget requests nearly $8 million to fully fund the child care salary 
supplements enacted in the FY2022 supplemental budget to so that child care workers will 
continue to receive increased pay for the critical services they provide. Building on the 
substantial funding provided in prior budgets, this biennial budget requests nearly $12 million 
for foster care and adoption assistance and also provides $2 million for foster care 
reimbursement rate increases. 
As in the supplemental budget, the biennial budget proposes one-time funding for-both the state 
($8 million) and municipalities ($3 million) to support increased General Assistance costs which 
have risen dramatically due to the COVID-J 9 pandemic and policy changes. T his funding would serve as a bridge while the Department works with the Legislature, municipalities, and 
stakeholders toward sustainable policy changes to support the program ’s goal of serving people 
in need ejjiectively in the long run. 
Lastly, the Department proposes numerous initiatives to support its ongoing operations. This 
includes, for example, $3 million to support renovation and maintenance activities at Dorothea 
Dix Psychiatric Center and Riverview Psychiatric Center. The proposals include $2 million in 
general funds for Maine CDC positions such as those needed to conduct testing for PFAS, 
improve state lab response, and expand drinking water infrastructure projects. 
Departmental Biennial Initiatives 
The Maine Health Insurance Marketplace Trust Fund program — Z292, on page A-355, supports 
Maine consumers in purchasing individual health insurance by providing marketing and 
outreach, individual assistance, and a platform for shopping and enrollment. Funding for this 
program is derived from a user fee charged on insurance companies offering plans on the 
Marketplace. This program has four initiatives. 
l. The ﬁrst initiative (C-A-7213) on page A-355 provides allocation to align With available 
resources. This initiative increases Federal Expenditures Fund All Other allocation by $500 in 
state ﬁscal years 2024 and 2025. 
3/1/2023 Department of Health and Human Services — Biennial Budget Page 3 of4
2. The next initiative (C-A-7211) on page A-355 establishes one Public Service Manager III 
position funded 100% Maine Health Insurance Marketplace Trust Fund program, Other Special Revenue Funds to support consumer assistance functions, such as overseeing complex eligibility 
casework and creating additional guidance. This initiative increases Other Special Revenue Funds Personal Services allocation by $165,237 in state ﬁscal year 2024 and $174,105 in state 
ﬁscal year 2025 and Other Special Revenue Funds All Other allocation by $10,682 in state ﬁscal year 2024 and $10,896 in state ﬁscal year 2025. 
3. The next initiative (C-A-7203) on page A-355 establishes one Comprehensive Health Planner II position funded 100% Maine Health Insurance Marketplace Trust Fund program, Other Special Revenue Funds to support consumer assistance functions. This initiative increases Other Special Revenue Funds Personal Services allocation by $102,377 in state ﬁscal year 2024 and $108,189 in state ﬁscal year 2025 and Other Special Revenue Funds All Other allocation by $9,165 in state ﬁscal year 2024 and $9,305 in state ﬁscal year 2025. 
4. The next initiative (C-A-7202) on page A-355 establishes one Public Service Coordinator II 
position funded 100% Maine Health Insurance Marketplace Trust Fund program, Other Special Revenue Funds to support insurance carrier relations. This initiative increases Other Special Revenue Funds Personal Services allocation by $120,347 in state ﬁscal year 2024 and $126,793 in state ﬁscal year 2025 and Other Special Revenue Funds All Other allocation by $9,599 in state ﬁscal year 2024 and $9,754 in state ﬁscal year 2025. 
Language 
The submitted language on page 40L, Part XX, makes the Executive Director of the State-Based Marketplace appointed by the commissioner and serves at the pleasure of the commissioner. 
3/1/2023 Department of Health and Human Services — Biennial Budget Page 4 of4
