Maine State Museum: FY 2024/FY2025 Biennial Budget 
Testimony of Bernard Fishman, Director of the Maine State Museum 
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government 
for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Education and Cultural Affairs 
February 13, 2023 10:00 a.m. 
Senator Rotundo and Representative Sachs of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee, Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan of the Educational and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, and honorable members of the legislature present for this joint committee 
meeting, I am Bernard Fishman, Director of the Maine State Museum, and I am here to 
summarize the museum's proposed budget for the coming biennium. 
Background 
As I reviewed earlier with the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, the museum presently 
finds itself in a difficult position because of the ongoing renovation project in the Cultural 
Building in Augusta, where, beginning in 1971, the museum's extensive public exhibits and its 
offices were located. The museum was closed to the on-site public in 2020, first for COVID and 
then because of the mechanical failures in the Cultural Building that led to the massive and 
ongoing renovation project. For two and a half years, much of the museum staff has been 
engaged in serving the needs of the renovation project, removing thousands of exhibit objects 
to protected storage and clearing or reducing tens of thousands of square feet of exhibits. This 
work continues. The construction is scheduled for completion in mid-2024, but the museum 
will need at least a year to move back and install its new opening exhibits, and so expects to re- 
open to the public in 2025. 
The museum was founded in 1836 and is the oldest of the nation's 44 state museums, though 
probably the smallest. It became a Maine state agency in 1965. By statute it was created to 
collect and preserve the physical materials representing the full significance of Maine's great 
cultural, environmental, and economic heritage. The museum manages the state's flag and 
portrait collections, and the displays in the State House and the Blaine House. The museum 
also arranges the public tours for those locations. Statute defines the museum's mission as an 
educational one, expressed especially through exhibits, but also in outreach and research
1
Maine State Museum: FY 2024/FY2025 Biennial Budget 
projects. The result is that the museum has assembled Maine's largest and most 
comprehensive historical and environmental collections, some 800,000 objects. Caring for 
these is a major and a continuing part of the museum's work. An on-site audience of nearly 
50,000 per year came to the museum when it was open, including over 15,000 students, the 
largest student audience of any Maine museum. When the museum re-opens, we are' 
confident these numbers will increase. 
At present we continue to exercise our preservation and educational missions, though most of 
our educational work has moved on-line during the closure. Some 4,000 people were reached 
directly last year through museum classes and presentations, and over 200,000 virtual visitors 
connected with us through our website offerings and social media. We are also deeply involved 
in planning major new exhibits for our re-opening. 
We anticipate with great excitement the upgraded and beautified Cultural Building that will 
reward our endurance with a safer, more efficient, and educationally more effective structure 
than the one we left over two years ago, in what now seems like another age. But the Cultural 
Building project, which as you know is also of supreme importance to the State Library and the 
State Archives, has turned into a truly massive enterprise, and one vital to our state; I urge our 
legislators to support the significant costs necessary to properly complete the project, 
specifically the $ 5 million being currently requested by the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services (DAFS) in the supplemental budget. 
First Museum Budget Program: Maine State Museum 0180. 
On page A—545 of your museum budget, Maine State Museum 0180, is the baseline General 
Fund Budget for the museum's operations. This budget is essentially the same as the one in the 
last biennium, plus modest routine cost increases required by various state government 
departments providing services to the museum. lt includes Personal Services for the salaries 
and beneﬁts of the museum's staff of 21 full-time equivalent positions. Under All Other are the 
museum's non-personnel General Fund costs, which cover a portion of the tools, equipment, 
and services enabling the staff members to perform their specialized functions. Here I'll 
mention that the museum normally raises a distinct portion of its total expenses from non- 
state government sources, an amount typically in the 15-20% range of its whole budget. I'll 
note also that being closed to on-site visitors means a continuing annual loss to the museum of 
over $ 100,000 in admissions and store sales. 
Four General Fund Initiatives 
We are proposing four initiatives in the General Fund, two of which were mandated to the 
museum by other state providers, and two of which are directly related to the Cultural Building 
renovation project. These are also on page A-545 of your budget.
2
Maine State Museum: FY 2024/FY2025 Biennial Budget 
Initiative 1: Technology upgrades. 
These are one-time costs, estimated by the Office of information Technology, to provide 
necessary technology upgrades in the exhibit galleries for the museum's re-opening, as well as 
for some routine cost increases in existing network services. Improved gallery wiring and 
equipment will allow for more versatile exhibits, greater interactivity with visitors, and wi-fi 
capacity that can be extended to most museum areas. Providing visitors with the means to gain 
additional information through phones and other devices is a growing and essential element in 
modern museum practice and is especially valuable and necessary for school and student 
education. 
Initiative 2: New Shelving 
This amount is one-time funding that will allow the museum to acquire additional fixed and 
wheeled shelving to provide storage for its growing collections of photographs, documents, 
and maps. 
Initiative 3: Mandated insurance Coverage. 
This figure is obligated to us by Risk Management to cover industry-wide cost increases. 
Initiative 4: Mandated Costs for the Financial and Human Resources Service Center. 
This figure is a DAFS-approved cost increase for supporting the Service Center. 
Within this category of Maine State Museum 0180, and located on page A-546, is Other Special 
Revenue Funds. This account, unchanged from the previous biennium, estimates revenues 
from certain peripheral sources, and therefore extends permission to spend those amounts. 
Located here are funds from the Museum Sales Program and the Maine State Museum 
Endowment for Publishing. Sales, as I've mentioned, are presently minuscule, and the 
Publishing Endowment derives from past museum sales. Neither fund comes from state 
revenues. These amounts are projections to cover possibilities that might reasonably 
materialize at some point in the biennium. 
Second Museum Budget Program: Operating Fund Z179. 
The museum's budget categorizations have been handed down from remote antiquity and are 
not always easy to recognize as a single connected whole, though they are. Here is another 
operating account, to be found on page A-546, with its own section for Other Sgecial Revenue 
/:L i7'S. These amounts are essentially unchanged from the previous biennium, except fora 
small, required, addition to cover the increased costs of personal services. In this category are 
potentially anticipated funds from museum admissions. As of now the museum has no
3
Maine State Museum: FY 2024/FY2025 Biennial Budget 
admissions revenue, but these figures allow for the possibility of such income within the 
coming biennium. 
Third Museum Budget Program: Research & Collection-Museum 0174 
Within the category of Research & Collection, Museum 0174, are the Federal Expenditures 
Fund and Other Special Revenue Funds, which you will see on page A-547. 
The Federal Expenditures Funds amount is unchanged from the previous biennium. It reflects 
an estimate of what federal grants might bring to the museum during the biennium. 
We currently have two federal grant applications pending, and we will learn by summer if they 
are successful. 
The Other Special Revenue Funds account holds the funds we hope to raise through grants 
from individuals, businesses, foundations, and other competitively awarded grants for special 
projects. 
Initiative 5. Increase in the Amount for the Other Special Revenue Funds Account. 
Here we wish to increase the amount permitted in this category because we expect to increase 
funding appeals in anticipation of the museum's re-opening. This request is an allocation, and 
any incoming funds in these two categories would not be from the state's General Fund. 
l thank you for your attention to the museum's budget requests. Only the first two initiatives, 
for upgrading information technology for educational purposes and for some additional 
collections storage shelving, represent more than tiny additions to the museum's budget from 
the General Fund. Those amounts are not vast and reflect needs directly resulting from the 
museum's mission and its future requirements. 
Notjust an elephant, but a Blue Whale in the museum's living room is the looming presence of 
the Cultural Building renovation. Can it be completed according to the new schedule and the 
new budget? And how will all the competing needs be weighed and met? All involved are 
trying their best to tame this beast in the face of substantial challenges, and we at the museum 
are vigilantly responding to the roller-coaster momentum of this complex project. But you'll 
see from these requests that the museum is actively planning its return to a full, public, on-site 
presence after years of a more pixelated existence. In these requests you see our eagerness to 
return to a position of outstanding public service, in the premier location in sight of the State 
House, where we and our sister agencies belong and long to return.
4
