K FINANCE AUTHORITY 0? MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
In Support of L.D. 258 
An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State 
Government, General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years 
Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement & Business 
February 15, 2023 
Senators Rotundo and Curry, Representatives Sachs and Roberts, and Distinguished 
Members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Imiovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify in support of the Governor ’s proposed initiatives found on pages A-293 — A-299 
of your printed materials. 
FAME is a quasi-independent state agency that provides ﬁnancial solutions that 
help Maine people achieve their business and higher education goals. We create business 
and educational opportunities through our willingness to invest at greater risk based on 
public beneﬁt. F AME’s mission is to provide ﬁnancial solutions that help Maine people 
achieve their business and higher educational goals. Our vision is to help create a Maine 
workforce with good paying jobs by focusing on the nexus of economic and educational 
development. 
To begin with, I would like to point out that most of the items discussed here 
today are ﬂat-funded lines. There are two new initiatives, however, and these relate to 
funding to continue the Maine Health Care Professionals Loan Repayment Pilot Program 
and increased Maine State Grant funding. 
The ﬁrst FAME program may be found on Page A-294 of your materials. 
Although not a new budget initiative this year, it reﬂects that $1 million in federal ARPA 
funding, approved during the 130th Maine Legislature, is budgeted in FY 23-24 for the 
Doctors for Maine’s Future Scholarship Program. This program provides a tuition 
subsidy of ﬁfty percent of the cost of attendance annually, up to a maximum of $25,000
I
per student annually, for eligible students who enter qualifying Maine-based medical 
school programs. For each student funded with a Doctors for Maine’s Future Scholarship, 
the participating medical schools fund an additional scholarship on similar terms. Thus, 
the program in effect has a l:l match ratio. The goal of the program is to increase the 
number of physicians in the state who practice in primary care, underserved specialties, 
or underserved areas of Maine. The Maine Medical Center-Tufts University Medical 
School and the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine participate 
in the program. 
The second program, also found on Page A-294, is termed as the Educational 
Opportunity Tax Credit Marketing Fund. $75,000 is provided for in both years of the 
biennium for ongoing marketing of the newly named Student Loan Repayment 
Program, formerly known as the Educational Opportunity Tax Credit. As you will 
recall, last Legislature the program was simplified and renamed, providing for up to 
$25,000 in lifetime refundable tax credits (or $2,500 per year) for eligible Maine 
residents who make student loan repayments. Maine Revenue Services administers that 
tax credit, but FAME helps to market it. FAME has been directed by the Legislature to 
contract with a private, nonproﬁt entity to help market the tax credit. FAME contracts 
with Live and Work in Maine, LLC, to help publicize the program. Live and Work in 
Maine, LLC has been doing a good job at increasing awareness of this credit. Among 
other things, they have been targeting graduating Maine students and former Maine 
residents to retain and attract them to Maine. We are grateful for the Administration ’s 
support of continued funding for these marketing funds. It helps Maine businesses and 
taxpayers with loan debt to become better aware of this important and underutilized tool 
for workforce attraction and retention. 
The third program is found on the top of Page A-295 of your materials and 
concerns Fund for A Healthy Maine allocations to the Maine Dental Education Loan 
and Loan Repayment Programs, which are administered by FAME. There is no new 
initiative here, but the budget provides ﬂat funding of $237,740 in each year of the 
biennium for the program’s continued operation. 
The Maine Dental Education Loan and Loan Repayment Programs provide need- 
based, forgivable loans of up to $25,000 annually to Maine residents pursuing 
postgraduate education in dentistry and loan repayments up to $25,000 annually for 
dentists providing services to underserved populations in Maine. The proposed funding 
will allow for the selection of new participants in the program and provide continued 
funding for students needing loans and loan repayment as dentists practicing in 
underserved areas in Maine. FAME will be able to meet its commitment to existing 
program participants, as well as add approximately four new participants. A commitment 
in this program is four years for both students receiving loans and for dentists receiving 
loan repayments. 
The fourth item relates to the Maine Area Health Education Centers (AHECs) 
and is also found on Page A-295 of your printed materials. The budget proposes flat 
funding of $1 10,000 in FY 23-24 and $110,000 in FY 24-25. This is “pass-through ” 
money which FAME transfers to the University of New England, which helps to fund the 
rural health workforce development programs in the Area Health Education Centers
2
located in Bangor, F armington and Presque Isle. These funds are matched 1:1 by the 
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services. 
The AHEC network works to alleviate shortages of health professionals in 
Maine’s rural and underserved areas by actively engaging with academic and community 
partners to: 
0 Encourage Maine youth and mid-career professionals to explore health careers 
and create a “pipeline ” to target those Maine residents, particularly those from 
rural areas with the most likelihood of staying within Maine to live and work; 
0 Provide rural, community-based clinical training experiences for medical and 
other health professions students. Evidence shows that where students ’ initial 
placements occur creates a likelihood that they will return to practice in those 
communities; and 
v Support practicing health professionals with continuing education and distance 
learning opportunities to train and retain Maine health professionals Within the 
state of Maine. 
The ﬁfth program pertains to the Foreign Credentialing and Skills Recognition 
Revolving Loan Program Fund. It may be found on page A-296 of your materials and 
proposes continued funding of $75,000 in each year of the biennium. This program was 
established to provide small loans to assist eligible immigrants living in Maine who are 
not yet eligible to work in the United States. Loans up to $700 are available to help pay 
for the costs associated with the process of becoming work-ready while waiting for 
issuance of a work permit by federal immigration authorities. 
The sixth item, which is found on Page A-297, relates to the Maine Health Care 
Provider Loan Repayment Pilot Program. It provides the ﬁrst new “initiative ” in the 
budget for a FAME program. Part "SS" of the budget language would transfer $4 million 
in FY 23-24 from the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to this program. The $4 
million in 0ne~time federal ARPA funds would enable the program to make loan 
repayments to eligible program participants to address critical workforce shortages 
exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to, the behavioral 
health and oral care sectors. The program is designed to attract and retain health care 
professionals in Maine by repaying outstanding student loans of selected participants who 
commit to living and working in Maine for at least three years. FAME will pay up to 
$25,000 per year or, in aggregate, the lesser of $75,000 or 50% of the recipient ’s 
outstanding loan balance. During the ﬁrst round of this pilot program, FAME received 
over 1,000 applications from interested health care professionals. We were only able to 
fund 18 individuals with the limited $1 million we were provided by the state, however. 
We would like to use this money to help the other qualiﬁed individuals who applied 
previously, as well as perhaps consider new applications if funds permit. 
The seventh program, found on Page A-298, pertains to the Small Enterprise 
Growth Fund, which does business as the Maine Venture Fund. The budget proposes to 
continue the $500,000 in ongoing funding for the Maine Venture Fund. FAME 
administers the money for this separate and independent entity. It is a professionally
3
managed fund that invests exclusively in Maine-based companies that demonstrate a 
potential for substantial growth and success that will contribute to Maine’s prosperity. 
Joe Powers is the managing director of the Fund, and he is also submitting testimony in 
support of this line. Since inception, the Fund has invested over $28 million in more than 
eighty Maine companies; has a current portfolio of thirty-three companies; and has had 
several proﬁtable “exits,” including four in FY 2017, including Certify, which has over 
150 employees in Portland. Companies in the Maine Venture Fund portfolio include Sea 
Bags, a manufacturer located on the working waterfront in Portland, which now has over 
100 employees working across a variety of skilled, well-paying jobs and a strong Maine 
brand that is known far beyond the borders of our state. Other notable companies include 
Tanbark in Saco, Coursestorm in Orono, and BlueTrace in Castine, providing innovative 
solutions in forestry, software and aquaculture, respectively. 
The eighth line, found at Page A-299 of your materials, provides funding for 
FAME’s Student Financial Assistance Programs in the amounts of $32,890,394 in FY 
23-24 and FY 24-25 of the biennium. The programs funded through this line of the 
budget include the Maine State Grant Program; the Educators for Maine Program; the 
Maine Health Professions Loan Program; the Maine Veterinary Medicine Loan Program; 
and the Doctors For Maine’s Future Scholarship Program. The initiative here, the second 
of two regarding F AME, provides $10 million ($5 million more in each year of the 
biennium) in Other Special Revenue Funds to increase Maine State Grant awards for full- 
time students from $2,500 to $3,000 per academic year. 
FAME is excited about and deeply appreciative of Governor Mills’s proposal to 
boost the Maine State Grant again. The Maine State Grant is the state’s basic need- 
based undergraduate grant program. We award on average approximately 12,500 Maine 
students a maximum grant of $2,500 amiually (full-time) and $1,250 (part-time) through 
this appropriation. Over the years, the Legislature has continually emphasized the 
preeminent position of this program amongst FAME’s higher education programs, and 
we have, accordingly, given it top priority in General Fund budgeting. Thanks to the 
Governor ’s and to the Legislature ’s support, in recent years we have been able to increase 
full-time awards from $1,500 to $2,500, and now if enacted, this new funding will enable 
us to increase the award to $3,000 per year. 
Another program funded through this line of the budget is the Educators for 
Maine Program. The Educators for Maine Program is a merit-based forgivable loan of 
no less than $3,000 for Maine undergraduate students and no less than $2,000 for Maine 
graduate students annually pursuing initial certiﬁcation as a teacher, including speech 
pathology or a career in early childhood education. Loans are forgiven if the student 
teaches or serves as a speech pathologist in an eligible elementary or secondary school or 
a quality childcare program in Maine. The program currently funds about forty new loans 
and approximately seventy-five renewals per year. 
The Maine Health Professions Loan Program, different from the loan 
repayment program mentioned above, is also a part of this budget line. The program 
features a repayable loan of up to $25,000 per year for Maine residents pursuing post- 
graduate medical, dental, or veterinary education. The loan provides a zero percent
4
interest rate incentive to encourage recipients to practice primary care medicine or 
dentistry in underserved areas of Maine. 
Another program funded through this line is the Maine Veterinary Medicine 
Loan Program. This previously was a need-based forgivable loan for large-animal 
veterinary students enrolled in a program leading to a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine 
degree. Loans in the amount of $25,000 annually were available to students. As a result 
of successful legislation sponsored last Legislature by Representative Fay, beginning in 
academic year 2023-24, the program will be expanded (funds permitting) as follows: 
increased number of loans that may be awarded from two per year to eight per year, with 
overall aggregate program loans increased from eight to thirty-two; at least half of these 
(and no fewer than two) must be awarded to livestock veterinary students, unless we do 
not receive enough applications, in which case we may award remaining loans to other 
eligible applicants; increased maximum loan amounts from $25,000 per year to $35,000 
per year; expanded program eligibility to veterinarians who practice “emergency and 
critical care” (to be deﬁned by the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
(DACF), but to include non-livestock animals like cats and dogs); and expanded program 
eligibility to veterinarians of any kind who practice in “underserved geographic regions” 
(to be deﬁned by DACF, but priority must be given to Aroostook, Oxford, Penobscot, 
Piscataquis, Somerset, and Washington Counties). 
The Doctors for Maine’s Future Scholarship Program, referenced previously, 
also receives $400,000 ﬁ'om this line to help continue its operation. 
We are grateful for the Governor ’s funding proposals for FAME’s student 
ﬁnancial assistance programs and would appreciate your continued support of increasing 
access to higher education in Maine. We know you face numerous competing priorities, 
but We wish you all the best in your work and deliberations. 
Thank you for this opportunity and I would be happy to answer any questions.
5
