Good Afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci, 
Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human 
Services.
 
My name is Brandy M Staples and I’m a constituent of Phippsburg, Maine. 
When I was 26 years old and about to graduate from college I was diagnosed 
with a stage 4 breast cancer. Everything up till that point that I new 
about my future was gone, or if I even had a future anymore. I didn’t even 
know how to pick up the pieces. The real “piece de resistance” came when I 
was in the middle of my treatments. I had to reapply for MaineCare and I 
was denied. I was told everything from I made too much money, to that I 
was too young to have breast cancer. I fought with MaineCare for well over 
a year. In the end I was told that I had applied for it too late past my 
deadline to reapply and I would be put on a wait list. I would have to 
wait till someone else came off it in order to get it. As you know cancer 
doesn’t wait.
 
I got a lucky break, I had relatives in Massachusetts who informed me that 
former Gov. Mitt Romney had enacted a law of state aided healthcare 
coverage and no one could be denied, even with preexisting conditions. I 
had to move to Mass to get the medical coverage I needed so I could finish 
my cancer treatments. A state where I only knew a handful of people and 
never paid taxes to. They allowed me to have the healthcare I needed. To 
say I’m a little miffed that a state where I was born and raised, had 
roots and generations of family in and paid taxes to since I started 
working and was an upstanding citizen is an understatement. This same 
state threw me under the bus the minute I had cancer and pretty much told 
me I was on my own and to go be another states welfare problem.
 
So I’m here today in support of funding Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross’ bill, 
LD 199, “An Act To Improve the Health of Maine Residents By Closing 
Coverage Gaps in MaineCare and the Children’s Health Insurance Program”. 
I’m in remission now and was able to move back to Maine in 2011. Since 
then I’ve been a strong advocate for healthcare and coverage in Maine and 
was part of the Mainer’s for Healthcare Team to push for the medicaid 
expansion. I collected over 1000 signatures to get it on the ballot, 
knocked on over 600 doors in my community to educate people and get them 
out to vote. I even went to court when former Gov Lepage was sued for not 
respecting the peoples referendum. 
 
In August of 2024 I will have hit my 20 year “Cancerversary” mark still in 
remission. 20 years. I can’t believe that in 20 years very little has 
changed about our healthcare. I lost my healthcare and almost my life 
because someone got to pick and choose who got to have healthcare in our 
state. What happened to me can never be rectified but I can make sure it 
never happens to anyone else. I put in a lot of  volunteer-time and effort 
to fight for the expansion, to fight for those who can’t and don’t have a 
voice. I didn’t fight so hard for this to have others get to pick and 
choose who gets to have healthcare or decide who gets to live. I fought 
for this for everyone.
 
So many of those who need it aren’t here by choice, they are from war torn 
countries where everything they ever knew was destroyed and will never be 
able to go home again. It’s essential that we make that transition as easy 
as possible, and providing access to healthcare is one of the best things 
we can do. 
 
Thank you for your time today and all the work that you do. 
 
Brandy M Staples
1654 Maine Rd
Phippsburg ME 04562
Phone: 508-838-9497
Email: Marlaina23@hotmail.com
