Newman Homes Custom Home Builder and General Contractor 
Good afternoon, 
My name is Brandon Roberge, President of Newman Homes, an Augusta based general contracting 
company with a focus on building custom homes and multi-family construction projects. We've built 
numerous custom homes in subdivisions like Fieldstone Place, next to Cony High school in Augusta as 
well as large multi-family projects, like the 14 townhouses we are currently building in Watewille. l'd like 
to briefly discuss with you a low-income development project that we are planning to build in Winslow, 
Maine, as well as Maine's dire need for projects like this one. 
According to our current plans for this low-income housing development project in Winslow Maine, the 
site will consist of 18, 3-bedroom, 2-bathroom duplex style apartments. Each unit having a garage, heat 
pumps, and paved parking. We will have some solar and electric vehicle charging infrastructure for 
future use, as well as a playground and an on-site daycare facility. We intend to work out an 
arrangement with the daycare facility, wherein they receive a financial discount on their lease for 
accepting daycare vouchers offered by state programs for low-income families, which are all too often 
not accepted by daycares. We also intend and are hopeful to have a 25-50% Section 8 tenant occupancy, 
in order to help those most in need.- 
Maine's housing shortage has become increasingly concerning in recent years. Maine's vacancy rates of 
less than 1% is just one sign ofthe extent ofthis housing shortage. Those most adversely affected by this 
housing shortage are Maine's low-income families. When landlords are faced with so many potential 
tenants due to the shortage of available housing, it is all too often the lower income families that lose 
out on the opportunity to acquire housing. This is why l believe that programs like the Rural Rental 
Program are so important to low-income families in Maine. 
The largest barrier to developers building low-income housing projects is funding, which is why 
programs like the Rural Rental Program are so vital to remedying the shortage of affordable housing for 
low-income families in Maine. 
l’m aware that 30 million dollars allocated from the general fund for developing affordable housing in 
Maine isn't in and of itself going to solve the affordable housing shortage, but it is a much-needed step 
in the right direction and each and every low-income family in Maine that is able to acquire housing built 
by funding from the Rural Rental Program will be far better off because of it. 
l appreciate your consideration in approving the allocation of these funds for the development of 
housing for the low-income families of Maine. 
Thank youl 
O:(207) 480-7700 C:(207) 660-2037 www.i\iewmanHomesME.com _ 125 Community Dr. Augusta, ME
