HIGH EAKS 
Testimony in Support of LD 258 
"An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" 
February 28, 2023 
Brent West, Executive Director 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pleucker, and 
honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Brent 
West. I am the executive director of the High Peaks Alliance whose mission is to ensure and 
enhance access and recreational opportunities in Maine’s High Peaks region. I am testifying in 
support of LD 258. 
I have come today to express my gratitude and support for the Bureau of Parks and Lands (BPL). 
Their role in our region has grown tremendously over the last two decades. \lVhen I grew up in 
New Portland, I would stand outside the local dowel mill waiting for the bus. I still remember 
when that mill closed. I rode the school bus with the children of the people who walked into that 
mill for the last time. After the mill closed, the elementary school was close to follow. Forest 
products are still a large part of our economy in the region, but we look to our future and outdoor 
recreation gives us hope. The issue is complicated by the fact that as the mills closed, the land 
was sold to investment groups. The local connection to the land in too many instances has been 
cut off. As Maine faces a demographic cliff, the land transfers accelerate. These changes have 
led to a large increase in the need for the Bureau of Parks and Lands. 
The Androscoggin Valleys Council of Government ’s 2023-2028 development strategy states; 
“Our shared vision for Western Maine is a place of sustained quality and natural beauty, Where an 
abundance of clean lakes, river valleys, mountains, farmland, forests, and trails frame our 
communities and offer an exceptional residential and business enviromnent. ” This document
outlines the top four strengths of this region as recreation, love of the region, forest products, and 
tourism. 
BPL has taken on a signiﬁcant amount of responsibility for this vision. Since I was a child, some 
of the most beloved places in our region have been conserved, which requires increased 
management. The Maine people have shown their support over and over again since we voted to 
acquire the Bigelow Preserve up to the most recent LMF bond vote. Maine people want access 
and trails. Unfortunately, BPL doesn’t have the support or capacity to respond to our regional 
goals. They are blessed to have many passionate employees that realize the value of public 
service, but landowners and the public are asking more of them. Please give them the resources 
they need. They fund operations through forestry which needs foresters. They have taken on the 
large task of coordination between landowners and clubs on trail access issues. These issues 
used to be dealt with locally. 70% of Mainers participate in outdoor recreation and 41% of 
housing in our region is recreational or seasonal. We have money to continue to promote these 
places, but we don’t have adequate funds to care for them. 
Please support the Bureau of Parks and Lands budget needs. 
Thank you, 
Brent West 
Executive Director 
High Peaks Alliance 
P.O. Box 987 
Farmington, ME 04938 
(207) 491-2750 
www.highpeaksalliancaorg
