%% 165 Main Street 
| I P.O. Box 62 
. . Damai-1sc0 ’Eta, ME 04543
F 
mldcoast council of governments 20?-209-4129 
EDA designated economic development district 
Testimony of the Midcoast Council of Governments in Support of 
DECD's Housing Opportunity Program 
a part of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and 
June 30, 2025. 
February 9, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs Committee, 
and Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, l am Brian 
Dancause, Deputy Director of Midcoast Council of Governments (MCOG). l am here today to speak in strong 
support of full funding for the Department of Economic and Community Development's Housing Opportunity 
Program, contained in the Governor's biennial budget. 
MCOG serves over 62 communities stretching from Brunswick to Belfast, including the counties of Sagadahoc, 
Knox and Waldo. While Lincoln County has its own planning services, we collaborate with Lincoln County 
Regional Planning Commission and also provide direct planning services to multiple communities who are 
dues-paying members of MCOG. In that role, MCOG provides municipal planning and development services 
including transportation, land use, economic and community development, and GlS services. Within that 
context, MCOG also provides housing planning and development services to its member communities. An 
affordable housing subdivision in Boothbay Harbor and redevelopment of a former school into housing units 
in Union are but two examples. 
We face housing supply shortages across all workforce groups throughout the Midcoast region. We are 
experiencing significant housing displacement of our local working community, particularly along the 
coastline. Our communities are concerned and in need of assistance. We have chronicled stories from our 
regional businesses, such as BIW, as well as our medical and research institutions, which have lost recently- 
hired employees because ofthe inability to find housing. In our own profession, a recently hired planner 
resigned, partly because of the inability to secure local housing. 
With these challenges in mind, l\/ICOG has begun the development of a series of studies in the region, 
including zoning barriers to housing, supply and demand challenges, and assisting communities in meeting the 
challenges of implementing LD 2003. We encourage you to our website: www.midcoastcog.com, to 
experience a series of story-maps on housing shifts in the Midcoast region, a preliminary examination of the 
underlying issues of housing shortages. These maps, which are based on publicly —available data, show the 
following decline in just a 5-year period: a reduction of 18 ”somewhat affordable" or better communities in 
2016 to just two such communities in 2021.
Given these pressures, the MCOG Board of Directors launched a strategic planning process in the fall, in which 
housing was identified as one of seven primary goals:_ 
Implement a regional program that addresses the short term and long-term housing 
shortage in the MCOG region. 
To that end we have identified strategies to address housing needs. They include additional data analysis to 
understand the housing issues better at the local level and subregional level. They involve providing direct 
assistance to communities in adding to their housing stock or amending their zoning ordinances to be more 
flexible in responding to workforce housing demand. They include adding to the development capacity of the 
region and assisting the further development of housing trusts throughout the region. 
The funding contained in the Governor's budget will enable DECD to implement its Housing Opportunity 
Program through the work of regional planning agencies such as MCOG. This funding will enable us to reach 
out directly to our member communities for necessary planning and implementation assistance. It will also 
enable us to focus our study and solutions on subregional patterns, as we look to ensure that each of the 
Midcoast's five labor market areas are providing the housing supply to meet the needs of our growing 
businesses. . 
With full funding MCOG is confident we can provide the necessary assistance at multiple levels to address 
these housing shortages. Like each of the regional agencies, failure to provide this support will stretch our 
staff's capacity to meet growing municipal housing demand; our local and regional economies will suffer. 
For all these reasons we urge you to vote to support full funding for DECD's Housing Opportunity Program as 
proposed in the Governor's budget. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and please let me know if MCOG can help you with your 
important work on the Governor's budget, and the implementation of state housing policies.
