1 
 March 2, 2023  
To the Members of the Maine Legislature’s Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, 
and the Committee on Transportation:  
I’m Brian Markey. I work for MaineDOT  currently as an Assistant Technician  and prior to that 
as a Transportation Worker III. I live in Kenduskeag. 
I’ve been with MaineDOT for seven  years. I work seven  days a week in order to pay my 
mortgage, health insurance, childcare and j ust day -to-day bills – heats , lights and stuff. I have a 
second  job to make en ds meet . I’d like to share with you my wages at each job and the work I do 
for each employer . At my second  job, Bangor Aviation Food Service, the parent company that 
operates the restaurants at BIA, pays me $30 an hour to service vending machines  at the airport . 
But in  my main  job, with MaineDOT, I earn less than $22 an hour operating a $1.2 million 
testing vehicle for the department. You need to know the pay at MaineDOT  is not enough to even really survive on. I just barely 
pay the  bills. And it’s  not just the low pay that’s a problem. It’s also the huge workloads caused 
by understaffing. There are so many vacant positions we’re all stretched way too thin. In my 
former job as a transportation worker, I once plowed continuously for 42 -and-a-half hours straight, 
during the bomb cyclone of February 2017. You see double -vision, triple -vision, when you get that 
tired.  This is all dangerous and hard work. It requires our full attention to keep everyone safe, not 
just the workers but the general public as well.  
Throughout Maine DOT, and the rest of state government, there’s a big problem with recruiting and retaining qualified workers. It’s been going on for decades. Some of you may recall that 
back in January of 2009, the Maine Department of Administrative and Financial Services contracted with Crescendo Consulting for a labor market survey. Tha t survey found that even 
back  in 2009, MaineDOT highway crews were paid 21.6 percent less than their private sector 
counterparts. 
Whenever  a MaineDOT camp is short Transportation Workers, it means everyone else has to 
work twice as hard. This leaves all of us vulnerable to health and safety problems. You can get 
rushed and that can lead to problems real fast.  
In recent years, t here has been  some progress in dealing with the recruitment and retention 
problem  at MaineDOT. A Recruitment and Retention Committee over the years took action to 
make things better in some job classifications. But there’s much more work to be done  and many 
more DOT classifications to address. We all know a Department -wide, S tate-wide solution is 
needed . 
The State must  start paying all of us fairly for the hard work we do. Management needs to stop 
lowbal ling the  pay of state workers and start paying us fairly.  You have t he latest facts: As of 
2 
 two years ago, S tate of Maine workers were being  paid on average 15 percent less than what our 
counterparts make throughout New England, and that’s even after accounting for regional 
differences. It’s all spelle d out in the 2020 State of Maine Market Study Report . And it’s even 
worse for some positions. M aintenance mechanics  who work for the State of Maine  are 
unperpaid by 31 percent, according to the report .. It should come as no surprise, then, that 
because MaineDOT competes with municipalities and the private sector for worker s, the pattern 
of MaineDOT training drivers who then leave state service for be tter pay in the private sectors 
and municipalities is continuing . 
The State Employee Pay Gap has worsened since that 2020 report came out. State w ages haven’t kept  up 
with the rising cost of living, so my coworkers and I have been falling further and further be hind. That’s 
why I’m asking you, as you craft and vote on the next two- year State Budget, to : 
 
1) Address this issue by including in the State Budget the funding necessary to end the 
State Employee Pay Gap ; 
 
2) Provide the funding in the State Bu dget necessary for the Executive Branch of Maine 
State Government to both complete and implement the ongoing review of the State compensation and classification systems.  
 Both actions are necessary to ensure the quality MaineDOT services folks count on, a s well as 
the quality services Maine people count on from all other departments of Maine State Government . Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 Brian Markey  
Kenduskeag, Maine  
 
 
