Testimony in Support of Budgeted Funds for Public Health Nursing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
February 22, 2023 
Brownie Carson 
PO Box 68 
Harpswell, ME 04079 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci,~ 
Representative Meyer, 
I am Brownie Carson, a resident of Harpswell. I was privileged to represent Senate 
District 24 in this legislature from 2016 until 2020. Thank you for the opportunity to 
appear before you today to testify in support of rebuilding Maine's Public Health Nursing 
Service, funds for which are contained in the proposed biennial budget. 
I would like to bring a few of the voices from the public hearing on LD 1108, An Act to 
Restore Public Health Nursing Services, into this room today. There were many 
citizens who supported LD 1108 back in 2017. And their presence madea 
difference. The bill was finally enacted by bipartisan votes of 31-4 in the Senate and 
101-34 in the House. Today, and going forward, we must continue the task of 
strengthening the corps of public health nurses whose work is vital to the wellbeing of 
Maine residents. 
I will quote briefly from several pieces of testimony offered before the HHS Committee, 
April, 2017: 
Peter Elias, Family Practice MD, Lewiston-Auburn 
Primary care is a team effort. In my forty years of medical practice, public health nurses 
were important members of the care team. They provided essential home-based 
sen/ices including prenatal and infant care, care for the homebound elderly, infectious 
disease prevention and treatment, and care of chronic disease. Their services reduce 
the need for expensive hospitalizations and nursing home care. Even if we, as 
individuals, never see a public health nurse, we benefit from their work. 
Mark Brown, Chief of Pediatrics and Neonatal Medicine, Eastern Maine Medical 
Center: 
Over the years, I and many other doctors have worked very closely with Bangor and 
county-based PHNs. Alarmingly, since these nurses ranks have virtually disappeared, 
accurate and timely assessment of babies safety has suffered. In the past, before our 
patients left the EMMC post-partum unit with their babies, we were able to refer all 
babies to PHN s who had great success at mitigating high risk issues. These nurses 
were outstanding at physical assessment and really knew the communities and 
resources and how to mobilize them to make them work for such patients. Now signsof
complications or assessment of risks for those babies mentioned above are not even 
recognized because nurses are not on the case. 
Eric R Brown, MD, Family Medicine, EMMC. 
In the process of training new doctors for Maine communities, I get to work with a lot of 
high risk pregnant patients in high risk families: for example, families experiencing 
substance abuse, domestic violence, and child abuse. We treat the largest percentage 
of pregnant moms addicted to opioids in the state with medically assisted treatment with 
Buprenorphine. To do this well, we need to collaborate as a team with other community 
intervention and prevention partner resources for the best outcomes for our infants as 
well as adults. 
If we really care abouthaving healthy babies who turn into healthy adults, we need the 
whole contingent of Public Health Nurses to maintain a strong, proactive safety net for 
families at risk as well as the rebuilding the decimated more traditional public health 
duties and infrastructure. 
Melissa Burch, MD; Cynthia Wibberly, Family Practice, Bangor 
Ten years ago, we could count on a public health nurse to visit new mothers struggling 
with their newborns. This was especially crucial when mother, baby, or both had 
medical problems that put the baby atrisk. These home visits can significantly reduce 
the risk of an expensive hospital readmission. All too often now, no PHN is available. 
Sue Mackey Andrews, Dover Foxcroft: 
Many times, the medical / health issues of these babies (affected by substance use 
disorder) are not readily apparent. They emerge sometimes slowly, unnoticed; often 
coupled with maternal depression, complicated by poverty, food insecurity, etc. lt takes 
a trained eye to notice - and to identify - and to respond. Maine Families home visitors 
are not clinically trained in these delicate and often complicated signs. 
Rita Furlow, Maine Children's ‘ Alliance 
By meeting families where they are, in the home, the role of public nurses ranges from 
education and outreach support to direct health care services, with the goal of improving 
health outcomes of entire communities. They provide pregnancy education, 
newborn/infant assessment, breastfeeding support, communicable disease control, lead 
poisoning management and so much more. As a result, Maine children of all socio- 
economic backgrounds can get a strong start to life and receive routine, preventative 
care, which is critical for their physical, cognitive, social and emotional growth and 
development. 
Dervilla McCann, Chief of Population Health, Central Maine Health Care. 
A key question that should be asked at today's hearing is why wehave a need for public 
health nurses. The reason is simple. We have a public health system for the same 
reason we have police, and firemen, and the military. These groups all sen/e to protect 
us from threats. 
In 2009, the H1N1 pandemic occurred, leading to an extraordinary collaboration 
between the national and state CDC. ln the case of Maine, our response was to inform
the public, mount an intensive vaccination program using our public health nurses in 
schools, and to distribute an antiviral agent in confirmed cases of the disease. It is 
estimated that over 500,000 people died world wide during the pandemic, particularly in 
low income countries. Over 12, 000 of these deaths occurred in the US. Pregnant 
women and young adults were particularly impacted, but in the state of Maine, we had 
not one pediatric death. We were prepared, and our public health system was effective. 
Stephen Sears, M.D. infectious Disease Specialist 
The citizens of Maine expect their Public Health Department to identify contagious 
diseases and they expect to be protected. To provide this protection, Public Health 
Nurses are the vital link in protecting all of us when outbreaks occur and outbreaks will 
occur. Let me be more specific: during my time as State Epidemiologlst, I can easily 
recall several outbreaks affecting Maine citizens that needed the Public Health Nurses 
to respond to help prevent illness and minimize morbidity and mortality. .. 
For a Public Health program to be effective, there needs to be a fully-functioning 
surveillance system and an active and proactive system to intercede in disease 
prevention - that is PHN. 
Jan Morrissette, Maine Public Health Nurse for 26 years, Director, Maine PHN, 
2005-2011. 
PHNs have a strong role in infectious disease outbreak control. PHNs provide directly 
obsen/ed therapy (DOT) for tuberculosis (TB). lt is imperative that people with TB take 
medication daily without fail, often for 6 - 9 months. if days are dropped, then resistance 
to the medications grows, which has become a major health problem. So, PHNs filla 
critical gap by visiting or contacting those patients every single day to make sure they're 
taking their medications appropriately. No other workforce is funded to do, or can do 
this. During FY 2010 PHNs devoted a total of 4,919 hours to TB control activities. 
As you can see from this testimony, and as was the central theme of dozens of other 
statements in support of public health nursing six years ago, the core of PHN work is 
prevention of serious disease. Yes, public health nurses treat individuals at home in 
their communities (think direct obsen/ation of medication for TB). But they also keep 
watch on the health of children (especially newborns and kids with problems in their 
early weeks and months) and families (issues like post-partum depression, domestic 
abuse), and monitor the health of our communities, watching for outbreaks of infectious 
disease. The physicians quoted above told story after story, giving powerful examples of 
how public health nurses help keep us healthier and safer. 
We need to grow their numbers, and allow them to do more to protect our most 
vulnerable neighbors. 
Yesterday, while searching the DH HS website to find out how many vacant PHN 
positions are open and posted, l found just one--a P_HN is being sought for "district 
lead," in Augusta. Perhaps other postings have recently closed, and some new PHNs 
hired. I hope so.1
lf you look further at DHHS jobs posted, you will find thirteen (13) positions posted for 
child protection case workers. Candidates are being sought for child protection 
casework across the state: Sanford, Machias, Biddeford, Houlton, Caribou, Ellsworth, 
Bangor, Rockland, Lewiston, Portland, Skowhegan, Augusta. Judging from these 
postings, our children and families are very much at risk in many places. 
Maybe, just maybe, if we were hiring more public health nurses, there would be less 
need for child protection, and families would be healthier and safer, both mentally and 
physically. Listening to the voices of people like Drs. Elias, Mark and Eric Brown, and 
Burch, plus the others who see the value of stronger public health infrastructure, l 
believe that strategy should be pursued. 
Thank you.
