‘ 15 University Drive 
Maine Water Utilities Association Augusta, Maine 04330 v**=*"" Organized 19251 
May 17 2023I 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair 
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Letter of Support of the Governor ’s Change Package Part MMMM funding for water and 
wastewater infrastructure investments 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide the following 
testimony in strong support of Part MMMM of the Governor ’s Change Package for LD 258 which 
proposes to fund critical investments in drinking water and wastewater system investments throughout 
our State. 
About MWUA. MWUA is a is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
What does Part MMMM do? As proposed by Governor Mills in the "change package, ” an additional $36 
million over the biennium will be available for water and wastewater infrastructure investment. Ofthis 
$36 million, $22 million represents one time money intended to match newly available federal funds 
under the federal infrastructure and Jobs Act, and $14 million represents a baseline appropriation to 
match more typical levels of federal infrastructure support for water and wastewater. Collectively, 
these funds will provide the necessary state match to secure federal funds from the US Environmental 
Protection Agency used for the replacement of aging water and wastewater infrastructure around the 
State. 
The baseline appropriation included in Part MMMM is also important given Part K of LD 258 which 
repeals the current law that allocates money from the State's Liquor Operations Fund to water and 
wastewater infrastructure. For nearly a decade, funds from the Liquor Operations Fund provided the 
State match for federal money, and with the repeal of this "cascade" of funds for water and wastewater, ‘J 
the creation of a ”baseline ” appropriation for water and wastewater is critical. We see this as an 
essential part of Part MMMM. 
What will this investment pay for? Many Maine people and businesses in every corner of the State rely 
on public water systems to provide safe, potable drinking water, and they rely on publicly owned 
treatment works to treat wastewater generated from household and business use. To maintain these 
systems, communities must invest millions of dollars to ensure their water remains safe and wastewater g! 
ll 
.. 
..
A 
ll
l
MWUA Letter to AFA re LD 258, Part MMMM 
May 17, 2023 
Page2 
is properly treated. Combined, the capital replacement needs of these systems in the State of Maine run 
into the hundreds of millions of dollars. 
To help pay for the infrastructure needs of these systems, the federal government provides states with 
hundreds of millions of dollars each year, subject to a very favorable state match of 5 to 1. In other 
words, for every $5 in federal funds available, a state must provide $1 in local match. Few federal grant 
|Dl'Ogl'8lTlS are 35 generous. 
ln Maine, these funds go to the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) as part of the 
Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) and to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) 
as part of the Clean Water State Revolving Fund (CWSRF). The DWSRF provides funding for public water 
system infrastructure improvements while the CWSRF provides funding for wastewater system 
infrastructure improvements. 
The opportunity for water and wastewater utilities to access these federal and State dollars through low 
interest loans and grants enables utilities to replace aging infrastructure while reducing the direct cost 
on water and wastewater customers. 
The federal funding secured by the State Match also covers the cost of many State positions at DHHS 
and DEP. DHHS's Drinking Water Program not only administers the DWSRF but provides regulatory 
oversight of almost 2,000 public water systems in l\/laine. Seventeen positions at the Drinking Water 
Program are funded through the annual federal DWSRF grant. Without access to federal funds for these 
seventeen positions, this critical public health program would be ineffective in fulfilling its core mission 
of ensuring public water systems are delivering safe drinking water. 
Using the annual State Match and federal investment, as well as loan repayment funds, the DWSRF has 
been able to fund more than $350 million in public water system improvements over the past 25 
years. While the infrastructure investment over the past 25 years has been significant, the need for 
funding always outstrips the available funding. Typically, only about 50 percent of project requests can 
be funded. 
Part MMMM of the Governor's Change Package will fully fund Maine's state match needs over the 
biennium. 
Conclusion. We strongly urge the Committee to support Part l\/ll\/llVll\/l of the Change Package so Maine 
can continue to provide the state match to secure many times more in federal funds to support water 
and wastewater infrastructure investments. lf you have questions or need anything else, please let us 
know. 
Yours for safe drinking water, 
lit by Bruce Berger, 
Executive Director 
ec: James l. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
