 Maine Association of Conservation Districts
Working for Maine’s Conservation Districts
PO Box  541   Portland, ME  04112
Executive Director, Carol Weymouth         cweymouth@maineconservationdistricts.com
Maine Association of Conservation Districts is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
1Maine Association of Conservation Districts – Written Statement Supporting
LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 20, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025”
February 28, 2023  
Support for Maine Dept. of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry
Increase in funding for Maine’s Soil and Water Conservation Districts
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry,                              
and Members of the ACF Committee:
My name is Carol Weymouth, Executive Director of the Maine Association of Conservation Districts 
representing Maine’s 16 Soil and Water Conservation Districts. On behalf of the Maine Association of 
Conservation Districts, I’m writing in support of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
proposed budget of LD 258, regarding the increase of funding to the Soil and Water Conservation Districts 
(SWCDs). 
For nearly 80 years, Maine’s SWCDs have provided respected, trusted, local leadership in natural resource 
conservation across the State with the mission of assisting landowners who endeavor to learn more and do 
better as stewards of their land. 
The sixteen Soil and Water Conservation Districts in our state aid residents in every county in Maine, offering 
outreach, education, technical assistance, and resources with a focus on locally prioritized environmental 
issues.  
Those environmental issues address a wide range of natural resource concerns. While some concerns are 
statewide - invasive plants and pests, forest management practices, non-point source pollution to lakes, rivers, 
streams, and coastal shoreline erosion - local issues vary significantly across the state. Districts host local 
working group public meetings in each county to gain insight from residents, landowners, and partners to 
prioritize the issues which affect their specific service area. 
Responding to those issues is one of the areas where Maine’s Soil and Water Conservation Districts excel – 
why they were nationally authorized legislatively by President Roosevelt in the 1930’s as a response to the 
devastating effects of the Dust Bowl. Then, as they are now, SWCDs were tasked to provide local leadership, 
by elected or appointed Boards as non-regulatory quasi-State entities to engage landowners in voluntary 
conservation efforts to improve soil health, reduce erosion, utilize best management practices, and adopt 
science-based enhancements to their farms, woodlots, and properties.
 Maine Association of Conservation Districts
Working for Maine’s Conservation Districts
PO Box  541   Portland, ME  04112
Executive Director, Carol Weymouth         cweymouth@maineconservationdistricts.com
Maine Association of Conservation Districts is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
2By generating additional funds from State and federal agencies, county appropriations, nonprofit foundation 
grants, and other sources to support conservation efforts, Districts, on average, are able to develop over $ 5.00 
of additional support for every $ 1.00 the State invests.
Despite their efforts, Districts are currently stretched thin, challenged to recruit, and retain staff needed to serve 
local landowners. With an expected influx of federal funding for climate smart agriculture and resilient forests, 
expanded Soil and Water Conservation District services will be needed to provide the necessary planning for 
Maine landowners to take advantage of these funding opportunities. 
The anticipated increased investment in conservation at the federal level allows Maine’s Soil and Water 
Conservation Districts opportunities for much more technical assistance they could provide if financial support 
was increased by the State. The increase in funding would allow Districts to expand technical assistance 
staffing and program capacity which in turn would increase local conservation planning, educational outreach, 
and projects.  
Maine’s Soil and Water Conservation Districts, with their unique ability to engage and partner with 
municipalities, State agencies, Federal partners, and non-profit organizations, have the ability to address a 
broad range of local prioritized natural resource issues.  
This is the perfect time to invest in the future of Maine’s Soil and Water Conservation Districts. On behalf of 
Maine Association of Conservation Districts, I encourage you to support the increase in funding in order to 
promote local conservation across the State. 
 Carol Weymouth, Executive Director, 
Maine Association of Conservation Districts
