Pf.) %~5<>:< 1' < , 
Punizmvi, aw <1 
(it)./) }‘}-’4E~’3- '/< 
\-.M‘~ ..-*=/*=x=/.;+=r_i anm 
AMERICAN GIVII. LIBERTIES IINIIJN 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF CAROL J. GARVAN AND ZACHARY L. HEIDEN 
LD 258—Ought To Pass As Amended 
An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
' 
February 27, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, greetings. We are the Legal Director (Carol 
Garvan) and Chief Counsel (Zachary Heiden) of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine,a 
statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving the civil liberties guaranteed by 
the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. Along with our colleagues, we currently represent a class of 
plaintiffs comprised of all individuals who are or will be eligible for the appointment of 
competent defense counsel because they have been indicted for a crime punishable by 
imprisonment and they lack sufficient means to retain counsel. Our case, Robbins v. Maine 
Commission on Indigent Legal Services, was filed one year ago this week. 
On behalf of our members, we are here to testify in support of amending the budget as it 
pertains to the appropriation for the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services. The ACLU 
of Maine urges this committee to add sufficient funds to the budget to ensure that the lawyers 
assigned to people facing criminal charges have been appropriately screened, trained, evaluated, 
supervised, and supported. This includes funding for public defender offices in each of Maine’s 
eight prosecutorial districts (approximately $3 million/office); funding for two statewide defense 
units to handle appeals and post-conviction review cases (approximately $900k and $1.35 
million, respectively); funding to increase the MCILS capacity to provide training, oversight, 
attorney evaluation, and supervision (approximately $3 million); funding to increase the hourlyI
ACLU of Maine 
LD 258 (13 l st Legis.)-~Page 2 
rate for appointed counsel to $150/hour (approximately $16 million); and funding for meaningful 
in-person trainings and IT support (approximately $330,000). 
A hybrid public defense system like this will be both more effective and more cost- 
efﬁcient than continuing to rely almost entirely on appointed counsel at an increased hourly rate. 
And, a hybrid system will give the state maximum ﬂexibility both to quickly respond to the 
current constitutional crisis and to make long-term structural reforms to address changing 
economics and demographics in the state. We recognize that this system cannot be instituted 
overnight and will take time to build, but that’s all the more reason to start the process now: we 
cannot wait another two years to start building a stable foundation for the system, and we C8.1'1I1O'[ 
continue building on a foundation of sand. Raising the hourly rate for lawyers is important asa 
matter of basic fairness, but it is~—at best—a band aid ﬁx for the larger public defense crisis. The 
best time to begin the process of making substantial structural reforms is five years ago, but the 
second-best time is right now. 
These investments represent considerably more than this State is accustomed to spending 
on indigent defense, but they should not be mistaken for luxury. This is the bare minimum 
funding required to have a functioning indigent defense system, and, by extension, a functioning 
criminal justice system. This is the cost of bringing Maine into compliance with the United 
States Constitution. 
As you are all aware, Maine is organized into eight prosecutorial districts. In addition, 
certain crimes are prosecuted at the state level by the Attorney General’s ofﬁce. You have before 
you a budget proposal for funding for 97 District Attorneys and Assistant District Attorneys 
across the state, as well as funding for the criminal division prosecutors and staff in the Office of 
the Attorney General. For each prosecutorial district, and for the state-level prosecutors, there are 
multiple staffed offices, with technology, support, insurance, desks, chairs, printers, and copying 
machines. In fact, you have before you a proposal to upgrade those printers and copying 
machines for the prosecutors of this state. And, every lawyer who carries out the state’s interest 
in prosecuting people accused of crimes has someone watching over them to make sure they are 
doing a good job. For District Attorneys, that’s the voters. For the Attorney General, that’s you
ACLU of Maine 
LD 258 (l3lst Legis.)--Page 3 
and your colleagues. For the more than 100 other prosecutors, it is a supervisor. They are all paid 
to attend regular trainings, and they all have someone in the office to consult with on a difficult 
issue. They have the police to help with investigations, and they never have any difﬁculty 
tracking down their clients. 
Maine cuirently has four public defenders, working out of an ofﬁce across the street from 
the statehouse, but vested with a mandate to provide representation in any rural undersen/ed 
areas of the state. The budget before you proposes to increase that number to 15 public 
defenders, working out of one small ofﬁce in Augusta, to S61'VC the 1.3 million people across 
Maine’s 35,000 square miles. That is plainly inadequate. It is not a long-term solution to the 
current indigent defense crisis; it is not a short-term solution either. 
One proposal under consideration is raising the rate of compensation for private lawyers 
who take court-appointed cases to $150/hour, which will provide sufficient funding for those 
lawyers to afford their own ofﬁces, office staff, printers, copiers, desks, chairs, computers, and 
insurance. Lawyers performing the difficult and critical task of representing people accused of 
crimes or facing involuntary commitment or loss of custody of their children deserve to be fairly 
paid for their work. Last year, Maine was required to pay for approximately 265,000 hours of 
attorney time, for the 20,000 criminal cases brought by prosecutors seeking jail time. That’sa 
cost of approximately $40 million for private lawyers to handle public defense per year. 
In the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Defense’s budget proposal, it estimated that 
a fully-staffed public defender ofﬁce costs approximately $3 million, which means that the state 
could fund a public defender office in each of Maine’s eight prosecutorial districts for $24 
million. This would reduce the demand for private attorneys by 160,000 hours per year, leaving a 
cost of approximately $16 million for private attorneys to provide the additional 105,000 hours 
of attomey time. In other words, the same $40 million that some would have you spend ona 
purely private system, could instead be spent on a hybrid private/public defender system that is 
better able to guarantee sufficient lawyers in all parts of the state, and better able to ensure that 
those lawyers are trained and prepared. Not every defense lawyer is going to want to be a public 
defender, and a hybrid system would leave open the option for lawyers to include indigent
ACLU of Maine 
LD 258 (l3lst Legis.)--Page 4 
defense as part of their private practices. But many lawyers will ﬁnd the prospect of being able to 
focus on their clients and their jobs, rather than on paying the rent or the support staff or the 
insurance bills, appealing. Some have suggested that it will be difficult to ﬁll those public 
defender positions, but for the 97 prosecutor positions across the state there are currently only 
three vacancies. 
Every day, the court clerks in this state send out lists of 20 or 30 people who are in need 
of a lawyer, asking for some lawyer somewhere to agree to take their case. Some counties only 
have two or three lawyers Wl1O are agreeing to take new cases, and some counties have none. 
This is a crisis. Nobody who is accused of a crime should have to wonder Whether the lawyer 
appointed for them by the government is competent. Nobody facing the potential of having their 
child taken away should have to wonder whether the lawyer provided to them by the government 
is being adequately compensated and has the necessary support to devote themselves fully to the 
task of counselor and advocate. Nobody at risk of losing their liberty, their job, their access to 
credit or an education, should have to wonder whether the lawyer assigned to them by the 
government has the skills and the experience necessary to provide a constitutionally-adequate 
defense. 
On March 18, we will mark the 60th anniversary of the Supreme Court’s decision in 
Gideon v. Wainwright, in which the Court recognized that competent, trained, prepared lawyers 
for people accused of crimes is a necessity not a luxury. In Gideon, the Supreme Court 
announced that it is the state’s obligation to ensure that the accused is provided with the 
“assistance of counsel” as required by the Sixth Amendment. Maine is not living up to its 
constitutional obligation to guarantee the assistance of counsel to people who have been accused 
of crimes but who cannot afford an attorney. You will hear and read compelling testimony from 
many different people and groups over the course of your weeks of budget hearings, asking you 
to support many positive and worthy programs, but you will not hear a stronger claim of the 
state’s obligation to adequate funding than the right to counsel for individuals, presumed 
imiocent, who are facing criminal charges without the able assistance of counsel.
ACLU of Maine 
LD 258 (13 lst Legis.)--Page 5 
Some have suggested that the current crisis is the result of COVID-related backlogs in the 
courts, but you all know better. The Maine legislature recognized the dangerous risk of system- 
wide failure more than six years ago. In 2017, you created the Working Group to Improve the 
Provision of Indigent Legal Services, because of a concern that MCILS did not supervise and 
evaluate the lawyers on its rosters and that MCILS needed stronger ﬁscal management; MCILS 
still does not supervise and evaluate the lawyers on its rosters. In 2018, the Legislative Counsel 
contracted with the Sixth Amendment Center, a national organization with expertise on the right 
to counsel, to conduct an investigation of Maine’s indigent defense system, and the results of that 
investigation were issued in April 2019. That report made it clear that Maine was not meeting its 
constitutional obligation to guarantee the assistance of counsel to people who are accused of 
crimes and who cannot afford an attorney. The Sixth Amendment Center found that the attorney 
qualiﬁcation standards are too lenient, that training is inadequate, and that oversight is practically 
nonexistent. And, the Sixth Amendment Center provided a list of recommendations for the state 
to pursue to come into compliance with the law and the constitution. All of this happened long 
before anyone had ever heard of COVID. 
My colleagues and I have spent thousands of hours in litigation over the right to counsel, 
and we are prepared to spend thousands more putting the State of Maine on trial for its failure— 
our collective failure—to follow the constitution. We are prepared to ask the Court to order the 
state to ﬁx the indigent defense system, and to keep the state under court supervision for as long 
as it takes to reach a solution. But, there is no reason to wait for that. You have the power, and 
the knowledge, and the commitment to put Maine on a different path right here, in this room, 
today. We urge you to amend the budget to begin that process of repair, and to pass the budget as 
amended.
