 
 
Senator Rotundo 
Representative Sachs  Members of the Committee on Appropr iations and Financial Affairs 
 
RE: LD 258 An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Al locations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisi ons of the Law Necessary 
to the Proper Operations of State Government for th e Fiscal Years Ending June  30, 2023, June 30, 2024 
and June 30, 2025 
 My name is Carrie Woodcock I am the parent of tw o children with different abilities (disabilities) and 
the Executive Director for Maine Pa rent Federation (MPF). MPF is the federally funded Parent Training 
and Information Center (PTI), Family to Family Health Information Center (F2FHIC) and Statewide 
Family Network. We assist families  of children with different abilit ies to navigate all systems of care 
including Early Intervention. I am submitting this testimony neither for nor against LD 258 An Act 
Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund an d Other Funds for the 
Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certai n Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper 
Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Ye ars Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025.\ 
 Thank you for the request within the budget of an a dditional 10.5 million dollars to fund preschool 
programming for young children with special needs. As  studies have shown inte nsive early intervention 
for young children with different abilities signif icantly improves the positive outcomes for these 
individuals.   My daughter, Sami, is 15-year-old s and has Down Syndrome. Just one week after her birth and 
throughout her first five years of  life Sami received intensive physical, speech, occupational, and 
developmental therapy. Currently, she is a freshman at Thornton Ac ademy and participates in the 
mainstream community. Her hopes are to graduate with her class, go to college, become a police officer, 
and live with her friends in an apartment. There is no doubt this level of achievement and continued 
aspirations is due to the early  intervention Sami received. 
 While, we support the additional funding MPF does contin ue to have concerns in regards to the unmet 
early intervention needs w ithin Maine. The creation of pre-school programming is important but for this 
programming to make an impact it needs to be pr operly staffed and follow IDEA’s definition of Least 
Restrictive Environment.   MPF continues to hear from families  of 3-5-year-olds abou t services listed on  Individual Education 
Programming (IEP) which is going unmet. This incl udes waitlists for pre-school programming as well 
as for services such as therapies. For families w ho are on waitlists to get into a pre-school program this 
means that most if not all of the IEP is not being met.  For the others waiting on a specific therapy, they 
may currently be in a progra m but unable to recei ve part of their IEP. In both  of these instances it is the 
direct result of the workforce shortage and the inab ility to properly staff to meet the need. If we are 
unable to staff the additional preschool programming th e 10.5 million creates, we will continue to have 
unmet need.  
Additionally, MPF is concerned that  new programming will not meet the criteria within IDEA that 
mandates students with different ab ilities (disabilities) be educat ed in their Least Restrictive 
Environment.  
 
 
 
In Section 300.114 of IDEA it states  
“(2) Each public agency must ensure that— 
(i) To the maximum extent appropriate, child ren with disabilities, including children in 
public or private institutions or other care facilitie s, are educated with children who are 
nondisabled; and 
(ii) Special classes, separate schooling, or  other removal of children with disabilities 
from the regular educational environment occurs  only if the nature or severity of the 
disability is such that edu cation in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids 
and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily.” 
 
The creation of new pre-school programming wh ich does not educate th ese students in their 
community with non-disabled peers will be  a violation of LRE within IDEA.  
 
The state of Maine recently created new pre-sc hool programming in response to a complaint 
investigation ruling involving unmet  need within Child Development Services (CDS) in York County. 
It has been recognized that CDS ha s had significant challenges sta ffing these programs and when able 
to staff them have not been able to maintain LRE for these students.  
 
Additionally, MPF has concerns that funding is no t being directed towards Maine’s Part C early 
intervention services. These are the interventions which provide servi ces for children with different 
abilities (disabilities ) ages birth – 3.  
 
MPF is hearing from families within  this population that th ey are neither receivi ng appropriate levels 
of developmental therapy (1-2 hours every 1-2 w eeks) nor are they recei ving any Occupational, 
Physical, or Speech therapy despite missed mi lestones and/or exhibiting regression. The 
developmental therapy being provided  is a “coaching” model instructi ng the parents/caregivers on the 
intervention and leaving the direct intervention to the parent/caregiv er. Most parents/caregivers need to 
work full-time jobs to meet the basic needs of their families, especially with the impact of inflation. 
Putting the additional responsibility of  providing all the early interventi on of their child on their plates 
is irresponsible. We also need to consider that parents have not had the years of training which is 
necessary to ensure fidelity of early intervention.  MPF is concerned CDS has defaulted to this model 
as it decreases the demand for serv ices and allows the state to re flect no unmet need in Part C. 
 
Finally, MPF has concerns that families who worked with their Primary Pediatric Provider to identify 
red flags of autism spectrum  disorder (ASD) and have been referred to CDS are being told by CDS that 
they will not be evaluated until they turn 3-years-ol d. Research shows that early identification of ASD 
and access to early intervention increases positive incomes and reduces the need for intense 
interventions and accommodations later in life.  
 
It is our hopes that the State of Maine can look at  the appropriation of funding to CDS and better 
address the current needs which are crucial to th e outcomes for these childre n and their families.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  Carrie Woodcock  Executive Director  Maine Parent Federation  
