 
 
 
Contact:  Casey Clark Kelley, CEO , Central Lincoln County YMCA   
P: 207.563.9622  E: cclarkelley@clcymca.org 
 
Testimony of  Casey Clark Kelley  before  
the Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and  
the Committee on Health and Human Services  
in support of  
LD 258 : An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 , and June 30, 2025  
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs  
 
February 2 1, 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services , my name is Casey Clark Kelley  and I’m the CEO of Ce ntral Lincoln 
County YMCA in Damariscotta, serving over 100 children in our child care programs , and am a 
resident of Jefferson . I support the investments in the child care industry in the Governor’s 
budget proposal.  
 
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy .  
 There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for 
the YMCA . We greatly appreciate the Governor’s inclusion of these initiatives.  
 
1) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 635 for salary 
supplements awarded to individuals who provide childcare or are early childhood 
educators. (Page 307)  The $200/month sal ary supplements have helped us better support 
our staff and retain them in the child care field. It is challenging to pay our childcare staff a 
competitiv e salary while striving to keep the cost of chi ldcare low to families, as they 
aren’t able to pay at a higher rate that would allow the program to pay for itself. The 
salary supplement allows us to better meet this goal. If we were to  lose this funding, our 
Y would have to absorb the financial impact to keep our staff at the level they have been 
receiving, and we are already operating at a de ficit due to the impact of the pandemic.   
 
2) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 679, An Act to Expand 
the Statewide Voluntary Early Childhood Consultation Program, for the Early Childhood 
Consultation Program.  (Page 333)  Our Y programs have seen an increase in challenging 
behaviors with our youth. It is important that we are supporting them with all resources 
available .  
 
 
 
Contact:  Casey Clark Kelley, CEO , Central Lincoln County YMCA   
P: 207.563.9622  E: cclarkelley@clcymca.org 
 
 
 
Ensuring that all young children have an equal opportunity for healthy growth and development 
is a long- term investment in Maine’s future prosperity. 90% of a child’s brain develops as early 
as five years old, and positive early learning experiences establish strong foundations for the 
brain’s architecture. We apprec iate the initiatives outlined in the Governor’s budget, and look 
forward to working with you and your colleagues this session to further increase the state 
investment in this critical sector.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Casey Clark K elley 
Chief Executive Offi cer 
Central Lincoln County YMCA  
 
 
