Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, andhonorable members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairsand Labor and Housing, my name is Cate Blackford. I serve as the policy director for the MainePeople’s Alliance.I am here to testify today neither for nor against LD 258.As you know, the Commission to Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Programreleased itsrecommendationsearlier this week. Thiscommission has worked tirelessly for thepast two years to develop a paid leave program specifically tailored to the needs of Maineworkers, families and employers. Their research has shown both the great need for such aprogram and the significant return an investment in creating such a program would have acrossthis great state. They estimate the startup costs would be $65 million over 2-3 years.While the work of the commission was conducted, Maine People’s Alliance and the MaineWomen’s Lobby launched a ballot campaign to establish a universal state paid leave program.The program aligns closely with the recommendations of the commission, though we estimatethe startup costs to be closer to $40 million. The primary cost driver is the IT for managingcontributions and benefits.Today I would like to share with you an overview of how we covered those costs throughrevenue bonds backed by the employee and employer contributions, in case it is helpful in yourdeliberations on how to fund the startup costs with a legislative path to creating robust PFML.The ballot measure tasks the Maine Municipal Bond Bank with procuring the necessary startupfunds from the bond market and their repayment. MPA worked closely with attorneys expert inthose regulations to draft language to ensure the timely and responsible borrowing andrepayment of the funds. The full language outlining the process can be found on page 14(SS850-S) of theballot measure language. Given thetime constraints, rather than me walkingyou through that, please see the attached flow chart that summarizes the ten-year process.As you know, there are pros and cons to using revenue bonds versus general fund dollars forsupporting the creation of Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program. Revenue bondsare not an option for funding all state programming and can alleviate pressure on the budget.However, borrowing costs are not as low as they were even a few years ago and this specificprogram revenue would not yet exist at the time of borrowing, making borrowing for start-upcosts more expensive than might be desired and adding to the overall program costs. Borrowingfrom the bond market also adds additional steps to the creation of the program and may extendthe time frame to set the program up. It also requires borrowing the full amount you may need,

as the state is unlikely to know the total costs at the point when deciding how much to bond,which can lead to unnecessary costs.I am happy to answer questions about the revenue bond process and the ballot language in thehopes that it can help you determine the best path to cover the startup costs. MPA is excited atthe prospect of the legislature passing a paid leave program that aligns with therecommendations of the Commission and I would urge you to fully fund this critical investment inMaine’s economic future.Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to take any questions.
Maine Municipal Bond Bank Startup FundPFML Payroll Premium Revenue Fund within Bureau of Labor Standards, Maine Department of LaborStarting July 1, 2025 Employers and Employees Pay Payroll Premium Creating Revenue Stream
Starting July 1, 2026 Payment of Benefits to EmployeesStarting May 2024 Internal DOL Staff and Operational ExpensesDecember 2024 $38M Estimated Payment for IT Biling and Benefit Tracking SystemsApproximately April 2024 $40 million in Bond Sale ProceedsApprox. Sept. 2025 Interest and Capital Repayment to Bondholders BeginsBondholders
Costs of issueance, ancilary costs of bonding, bonding "reserves," and MMBB internal administrative costs.Approx. May 2024 One-Time Transfer of Balance of Bond Sale Proceeds after Initial CostsStarting September 2025, Biennial Transfer of Amounts Collected in Payroll Premiums Sufficient to Pay Capital and Interest on Startup Bonds. Transfers end when all bonds retired. CoveredEmployers& Employees
PFML Operating Fund within Bureau of Labor Standards, Maine Department of Labor$40M bonds sold into market approximately April 20241234
567
810
119biennial transfer of premium revenue not needed for bond service
Eligible Workers
