February 17, 2023
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director
The Nature Conservancy in Maine
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 nature.org/maine
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
RE: LD 258 – Biennial Budget Proposal for the Governor’s Office of Policy, Innovation 
and the Future and Department of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS) 
Information Services
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I 
am the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of two areas of the proposed biennial budget - the 
Governor’s Office of Policy, Innovation and the Future and the Information Services 
budget within the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create 
innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that nature and 
people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages local communities, 
governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature Conservancy has been leading 
conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner in the state, 
owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We also work across Maine to restore rivers and 
streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and 
develop innovative solutions to address our changing climate.
Governor’s Office of Policy, Innovation and the Future (Z135, page A-289)
TNC has worked in close collaboration with the Governor’s Office of Policy, Innovation and the 
Future (GOPIF). Our State Director, Kate Dempsey, served on the Maine Climate Council and 
many of our staff served on the Climate Council Working Groups. Our organization works with 
both coastal and inland communities to support climate resilience planning and investments. We 
are pleased to see this work in action in the GOPIF budget proposal.
Specifically, we support the increased funding proposed for the Community Resilience 
Partnership (CRP) Program. The recently released annual report for the program demonstrates 
an outstanding record of success over just a short time. Since the program was announced in 
2021, 131 cities, towns, and Tribal governments have participated in the program either on their 
own or through regional coalitions. To support these participants, CRP awarded $4.65M during 
two grant rounds. This incredible success demonstrates the popularity and need for this work, 
and we strongly support continued investment in this program.
Additionally, the GOPIF budget proposal establishes one new staff position to manage the 
Community Resilience Partnership Program. As the programs grows, it is important to invest in 
staff capacity to continue to provide high quality support for the communities that are enrolled 
and participating. TNC fully supports the addition of a new staff member to support the CRP.
Department of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS) – Information Services 
(0155, page A-29)
The DAFS Office of Information Technology manages and provides enterprise information 
services throughout state government. These services include Geospatial mapping. The budget 
proposal establishes two new staff positions to serve these needs – one Public Service 
Coordinator I position and one System Analyst position to serve Geospatial mapping needs. 
Additionally, the proposal provides funding for acquiring spatial data including high resolution 
aerial images. Accurate, high resolution Geographic information, including aerial imagery, 
landcover data, and lidar-based elevation models are absolutely key to decision making and 
planning across all sectors in Maine.  Private industry, town governments, state agencies, non-
profits, and private citizens rely on these data and services.  The Maine Office of GIS and the 
Geolibrary provide an essential service in the acquisition, analysis, and distribution of this 
information and knowledge.  TNC and our partners specifically rely on the up-to-date accurate 
geospatial information the state provides for planning for land and water conservation, decision 
support tools, and climate change adaptation and mitigation planning.  TNC supports increased, 
long term funding for staff and programs for Geospatial data, acquisition, and analysis.  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of these two important budget areas.
