-1- 
 State of Maine  
130th L egislature 
Joint Standing Committee s on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and on the Judiciary  
Testimony of Charles F. Dingman  
For the Justice Action Group  
Supporting  
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of  State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of Sta te Government for the 
Fiscal  Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025"  
Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs  
February 27, 2023  
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs , Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and 
members of the Joint Standing Committee s on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and the 
Judiciary , I am Charlie Dingma n, a lawyer with the firm of Kozak & Gayer . I am here today in 
my role as a volunteer with the Legislative Committee of the Justice Action Group, a judge -led 
coalition  including Maine ’s 7 legal aid providers and a cross -section of lawyers and others who 
support equal access to justice by supporting civil legal aid for low -income Mainers.1 The Justice 
Action Group thanks the Governor for  the continued appr opriation to the Maine Civil Legal 
Services Fund that she has proposed but urges that the final budget reflect a greater investment in 
address ing the vast unmet need for civil legal aid.  
Justice for all requires investment in both criminal and civil legal services. In criminal 
cases, the accused has a right to a lawyer. Like criminal cases, civil legal problems can threaten  
people’s livelihoods, health, or families in profound ways, yet  there is no right to counsel.  Civil 
legal  aid provides help for  Maine people who cannot afford a lawyer but face life -changing legal  
challenges such as evictions and other housing crises , domestic violence, c hild protection and  
custody issues , access  to health  care, hunger , and many more  issues requiring professional 
guidance through the legal system .  
Maine’s system of civil legal aid consists of a well -coordinated, innovative, and 
hardworking group of legal service providers , funded mainly through a patchwork of sources, 
including generous donations from private practice lawyers, surcharges on court fees, interest on 
lawyer trust accounts, and the like .  The JAG is grateful that the Governor’s Biennial Budget 
continues an  annual appropriation of $1.3 million from the General Fund to the Maine Civil 
Legal Services  Fund, 2 first enacted last y ear for FY 2023.  This bas eline funding is critical ly 
important  in helping legal aid providers maintain operations despite the impacts of the pandemic 
and to fill funding gaps  as other sources of support have declined, but it is not sufficient to meet 
 
1 The Justice Action Group is chaired by Associated  Maine  Supreme Court  Justice Andrew Mead and  is described more fully 
here: https://justicemaine.org/grants -and-programs/justice -action -group/  
. 
2 Part A of the Biennial  budget document at p. A -483.   
 
-2- 
 the current  and growing needs of Maine's residents and court system.  Funding for civil legal 
services remain s at a level  that preclude s delivering representation to most of those who need it 
to protect the  vital interests I described ear lier.  For decades, the Justice Action Group has urged 
that the enormous unmet need for these services calls for  sustained support from state 
government through direct appropriations to the Maine Civil Legal Services Fund.  It is 
commendable that, at last, the budget includes a first step in that direction, but far more 
investment is needed.  
As you deliberate on the totality of this biennial budget, JAG asks that you honor the 
spirit of this vital first step by recognizing that to truly meet the acute need for civil legal aid, a 
substantial  increase in  General Fund support  is essential .  LD 564, sponsored by Senator 
Carney , will be heard by the Judiciary Committee next month.  That bill addresses the ongoing 
need by proposing an investment of $3.9M in FY 2024 and $7.8M in FY 2025.  A n investment at 
this level would:  
✔ Preserve existing legal aid cap acity ( which will otherwise decline to an anticipated  loss 
in ARPA funds at the end of this year ). 
✔ Increase intake capacity and provide legal help to at least 10,640 more households  
each year, while  address ing the legal needs of at least 20,000 households  through 
impact  litigation and administrative advocacy.  
✔ Increase education and outreach efforts , expand client -facing  technology tools, and 
improve self -help options to reach and assist even more people in need of  legal 
help. 
✔ Begin to move Maine toward an adequate number of legal aid attorneys.  The National 
Justice Index calls for 10 legal aid lawyers for every 10,000 low income people .  
Maine currently has fe wer than 2 lawyers per 10,000.  The proposed FY 2025 
appropriation would bring Maine to about 3.6 attorneys per 10,000 low -income 
persons.  
The resources are available now to begin this commitment to access to justice for all.  
The JAG asks that this Legislature take that important step.   
Thank you for your time  and attention today. I would be pleased to respond to any 
questions now or via the contact information provided below.  
Charles F.   Dingman, Esq.  
Mobile (207) 240 -9146  
Direct: (207) 430 -0842  
cdingman@kozakgayer.com 
 
Kozak & Gayer, P.A.  
157 Capitol Street, Ste. 1  
Augusta, ME 04330  
(207) 621 -4390  
 
https://justicemaine.org/grants -and-programs/justice -action -group/  
