Testimony of Christine Alberi, Child Welfare Ombudsman 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
LD 25 8, State Biennial Budget 
Public Hearing 
February 21, 2022 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. 
My name is Christine Alberi, and I am the Child Welfare Ombudsman for Maine. I am here 
today to testify in support of the provisions of the proposed biennial budget that support the 
Office of the Child Welfare Ombudsman. 
Maine’s Child Welfare Ombudsman program is an independent non-proﬁt authorized by 22 
M.R.S.A. § 4087-A to provide information and referrals to individuals requesting assistance with 
child welfare and to perform case-speci ﬁc reviews of child welfare involvement. Under the 
statute the Ombudsman also has a duty to analyze and provide opinions and recommendations to 
agencies, the Governor, and the Legislature on state programs, rules, policies, and laws. 
The Ombudsman ’s opinions and recommendations are based on our case-speci ﬁc reports. We 
receive a complaint from an individual who calls the Ombudsman and then the complaint is 
referred to the Department. Then we review all of the information relevant to the determination 
of the complaint, including a response from the Department. A report is drafted, We receive 
feedback on the report, come to an agreement about the contents of the report, and then ﬁnalize 
the report. 
We also provide direct information to the public. For everyone who contacts us, even if we do 
not complete a case speciﬁc review, we can give detailed information about the laws, policies, 
procedures, and practices in child welfare cases. 
The Ombudsman ’s office was founded as part of child Welfare reforms enacted in the Wake of 
the death of Logan Marr, a child who died in foster care in 2001. In its ﬁrst years, the ofﬁce was 
housed in the Maine Children ’s Alliance. In 2012, in conjunction with a funding reduction, the 
Ombudsman ’s office became an independent non-proﬁt with one staff member. I took over as 
the Ombudsman at the end of 2013. For context as to how the program has grown over the years, 
a decade ago in ﬁscal year 2011, there were 282 contacts to the office. In 2013 there were 452, 
and this past ﬁscal year, 2022, there were 801 contacts. 
In 2019 we were able to add one additional staff member, Associate Ombudsman, Ashley 
Morrell. Despite this, We were still under resourced for the scope of the Work contemplated in the 
statute. During the last legislative session, additional funding was appropriated in order for us to 
hire additional staff. This was much needed funding, but we have been struggling to ﬁnd staff in 
today’s difﬁcult job market. 
As you are unfortunately aware, due to recent, highly publicized child deaths, there is increased 
scrutiny of the child welfare system in general, and specifically the area that We are charged with
reviewing, investigations into the safety of children by the Department of Health and Human 
Services, and reuniﬁcation of children and their parents after children have been removed into 
state custody. We are working closely with the Department to make recommendations for both 
system improvements and changes and improvements in individual cases in real time. Children 
in Maine are struggling in unprecedented Ways, and the work of the Ombudsman ’s ofﬁce is an 
important piece of solutions for our children who are at the greatest risk. 
Thank you for listening to my testimony today, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
Christine Alberi 
Child Welfare Ombudsman 
ombudsman@cwombudsman.org 
207-215-9591
