Statement of Christopher V. Davis, Ph.D., Executive Director 
Maine Aquaculture Innovation Center 
before the 
]oint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and the 
Ioint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business 
Wednesday, February 15, 2023 
The Maine Aquaculture Innovation Center was created by the Legislature in 1988 with the mission of 
developing economically and environmentally sustainable aquaculture opportunities in Maine. Over the 
past thirty-five years, the MAIC has supported over 400 research projects and has held numerous 
workshops, briefings, conferences, and other educational events, all designed to inform the 
public concerning the economic development potential of commercial aquaculture, and the challenges 
facing Maine finfish, shellﬁsh and seaweed farmers. The MAIC also manages, in partnership with the 
University of Maine, an aquaculture business incubator program with facilities in Franklin and Walpole. 
The MAIC sponsors and facilitates innovative research and development projects involving food and 
other products from sustainable aquaculture systems; invests in the enhancement of aquaculture 
capacity in Maine; serves as a source of educational information to enhance public visibility and 
acceptance of aquaculture; and encourages strategic alliances tasked with promoting research, 
technology transfer, and the commercialization of aquaculture research. 
Most of the activities supported by the MAIC are done in collaboration 
with stakeholder organizations. Our primary partners include the Maine 
Sea Grant Program, SEAMaine, Focus Maine, the Down East Institute for 
Applied Marine Research and Education, the Maine Aquaculture 
Association, the Maine Technology Institute, the University of Maine 
including the UM Aquaculture Research Institute, the Maine Center for 
Entrepreneurial Development, the Maine Departments of Marine 
Resources and Community & Economic Development, the U.S. 
Departments of Commerce and Agriculture and the World Wildlife Fund. 
Legislative support has always been critical to the MAIC's success. The 
Center and its Board of Directors work hard to identify projects and activities that apply sound science to 
industry problems and that address questions about aquaculture posed by the public. Every effort is made 
to keep administrative costs to an absolute minimum. Christopher Davis serves as the Executive Director 
and works out of donated space at the University of Maine's Darling Marine Center in Walpole. State 
appropriated funds managed by the MAIC are re-granted to research teams 
working on industry challenges, ranging from disease prevention to the 
introduction of new cultured species. The minimum project award/ match ratio 
is 1:1, but over the past ten years, has averaged $2.25 in matched funds for 
every dollar expended by the Center. Examples of recent MAIC research 
projects include: 1) development of culture methods for the emerging sea 
scallop industry, 2) development of workforce training curricula for the 
community college system 3) development of best practices and tools 
for Maine aquaculture farmer improve the social acceptability of their farm 
operations, and 4) an interactive aquaculture e-book curriculum for use in our 
workforce development efforts. Furthermore, Legislative support for 
the MAIC has allowed it to leverage additional federal funds for projects 
directly benefiting the Maine industry such as recent USDA funding to 
support job training and
curriculum development efforts to benefit commercial fishermen and others wanting to diversify their 
incomes and / or create new aquaculture businesses. 
The MAIC manages the biennially-held Northeast Aquaculture Conference 81 Exposition (NACE] — now 
the Northeast ’s largest aquaculture meeting. In 2022, the NACE convened in Portland and brought 
together about 550 industry producers, vendors, researchers, managers, investors and students to discuss 
emerging issues affecting the industry. 
The MAIC in partnership with the University of Maine 
currently manages the aquaculture business incubator 
program which provides startup businesses and 
entrepreneurs with 1) unique facilities to conduct research 
leading to new aquaculture products, 2) technical, business 
and financial assistance and 3) direct access to University of 
Maine academic and research resources. Some of the many 
Maine businesses that have used this program include 
Kennebec River BioSciences, Sea & Reef Aquaculture, Mook 
Sea Farms, Acadia Harvest, lnc., BioProcess Algae, Inc. and 
most recently, American Unagi, Maine Fresh Seafarm, Maine 
Shellfish Developers and Aqualine, LLC. Financial support for the incubator program is provided in part by 
the Applied Technology Development Center System administered by the DECD and additional support 
from the Maine Technology Institute. 
In summary, the MAIC is working in a variety of ways to help Maine's aquaculture industry grow and 
prosper and on behalf of the MAIC Board of Directors, I would like to express our appreciation for the 
legislative support we have received in past years and hope that the Legislature will continue to fund this 
important program in the next biennium.
