Christine Johnson
Waterville/Alfond Youth & Community Center
LD 258
Testimony of Christine Johnson
Child & Youth Development Director/AYCC
In Support of LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from 
the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025" 
Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Tuesday, February 21, 2023, State House Room 228
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, 
members of the Health and Human Services, my name is Christine Johnson, and I am 
the Child & Youth Development Director at the Alfond Youth & Community Center.
The ECCP has been a vital resource for the preschool team at the AYCC and 
parents/guardians of that program. Susan Brousseau, our area LCSW, came to us two years 
ago to introduce us to the program and we have utilized it several times for child specific and 
classroom issues. The communication has been excellent and based on a team approach 
from the start. Our preschool team has learned a great deal from going through the process 
of referrals, evaluation, and classroom implementation of strategies with the ECCP 
professionals. Parent have had all positive feedback for communication as well as approach. 
In times when we felt a real uptick in concerning behaviors in this preschool population, this 
program came along and has so far met our needs. My concern now lies in the program 
being able to keep up with the demand that will now come, as parents looking for services for 
their children are just not finding any or encountering huge wait lists. Also with the ability to 
keep kids in our programs who need time sensitive or temporary support to be successful, but
cannot find it. 
The one-time stipend we received for utilizing the program went right back into enhancing our
preschool curriculum materials and increasing our outreach to make sure we are always fully 
enrolled and supporting the community to the best of our ability. If we want the classroom to 
be successful and be able to meet the needs of the youth in our care, we need to programs 
like this to continue and grow. The only way that can happen is with your support. 
Christine Johnson
Child & Youth Development Director
Alfond Youth & Community Center
Waterville, ME

