SI 
131 Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
A 
With the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of the Maine Association of Public Housing Directors in Support of 
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025" 
09 February 2023* 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing. 
I am Christopher LaRoche, Executive Director of Westbrook Housing Authority, I am here today 
as a member and on behalf of the Maine Association of Public Housing Directors (MAPHD). 
The Maine Association of Public Housing Directors is comprised of 23 public housing 
authorities working across the state of Maine. We support the proposal in LD 258 to transfer 
$30,000,000 from the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Maine State Housing 
Authority for the Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program and the Low-income Housing Tax 
Credit Program. 
I will be brief, in respect of the Committee ’s time dedicated to this important work to discuss the 
urgent need for more affordable housing in our State. We believe this is an issue we can all agree 
on. The challenge before us is how to achieve this goal with the resources that are available to us. 
The magnitude of the production of affordable housing requires the attention of all parties 
concerned, private and public housing developers; local, county, and federal govermnent and the 
State of Maine. We urge you to support the initiative to divert surplus funds to the construction 
of new housing units. While better zoning, thoughtful collaboration and improved construction 
methods can reduce the costs of building housing, it ultimately requires substantial funding to 
build affordable housing. 
This allocation of funds continues to build upon the success of the past 20 years and the moret 
immediate success of the last four years of the Legislature ’s commitment to address the shortage 
of affordable housing. 
The 23 municipal Housing Authorities have been building affordable apartments in rural and 
urban communities as far south as York and as far north as Fort Fairﬁeld. To meet this 
immediate need, eleven of our member Housing Authorities across the state have 1,238 
apartments in their pipelines and shovel ready for construction. Additional resources at the state 
level will facilitate these — and many other -- projects.
The $30 million being proposed will leverage other funds such as the State and Federal Low 
Income Housing Tax Credit program, State and Federal Historic Tax Credits, Community 
Development Block Grants, Local Community Bank loans, and other programs such as the 
federal Home Loan Bank’s Affordable Housing Program. 
We understand there is tremendous pressure on state govermnent to be prudent and ﬁscally 
responsible with the taxpayers hard earned money. We can think of no other need greater than 
that of having a safe, secure, and stable place to call home that will provide an immediate 
response. We urge you to adopt this proposal. 
Thank you.
I 3 ls’ Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
With the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing
l 
Testimony of Westbrook Housing Authority in Support of 
LD 258 "An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025" 
09 February 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing. 
I am Christopher LaRoche, Executive Director of Westbrook Housing Authority, and I am 
testifying in Support of LD 258. 
I wish to provide you an example of the impact of this $30,000,000 will have from an economic 
standpoint. In the past 5 years and inclusive of new construction to commence in 2023, 
Westbrook Housing will have produced or preserved 365 affordable housing units in the City of 
Westbrook. Through the actions of the Legislature in support of bonds and the Maine Real' 
Estate Transfer Tax, and its support of Maine Housing, $15,496,086 of subsidy has been 
dedicated to create these affordable housing properties. The State funding has leveraged 
$41,590,057 of funding capital that is non-interest bearing and would have otherwise been 
distributed to another state. In addition, Westbrook Housing and its development corporation 
has infused $6,750,000 of matched funds to these properties. The State funds leverage over three 
times the amount of non-interest-bearing capital. 
The investment by the state in my example is $117.93 per month per household for a period of 
30 years. I could go into a detailed analysis of how this offsets general assistance, or the costs 
related to housing immigrant families, or the added costs related to families in school systems 
who are homeless. We are all aware that the Social Cost to stabilize families reduces the overall 
present and future costs of municipal, county, and state govermnent. 
One ﬁnal point, any Bill to fund Affordable Housing has a secondary impact as a Jobs Bill, as in 
my example $85,118,231 is infused into the Maine economy through construction payroll, 
material purchases, and vendor payroll. The result is an approximate $4,468,700 in Maine 
personal income tax and sales tax. 
Thank you for your time and your support of this Bill to fund Affordable Housing.
