Testimony 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
Maine Public Broadcasting Corporation (Maine Public) 
Clare E. Hannan, Vice President and Chief Operating Officer 
February 13, 2023 
Thank you, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, 
and all the members of both committees; l’m Clare Hannan, Vice President and Chief Operating 
Officer for Maine Public. I appreciate the opportunity to address you today on the funding and 
work of the Maine Public Broadcasting Corporation, and to provide a brief overview of a few of 
our strategic efforts. We value our partnership with the Legislature and state government and 
appreciate your support. 
Maine Public is the statewide public television and public radio network. We are where Mainers 
get the television programs of PBS and the radio service from NPR, we have also become a key 
resource for state and local news from Maine Public journalists, as well as for classical music on 
our Maine Public Classical network. 
There are so many Mainers who are represented here, from the hundreds of thousands of 
viewers and listeners across the State of Maine, the nearly 53,400 member households who 
support the programming with their contributions, our 120 employees across the State, and the 
20 community volunteer members Board of Trustees. 
We broadcast Maine news and information and tell Maine stories. One of our distinctive 
services is High School Basketball Championship Weekend, where we broadcast the 
championship game for each of the five high school divisions for both boys and girls. lt'sa 
tradition that Mainers associate with public television, and we are proud to do it. 
We're also proud to produce some competition on the academic side. In March, we will 
premiere Season Six of High School Quiz Show Maine, a fun game-show-style competition 
featuring high school teams from all over the state. 
Perhaps the most important part of our partnership with state government is our role in public 
safety and emergency communications. On the handout, you can see a map of our transmission 
network for radio and television. We are the only broadcast service that covers the whole state, 
and we partner with the Maine Emergency Management Authority, MEMA, to give them the 
ability to communicate emergency information statewide. Maine Public is the primary 
distribution method for Emergency Alerts System messages, EAS. We are the best way that 
state authorities can communicate easily and simply in an emergency. 
Page 1 of 2 (over) 
Testimony to Joint Appropriations and Education Committees 
by Maine Public Broadcasting Corporation, Clare E. Hannan, Vice President & Chief Operating Officer, February 13, 2023
The costs of operating and delivering signals to remote locations from Aroostook & 
Washington, Penobscot & Piscataquis, Somerset to Androscoggin, Oxford, and frankly, every 
single county in Maine are significant ~— about $2.6 million out of an annual budget ofjust under 
$16 million in FY22. We serve these rural communities as a partner like we always have — but it 
remains both expensive, and technically challenging to keep these 5 television and 7 radio 
broadcast transmitters and dozens of transmission links operational and ”on the air" every day. 
The dollars that come from the State are, per State statute, intended to meet the costs of 
delivering broadcast and emergency alert services and maintaining our state network. The 
programming costs for TV and Radio are exclusive of State monies, and supported by our 
listeners, viewers, and underwriters, and by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. 
As you can see represented by the graph in the center of your handout, there has been a gap 
for several years between our state appropriation and the costs we incur to maintain our 
network. As recently as 10 years ago, in 2012, the appropriation was just under two million, 
and our expense for operating and maintaining the network was also around $2 million. ln the 
past ten years, the appropriation declined to $1.5 million, and in the last budget it rose to $1.65 
million. Meanwhile, our expenses have risen to over $2.6, so the gap is now at just about $1 
million. For that reason, we respectfully request an additional $850,000 be added to our 
baseline appropriation. 
Finally, the handout has a note about infrastructure improvements. Our network of towers and 
transmitters was built in the 1960s and requires significant upgrades and replacement. We have 
a modernization plan that costs approximately $27 million. ln 2021, we were allocated $10 
million in ARPA funds through the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan. That $10 million is helping us 
with significant modernization, including replacing two main television transmitters. But that is 
$10 million out of a $27 million need, so we will continue to ask for more support during this 
legislative session through the bond bill process. 
In summary, we remain committed to serving all the people of Maine for public safety, while 
connecting to them in a variety of ways. We're focusing on a continued emphasis on Maine 
news, journalism, and public affairs content in more places across the State. We're launching 
new digital platforms and program services to meet the needs of current and future 
generations of users and ages. And finally, we continue to work on building strong 
relationships with all of you as part of our statutory and historical connection to the State of 
Maine. We're appreciative of your commitment to Maine Public as we face new technology and 
programming challenges, even as we set our sights on continuing to be a valuable asset for 
Maine and in fact, creating new ways to meet the Public Broadcasting needs of future 
generations of Maine citizens. 
Thank you again for this opportunity, and l'd be pleased to answer any questions from the 
Committee members. Page 2 of2 
Testimony to Joint Appropriations and Education Committees 
by Maine Public Broadcasting Corporation, Clare E. Hannan, Vice President & Chief Operating Officer, February 13, 2023
