Good Afternoon Senator (    ), Representative (.     ), and members of the 
committee. 
My name is Connor Smith, I am a Procurement Analyst II for DAFS. The 
State Department responsible for overseeing every purchase made by 
State of Maine Agencies. I am here to today to discuss the importance of 
increased funding to both our agencies and our workforce. Staffing 
shortages are going to become an increasing problem over the coming 
years, and significant funding is the only way to combat the issue. An aging 
workforce is going to see a substantial increase in vacancies, vacancies 
that will not be filled at the current pay rates. My department alone is 
seeing two retirements within the next six months. These retirees are public 
servants who have taken on significantly more work than their roles would 
normally require, because 30 years of experience provides expertise that 
can not be taught over night to new hires. The cost of living, especially 
rental prices, have skyrocketed throughout the state of Maine over the last 
few years. One bedroom apartments under 1500 dollars a month are few 
and far between, and rarely in places people want to live let alone start a 
family. To be frank, I am only able to work for the State because my 
education was paid for through military service. The current pay gap has 
become so extreme that there will be no hiring college graduates struggling 
with student loans on top of the increased price of living. The phrase “do 
more with less” will not fill positions or allow workers to keep up with 
demands as people leave for well deserved retirements. Turn around times 
within my department are expected to be within five days for RFPs, RFAs, 
or selection packages – something we feel is necessary to keep our 
government functioning. It is difficult to see how our department, or any 
department, can continue to provide timely service when our workforce 
continues to downsize and positions cannot be filled by qualified workers 
do to the pay gap. Raises that fail to meet interest rates are not raises, but 
pay cuts. As things currently stand, State employment is not an avenue to 
the middle class, but a sentence to live pay check to pay check. 
Recruitment and retention needs to be the primary focus of the State if they 
intend to continue functioning while dealing with the retirement of one of the 
oldest work forces in the nation. 
I appreciate your time and consideration and hope that the wellbeing of 
those who have dedicated their lives to State service will a remain a priority 
for you all. 
