Corrinne Collett
Brooklin Climate Response Committee
LD 258
On behalf of the Brooklin Climate Response Committee I urge the Maine legislature 
to continue its support of the Community Resilience Partnership program. In 
particular our committee would like to speak about our experience working with the 
local service provider on the Blue Hill peninsula, Allen Kratz of Resilience Works 
LLC.
We formed our committee in the Fall of 2022 at the request of the Brooklin select 
board to help the town enroll in the Partnership. I think it is fair to say the committee 
members were novices at working with state requirements and were rather daunted by
the forms placed in our hands. The expert guidance and assistance Mr. Kratz provided
at this initial stage was critical to our successful Partnership application, and made it 
possible for us to move on to other projects. 
In the few months since we first created the committee we are assisting our school 
with energy efficiency advice for their upcoming renovation program, helping the 
select board with efficiency improvements at municipal buildings, and building a 
neighbor to neighbor program to help town residents and businesses lower their 
energy demands and avail themselves of the many incentives offered by Efficiency 
Maine and the state and federal tax codes. Throughout this process, Mr. Kratz has 
been our eyes and ears into the wider world of grants, government programs, and 
other Maine organizations working to fight climate change. His advice and 
encouragement have been essential in helping our committee to move forward with 
confidence and speed. Without a service provider available to explain processes and 
make connections, I think it is safe to say that we would be struggling, if not failing 
entirely. Instead we have taken his advice to “think big” as we grow our projects to 
confront the effects of climate change.
It’s hard for me to imagine a more effective use of state monies than the funding of 
the local service providers like Mr. Kratz. His hard work and impressive talents have 
been essential to bringing the Governor’s climate programs to the residents of 
Brooklin.
Brooklin Climate Response Committee
Si Balch
Corrinne Collett
Doug Hylan (Chair)
Stephen Kazmierczak 
Lars Selberg

