`
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ 
feedingmaine.org
February 28, 2023
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee On Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs in support of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations 
from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025. 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Ingwersen, Representatives Sachs and Pluecker, and 
members of both the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry Committees.
My name is Courtney Kennedy, and I am the Nutrition Director for Good Shepherd Food Bank. I 
am here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of the Nutrition Incentives 
funding included in the budget before you for consideration. 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access 
to nutritious food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the 
public in the fight to end hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 
600 organizations to help distribute food to community members in need. Our network of partner 
agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior centers, school programs, and healthcare 
facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working with communities of color 
to address food security in a culturally responsive way. 
In addition to our traditional partner network, Good Shepherd Food Bank collaborates with small 
grocers and food retailer to oversee Farm Fresh Rewards.  With Farm Fresh Rewards, shoppers 
using SNAP/EBT earn bonus dollars for Maine-grown fruit and vegetables.  Incentives programs 
such as Maine Harvest Bucks and Farm Fresh Rewards encourages shoppers to spend their 
SNAP dollars on healthy product by providing financial incentives on fruits and vegetables.  
SNAP incentives not only improve healthy food access and nutrition among SNAP participants, 
they also support farmers and small businesses, and stimulate the local economy.  Since the 
inception of Farm Fresh Rewards in Maine, over $500,000 of incentives have been redeemed on 
Maine local product by SNAP shoppers- showing growth year over year.  Good Shepherd Food 
Bank feels strongly about the positive impacts this program has on the wellness of food insecure 
Mainers.
Our Farm Fresh Rewards stores are deeply embedded in their communities and have shared the 
impact that this program has had on SNAP shoppers.  Families can prioritize eating local.  As a 
`
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ 
feedingmaine.org
food strategy for Maine we recognize the sustainable impact this program has on not only our 
farmers, but also our environment and our communities.  Farm Fresh Rewards store include 
Belfast Co-op, Berry Fruit Farm, Blue Hill Co-op, Food Share Co-op, Gardner Co-op, Ginny’s 
Natural Corner, Good Turn Co-op, Jordan’s Farm, Machias Marketplace, Marsh River Co-op, 
Portland Co-op, Rising Tide Co-op, Rosemont-Munjoy Hill, Royal River Natural Foods, 
Sheepscot General Store and Spice and Grain.
I want to share with you a little about Virginia Jewel or as her community knows her as Ginny of 
Ginny’s Natural Corner.  Ginny not only takes the time to engage her Farm Fresh Rewards 
shoppers, but she is even willing to meet them at the Farmers’ Market to share with them ways 
that they can shop not only at her store in Skowhegan but also take advantage of the nutrient full 
local fruits and vegetables at the Skowhegan Farmers’ Market.  
Another example is the team at the Portland Coop who are interested in responding to the ever-
growing diverse shoppers they are seeing in their store.  By making sure that they have culturally 
relevant local produce and partnering with local farms to simulate opportunity for both the 
shoppers and the farmers find beneficial.  Building on the impact of supporting more diverse 
farms and building access to foods that are familiar to many shoppers who now call Maine home.
SNAP/EBT shoppers share over and over that they get to prioritize local for their families, 
allowing them to contribute to a strong and healthy community.   I have spoken to program users 
who are thankful that they do not have to choose between purchasing foods that are nutrient void 
because they cost less, but that they can purchase and extend their food dollars on local, healthy 
produce for their families.  Extra funds for SNAP/EBT shoppers to purchase fruits and 
vegetables means that more fruits and vegetables are consumed; this results in improved health, 
and decreased diet related diseases in program users.
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with 
the state legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make 
Maine a stronger, better place to work and live.  Because only partial funding for Farm Fresh 
Rewards is awarded through Gus Schumackers Incentive Program (GusNIP) which requires a 
non-profit or government agencies to apply and GusNIP requires a dollar-for-dollar match for 
programming.  We ask you for your support in ensuring that Maine food insecure families have 
access to fresh, local and nutritious foods!   
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony, and I ask you to keep this funding in the 
budget. 
`
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ 
feedingmaine.org
Sincerely,
Courtney Kennedy
Director of Nutrition
207-232-1975 
ckennedy@gsfb.org
