  
 
February 16, 202 3 
 
Testimony in Support of  the Community Resilience Part nership Funding as part 
of LD  258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Sen ator Nangle, Representative Stover  
and members of the Appropri ations and Financial Affairs Committee  and the 
State and Local Government Committee . My name is Cou rtney O ’Donnell  and I am 
the Assistant City Manager for the City of Bangor. I am providing testimony today in 
support of LD 258 that provides funding for the Community Resilience Partnership.  
The funding in LD 258 for the Communi ty Resilience Partnership is an import ant step to 
ensur ing Mainers are better  equipped to  reduce carbon emissions, transition to clean 
energy, and become more resilient  to the effects of climate change. This f unding would 
directly  support  local efforts to protect what makes Maine so great.  
As a member of the Partnership, Bangor has  been fortunate to receive grant funds to 
support  the installation of  additional EV chargers in Bangor, as well as develop a 
regional  climate action plan with the Town of Orono and the Bangor Area 
Com prehensive Transportation System ( also known as BACTS) . Once completed, o ur 
regional climate action plan will be publicly  available for all communities in our area to 
take advantage of , thereby jumpstarting  regional  efforts to  implement recommendations , 
many of whom would benefit great from  these grant dollars .    
The proposed funding increase for the Partnership in this budget shines a light on the 
important acknowledgement that more and more communities are embrac ing the 
urgency of climate change and should be support ed in their efforts.  Through our own 
local process , we have learned firsthand that resources for reg ional planning , and 
implementation,  efforts are vitally imp ortant.  
Additionally,  funding for the Partnership lets the people of Maine know that we are in it 
for the long haul  while  encourag ing efforts  to better  prepare our communities for the 
challenges  ahead . I know a walk through our City forest, a view from t he Thomas Hill 
Standpipe, or l unch at one our many downtown restaurants  with the Kenduskeag 
Stream  and Penobscot River nearby  reinforce  my desire to mitigate  the effects of 
climate change while we still can . The Partnership has created an avenue for 
municipalities  to act and for that we ar e appreciative.  
Thank you for your time and attention. We’d be pleased to take any questions.  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager  courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov ; 992 -4202  
Anja Collette , Planning Analyst anja.collette@bangormaine.gov   
Rick Fournier, Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov   
 
 
 
 
