Testimony of Courtney Vannah, Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives, MCD Global Health 
for LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Endin g June 
30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025.  
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee and the Health and Human Services 
Committee  
Public Hearing: February 22, 2022  
 
Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representativ e Meyer, and esteemed 
members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services 
Committees, I am pleased to offer testimony in support of LD258. I am an independent practice 
dental hygienist who works with MCD Global Health on multi ple measures increasing access to 
dental care for Maine’s children and have worked directly with the Maine CDC School Oral 
Health Program in the past, providing invaluable services to the underserved children of Maine. 
I’m testifying today to encourage the  Committees to add the necessary funding into the budget 
to ensure Maine CDC’s School Oral Health Program has the resources to expand to all schools 
by 2025, as enacted last legislative session.  
Far too many of Maine’s children go without dental services. Numerous children rely on 
school -based services as their only access point for dental care of any kind. Maine’s School 
Oral Health Program (SOHP) offers some children their only  opportunity for oral health  
assessment  and application of fluoride varnish. Th is evidence -based preventive treatment is 
proven to reduce dental disease risk when applied routinely. While working with the SOHP, I 
saw children with active dental infections who said they  had never had a dental appointment 
before. Without screenings provi ded in schools, many families are unaware that their child has 
dental needs, and issues can go unnoticed until they are severe and require emergency 
intervention. Access to this basic health service is an essential need that should be afforded to 
all child ren, not just those who are lucky enough to be enrolled in a school currently served by 
the SOHP. All children, in all schools , in Maine should be offered equal access to this basic 
need.  
It is very important that we fund the expansion of this critical program. Tha nk you for your 
consideration of my testimony on this important issue.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
Courtney E. Vannah, IPDH, MS, MPH  
Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives  
MCD Global Health  

