 
 
      QUALITY AND RELIABILITY SINCE  1903  
 
 
       
 
 
Craig W. Douglas, PE  
General Manager  
 
T.C. Schofield, PE  
District Engineer   
PO Box 489  
Topsham, Maine 04086  
Telephone (207) 729 -9956 
Fax (207) 725-6470 Daniel O. Knowles, CPA 
Director of Finance and 
Data Management Systems  
 
Joshua S. Cobb, PE  
Director of Operations  
May 17, 2023  
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair  
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Letter of Support of the Governor’s Change Package Part MMMM funding for water and  
        wastewater infrastructure investments  
 
 
Dear S en. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee:  
 
For nearly a decade, funds from the Liquor Operations Fund provided the  State match for federal 
money,  providing returns of $5 of federal funds for every $1 of sta te funds. This program leveraged tens 
of millions of dollars each year  for the State’s water and wastewater utilities.  With the repeal of this 
“cascade” of funds for water and wastewater,  the State threatens to  undo years of significant progress 
against th e ongoing water and wastewater crisis.  
 
Lead service lines, deteriorating water and sewer mains and PFAS in source water and sludge are 
pressing public health issues that need the State’s attention. Ensuring State funds are available to 
leverage the available  Federal funds  at the aforementioned 5 to 1 ratio is just good common sense.  
 
These funds enable lower rate loans and partial forgiveness for communities that desperately need the 
funds to address aging infrastructure,  the increasingly stringent public health goals  and the emerging 
PFAS crisi s. We strongly urge the Committee to support Part MMMM of the Change Package so the 
State of Maine can leverage the  federal funds to support the needs of the public water  and wastewater  
utilities that desperately need these funds.  
 
If you have further questions, please feel free to call or email cwdouglas@btwater.org . 
 
Very truly yours,  
 
 
 
Craig W. Douglas, PE  
General Manager    

