      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
February 9, 2023  
 
Re: LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State  
Government, General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing Certain Provis ions of the  
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending  
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of 
the Joint Standing  Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of 
Community Housing of Maine or CHOM .  CHOM’s  small staff  works collaboratively service 
provider s all across Maine to house hundreds of people experiencing homelessness, 
particularly the longest stayers in homelessness, victims of domestic violence, and homeless 
Veterans – all of whom require supportive housing.   I also chair the Maine Homeless Policy 
Committee, the Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors, as well as the ESAC Long 
Term Stayers Committee.   
 
I am testifying in strong support of the Biennial Budget .  Specifically, I urge you to support 
Part TT wh ich would allocate $30 million to expand affordable rental housing options for 
workers and their families through equal funding of $15 million  to both the Rural Affordable 
Rental Housing Program and the Low -Income Housing Credit Program . 
 
There is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine:  The aggregate waiting list for affordable housing managed by state’s largest apartment association has risen 
to more than 30,000 households; 26,000 Maine households are on waiting lists for f ederal 
rental assistance, often waiting five to ten years.  This data is as of 2019 – it has worsened 
since, especially amid the pandemic and the sharp increase in cost of housing.   There is an 
extraordinary unmet demand for affordable, quality housing for  all populations, as well as 
supportive housing for people experiencing homelessness with complex issues such as serious 
and persistent mental illness, substance use disorder, and trauma from domestic violence.  
 
In the past few years, resources have only allowed for about 180- 220 affordable housing units 
a year to come online, and closer to 12 each year for supportive housing.  Despite 
MaineHousing and the Legislature increasing resources toward this , the need for affordable 
and supportive housing for homel ess and special needs populations far exceeds the supply.    
 
Only a small fraction of affordable housing has been targeted toward serving homeless 
populations. Without creating solutions at a more significant scale, we won't make a real 
difference in ending homelessness in Maine.  
 
Homelessness is solvable.   Housing and services are the key tools we need to do so.   
 
It is extremely important whom, within the homeless populations, this housing targets. 
Housing someone who was homeless for a day or even a few weeks will help, but modestly. Circumstantially homeless populations generally do not require dedicated supportive housing. 
In contrast, housing people experiencing homelessness for the longest period of time  who have 
compl ex needs requiring a permanent supportive housing intervention , will make the most 
significant difference in emptying out shelters and getting people off of our streets. This 
population is our Long Term Stayers  (LTS, people with 180+ cumulative nights of 
homelessness, in shelters or outside, in any 12- month period) .  LTS use beds night after night, 
making no vacancy situations for the majority of people who are circumstantially and briefly 
homeless.  
 
The ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee , which includes 20 participating organizations , has 
housed more than 430 of the longest stayers in homelessness  with the most complex needs  in  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Dylan O'Neil  
Asset Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
Maine over the last 7 ½ years, and also demonstrated that this population is as many as 45 times more likely to be in 
jail and 29 times more likely to be in the hospital when unhoused vs housed.  Housing this population saves us a lot of 
money and is a game changer for each person.  Our biggest problem is finding it.    
 
If done right, Part TT of the Biennial Budget could dramatically he lp Maine end homelessness, by housing the few 
hundred people who need it most.  
 
Supportive Housing as an Evidenced- Based Practice 
Today in Maine it costs:  
• $903 per day, or $47,000 per person per year, to have someone in jail.  
• $1000 per person per day to ha ve someone in the ER, not including rescue transportation there or other 
hospitalization costs that can follow such visits.  
• $3073 per person per day, or $159,813 per year, on average to have someone at Riverview.  
• $1200 per person/month or $14,400 per year to keep someone in the least expensive emergency shelter, not 
including food, or other services.  
In contrast to the cost to serve frequent users of these many systems, it costs:  
• $13,200 to house someone for an entire year in Maine* and approximately $3200 a year for support services**, for a total cost of $16,400 per person per year to be stably housed.  
• For the few that need them, additional support services such as Acute Care Team (ACT) are much more efficiently 
delivered and effective when a person is housed rather than homeless.  
 
There are multiple successful, best -practice models for housing homelessness populations requiring supportive 
housing. Three in Maine with the most success are:  
• Site-based Housing First models, such as Logan Place, Florence Hous e, and Huston Commons in Portland. These 
are dedicated buildings, coupled with project -based rental subsidies and 24/7 support services, with low barriers to 
entry. This model has provided permanent stability for people experiencing chronic homelessness wi th high 
vulnerabilities.  
• Scattered -site Housing First models use the same low -barrier approach as the site- based model, but instead feather 
homeless populations into housing using rental subsidies. Outreach services are provided to ensure people 
maintain stability in their housing. This model has had a success rate in the mid- 90% range, but it is dependent on 
finding housing in the marketplace for the most part, and 1% vacancies make this very tough to find.  
• Dedicated Transitional and Permanent Supportive housing with low barrier access. These are generally smaller 
multifamily projects scattered around service center communities across the state. They specifically house 
homeless populations and provide dedicat ed support services for their success. Much of the housing for victims of 
domestic violence, youth who cannot be reunited with families, and people with substance use disorder, is 
transitional; LTS require permanent supportive housing for success.  
• Inclusi ve Housing, where multifamily affordable housing welcomes homeless populations into a percentage of the 
units, and outreach support makes this supportive housing.  
 
We need sufficient supplies of all of these best practice models. We are significantly shor t in our supply of all of them. 
I would encourage Part TT of the Biennial Budget  to specifically prioritize people homeless the longest vs. shortest 
lengths of time.  That way it will do the most good.  And flexibility in the housing design will be importa nt for this to 
work well all over the state.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.  
