1 
  
Good Morning Esteemed Members of the Committee,  
 
My name is Cynthia Barre. As a Maine citizen I am personally providing my written testimony to address concerns of State employment. Thank you for taking the time to listen and to consider our concerns rega rding our working conditions. 
 
First, I would like to inform the Committee that as a State employee who has some knowledge of the 
Legislative process, I was completely unaware of your hearing on this issue until yesterday afternoon. There are far more Stat e employees who do not have exposure to the Legislative process, than who do. 
For this reason I ask that you consider generously extending the deadline for the submission of written 
testimony beyond today. I believe you will find today that there is limite d testimony because State 
employees were unaware of this hearing.  
 
I started employment with the State of Maine in 2012 after working half of my career in the private sector. I started at MaineCare where the pay was low, the building was sickly, and the j ob was high 
stress due to working on many emergent issues. While at MaineCare my team filed an FJA to have our pay scale re- evaluated. It was a long and hard battle which took 5 years. The State fought hard against 
us. We were not willing to give up and we  won. This resulted in moving up one paygrade. By the time 
this happened I had already left MaineCare and took a new State position.  Currently I work at the Maine Bureau of Insurance. The majority of our job descriptions were written in the 1980's, which is when they were assigned a paygrade. These outdated job descriptions and paygrades are common with the majority of the State's positions.  
 
In 2020 MSEA was successful in getting a Pay Scale Study approved by the State. The study has been 
completed, howe ver, to date the State has done nothing to consider re -accessing our pay scales. The 
data in the study reveals that employees in the private sector who have the same job titles and job 
duties are making considerably more than their counter part does at the  State of Maine. Since the study, 
the MSEA has negotiated our contracts and the State has held strong on not addressing the inequity in our pay, only agreeing to minimal pay raises in each contract negotiation.   
 
Staff retention, and finding the best qual ified candidates for State positions, is an issue due to the 
paygrade of State positions. While I was at MaineCare, Governor LePage put both a hiring freeze and a 
pay raise freeze on State positions. Due to these two factors if a position became open a new  employee 
could not be hired to fill the position. By the time I left MaineCare I was doing three jobs for the same low paygrade I was hired at. Although today we no longer have a hiring freeze or pay raise freeze the 
issue of inequity in our pay and staff  retention still persists. It is hard to find high quality candidates 
when they see the pay they will be offered.  
 
Telework is also an issue State employees are greatly concerned about. During contract negotiations the State would not allow telework to be  written into our contract. Instead the State said they were 
developing a telework policy. So far this telework policy has been a moving target as it is changed and 
been reworded more than once. Telework has been a big plus for my team since the pandemic s ent us 
home to work in March of 2020. My Management tells us our work performance and employee morale 
has increased since we have started working from home. Telework is also a factor for prospective employees, so many companies are now offering full time t elework. Between the paygrade and the lack 
of permanent telework, Management struggles to find the best qualified candidates to fill our State 
2 
 positions.    
 
 
I would like to ask the Legislature to address the sick buildings we work in as State employees. Currently my building is closed and employees are either working from home or in a temporary State space due to our building being unhealthy. Since I have worked for the State I have had multiple lung 
infections and health issues due to toxic air quality i n the buildings I have worked in. I have addressed 
this issue over and over again since 2012 only to have it fall on deaf ears by the Administration. The 
majority of the State buildings I have been in (for meetings etc.) have made me and others sick.  
 Ther e are a vast number of State buildings that are in horrible condition and very toxic to employees ’ 
health. It would be  a significant cost savings to Maine taxpayers to close these old dilapidated buildings 
and enact a permanent telework policy. I understa nd this is not an option for all State positions as some 
employees interface with the public daily, however many employees do not. The State could keep a number of the newer State buildings for employees who must work on site.   In 2021 I was approved through an ADA request form to work from home due to the health ramifications State buildings have caused me. The State put a disclosure in this approval that for the purpose of work operations this approval can be revisited at any time. My long term health ramifications that have been caused by working in these toxic State buildings is not going to change. It 
is my greatest fear that the State will make me go back to work in a State building. Due to the State's disclosure my ADA approval seems to be the same mo ving target that our current telework policy is. 
 Lastly, enclosed is a copy of the letter I wrote and submitted with my completed ADA form. I find it both disturbing and sad that I had to fight for nine years and I had to advocate this hard for myself to be 
allowed to work in healthy working conditions. I can't breathe in State buildings and I have had 
multiple lung infections due to the condition of the buildings I have worked in. Today I have been 
working from home for 3 years and I have been breathing f reely for these 3 years. I am grateful every  
day for the privilege of breathing freely. This in itself is sad because breathing freely should not be a 
privilege, but a right. I hold myself to a high moral standard and I have an excellent work ethic. I ask that my employer respect what I bring to the table with actions that address the concerns of employees. 
I am about to turn 59 and I thought I would be with the State until I retire. I have been seriously 
reconsidering this due to the issues I have outlined . Employment elsewhere has become an option that I 
am researching and considering.  
 Thank you for your time.  
 
 
Cynthia Barre  
 
  
 
 
    
 
3 
                                                                        6/2/2021 
           I am requesting the followi ng accommodations or modifications to my employment:  
 
I am requesting to permanently continue remote work from my home office. My supervisor, Deputy Director Kim Davis, can confirm that both her ability to rely on me to step up and take on additional projects, and my work ethic, has not changed in the past year plus that I have been working remotely 
from my home office. My quality of work has not changed and I have handled my workload and 
additional assignments in the same attentive manner that I displayed  when working inside my State 
building. I received a step increase during my annual evaluation in May of 2021, attesting that my  
quality of work and work ethic has not changed since I began working from home over a year ago.    
I was born with a genetic r espiratory issue which has resulted in a lifetime history of acute bronchitis's 
and pneumonia's due to my extreme sensitivity to poor air qualities and toxins. My first pneumonia was 
at 2 weeks old. In February of 2011 I was diagnosed with COPD. Years of pne umonia's and acute 
bronchitis's caused the onset of this COPD. On September 24, 2012 I became employed by the State of Maine and I have worked in two State buildings to date. Both buildings have made me sick numerous times and sent me to Urgent Care and Ex press Care with bronchial spasms requiring nebulizer 
treatments. For years I used my own sick time and paid out of pocket for medical care during these episodes. My employee file will reveal that I finally reported it to HR and filed Worker's Comp the la st 
few times I had these bronchial spasm episodes. Since working in my home office I have not had one episode of bronchial spasms and I certainly have not needed any nebulizer treatments. When I have these bronchial spasm episodes, they do not end with the  nebulizer treatment, that is only the 
beginning. Having these episodes causes me to then develop either an acute bronchitis or a pneumonia, leading to a longer sick time away from my job and my workload. In these State buildings I need a prescribed inhaler and use the inhaler almost daily. In the past year plus while working at home I have 
not needed or used the inhaler once.  
 
My lungs can't afford exposure to toxins that cause me these respiratory illnesses which in turn will 
accelerate the progression o f the COPD. I work in a profession that serves Maine citizens. I did not 
choose a position in a chemical plant where working conditions and air quality would obviously and knowingly impact my long term health. As a State employee who is serving the public, I  did not expect 
to work in buildings that have conditions which seriously affect my health and are causing me long 
term health ramifications. I am 57 years old and did not envision a retirement filled with doctor 
appointments, hospitalizations and oxygen dependency, because the air quality and conditions of the State buildings that I worked in, accelerated the progression of my COPD. Presently I still have the opportunity to avoid this outcome by continuing to work from my healthy environment and avoiding working conditions that are toxic to my health. My home office has proven to be beneficial to both my 
overall health and my respiratory health while State buildings have proven to be harmful to my health 
and respiratory system.  
 The first bronchial spasm  episode I had in a State building happened only one month after I started 
State employment in 2012. The maintenance crew was working on the duct work in my building. Two 
coworkers and I all ended up with pneumonia (our cubicles were under the same ceiling vent). I was 
out of work for nearly three weeks and very ill. It required two rounds of Z -Pak to overcome this 
particular pneumonia. Before becoming a State employee, while sick with acute bronchitis, I had a 
coughing spell that became so violent I cracke d two ribs and ruptured my spleen on February 26, 2011. 
This is when the COPD was discovered. My respiratory illnesses are not just a nuisance they are 
distressful, painful and life threatening at times. There is no logistic need for me to be exposed to  
4 
  
conditions and air qualities which aggravate and exacerbate my respiratory issues when I have proven 
that I can effectively do my job from my home office. I am a two time cancer survivor with an immune 
system that has been zapped and I am susceptible to al l kinds of illnesses. At home, in my controlled 
atmosphere, I have avoided all community spread illnesses and all respiratory illnesses. I want to continue to be afforded good health by working from my home office which has proven to be a healthy 
environme nt for me. As a loyal and dedicated State employee I deserve to be allowed an air quality and 
working conditions that are not negatively impacting my health or causing me long term health effects. 
 My noticeably good health this past year has been an eye ope ning experience for me. It is unheard of 
for me to go this duration of time without a respiratory illness of any kind. This past year is the first 
time I was not required to sit inside a State building and it has made a significant positive impact on my 
health. I now can clearly see that I have been the canary in the coal mine while sitting inside these State 
buildings for 40 plus hours a week since 2012. Anytime air quality testing has been done in my 
buildings it was reported back that the air quality w as at acceptable levels. Each time I heard these air 
quality reports, like the canary in the coal mine, I alerted my Management and the Union, that the air quality is really not acceptable, and it is causing me and others health issues. The higher percenta ge of 
State employees have strong respiratory systems and immune systems and they do not suffer noticeable effects from the air quality in our State buildings. This does not mean the air quality levels are  acceptable or that these State buildings will not c ause these employees long term health conditions in 
their future. Governor Mills just reported that 87 million has been allotted to assess building problems and finance the clean up and remodeling of our sick State buildings. I am one of your State employe es 
who gets sick inside these sick State buildings and returning to my State building will risk my respiratory health and impact my future health by deteriorating my ability to breathe on my own. I certainly cannot be sitting in one of these State buildi ngs when toxins are being disturbed during clean 
up and remodeling.    
 
I live alone therefore I am a one income household. I am requesting my Employer rightfully grant me 
this reasonable accommodation and not force me to choose between my health and my pa ycheck. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.   
 
 
Sincerely,  
  Cynthia Barre  
 
 
   
 
 
