Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services,  
 
My name is Cynthia Oakes, I live in Augusta,  and I’m testifying on my own personal time. I work at the 
Department of Health and Human Services as a Planning and Research Associate and I have been 
working for the State for 29 years.  
 
When I first returned to work after having my kids , I made more p er hour as a temp worker than 
equivalent State positions  paid.  But full-time work , permanent hours, health insurance, and paid time 
off made up for the difference in pay.  
 
As time went on , inadequate cost of living increases, mandatory shutdowns, early clo se on Fridays, and 
freezes on merit increases meant I was falling further behind.  
 
I worked hard  and furthered my education and training so I could advance in my career. I started as a 
Clerk Typist II with a pay range of 8 , and currently I am a Planning an d Research Associate at pay range 
23. At each step of the way my pay has lagged behind the private sector , but more flexible time off was 
important to me while raising my family. At times I worked a part time second job . 
 
There have been two pay studies in  my almost thirty years with the State and each has shown that there 
is a pay gap.  The first study completed the Administrative group , and they all got a pay increase . Just 
after that study, my hard work and new skills got me a job in the Professional & Technical bargaining 
unit. Improving myself meant I made less than my previous position and the rest of the pay study was 
dropped before completion.  
 
I recently sat on two interview panels where we were down to one candidate for each position before 
we even scheduled the interviews. The reason each candidate gave for declining was pay. Fortunately 
the candidates were well qualified and are working out. One of the two later told me that she was 
offered $8000 more for a private sector job but needed the flexibl e schedule we offered. To take a State 
job means less pay that erodes more each year. We can’t continue to rely on attracting good workers by 
offering flexible hours. Especially when there is a shortage of workers.  
 
Once my children were grown , I once more  reviewed my priorities. Having worked under both Social 
Security and State retirement system  (MainePERS)  I did a little research and because I did not have 
enough working years left to avoid the Windfall Elimination offset , and because my part time jobs w ere 
low paying , it made more sense to continue my career with the State. Now at sixty six years old I am still 
working because each year adds 2% to my retirement income. I am so lucky to be healthy and able to do 
this.  
 
I am proud to work for the people of  Maine. Proud of my work. Proud of all the skills I learned and 
applied to my work and life. Proud of my coworkers. I hope to continue to be proud of those who work 
for the State , but I believe we have reached the point where we will no longer be able to a ttract the 
people we need with just flex time to balance offers of higher pay.  The State needs to take steps to close 
the pay gap and ensure that all workers are being compensated well for the important work they do. 
Without an investment in our state work ers, we will continue to face recruitment and retention 
problems, and they’ll likely get worse in the future.  
 
 
