, 
§"?~;'9~' - " ~54‘ 
** .~;»-\5 
».»» . .1 , .. \ . . . 
an I . .» 
_~..» ,_ ..>~,¢.‘ ;., . ',~.* 
1 ~ A 
1: -11>v 
.» 
53.», ,_.,¢_ V-’~=_£3' L -5.-'a-yr J,v..,1¢- ,_ .'-.' "= ' 
.-_~ . . ,2 .....' :.- '.~ 
b . in-I‘ “*1; .1; ,' 
,¢:1= .‘ -j.-;;1rr,-:5 ‘- _+:_,-_"!- ~ ,'r, —~"S[~ ., 
~ " “YH.
= T‘ 4' .\"_¢. ...=-. 
; V’ ;r,{§;.§;§.§:==_ 
_L'i" -2' t 11 A ‘ * "Y Comrmmitzes Workin To ether To Protect OurRivc1's 
,, ms §‘141%~.» =¢ 
"”i$'f5§" I ‘ Saco River Corridor Commission 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Senate Chair, Margaret Rotundo 
House Chair, Melanie Sachs 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Senate Chair, Stacy Brenner 
House Chair, Lori Gramlich 
February 16, 2023 
Appropriation Committee Chairs, Senator Margaret Rotundo and Representative Melanie Sachs 
and Environment and Natural Resource Committee Chairs, Senator Stacy Brenner and Representative Lori 
Gramlich, and members of the Joint Committees, thank you for your time. 
Over 50 years ago, a group of citizens gathered to discuss the importance of clean water and a plan 
to ensure clean water for future generations. This group approached the Maine State Legislature, and in 
1971 the legislature concluded that the Saco River, and its major tributaries, the Ossipee and Little Ossipee 
Rivers, are rivers of great scenic beauty and unique character, with outstanding recreation opportunities and 
important enviromnental values. Due to the development trends in the area at the time, the legislature 
believed it was in the people's best interest to provide orderly protection and proper development values in 
the Saco River Corridor. 
The river remains relatively unspoiled, and many of the important characteristics of the rivers are 
the same. Over time, development in Corridor towns, especially in York County, has increased 
dramatically. In 1973, these issues were discussed in the context of their importance to the region and the 
State. The legislature, and people, believed a system was needed to ensure the important values and 
characteristics of the Corridor were protected into the future. It was in this light that the Saco River Corridor 
Commission was created. These values found in the Saco Basin are still of irmneasurable importance and 
intact because of the Saco River Corridor Commission's work. 
There are 20 towns within the Saco River Corridor, from Fryeburg to Biddeford and Saco. Each 
municipality may appoint a member and an alternate to represent their town on the Commission's regional 
board. The Commissioners meet twice a month to review development applications within 500 feet of the 
Saco, Ossipee, and Little Ossipee Rivers extending up to 1,000 feet in the 100-year ﬂoodplain. Each 
application review includes a ‘site visit, the review of soil information, forestry and habitat information, 
setback measurements, slopes, and septic designs, lot coverage, erosion and sedimentation controls, and 
other site speciﬁc information. Each application is digitized. The General Fund appropriations support the 
Water Quality Monitoring Program and some of the overhead costs of the Land-Use Regulatory Program. 
The SRCC uses around 40% of General Fund appropriations to ﬁnance the water quality program. In 
2001, the Commission created the RIVERS (Regional Interstate Volunteers for the Ecosystems and Rivers 
of Saco) monitoring program to establish a baseline of the water quality of the rivers and monitor for trouble 
areas that indicate declining water quality. The program currently includes 42 sample sites along 130 river 
miles, tested bi-weekly from May to September yearly.' 
The Commission works with many other regional environmental groups. The Green Mountain 
Conservation Group, our partner organization, monitors 28 sample sites in the Ossipee Lake 
Watershed. The programs have over 30 dedicated volunteers who help collect water samples. More 
people express interest in volunteering every year. The program encompasses one watershed, two States, 
and 26 towns. 
PO. Box 283 - Cornish, Maine 011l()2O-01883 ~ (207) (525-8123 Fax (207) 625-7050 Email: srcc@1srcc-rriaineorg
The Maine DEP, New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, and the US Environmental 
Protection Agency approve the protocols for the monitoring program. In the last several years, sites were 
identiﬁed where parameters are approaching the lower limits set for class AA waters, including increases 
in nitrogen, phosphorus, and bacteria approaching nuisance levels. The SRCC continues monitoring these 
sites. Every year, the Commission analyzes the data collected for each town, including positive or negative 
water quality trends and recommendations to resolve any observed issues. This analysis helps towns make 
informed land-use decisions that may impact water quality, identify problem areas along the rivers, and 
resolve these problems. 
The program includes E. coli testing weekly d-uring the summer months at popular swimming areas. 
The Commission notiﬁes towns when bacteria samples are over the acceptable State limits so the town can 
post advisory warnings. A sample is collected the next day to reevaluate swimming conditions. Thanks to 
a grant from the Maine Outdoor Heritage Fund (MOHF), the SRCC has the equipment to test bacteria levels 
in-house, allowing us to increase nutrient parameter sampling by 50%. In 2023, with a signiﬁcant grant 
contribution from the MOHF, we will launch a pioneering project in environmental DNA analysis, 
including microbial source tracking fecal contaminants to determine their source. 
The Commission works closely with member municipalities and town officials in the land-use permit 
process. The Co1n1nission ‘s ESRI Arc GIS map system includes informational layers such as FEMA ﬂood 
maps, land-use districts, jurisdictional boundaries, conservation areas, and individual tax map parcel 
information. A real-time data analysis tool was developed for the maps to allow users to see visual water 
quality trends. Citizens and towns can see the big picture of water quality throughout southern Maine.A 
new dashboard notiﬁcation system on the SRCC website will display bacteria levels at each site, warning 
if the levels are unsafe for public use. 
People's interest in living in Maine has increased, especially along a water body. The pace of 
development along the river corridors continues to increase. In 2022, the Commission reviewed around 120 
applications for development in the Corridor, double the average received before 2019 (60-70). For the 
Commission's appropriation of $46,960, the State of Maine receives the beneﬁt of thousands of hours of 
work annually and expertise from over 60 volunteers and staff protecting the waterways. 
The other major contribution to the Commission ’s budget is from a special revenue fund known as 
“The Saco River Corridor Fund,” established by the legislature in 1997, whereby the Commission collects 
a 1% fee on the sale of water and ﬁre protection services by a “Water Utility” which draws water from the 
Saco River for sale and distribution. The amount collected has increased as the Maine Water Company 
expanded operations and implemented a rate increase in 2021.2 
The Saco River is relied upon for drinking water in Biddeford, Saco, Old Orchard Beach, and 
portions of Scarborough. Other towns in the region are also clients of the Maine Water Company. The 
Commission accomplishes a great deal, fueled by dedicated volunteers from our communities who protect 
southern Maine's natural resources through land-use water quality oversight. Thank you for your continued 
support, time, and dedication to our State. 
Sincerely, 
D4,?» 7§(w¢o» 
Dalyn I-Iouser 
Executive Director
2
