Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacc i, Representative Meyer, and members 
of the committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services,  
 
My name is Darcey Boucher . I’m here testifying on my own time, and I live in Sabattus.  I have 
worked for the Department of Health and Human Services  in the Office of Family Independence  
for 14 year s, and I currently work as an Eligibility Specialist. My role involves working with 
Mainers and families to determine their eligibility for benefits provided through DHHS, such as 
EBT, TANF, MaineCare, etc.   
 
In my time at DHHS, I’ve seen the number of clients in need steadily increase each year . As 
more people struggle to keep up with th e rising cost of housing , food, heat, medicine, childcare, 
and other expenses, more people are relying on Maine’s social safety net and the services that 
we provide at DHHS. Because we are helping more people in need,  caseloads  have  grow n, 
which has led to  stress and burnout for many staff members.  
 
Specialists, who assist Mainers with accessing these critical benefits,  are trained for roughly six 
months when they  are first hired. But after their training , many of them will promote to a 
different role or simply leave the department due to the pay, large caseloads, and stress.  The 
turnover is not sustainable and makes it harder for all of us to do our work.  
 
If we want to keep qualified  and experienced people on staff, we need to pay them more. 
Higher pay wi ll help the Department with both recruitment and retention. The longer you do 
this work, the more experience you gain. If we were able to retain more of our staff, it would 
mean we could help more Mainers who are in need. It would also mean a better work/l ife 
balance for all of us, as the caseloads wouldn’t be as heavy if we had more people to work 
them.  The work that my coworkers and I do is so important to so many of our fellow Mainers; 
we offer stability during challenging times, a lifeline out of povert y, and a safety net for those 
who are down on their luck. But we need to be paid fairly for the work we do and we need to 
invest in making sure we retain qualified staff like myself.  
 
Thank you for your time.  
