Darla Chafin
Augusta
LD 258
Chairwoman Rotundo, Chairwoman Sachs, distinguished members of the Joint Standing  
Committee in Appropriations and Financial Affairs.  Chairman Baldacci, Chairwoman Meyer, 
and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services:
My name is Darla Stimpson Chafin and I live in Augusta. I am testifying neither for nor against
this biennial budget.  I do have a concern about the need for more investment in the care of 
people with cognitive disabilities and in the training and value of those working with them.  
My daughter is a former Pineland resident now living in a waiver group home.  It took
a long time, but she now has a home where she feels safe and useful and is very proud
to believe that she can give her opinion (even without formal language)  about her 
home and her activities.  Even though she lost all but one of her staff during COVID, 
the replacements obviously were trained about her limitations as well as her ways. As 
a result, she has improved in her use of the guard rails in the house and realizes that I 
may need more help as well these days.  She says nothing, but she is aware and helps 
in the limited way she can. Most importantly, she trusts them, not only in the way 
they treat her but also her roommates and those they meet.  It is refreshing and also 
healthy for her.  Frankly, it is the way people should live and learn. But it does cost in
enlightened training and dedicated staff who earn enough so they don’t have to find a 
second job. My daughter who has scarred lungs and is prone to upper respiratory 
diseases and choking has been watched closely enough to not have to be hospitalized 
with pneumonia or COVID since this placement. Or even for head injuries caused by 
her poor sense of balance. It was all caught early enough and treated competently 
enough that she could stay either at home or with staff she knew and away from 
vulnerable clients who might be exposed to any illness.
 Assistance and supports whether given in a residential placement, with their family 
or at their own home allows amazing progress for all involved.  Waitlists for these 
people do cost lives and degraded health, if not theirs then their families. It is time we 
corrected this situation. I think the economic changes that would result in their lives, 
in the health and careers of their families, and in the families of those who receive the 
training and well-earned respect for their dedication and support as Direct Support 
Professionals, Case Managers and administrators that continue to pinch a penny to 
stretch their budgets as far as possible, knowing the great needs still waiting to be 
addressed. 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. And thank you for your continued open 
mindedness in the struggle to understand and address the needs of those who are easily 
overlooked. 
.
