Testimony of Dean Staffieri 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
In Support of LD 258, ”An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal 
Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" (Emergency) 
(Governor's Bill) 
Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, 
and the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Friday, February 10, 2023, State House Room 228, and Electronically 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members ofthe Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing, i'm Dean Staffieri, President of the Maine Service Employees Association, Local 
1989 of the Service Employees international Union. The Maine Service Employees Association 
represents over 13,000 workers across the state, including but not limited to workers in all 
three branches of Maine State Government, the Maine Community College System, Maine 
Maritime Academy and Child Development Services, the Maine Educational Center for the Deaf 
and Hard of Hearing/Governor Baxter School for the Deaf, as well as public workers for the City 
of Lewiston, Lewiston Schools, City of Auburn and York County Government. 
Members of our union are encouraged by many initiatives impacting them in the Governor's 
proposed state budget. It continues free community college for another two years. It increases 
funding for both the Judicial Branch and Maine Maritime Academy. lt reduces the state 
employee share of individual health insurance premiums by establishing new premium tiers 
and also adjusts the health credit premium program to reflect those income tiers. It fully funds 
municipal revenue sharing. 
In her remarks at a news conference on January 10 about the proposed budget, Governor Mills 
said, "We must invest in the infrastructure that supports our greatest asset, which is our 
people.” We wholeheartedly agree on the need for this kind of investment in this budget. 
The proposed budget counts on a qualified and experienced state workforce to provide services 
to all Maine people, yet throughout all departments of Maine State Government, state workers 
are continuously overwhelmed and understaffed in delivering the quality services Maine people 
count on. Several members of our union recently have shared their experiences to draw 
attention to the State's public employee recruitment and retention problems. 
0 MSEA-SEIU Member Brian Markey, an assistant technician at Maine DOT, said that in his 
former position as a transportation worker, he once plowed continuously for 42-and-a-
1
half hours straight, during the bomb cyclone of February 2017. He said, "You see 
double-vision, triple-vision, when you get that tired." 
0 MSEA-SEIU Member Brocke Robinson, who works as an emergency communications 
specialist for the Maine Department of Public Safety, said that because of understaffing, 
"instead of working eight- or 10-hour shifts, most of the time i'm working 14 or 16 
hours, a lot of the times with eight hours off, and then we return to work another 14- or 
16-hour shift. it can be exhausting. if you're tired, the chance of making a mistake, or 
making a wrong judgment call, is higher. We pray that that's never the outcome but 
that's the reality of the situation." 
Brocke Robinson also had this to say: ”We need to step in now, and get the funding that 
we need now before we get to the point where everybody in the general public is gonna 
notice that there's a shortage." 
The stories of Brian and Brocke are not isolated. Rather, they are just two examples of the 
impact of the State of Maine consistently underfunding and understaffing the services Maine 
people count on. 
A recent market pay study commissioned by the State shows workers in the Executive Branch 
have fallen significantly behind other public sector and private sector workers in compensation. 
In 2020, the Mills administration released the State of Maine Market Study Report comparing 
the wages of State workers to their public and private sector counterparts throughout New 
England. The findings confirm what we've been telling the public and lawmakers for years and 
what a similar study found back in January of 2009: The State continues to substantially 
underpay state workers for the work they do. immediate action and progress are needed to 
address this longstanding injustice. 
The study used a sample of 100 "benchmark" job classifications to determine the overall 
competitiveness of the Executive Branch. According to the report, “The State's base pay is 
consistently below the market average at the pay range minimum, midpoint, and maximum. Of 
the 100 benchmarkjob titles, 63 benchmark titles are below the market average; 14 benchmark 
titles are competitive with the market average; 5 benchmark titles are above the market 
average; 18 benchmarkjob titles do not have sufficient market data to make a comparison. 
According to the report, MSEA-SEIU-represented positions in the State of Maine Executive 
Branch earn less than their counterparts as follows: 
0 Administrative Services Bargaining Unit: Workers earn 82% compared to their 
counterparts; 
0 Operations, Maintenance and Support Services Bargaining Unit: Workers earn 82% 
compared to their counterparts;
2
0 Professional-Technical Services Bargaining Unit: Workers earn 86% compared to their 
counterparts; 
0 Supervisory Services Bargaining Unit: Workers earn 84% compared to their 
counterparts. 
You should know that members of l\/lSEA-SEIU Local 1989 are currently in contract negotiations 
with the Mills administration for new Executive Branch contracts and we are determined to use 
the report's findings to advocate for ending the state employee pay gap. We look forward to 
working with this committee and the entire 131$‘ Maine Legislature in support of ending the 
pay gap and continuing our advocacy for state workers and the services they provide. 
While we are encouraged by many of the initiatives in the proposed State and Supplemental 
budgets, more must be done. Please continue addressing the need to make retired state 
workers and retired state teachers whole from the pension cuts of 2011. We're asking this 
Legislature and administration to fully fund a retiree cost of living adjustment (COLA) that 
matches inflation for participants in the l\/laine Public Employees Retirement System. 
Our members look forward to working with all of you to ensure a State budget that funds 
quality services and treats fairly the workers who provide them and the retirees who have 
dedicated their careers to public service in our Great State of l\/laine. As you craft this budget, 
please take to hear the Governor's words from Jan. 10: "Our greatest asset....is our people.” 
Thank you and l would be glad to answer any questions.
3
