Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org Maine Chapter 
INCORPORATED IN MAINE 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
DEDICATED TO THE HEALTH or ALL curr.rmnN= '*-5* 
Testimony neither for nor against: 
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 
30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services February 22, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer 
and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Dr. Deborah Hagler. I am a resident 
of Brunswick, a pediatrician, the immediate past president of the Maine Chapter of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and a member of the Maine Medical Association. 
The Maine AAP strongly encourages funding to address children ’s physical, mental and oral health 
initiatives in the budget. The pandemic exacerbated behavioral and mental health problems already on 
the rise prior to the pandemic ’s onset. Alarmlngly according to the 2021 Maine Youth integrated Health 
Survey, 35.9% of Maine’s High School aged youth felt depressed and 18.5% seriously contemplated 
suicide. Unfortunately, the need for increased behavioral and mental health support is occurring at the 
same time that Maine is experiencing a signiﬁcant shortage in our behavioral health workforce. Asa 
result, many families are struggling to access care for their children resulting in an increase in 
Emergency Room visits, calls to crisis, and an increased burden put on schools. 
Raising MaineCare's reimbursement rates for behavioral health clinicians is one important mechanism 
to address this issue. Identifying a funding source to support this work in schools and school-based 
health clinics is critical as we move forward in our work to address the needs of these youth. The 
Maine AAP strongly supports funding to continue the Maine Pediatric and Behavioral Health 
Partnership Program to support primary care clinicians to identify and care for children and adolescent 
behavioral and mental health problems in the primary care setting. We have legislation forthcoming to 
support this program, LD 231, "An Act to Support the Pediatric and Behavioral Health Partnership 
Program" sponsored by Representative Shagoury. We look forward to providing the Health and Human 
Services Committee with more details on the outstanding success of the program and our proposed 
improvements at the public hearing. it merits investment of state resources, and we urge both 
committees to prioritize this vital tool for pediatricians and primary care providers. 
The pandemic has also delayed routine preventative care and maintenance care for chronic illness- 
including oral health. Dental caries is the most common chronic medical illness of childhood. 
Pediatricians and other child health providers are grateful the legislature voted to expand the oral 
health program last legislative session to help Maine children and families. This expansion called for 
funding, which is not in the current proposed budget. As in behavioral health, there is an oral health 
access crisis, and this funding is a critical part of the solution. We are requesting you add the funding 
as indicated in the original fiscal note for LD 1501 from last session. 
On behalf of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Maine Medical 
Association, please accept my sincere thanks for your hard work in making these important health 
initiatives for children and families a priority. To paraphrase Senator Markey- Youth are about a quarter 
of the population but 100% of the future. if we want to invest in Maine's future, we need to invest in its 
youth — and there is no more critical time than right now as we are seeing the need so acutely. 
Thank you.
