Debora Keller
Bath
LD 258
My name is Debora Keller, and I am the Executive Director of Bath Housing.  
I am writing in support of the Change Package to Biennial Budget, LD 258. 
Specifically, the section on allocating $80 million to the Maine State Housing 
Authority with $35 million for the Rural Rental Assistance Program; $35 million for 
the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program; and $10 million for innovative 
affordable housing development strategies.
Bath Housing is one of eight initial recipients of funding under the Rural Affordable 
Rental Housing Program.  As I have previously testified, I am a big fan of this 
program.  New data on rental prices in our region shows a 95% increase in rental 
prices in Bath since 2017. Wage increases have not kept pace with these increased 
housing costs and people are being priced out of our community.  
There is no quick fix for this problem -- but we need more housing.  At Bath Housing,
we are working on housing challenges from a variety of angles and are fortunate to in 
a community and region that has been proactive in addressing housing issues.  We 
have a four-pronged framework for action that involves policy & planning, direct 
assistance to households, preservation, and production.  But production must be our 
focus right now and this bill will facilitate this.  
Bath Housing is fortunate to be one of the first eight organizations granted a notice to 
proceed to build housing with MaineHousing's Rural Affordable Rental Housing 
Program (RAHRP).  I have been working in the housing field in Maine since 2000 -- 
as a lender, a developer, and now at the housing authority.  The RAHRP program is 
the single most elegant housing production program I have ever seen.  It's really the 
perfect program.  Because it's low barrier, it will allow for a much faster production 
process.  Because it targets price points at or below 80% AMI, it meets the need for 
housing that either households with vouchers can rent -- or people without subsidy 
can still afford.  It also helps communities ensure that the missing middle can be 
housed -- preventing the continued bifurcation of Maine towns.  And it comes without
the spectacular strings that come with the LIHTC program – a housing program under
the IRS.  (Which, until now, has been the primary production program available for 
new construction.)
Every community in Maine has a responsibility to be part of the solution to our 
housing issues.  By adding additional housing subsidy funds, specifically through 
MaineHousing's Rural Housing program, this bill allows smaller communities an easy
way to get new housing built.  Thank you for your consideration.
