 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inaction,  Inflation, and  Insufficient Raises  Widen  Wage Gap  to 25%  Over 3 Years  
 
Derryen M. Plante  
Principal Revenue Agent at Maine Revenue Services  
Eight Year State of Maine Employee  
Doctoral Candidate  
February 22, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inaction, Inflation, and Insufficient Raises Widen Wage Gap  to 25%  Over 3 Years  
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and members of the Committee on Appropriates 
and Financial Affairs, I am here on my own time to speak in support of LD 258, An Act Mak ing 
Unified  Appropriates and Allocations f rom the General Fund . My name is Derryen Plante. I am  a 
29-year-old born and r aised 5th generation Mainer, who has  been working for the State of Maine 
for eight years . Despite my young age, I have already dedicated a quarter of my life to helping 
my fellow Mainers. In addition to my supervisory role at Maine Revenue Services, I am 
finalizing my independent research for my  Doctor  of Business Administration  degree . I 
completed my coursework with a 3.95 GPA  and maintained full -time employment at MRS while 
pursing this education. My purpose in providing this written testimony it to encourage the 
committee to provide state employees with the funds necessary to close the wage  gap.  
I am finding it difficult to draft this letter. It is both discouraging and disheartening to 
need to take the time to explain  why taking a 10% pay cut over the last three  years has causes 
significant hardship.  Despite becoming aware of this issue in  2020, management  is committed to 
keeping their rose-colored  glasses on and telling themselves, and the legislature , that everything 
is just splendid and great. The updates  that have been provided to the legislature regarding  the 
compensation study are app alling misrepresentations of reality . By conclusion of this letter , I 
hope I can convey  how dire  the economic situation truly is  for state employees. The 15% wage 
gap you were informed about in 2020 no longer exists. Over the last three years, inaction, 
inflation, and insufficient raises by management have caused the wage gap to nearly double – 
now sitting at 25.83%. Despite many opportunities to interv ene and prevent the wage gap from 
reaching this point, management refused to acknowledge how devastating this is and take action 
to alleviate the increasing strain state employees are facing.  
For anyone  who are unfamiliar, here is a brief recap of what st ate workers have been 
subjected to over the last few years : 
• 2019 : State employees turned to the legislature after management continued to refuse  to 
provide increases for a livable wage .  LD 1214. "Resolve, To Conduct a Comprehensive 
Study of the Compensati on System for State Employees" put the wheels in motion to 
provide management with the “proof” they needed to justify wage  increases .  
• November 2020 : The market pay study is completed by Segal, who provided a detailed 
breakdown of how  state employees are underpaid, by position, compared to private and 
public sector competitors , and recommendations for all 1,180 state positions . As of this 
date, it became known to management, legislatures, and state workers that as of 2019 (the 
data tha t was used in the study), we are underpaid 15% on average.  
• July 2021 : State employees begin contract negotiations with the “proof” of being 
underpaid by 15% on average. Management insists that the study hasn’t been completed, 
but will make a “good faith e ffort” to do so, and give us a 2% wage increase 12/1/2021, 
and 4% 7/1/2022.  
• Early 2022 : State workers begin experiencing unprecedent economic hardship : (1) gas 
skyrockets to about $5.00 per gallon; (2) landlords start increasing rents by several 
hundred d ollars a month; (3) CMP somehow gets approval for yet another rate hike, in 
addition to the 11.5% increase July 2021 we get hit with another 49% increase in 2022; 
(4) the spike in gas prices causes massive inflation in costs of goods. To put it lightly , 
WE ARE DROWNING.  
• Early 2022 : Our union  president  contacts management , requesting to sit down and 
discuss additional wage increases to compensate for the unprecedented economic 
hardship  state employees are dealing with . Management  denies this request.   
• March 2022 : The legislature is  provide d with  a spirted and cheery update regarding the 
compensation study which elaborates on  how wonderful life is for state employees  and 
how much progress has been made . The legislature is told that  state employees have 
experience wage growth of 10.32% , and that management is making “substantial 
progress” closing the gap, and (shockingly ) “keeping pace with inflation”.  But 
despite receiving a detailed catalog from Segal for all 1,180 state positions, they still 
haven’t gotten around to completing it.  The letter also notes that the project has 
experienced delays because  their specially established Steering Committee was 
“overwhelmed by the sheer volume of the data” . As with the WorkDay project, it seems 
that unqualified individuals were  appointed  to oversee this project , resulting in no 
progress being made over two years , perpetuating the economic suffering of 12,000 
work ers.  
• April 2022 : A massive $1.2 billion supplemental budget  has been announced  and state 
employees are given a ray of hope . State employees believed  that both m anagement  and 
legislatures would realize how much we have been struggling financially for years, and 
now we finally have the financial surplus to fix this issue. Unfortunately, r ather than 
invest in state employees ( thereby improving services for all Mainers), the surplus  money 
was distributed to individuals , many of  whom had already received massive 
unemployment benefits over the past several years . Having absolutely no money 
allocated to closing this gap was utterly devastating  to state employees.  
• Present Day : As of this writing, management is refusing to meet with us , further 
prolonging this economic torture . Rather than coming to collectively address problems 
with mass retirements, recruitment, retention, management instead  accuses us of 
gaslighting and cancel s two agreed upon meetings. More than 27 months after the 
compensation study results are provided to management, they have still not completed  it.  
So how much worse did the situation get  between 20 20 and 2023?   
To sprinkle a little reality on this 10.32% w age growth  being touted by management , let’s take a 
moment to fact check that:  
2019: Assumption that everything else held equal, wage gap stands at 15%  
Year  Wage Gap - 
Beginning  Negotiated 
Wage Increase  CPI Increase  Wage Gap - 
Ending  
2020  15% 4% 3.2%  14.2%  
2021  14.2%  2% 8.67%  20.87%  
2022  20.87%  4% 8.96% 25.83%  
 
Management told the legislature  we have experienced 10.32% wage growth.  Unfortunately,  the 
reality is between 2020 and 2022 , management’s lack of action has caused the wage gap to 
increase to 25.83%, cutting employee wages by 10.83%  in three years . 
Even though management has already burned through several budget surpluses, in preparation 
for the “we don’t have the money” argument, I have listed a few key points on this matter.  
• 40% of Maine employees will reach retirement age by 2025. Who do we plan on hiring 
for 75 cents on the dollar?  If significant raises aren’t implemented July 1, 2023, not only 
will retirements expedite but there will be a mass exodus of younger employees. 
Inclu ding myself.  
• Turnover costs amount to approximately 1.5 -2 times an employee ’s salary. The state’s 
total turnover cost  for FY21  is a figure that management should be able to provide, but in 
the event that they won’t disclose it, a rough  estimate has been p rovided below:  
 
Employee Compensation for FY 2021: $910,276,629.29  
Average  Turnover Rate for Government: 25%  
Estimated Number of State Workers: 12,000 
Average Salary Based on Figures Above: $ 75,856.39  
 
Estimate of Annual Turnover Cost  FY21 : $341,353, 755.00  to $455,138, 340.00 
 
          So, right now, the state is losing  between $300 -$400 million annually as a result of 
turnover. These costs arise from lost production from vacant positions, costs of hiring, 
onboarding, lack of production due t o workers conducting  training , etc. In addition to the money 
that is being thrown away on turnover , employee satisfaction is at an all time low. The greatest 
driver of productivity, revenue, customer service, and a number of other variables is employee 
satisfaction. Right now, employees who are already 25% underpaid are now being forced to 
cover these vacancies  by absorb ing the extra work , increasing  burnout, further increasing 
turnover, decreasing moral, and worsening this vicious cycle.  
• If available funds to close the wage gap are a concern , here are the new sales taxes that 
have  been implemented in the last 5 years:  
 
 
o July 1, 2018 : 5.5% sales tax on all sales made over the internet.  
o October 1, 2018 : 9% sales tax on rentals booked transient  rental platforms and 
room remarketers (Airbnb, etc.).  
o October 1, 2019 : 5.5% sales tax on all sales made through marketplace 
facilitators (Amazon, Ebay, Etsy, Facebook, Walmart, etc.)  
o January 2, 2020 : tobacco excise tax increased from 20% to 43%.  
o October 9 , 2020 : recreational marijuana sales begin: 10% tax on all sales and 
excise tax on all transfers from cultivation facilities to products manufacturing 
facilities to retail stores.  
          If we just take a moment to think about the sheer size and magnit ude of these products and 
companies, to say the new revenue being generated is massive would be an understatement.  
Personally, it was incredibly embarrassing to read the Portland Press Herald article about the 
WorkDay meltdown. Besides the obvious nepotism  that remains a pervasive state -wide issue, 
contractors who were brought in to work on the project publicly pointed out issues that state 
employees are plagued with : (1) distracted senior management; (2) a toxic work environment , 
including sexual harassmen t going  unaddressed ; (3) constantly shifting requirements; and (4) 
failure to offer sufficient pay to recruit qualified individuals . Some notable quotes are included 
below:  
“Maine didn’t have the right people in the right places, and the rates they were offering 
were not going to bring the right expertise to Maine.”  
 
“Attempts to engage with the State of Maine teams are often met with resistance, 
deflection, defensiveness, and other tactics.”  
“I wasn’t the only one to make a [sexual harassment] complaint, but somehow he 
[manager] is still in the same post.”  
          In addition to the $300 -$400 million wasted on turnover,  at least  another $55 million has 
been wasted as a result of hiring unqualified individuals to oversee critical pr ojects . Management 
is throwing more money away than what it would cost to raise wages by 25%. Based on the 
numbers provided previously, raising wages by 25% would cost the state $227,568,000. Yes, that 
is correct. The state would save approximately $100 mi llion a year by paying employees a 
livable wage , increasing employee satisfaction, increasing production, increasing customer 
service, and recruiting talented, capable individuals.  
          The department that we have spent three years waiting  on to implement the compensation 
study and relieve our economic hardship is the same department that watched the wage gap 
increase by 10% in 3 years, has a documented history of ignoring , deflecting,  and failing to 
address issues, allocating unqualified i ndividuals to projects leading to failures, and 
demonstrating questionable integrity and ethical decision making. Based on these factors, the 
likelihood that management will follow through on implementing the classification study without 
the influence of t he legislature is non -existent. All 12,000 state employees are now looking to 
you, to be our voice, to be the ones to say “this is unacceptable, and we won’t allow it to 
continue any longer”. Thank you for your consideration in addressing this matter.  
Respectfully,  
Derryen M. Plante  
 
           
