Testimony of Donald E. Flannery, Executive Director, Maine Potato Board to the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee and Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry Committee
February 28, 2023
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025
Senator Rotundo, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Sachs, 
Representative Pluecker and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committees. Testimony of Donald Flannery, 
Executive Director of the Maine Potato Board.  I apologize that I am unable to attend the 
hearing today but I will be available to attend the work sessions, and please contact if 
you have any questions.
The Maine Potato Board (MPB) was created in 1986 by an act of the Maine 
Legislature for the purpose of establishing a cohesive framework for effective leadership 
within the potato industry. The mission of the MPB is to provide a competitive 
environment for Maine’s potato growers, processors and dealers; and to create both 
stability and the infrastructure for future growth.  
The primary functions of the MPB remain the same as when it was established in 
1986; to provide a framework for leadership and undertake activities that will ensure the 
sustainability of the industry.  To meet these goals the MPB has continued to develop 
programs and activities that meet the needs of an ever-changing industry.  In recent years 
we have taken on some non-traditional programs and eliminated some programs that 
were no longer essential to the success of the industry.  While a large portion of our 
resources continue to be directed to educational and research programs; we have added 
programs such as engineering/technical assistance, agronomy and plant pathology to 
help growers meet the changes in technology, state and federal mandates and new and 
emerging disease issues. In 2010, the legislature transferred the operations of the Maine 
Seed Potato Board (MSPB) from the Maine Department of Agriculture Conservation and 
Forestry (MDACF) to the MPB; we are now responsible for providing Maine seed 
growers with a satiable supply of high-quality seed potatoes.

The transfer of the MSPB from the MDACF had been discussed for a number of years, as it 
became apparent that continued operation within the existing structure would not be sustainable.  
The transfer has allowed the MSPB to change the operational structure of the farm and broaden 
marketing opportunities.  The MSPB uses an annual allotment from General Fund revenues 
($160,902) to maintain their tissue culture bank of over 150 varieties of potatoes and helps to 
support other essential activities in the laboratory.  This tissue culture bank ensures Maine growers 
have a secure source of early generation seed potatoes and is not depending on the importation of 
seed to support the industry; this not only ensures a secure supply but limits the risk of importing 
diseases that could negatively impact the industry.  The tissue culture bank provides the necessary 
support to the University of Maine’s potato breeding program in advancing new potato varieties for 
the potato industry.  It is estimated that over 80% of all potatoes planted in Maine originate from this 
tissue culture at the MSPB.
We undertake these activities from the MPB office in Presque Isle and the MSPB’s farm in 
Masardis.  The MPB’s staff in the Presque Isle office consists of six full-time and five part-time 
employees; at the MSPB’s Porter Farm we have six full-time positions and seasonal help as needed.     
             The Maine potato industry has seen many changes over the years; we believe that our 
industry today is one that has a bright future.  We will need to continue to make changes in all 
aspects of our industry to meet consumer demands and global market pressures.  The Maine Potato 
Board’s directors and staff look forward to the new opportunities that are ahead of us and believe we 
have the resources and foresight to help our industry continue to be an economic force in the Maine 
economy.
Actual   
2021-22Current   
2022-2023Budgeted 
2022-24Budgeted 
2024-25
General Fund 160,902 160,902 160,902 160,902
All Other 1,586,129 1,586,129 1,586,129 1,586,129
Thank you for your time today and I will be glad to answer any questions you have or 
provide additional information if necessary.
Donald Flannery
Maine Potato Board
LD 258
Testimony of Donald E. Flannery, Executive Director, Maine Potato Board to the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee and Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry Committee
February 28, 2023
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025
Senator Rotundo, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Sachs, 
Representative Pluecker and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committees. Testimony of Donald Flannery, 
Executive Director of the Maine Potato Board.  I apologize that I am unable to attend the 
hearing today but I will be available to attend the work sessions, and please contact if you 
have any questions.
The Maine Potato Board (MPB) was created in 1986 by an act of the Maine Legislature for 
the purpose of establishing a cohesive framework for effective leadership within the potato 
industry. The mission of the MPB is to provide a competitive environment for Maine’s potato 
growers, processors and dealers; and to create both stability and the infrastructure for future 
growth.  
The primary functions of the MPB remain the same as when it was established in 1986; to 
provide a framework for leadership and undertake activities that will ensure the sustainability 
of the industry.  To meet these goals the MPB has continued to develop programs and 
activities that meet the needs of an ever-changing industry.  In recent years we have taken on
some non-traditional programs and eliminated some programs that were no longer essential 
to the success of the industry.  While a large portion of our resources continue to be directed 
to educational and research programs; we have added programs such as 
engineering/technical assistance, agronomy and plant pathology to help growers meet the 
changes in technology, state and federal mandates and new and emerging disease issues. In
2010, the legislature transferred the operations of the Maine Seed Potato Board (MSPB) from
the Maine Department of Agriculture Conservation and Forestry (MDACF) to the MPB; we are
now responsible for providing Maine seed growers with a satiable supply of high-quality seed 
potatoes.
The transfer of the MSPB from the MDACF had been discussed for a number of years, as it 
became apparent that continued operation within the existing structure would not be 
sustainable.  The transfer has allowed the MSPB to change the operational structure of the 
farm and broaden marketing opportunities.  The MSPB uses an annual allotment from 
General Fund revenues ($160,902) to maintain their tissue culture bank of over 150 varieties 
of potatoes and helps to support other essential activities in the laboratory.  This tissue 
culture bank ensures Maine growers have a secure source of early generation seed potatoes 
and is not depending on the importation of seed to support the industry; this not only ensures 
a secure supply but limits the risk of importing diseases that could negatively impact the 
industry.  The tissue culture bank provides the necessary support to the University of Maine’s 
potato breeding program in advancing new potato varieties for the potato industry.  It is 
estimated that over 80% of all potatoes planted in Maine originate from this tissue culture at 
the MSPB.
We undertake these activities from the MPB office in Presque Isle and the MSPB’s farm in 
Masardis.  The MPB’s staff in the Presque Isle office consists of six full-time and five part-time
employees; at the MSPB’s Porter Farm we have six full-time positions and seasonal help as 
needed.     
             The Maine potato industry has seen many changes over the years; we believe that 
our industry today is one that has a bright future.  We will need to continue to make changes 
in all aspects of our industry to meet consumer demands and global market pressures.  The 
Maine Potato Board’s directors and staff look forward to the new opportunities that are ahead 
of us and believe we have the resources and foresight to help our industry continue to be an 
economic force in the Maine economy.
 
 Actual   2021-22 Current   2022-2023 Budgeted 2022-24 Budgeted 2024-25
General Fund 160,902 160,902 160,902 160,902
All Other 1,586,129 1,586,129 1,586,129 1,586,129
Thank you for your time today and I will be glad to answer any questions you have or provide 
additional information if necessary.

