 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 258-An Act  Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the 
General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years 
Ending June  30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 (Department of Economic and Community 
Development and Maine State Housing Authority Initiatives and Language)  
 
Joint Standing Committee on  Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
May 18 , 2023 
 
Senator  Rotundo , Repres entative  Sachs  and members of the Committee  on Appropriations , 
 
I am  Eamonn Dundon , the Director of Advocacy  at the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce. Our 
organization represents  1,300 businesses in our region , employing  over 65,000 Mainers. Today, I submit this 
testimony  today to express our qualified  support for the provisions of LD 258 aimed at  increasing the 
production of housing in Maine . 
 
Specifically, we support Language Part TT , which allocat es $80,000,000 to the Maine State Housing Authority 
for the purposes of funding the Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program, the Low -income Housing Tax 
Credit Programs, and the Innovation Fund for Attainable Housing. In many  cases, achieving the  affordability 
levels outlined  in this language section would not be possible  without public subsidy . Therefore,  this allocation 
sends a resounding  message that consistent and stable funding for housing production through the Maine State 
Housing Authority is a wise and necessary investmen t in the future of our state’s communities and economy. 
We are fortunate to have a multitude of  innovative and dedicated housing developers in Maine who will 
effectively utilize  this funding  to provide  high-quality housing tailored to the diverse needs of communities 
across the state.  
 
Expanding the Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program will create  new housing opportunities in 
communities that have historically seen limited  construction of publicly subsidized affordable housing.  This 
will enable  individuals in those communities to remain housed  there and prevent  overburdening  the already 
strained  social services infrastructure in our urban areas . The LIHTC allocation build s on Maine’s history of 
successful public -private p artnership s in the development of low -income housing . By establishing a  consistent 
revenue source , this funding will provide developers  with the predictability they need to execute complex 
projects that typically involve various  complimentary sources of pr ivate, local, state, and federal funding.  
 
Additionally, while we support Language Part RRRR , which allocat es $12,000,000 for the Emergency Housing 
Relief Fund Program, we believe  the allocated amount is insufficient  to address the challenges faced by  
residents, visitors, and businesses affected  by the proliferation of unsheltered homelessness in Maine. Our 
members located in proximity to the growing number of encampments in Portland have reported  alarming  
increases in violent crime and hazardous  public health conditions , leading several neighborhoods to the brink . 
Maine stands at a critical juncture, where we must choose between provid ing shelter for those in need or 
allowing  our urban areas to deteriorate and experience the chaos and dysfunction  witnessed in cities that failed 
to address their  unsheltered homeless populations  until matters spiraled  out of control, like San Francisco and 
Portland, Oregon. This turning  point necessitates a comprehensive  state intervention that provides ample 
resour ces and a well-though -out response plan to prevent our urban areas from reaching the depths of disorder 
and dysfunction observed in other parts of the country.  
 
 
 
93 Exchange  Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772 -2811 
chamber@portlandregion.com  • PortlandRegion.com  
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • Westbrook  
 
 
Lastly , we support the initiative in the Department of Economic and Community Development to  sustain  
funding for the two positions responsible for administering  the Housing Opportunity Program. Now that the  
rulemaking process for  both the provisions of LD 2003 and the grant program for local assistance  has 
concluded , the success of this program hinges  on the  efforts of the  staff who facilitate implementation . 
Municipalities now have final clarity on LD 2003 and with the guidance of these two positions at the state level, 
the implementation phase can fully commence.  
 
We thank you for your time and  commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for your expeditious approval of this 
important legislation.  
  
