LD 2582.28.23
On behalf of the Lewiston Farmers’ Market, agricultural producers, and people of 
Maine:
The Lewiston Farmers’ Market serves around 500 purchasing customers each week from 
the Lewiston/Auburn area. We are an association that includes some paid staff hours 
and is held together with robust board and volunteer participation. We processed 
$10,028.00 in Maine Harvest Bucks this year, and $3,065.00 in Bumper Crop bucks to 
provide shoppers with extra purchasing power on their SNAP/EBT allocations for fruits 
and vegetables.
This is an excellent program for EVERYONE! Our market benefits from increased 
customer base, producers benefit from more accessibility to their goods. More funds 
are retained within our economy and more food reaches neighbors. We strive to 
eliminate barriers to food security for our community. This can come in the form of our 
open air market format, locally produced crops of interest, and the invigoration of 
connection with fresh foods for new neighbors and  our next generations. 
Scott Jillson, at Jillson’s Farm in Sabattus:
“This program helps us provide fresh vegetables for people that may otherwise not 
receive them and helps our bottom line at the farmers market. We look forward to continuing 
this program for us and for our customers at the Lewiston Farmers’ Market. 
This funding helps promote the program to link more community members using SNAP 
to the market, helps cover the costs our market incurs to maintain accessibility to 
processing equipment, and most importantly, helps cover the cost of the redemption of 
HB. 
We ask for the “CONTINUOUS FUNDING at the $600,000 level per year. If it is continuous, then 
the market (and MFFM) can plan for growth and expansion of the program without any funding 
uncertainties or interruption.” -MFFM
It is essential for our farmers and food insecure community members, as well as our 
market to maintain consistent and reliable expectations regarding MHB and Bumper 
Crop bucks in order to continue to reach and grow a customer base that is eager and 
excited to participate in our local food economy. This is an investment in the future of 
not only healthy food, sustainable agriculture, and economic growth, but also a  
resilient, vibrant and welcoming arena that incentivises wellness for all. 
Thank you for your time,
Elizabeth Nelson
Market Manager, Lewiston Farmers’ Market
lewistonfarmersmarket@gmail.com
