 
 
 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
Representative Melanie Sachs 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
5 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Senator Stacey Brenner 
Representative Lori Gramlich 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
100 State House Station 
Augusta ME 04333 
 
February 16, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and the distinguished AFA Committee, Senator Brenner, 
Representative Gramlich and the ENR Committee, 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed biennial budget. The Appalachian Mountain 
Club wishes to express support for full funding of the vital work of the Department of Environmental 
Protection.  
 
The DEP is charged with preventing, abating, and controlling the pollution of our air, water, and land; 
with preserving, improving, and preventing the diminution of the natural environment; and with 
protecting and enhancing the public’s right to use and enjoy our natural resources. This is a solemn 
charge.   
 
Today a rapidly changing climate threatens our livelihoods, from crop loss and disrupted growing 
seasons, to the rapidly warming Gulf of Maine and its impact on marine ecosystems and seafood 
landings, to less reliable winters that reduce opportunities for winter recreation. More frequent extreme 
weather events damage both personal property and public infrastructure. We must act. 
 
At the same time, the globe is experiencing a dramatic loss of biodiversity, the variety of plants, animals, 
fungi, and microorganisms that is the basis of life on earth. For example, the populations of both insects 
and North American birds have dropped dramatically since the 1970’s. Pollution and habitat loss are two 
contributing factors.  
 
Thus, the DEP’s work is essential to our health and safety, our quality of life, our economy, and our 
future. To carry out that important work requires that the agency be both fully funded and fully staffed.   
 
We understand that numerous staff vacancies hinder the department’s ability to carry out its charge. 
For that reason, we support the numerous position reclassifications that we hope will improve the DEP’s 
 
ability to attract and retain qualified employees. We also urge you to fully understand the scope of the 
vacancies and to support measures to address them.  
 
Climate change and biodiversity loss demand immediate action. For the sake of your constituents, 
Maine’s economy, and all of our children and grandchildren, we ask that you do all in your power to 
ensure that the state agencies responsible for our natural resources are fully funded and staffed. 
 
Thank you for your work on behalf of the people of Maine.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
Eliza Townsend 
Maine Conservation Policy Director 
 
