 
 
 
 
 
 
February 24, 2023 
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair 
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations  
& Financial Affairs  
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 Sen. Stacy Brenner, Chair 
Rep. Lori Gramlich, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and 
Natural Resources  
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: Opposition to Part K of Biennial Budget repealing state match for water and wastewater 
infrastructure investments  
 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee; 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich, and Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee: 
  
The Maine Water Environment Association (MeWEA) appreciates the opportunity to provide the 
following testimony against Part K of the Biennial Budget which proposes to repeal a critically-important 
law that utilizes a portion of annual state liquor revenues as the annual state match to leverage millions of 
dollars in needed federal funds to support drinking water and wastewater system investments throughout 
our State. 
 
About MeWEA. The Maine Water Environment Association is a non-profit, all volunteer association of 
over 650 members. MeWEA represents a diverse group of water quality professionals throughout Maine 
including wastewater treatment plant operators, sewer collection system operators, utility system 
administrators, consulting engineers, suppliers, contractors, public works officials, stormwater system 
operators, and regulatory officials. The mission of MeWEA is to support and enhance Maine’s water 
environment community through promoting training opportunities; supporting balanced environmental 
policy and practice; and promoting education and collaboration with the public to protect and enhance 
Maine’s water resources. 
What does Part K of the Budget do?  As drafted, Part K of the Budget would repeal an existing state 
law that directs a portion of the proceeds from state liquor operations revenue fund to the State Water and 
Wastewater Infrastructure Fund. This Infrastructure Fund provides that state match to secure federal funds 
that pay for needed water and wastewater infrastructure investments around the State. 
What does the State Water and Wastewater Infrastructure Fund pay for?  Many Maine people and 
businesses in every corner of the State rely on public water systems to provide safe, potable drinking 
water, and they rely on publicly owned treatment works to treat wastewater generated from household and 
business use. To maintain these systems, communities must invest millions of dollars to ensure their 
water remains clean and that wastewater is properly treated. Combined, the capital maintenance needs of 
these systems runs into the hundreds of millions of dollars. 
To help pay for the infrastructure needs of these systems, the federal government provides states with 
hundreds of millions of dollars each year, subject to a very favorable state match of 5:1. In other words, 
for every $5 in federal funds available, a state must provide $1 in local match. Few federal grant programs 
are as generous. 
Letter to AFA and ENR Committee re LD 258, Part K 
February 24, 2023 
Page 2  
 
 In recent years, Maine has been eligible to receive as much as $14 million per year from the federal 
government to support wastewater infrastructure investments, and to leverage these federal funds, Maine 
must provide $3.5 in local match. Here is a brief outline of these very favorable terms for the State of 
Maine to fund wastewater infrastructure investments: 
State Match (20%)      $3.5M 
Fed Grant Max    $14.0M 
Total                   $17.5M available for wastewater projects in Maine 
 
Part K of the Budget would repeal the current mechanism for providing the local match for these federal 
funds. 
Why are liquor operation funds used as the local match for federal water and wastewater funds? 
For many years, Maine provided the local match for federal water and wastewater funds through a general 
fund bond issue. This required running an expensive political campaign to encourage voters to approve 
several million dollars of money per year to leverage many times more in federal money. Given the 
critical nature of the investments, and the very favorable federal match, voters always approved these 
bonds.  
More recently, the Maine Legislature decided to establish a dedicated revenue stream from liquor 
operations to ensure a state match for these federal funds and avoid the cost and uncertainty of a general 
fund bond issue. This step represented a sound fiscal policy and has helped leverage tens of millions of 
dollars in federal funds to support needed water and wastewater infrastructure investments. 
Part K sets Maine back and should be removed from the Budget.  As noted above, Part K of the 
proposed Budget would remove a critically-important part of Maine law that provides dedicated state 
revenues to secure many times more in federal funds to support water and wastewater infrastructure 
investments. If Part K remains in the Budget, Maine risks losing these needed federal funds, which would 
be fiscally imprudent and environmentally unwise. 
Conclusion. For the reasons noted above, we strongly urge the Committee to strike Part K from the 
Budget so that Maine can continue to provide the local match to secure many times more in federal funds 
to support water and wastewater infrastructure investments.  If you have questions or need anything else, 
please let us know. 
Sincerely, 
 
Emily Cole-Prescott    Amanda Smith 
 
Emily Cole-Prescott, Co-Chair    Amanda Smith, Co-Chair       
Government Affairs Committee     Government Affairs Committee    
 
cc:  Thomas Abello, Office of Governor Mills 
 Melanie Loyzim, Commissioner, Maine DEP  
 William Dawson, Director, Maine Drinking Water Program 
 Timothy Wade, MeWEA President  
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel 
