Yll.'.!:l?- COMMISSION or 
Eric Venturini, Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
Testifying in Support 
LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriates and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to 
the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, 
and June 30, 2025 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the Committee on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs, Senator Rafferty, and Representative Brennan, and esteemed the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Eric Venturini, and l am the Executive Director of the Wild 
Blueberry Commission of Maine. l appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of the proposed 
Biennial Budget as it relates to the University of Maine. 
On behalf of the Wild Blueberry Commission, l strive to represent the voices of Maine's 485‘ wild 
blueberry farmers and businesses who grow wild blueberries on approximately 42,0002 acres across the 
state and on Passamaquoddy tribal land. Our industry produces in some years over 100 million pounds 
of healthy wild blueberries and contributes an estimated $250 million dollars to the State's economy 
annually. 
Through ongoing partnership and collaboration with the University of Maine, our industry has increased 
the production of this healthy berry 500% over the last 50 years. Our excellent partners at the University 
of Maine have helped to transform Maine's iconic wild blueberry industry into the economic 
powerhouse it is today, and their ongoing partnership is critical as we seek to overcome new challenges 
to create a vibrant and sustainable future for our industry. 
Challenges to our industry's future like those posed by climate change. In 2 of the past 3 years most of 
our farmers have faced devastating losses due to climate change-induced drought.3 Wild blueberry 
1 National Agricultural Statistics Service. 2017. Berries: 2017. 
https:[/www.nass.usda.gov/PublicationsLA_gCensus/2017/Full Report/Volume 1, Chapter 2 County Level/Maine/st23 2 O03 
3 OO33.gdf 
1 Based on 2021 harvested acreage (appx. half of total acreage in any given year). 
https:[/extension.umaine.edu/blueberries/factsheets/statistics-2/crop;production-statistics-2019[ 
3 Maine's wild blueberry industry experienced a 45% crop loss in 2020. In 2022 the mid-coast was hit especially hard by drought 
conditions and many growers lost SO, 80, or even 100% of their crop.
researchers at the University of Maine leverage industry partnerships, industry tax-funded grants, and 
the Maine Economic improvement Fund (MEIF) to secure an estimated $300,000 “ additional external 
dollars in 2022 and as much as $2.5M in 2023 to understand climate-change impacts to wild blueberries 
and find solutions. And they are finding solutions. 
Challenges to our future like low profitability. Did you know that wild blueberry harvesters can leave as 
much as 20 or 25% of the crop on the ground? In close partnership with the University, we leveraged 
industry tax dollars and University match from sources that include the MEIF and in December secured a 
$500,000 grant from the Maine Technology Institute to reduce harvest shrink. This grant kicks off a $1M 
project led by University of Maine engineers and Extension faculty—a project that could drastically 
increase the profitability of Maine wild blueberry farmers. 
Maine's wild blueberry farmers and businesses rely on the University of Maine for research and 
development, for solutions. ln an era where our major competition measures their output by the billions 
of pounds, when new pests are always on the horizon, when a reliable and affordable seasonal 
workforce is harder and harder to come by, farmers lean heavily on the good faculty and staff at the 
University of Maine for solutions. To continue to provide those solutions and to maintain and to grow 
the competitiveness of critical industries like the wild blueberry industry, our agricultural researchers 
and Extension faculty and staff need your continued support. An investment in University of Maine 
research is an investment in the future of wild blueberry farming in Maine. 
I urge you to support the Biennial Budget as it relates to the University of Maine. Thank you for your 
time. I'd be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 
4 Estimated based on information provided by University of Maine researchers to the wild blueberry Advisory 
Committee in November 2022. 
5784 York ComplexSuite 52 ' 
Orono, ME 044695784 ' 207-S81-1475 - 
wbcrn@maine.edu
