Testimony for the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee and the Health and Human Services Committee ; 
February 2 4, 202 3
Regard ing LD 258 : An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the 
General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government 
for the Fiscal Years  Ending June 30, 2023,  June 30,2024  and June 30, 2025  
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci , 
Representative Meyer, and distinguished member s of the Appropriation s and Health and 
Human Service s Committees. Than k you so much for the opportunit y to spea k today.  
My name i s Eric Meyer; I am CEO of Spurwin k Services. I am here to spea k in support of LD258.  At 
Spurwink, we provide behavioral health and educational service s to children, adults, and families 
across Maine. Last year, we served over 8,1 00 Maine people affected b y trauma, mental health 
challenges, substance use disorders , developmental disabilities and autism, so the y can live healthy, 
engaged live s in their communities .  The adult behavioral health funding in LD258 i s critical to ensure 
that that vision i s realized. 
I am ver y pleased to report that the proposed funding in LD258 for adult behavioral health will make a 
significant difference for service s that Maine people depend on. Toda y I’m asking you to support this 
bill. 
Many of you know me and have heard me spea k about the desperate need for increased funding for 
behavioral health services. I am deepl y grateful and appreciative that over the last few year s in 
particular the legislature, Governor Mills and our colleague s at DHHS have enabled significant funding 
that wa s a good start in remedying a decade of underfunding of these services. Thi s proposed budget 
will allow provider s to stabilize service s and in many case s expand acce ss to care.  Increasing service 
availabilit y is critical because the need in Maine ha s never been greater. 
This type of investment in behavioral health services i s powerful and can be life changing. A year ago, 
Spurwink, in close partnership with DHHS, opened the Living Room Crisi s Center in Portland , Maine’s 
first crisi s receiving center .  In that year we served 634 guest s over 5267 visits.  One quarter of guests 
had their need s met in a single session.  Three quarter s had their need s met in five session s or 
less.  At the other end of the spectrum are guest s who visit the Living Room ever y day.   
One day this past year, the Spurwin k team had a call from the local Emergen cy Department.  Staff at 
the ED were worried about a particular person who wa s usuall y in the ED constantly , but hadn’t been 
there in weeks.  They were worried that the person had died.  The Spurwin k team wa s pleased to let 
them know that all wa s well, and that the person wa s receiving service s at the Living Room. 
In the year before the living room opened, that person wa s hospitalized 13 times, including one ICU 
stay.  Portland Police responded to 11 overdose s for thi s individual alone, in the community.  In the 
year since the Living Room opened thi s individual ha s had zero hospitalizations, police have responded 
to zero overdoses, and the person has transitioned from unsheltered homelessne ss to housed.     
The funding in thi s budget will allow u s to expand service s and increase urgentl y needed access to 
care. There are still gaps we need to address, such as the profound shortage of clinicians, but this is an 
excellent start.  As director Probert of MaineCare stated recently to the HHS Committee, the rate 
increases resulting from the new rate analysis for many of the behavioral health services are 
simply “setting a new baseline,” but it is not fixing the whole system . 
Than k you for considering these important issue s and please support LD258. 

