February 10, 2023  
 
Testimony in support of Paid Family Medical Leave.  LD258  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs.  
 
My name is Dr. Erica Magnus and I live in Windham. For almost a decade, I was a family caregiver for 
my mother in the home I share with my wife.   
 
I am writing neither  in support of nor in opposition to LD 258. Please consider allocating the startup 
funding for Paid Family Medical Leave in LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and 
Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025.  
 
We all know that life can be quite tumultuous at  times . Anything can happen and at those moments our 
loved ones help us get through. This is especially true for family caregivers ; individuals who help their 
loved ones with everyday tasks or even with complex medical assistance. Every day, millions of 
Americans just like me help their parents, spouses and other loved ones live independently at home — 
where they want to be.  
 
My mother was adamant about staying at home and I would not have had it any other way. When  
caregiving tasks became more and more in tense as my mother aged, we learned to do things we never 
thought we would do! We learned how to safely change bed linens with someone still in the bed. We 
administered medications and learned how to safely transition my mother from her bed, to a chair, to  a 
toilet and back again.  
 
As is the case with many caregivers in Maine, at the same time my mother started to need care at home, I 
was working part -time as a university professor. Ultimately, I made the decision to stop working because 
I simply could not manage both jobs – teaching and caregiving – at the same time. Something had to give. 
Although I gladly took on my role as a caregiver, I had worked hard to earn my Ph.D. and was saddened 
to put my career on hold. This situation put a lot of pressure on me , as well as on my family, but my wife 
and I agreed it was the necessary step to take.  
 
We didn’t realize then the long -term financial toll my time out of the workforce would take.  
 
I urge you to support a Paid Family Medical Leave (PFML) program for Maine  by allocating the startup 
funding for this crucial program. PFML allows for prolonged absences from work that can be used in a 
variety of situations, without sacrificing one’s livelihood. Had this program been in place when I was 
caregiving, it would have  been a welcome lifeline for me and would have enabled me to keep my job.  
 
Erica Magnus  
AARP Main e Volunteer Advocate   
