TESTIIVIONY 
OF 
FERN DESJARDINS, CHAIR 
MAINE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
And The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Hearing Date: February 13, 2023, 1:00 PM 
L.D. 258 “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and 
Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Fern Desjardins and I am the chair of the Maine State Board of Education. I am 
here today on behalf of the board to present testimony for the departmental items in the 
biennial budget bill. 
The state board consists of ll members. The Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, §40l-A 
gives the State Board of Education the primary responsibilities for formulating policy, 
advising the Commissioner of Education, and enforcing regulatory requirements. In §405 of 
the statutes and through other rules the board is delegated powers and duties that include, but 
are not limited to: make recommendations to the Legislature for the efﬁcient conduct of the 
public schools; approve the formation of School Administrative Districts and Community 
School Districts; grant permission for administrative units to enter into agreements for 
cooperative educational purposes; develop and adopt a plan for the establishment of career 
and technical education centers; approve standards for school construction; approve school 
construction projects for state aid; work as a partner with the Department of Education 
regarding the Essential Programs and Services school finance process; obtain information 
regarding applications for granting degrees and make a recommendation to the Legislature; 
accredit programs at institutions of higher education that train educators; establish standards 
for the certiﬁcation of educators; participate in the State Authorization Reciprocity Agreement 
(SARA) through the New England Board of higher Education; serve as the state agency for 
administering Carl Perkins federal funds; and to review student transfers requested by a parent 
or superintendent dissatis ﬁed with the decision of the Commissioner of Education. The board 
also appoints tlu'ee of its members to serve on the Maine Charter School Commission. 
The State Board of Education ’s baseline budget is on page A-25 8 of the General Fund 
Recommended Biennial Budget 2024-2025, PartA and there are two initiatives included on 
the same page. The board’s General Fund request is $201,098 in FY24 and $202,096 in 
FY25. The board requested four budget initiatives but the Department of Administration and 
Financial Services (DAF S) moved only two of the initiatives forward in the biennial budget.
1
The fn-st initiative provides an appropriation of $6,000 in each year of the biennium for per 
diem payments to board members. Per diem payments to board members are authorized by 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20-A, section 401, subsection 3. This initiative increases 
funding for per diem payments for two reasons: (l) based on the board being at full 
membership for the ﬁrst time in a number of years, and (2) the increase in committee work by 
board members as it relates to the activities described above and to the milestones in the state 
board’s 5-year strategic plan. 
The second initiative provides funding to reorganize the Secretary Specialist position to an 
Office Specialist II position. The state board has only one staff member, a secretary specialist. 
We requested to have an office specialist instead of a secretary specialist because the skills 
required of the ofﬁce specialist are at a higher level and more in alignment with the state 
board’s needs. The board seeks additional help to carry out its many roles and responsibilities 
in a diligent and consistent manner. The board’s workload requires members to dedicate a 
signiﬁcant amount of time in committees to accomplish all its responsibilities. Three newly 
appointed board members resigned in recent years because of the time commitment. The 
board requested an executive director to provide leadership and consistency, like in many 
other organizations. DAF S chose to include the office specialist initiative but not the 
executive director request. The other initiative dropped by DAF S Was a budget request for 
contracted services to conduct research for the board. 
I would be happy to answer any questions the committees may have or to provide additional 
information regarding the proposed budget initiatives in this bill.
2
