MAINE 
AUDBON 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
% Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
February 27, 2023 
RE: LD 25 8, An Act /1/Iaking Uniﬁed /lppropriations and A [locations from the General Fund and 
Other Fnndsﬁr the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of S ta te Gooernmentfbr the Fiscal Years Endingjane 30, 2023, june 
30, 2024 andjane 30, Z025 
Dear Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and 
Members of the AFA and IFW Committees: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on LD 25 8, An Aet]l4a/eing Uniﬁed 
Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State 
Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending fane 30, 2023,]ane 30, 2024 andjitne 30, 2025, speciﬁcally, the 
proposed budget initiatives and language related to the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife. My name is Francesca “Ches” Gundrum and I am Policy Advocate For Maine Audubon — the 
state’s oldest and largest wildlife conservation organization. 
Maine Audubon supports the proposed budget initiatives and language related to the Maine 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (Department, DIFW) because each is essential to the 
Department fulﬁlling its responsibility to preserve, protect, and enhance the inland ﬁsheries and 
wildlife resources of the state. Items that are of particular interest to our organization are: funding to 
assist with updates to the Department ’s headquarters; supporting several positions; and helping the 
Department match available federal funding to support citizen science projects, amongst other 
important initiatives. 
With Commissionerjudy Camuso’s bold leadership, MDIFW has embraced their mission to 
promote the safe enjoyment of Maine’s outdoors for so many Maine people. Maine Audubon is proud 
to be a partner in the Department ’s work to protect our state’s precious wildlife and habitat, restore 
endangered species, and boldly tackle some of the greatest challenges that face our state’s birds, bats, 
bees, and more. 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine ()4-105 ' (207) 781-2330 ' maineaudubonorg
MAINE 
AUDBON 
To adequately fulﬁll their duties, the Department needs a headquarters that fully supports the 
breadth of their work. From storage to science needs, the Department deserves the upgrade they have 
detailed in LD 258. To promote cohesive planning within MDIFW and provide educational 
opportunities for Maine people to learn how to track wildlife, safely navigate the woods with a map 
and compass, rid their boats of invasive species, and more, housing the majority of the Department ’s 
programs and people in one location is a no-brainer. Additionally, it is our understanding that the 
Department is eager to embrace energy efficient technologies and other cost-saving building 
opportunities — a win-win for all. 
Maine Audubon supports MDIFW’s request to adjust the funding mechanism for four 
positions - one Private Lands Biologist, two Forester positions, one Wildlife Technician Position ~ and 
add one additional part-time Federal Aid Coordinator position. All of these existing positions help 
MDIFW meet their programs ’ demands and would add needed capacity to ensure that the Department 
is managing and leveraging federal funding opportunities as much as possible. As a partner in the 
Department' s Beginning with Habitat program — a first-in-the-nation effort that consolidates and 
packages essential wildlife and habitat information for landowners, towns, conservation organizations, 
and more — we intimately understand the importance of the Private Lands Biologist in providing 
essential technical assistance for people and towns managing their lands for at-risk ﬁsh and wildlife. 
We support aiding the Department to match federal funding that supports citizen science 
projects, amongst other important initiatives. For decades, MDIFW has led citizen-science projects 
such as the Maine Bird Atlas — a state-wide assessment of breeding and wintering birds. Without data 
collected from this project, we cannot effectively guide future species status assessments, understand 
priority species’ needs, and identify and conserve high-value wildlife habitats. While some projects, like 
the Maine Bird Atlas, are in their ﬁnal stages, there is a long list of other wildlife research opportunities 
that the Departement could miss out on if matching support for these endeavors is not realized. 
Finally, it is our understanding that in many ways, the Department has been operating witha 
pre-inflationary budget for some time. What we have advocated for today is largely a readjustment of 
their base operations so that the Department scales accordingly to the realities of our economy. 
Supporting the Department ’s proposed budget initiatives and language, as well as considering other 
opportunities to expand the Department ’s capacity, will allow DIFW to do their very best work. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
%w~»£1&l» 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrurn 
Policy Advocate 
20 Gilsland Farm Road. Falmourh, Maine 04103 ' 
(207) 781-2330 ' maineaudubonorg
