Good afternoon,  
My name is Gabrielle Wiley, and I’m a 29 year old living and working in Bangor, Maine  where 
I’m also the primary caretaker for an aging parent . I’m submitting this testimony in hopes that it 
will contribute to creating  Maine’s first paid FMLA act, and perhaps advocate for stronger 
protections to be placed for Maine workers.  
Statistics collected on the income of Maine residents paints a bleak pictu re. In Penobscot County 
the median annual income in 2021 was just over $55,000, and nearly 14% of Penobscot County 
residents live at or below the Poverty level. (Maine.gov) W hile I would love to say these don’t 
feel accurate to my own personal experience, I know that they are because of how many people I 
see daily struggling to make ends meet, including the economic challenges my mom and I face.  
As the caretaker of an aging parent, much like having a small child, I need to be present for 
medical events (eme rgent or planned) which may require significant time from work. I am lucky 
to work for an organization that already offers paid FMLA, but between my current income and 
financial obligations there’s no way that I could afford to use it. According to MIT’s L iving 
Wage Calculator, a living hourly wage in Bangor , Maine for a two-person  household with no 
children on a single income is calculated as $24.69 . My employer offers 60% of my hourly pay  
(which is less than that living wage figure) for qualifying short t erm disability FMLA, and that 
resulting figure is less than the state’s minimum wage of $13.80 per hour. Which thanks to rising 
housing, food, and utility costs, is grossly inadequate.  
I know I’m not alone in my situation, because I’ve met many other hard working people who are 
singlehandedly supporting aging family members and, like myself, are afraid of how they will 
manage to afford necessities like housing and food and utilities if they had to take an extended 
leave from work in order to care for their families. As Maine’s population continues to grow 
older, we need to focus on how we can best support not just the elderly but also those who are 
staying to care for them.  Working families need our support to continue to make Maine their 
home, and we need w orking families for their contributions to our local businesses and 
industries.  A 60% FMLA rate such as what is offered by my employer is a start , however it is not 
substantive enough for most of Maine’s working families  and would leave many of us financia lly 
behind, placing a further strain on our social  safety net programs . We need a 90%  imbursement 
rate to support our working families so that they can continue to live and work in our beautiful 
state.  
Thank you for listening.  
 
Sources:  
https://www.maine.gov/labor/cwri/county -economic -profiles/countyProfiles.html  
https://livingwage.mit.edu/metros/12620  
 
