February 14, 2023 
 Testimony on LD 258 –  the Governor’s Proposed State Budget  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs , Senator Beebe- Center, Representative Salisbury, members of the Committee on Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety,  
I’m Gary R. Brooks from Dedham and I’m testifying here on my own time as a member of my union, 
MSEA, and as a private citizen. I work as a Building Custodian for the Maine Department of Defense, 
Veterans and  Emergency Management. I’m here today to tell you that State of Maine workers have 
been underpaid for years and it’s past time our wages are raised so 1) we can catch up with the rising 
cost of living  and 2) so we are paid fairly compared to everyone else doing similar work throughout New 
England.  
I have 20 years of experience as a custodian. Three other custodians and I clean 20 buildings daily. We 
cannot live on $17.54 an hour! The four of us are really hurting. We like are jobs and aren’t going 
anywhere,  but our pay cannot stay flat while everything around us skyrockets out of sight. I should not 
have to find another job to survive.  When I told my State Representative, Micky Carmichael, about our 
low pay, he asked me: Why is the pay so low and how are you  living on half- pay?  
Everybody knows w e’ve been falling further and further behind , but the State still hasn’t done enough 
about it . The State two years ago, in 2020, released a report showing State workers are on average paid 
15 percent less than their pu blic and private sector counterparts throughout New England. If you 
haven’t read that report, I think you should read it. It’s online at (https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/5615) . 
As a Building Custodian, my paycheck is eaten up the cost of living and circumstances beyond my 
control. We need higher wages. My power bill as a single person has gone up a lot because the PUC 
raised my kilowatt rate. With a $820 monthly hous e payment there’s not much left for everything else, 
so we custodians at the Guard base , all of us workers, every one of us, need higher wages.  
Right now the State has a budget surplus, so I’m asking you to fund a State budget that ends the State Employee Pay Gap. You should also know it’s the low wages for State workers that is making it hard for 
the State to recruit and retain workers. Funding a State budget that ends the State Employee Pay Gap 
will go a long way toward making sure the services are there that Maine people count on every day. 
Thank you.  
Gary R. Brooks  
Dedham, Maine  
