i 
MQIFIQI9 THE UNIVERSITY OF 
s» “£4” 
fies M A I NE umvsresnv or MAINE svstm I C°0Pe1'a ﬁV9 Extensiim 
Testimony of Behalf of the University of Maine System 
Presented by Hannah Carter, Dean of University of Maine Cooperative Extension 
In Support of Extension-Related Appropriations (Page A-648) 
of the Governor ’s Proposed FY24-25 Biennial Budget (LD 258) - Feb. 28, 2023 
Senators Rotundo and lngwersen, Representatives Sachs and Pluecker, and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations & Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry: 
My name is Hannah Carter and l am Dean of University of Maine Cooperative Extension. I 
am also a proud County native and a product of the Extension system through my early 
years in 4-H and later as a summer insect and disease scout when l was an undergraduate 
student at the University of Maine Presque lsle. l am here today on behalf of the University 
of Maine System to encourage your support of the General Fund appropriation and 
Special Revenue allocation that advance the statewide activities of UMaine Extension, 
which you will find on Page A-648 of the Governor ‘s biennial budget proposal. 
Extension brings research, education and outreach from Maine’s R1 university to homes, 
schools, farms, and communities in your legislative districts. Breeding more resilient potato 
varietals. Partnering with wild blueberry producers to improve the shelf life and quality of 
fresh packed berries. Providing food safety planning assistance to help new meat 
processors pass inspection. These are just some of Extension ’s statewide activities that 
strengthen and grow Maine’s agricultural economy and dependent rural jobs, and 
protect public, plant and animal health. _g 
Tick Laboratory & Pest Management Fund (A-648) 
ln 2014, the Legislature and Maine voters generously funded the construction of the 
University of Maine Extension Diagnostic and Research Laboratory (DRL) to bring Extension 
scientists —- including students — together to do research that matters to Maine and to 
provide unique diagnostic and testing services that matters to Mainers. Thank you. 
Today, the DRL supports aquatic animal health research necessary to the 
development of the state’s aquaculture and biotechnology sectors; veterinary 
diagnostic sen/ices vital for vets, game wardens and pet owners; plant disease 
testing that farmers depend on for crop management; and as Mainers increasingly 
appreciate, testing of ticks and other insects. 
Extension is generally supported within UMaine’s existing budgetary resources and by other 
local, state and federal competitive and formula funds and our own program revenue. 
However, in recognition of the DRL’s critical importance to our state, the 129"‘ Legislature 
established a 15-cent container fee on registered pesticide products charged to consumers 
at the point of sale, with a large portion of the proceeds benefiting the lab. Given the 
complexity of administration, with the full support of the University of Maine System and 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent 
University of Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
Maine retailers, the 130*“ Legislature and Gov. Mills repealed the fee and instead provided 
this more predictable source of ongoing operating resources for the DRL’s ever-expanding 
education, outreach and research activities, including testing each year of thousands of tick 
samples, more than one-third of which are positive for Lyme. 
There is no new initiative proposed for the DRL in the upcoming biennium. 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension (A-648) 
There is also no new initiative for the Extension integrated pest management (IPM) and 
pesticide safety education programs on Page A-648, which are funded by special revenue. 
lPM is a science-based approach to pest management that reduces the use of pesticides 
and their impact to public and environmental health while preserving the crop being treated. 
Extension leverages the State’s investment to attract external funding to further extend the 
positive impact of our proven lPM programs on Maine farms. We estimate that each year, 
our lPM recommendations generate more than $10 million in increased croplyield 
and reduced pesticides costs just for Maine’s potato industry and more than $5 
million on Maine’s apple industry. There are similar success stories for the state's 
strawberry, cranberry and sweet corn growers, and with this flat-funded allocation, we can 
continue this important work to grow Maine’s agriculture economy. 
Additionally, as reported to the ACF Committee earlier this session, the pesticide safety 
expert supported in part by this initiative provides regular research-based trainings to those 
licensed — or seeking to become licensed — in pesticide application. ln 2022, in-person 
training included sessions at the Agricultural Trades Show in Augusta that provided credit 
opportunities for more than 1,400 attendees and online sessions that collectively trained 
446 applicators. Topics included, but were not limited to, lPM, safety, labeling, forestry and 
rights-of-way, greenhouse best practices and worker protection standards. 
l want to thank you for your continued commitment to University of Maine 
Cooperative Extension and to Maine’s public universities. Your investment allows us to 
help Maine’s people help themselves through education and research. it also enables us to 
strategically partner with many of the other organizations you've heard from today, including 
the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, the Wild Blueberry 
Commission of Maine and the Maine Potato Board, all of which are equally deserving of 
your support and are vital to the future of Maine’s agricultural-dependent economy and 
communities. 
Thank you, and I look forward to taking your questions. 
Page 2 of2
