- 
‘%? ' 
STATE OFMAINE- 
—“ 
» t " 
HENRYE.M.BECK,ESQ. J1" 1 OFFICE or THE STATE TREASURER Sm, Tr@aSu1'@f 
p 39 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0039 
GREGORY OLSON 3.;/' - 1- ,' 
. 
as wwvi .ma1ne Gov/treasurer Deputy Treasurer 
March l, 2022 
Senator Margaret Rotundo, Chair Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Melanie Sachs, Chair Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Affairs Financial Services 
Re: Maine Retirement Savings Program, A-523 
Chairs and Honorable Members: 
I submit this written testimony in support of the items appearing in the Maine Retirement Savings Program (MRSP) 
portion of the biennial budget. I do so in my capacity as Chair of the Maine Retirement Savings Board. MRSP 
Executive Director Elizabeth Bordowitz is not available today because of a pre-existing scheduling conﬂict andI 
know she regrets missing the opportunity to offer information and answer questions. In the meantime, I thought it 
helpful to offer a brief program description and context for the Enterprise Fund. 
As the Committees recall, the Maine Retirement Savings Program was established in P.L. 2021, ch. 356, An Act T0 
Promote Individual Retirement Savings through a Public-Private Partnership (Senator Vitelli of Sagadahoc). The 
program has a quasi-governmental structure and is overseen by an appointed conﬁrmable Board which sets its 
internal budget. The Program’s mission is to assist residents of the State establish private retirement savings 
accounts. The Board is charged with establishing a public-private retirement savings program for employees who 
do not otherwise have access to a retirement savings program through their employer. Retirement accounts are not 
funded or guaranteed by the State and employers do not provide matches for accounts established under the 
Program. The Board and Ms. Bordowitz have spent the last several months establishing policies, discussing 
partnerships and recently retained an investment advisor. 
$1.6 MM to stand up the program was sourced from a legal settlement between the State and Moody’s Investor ’s 
Service. This initial funding is an acceptable use of settlement proceeds but note the legal matter is unrelated to the 
program. This $1.6MM was deposited into the Maine Retirement Savings Enterprise Fund and will pay for 
operations until other revenues from investments, program fees or other supports are collected. The Fund is 
managed by the Treasurer ’s Ofﬁce. Payments are periodically made to an external account managed by the Program 
for ongoing expenses. The Treasurer ’s Ofﬁce has viewing access to the external account and both the Fund and the 
extemal account are subject to required audit. Per the Act, investment earnings from the Fund remain in the Fund. 
Thank you for your time and attention and continued support of the objectives of the Maine Retirement Savings 
Program. I encourage Committee members to direct questions and comments to Ms. Bordowitz at 
elizabeth.bordowitz@mainesaves.or2. . 
Sincerely, 
Henry Beck 
State Treasurer 
Cash Management (207)624-7477 Fax (207)287-2367 Maine Relay 7ll Unclaimed Property (207)624-7470 
state.treasurer(i17maine.g ov upgeneralinquire@maine.gov Toll Free in Maine (888)283-2808
