 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Regional Government Relations Director  
North Atlantic Region  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc.  
207.888 .9826  / hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Regional Government Relations Director,  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network  
 
Portions of LD 258 “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Op erations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, 
June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 ” Related to the Prevention, Early Dete ction, Treatment and 
Survivorship of Cancer  
 
February 28, 2023  
 
Senator  Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative Meyer, members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee , my name is Hilary Schneider, and I am the Regional Government Relations Director of the 
Atlantic/North Region for the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN).  In this role, I 
serve as the lead Government Relations Director for Maine. ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan 
advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer Society, supports evidence -based policy and le gislative 
solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a major health problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for 
public policies that are helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, survivors, and 
their families have a voice in public p olicy matters at all levels of government.  
We appre ciate this opportunity to provide testimony on portions of the  Governor ’s biennial budget 
proposal related to cancer prevention , early detection and survivorship. One in two men and 1 in 3 
women are expected to be diagnosed with cancer in their lifetime.i The American Cancer Society 
estimates that 8,920 Mainers will be diagnosed with cancer and that 3,500  will die from the  disease in 
this year alone.ii Cancer is the leading cause of death in Maine.iii  
Tobacco Control  
Maine’s cancer incidence rate is significantly higher than the national average, driven largely by highe r-
than -average  incidence of tobacco -related cancers. Maine has the 16th highest rate of adult smoking  in 
the nation and the 9th highest rate of smoking -related cancer deaths.iv  You may be surprised to learn 
that Maine ’s adult smoking rate is higher than that of Georgia, Florida , North  Carolina , and Texas . An 
estimated 2,400 deaths are caused by smoking each year in Ma ine including nearly 34 % of cancer 
deaths .v  Smoking is estimated to cost Maine $ 942 million in direct health care costs, including $281  
million in Medicaid costs annually.vi  
Due to sharp increases in youth tobacco use in recent years, largely due to sk yrocketing rates of e -
cigarette use, the decades of progress that has been made in reducing tobacco use rates is now in 
jeop ardy . Here in Maine, nearly 1 in 5 high school students us ed some form of tobacco product in the 
last 30 days , including nearly 30% of 12th graders .vii  More than one in 20 Maine high school students 
smoke cigarettes.viii  Nearly o ne in 20 male high school students  smoke cigars in Maine.ix One in 3 Maine  
 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Regional Government Relations Director  
North Atlantic Region  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc.  
207.888 .9826  / hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org high school students and 1 in 10 middle school students have used e -cigarettes.x Nearly  20 percent of high 
school st udents are current users of e-cigarettes.xi 
Due to historical and ongoing patterns of tobacco indust ry marketing to targeted populations, tobacco use and 
tobacco -related disease tend to disproportionately impact some groups more than others.  Maine youth tobacco 
use rates are highest among high schoolers who identify as bisexual or transgender, as well as Native American 
high schoolers. Overall, f emale high school use rates are higher than male use rates.  According to polling of  likely 
Maine voters conducted by Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids, three -quarters of Maine voters are concerned, 
with nearly half “very concerned” about young people in their community becoming addicted to tobacco 
products.xii  
In the over 50 years since the first Surgeon General’s report on tobacco use was published, scientists and 
policymakers have learned a  lot about what works to reduce tobacco use. The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) fact -based recommendations for a comprehensive tobacco control program provides states 
with the needed framework to educate people on the dangers of tobacco u se as well as connect people who are 
already addicted to tobacco to resources to help them quit. When appropriately funded in accordance with CDC 
recommendations, comprehensive tobacco control programs are able to reduce tobacco use.xiii 
ACS CAN is pleased to see the Governor ’s biennial budget proposal including funding for the state tobacco 
control p rogram at the US CDC recommended level of funding of $15.9 million /year .xiv This level of funding was 
achieved through  the actions take n by the L egislature over the past few sessions , which demonstrated a cl ear 
prioritizatio n of adequate, susta inable funding for tobacco prevention and trea tment. These efforts  restore d 
cuts made to program funding and further increased the funding through the passage of LD 1868  last session . LD 
1868 was  a bipartisan bill  passed with unan imous support ou t of the H HS committee , unanimous support of the 
Appropriations committee in voting on the “table,” and the more than 2/3 support of the Legislature needed to 
pass it into law on  emergency basis. This state tobacco control program is funded through part of the revenue 
the state receives from the tobacco Master Settlement Agreement , a portion o f the excise tax on non -cigarette 
tobacco  products, and federal funding.  The increased level of fun ding is being used to increase  investments in 
tobacco cessation, targeted interv ention s to communities that are disprop ortionately impacted by tobacco u se 
and a  needed increased in vestment in surve illance and evalu ation , which will further  allow the program to  
ensure  evidence -based interve ntions  are being carried out in the most effectiv e and efficient manner possible.  
In addition , ACS CAN supports the Fund for a Healthy Maine  allocation to the Department of Atto rney General 
(p. A-118), which funds tobacco enfor cement efforts necessary to carry out the state ’s requirements  as part of 
the tobacco Master Settleme nt Agreement.  
Main e Breast and Cervical Health Program  (DHHS – Breast Cancer Services Special Program Fund Z069 , p. A -
306)  
In 20 23, an estimated 1,450  womenxv in Maine will be diagnosed with breast cancer and 190 will die from the 
disease.xvi  Cancers that are found at an early stage are easier to treat and lead to greater survival .xvii Uninsured 
and underinsured women have lower screening rates , resulting in a greater risk of being diagnosed at a later,  
more advanced stage of disease.xviii 
The Maine Breast and Cervical Health P rogram  provides low -income, uninsured, and underinsured women 
access to breast and cervical cancer screenings and diagnostic services, including mammograms, Pap tests,  HPV 
tests  and diagnostic testin g if abnormal results are found . From 20 16-2020, over 5,600  Maine  wom en were 
served by the program.xix During this time perio d, over 100 b reast cancers and 80 cervical cancers or  
 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Regional Government Relations Director  
North Atlantic Region  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc.  
207.888 .9826  / hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org  
precancerous lesions have been detected by the program.xx  
Although access to preventive services  has increased through expanded health  care coverage and elimination of 
most cost-sharing, millions of individuals with low-incomes or who are  underserved still do  not have adequate 
access to breast and cervical cancer screeni ng services. Nationally, the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early 
Detection Program (NBCCEDP) can only serve  less than  one in ten eligible individuals  for cervical cancer 
screening and less than two in ten eligible f or breast cancer screenings.  Maintaining  state funding for the Maine 
Breast and Cervical Health Program  will preserve a critical safety net for Maine  people  who conti nue to lack 
access to life saving cancer screening, diagnostic , and treatment services  for breast and cervical cancers . 
Maine Hospice Council  (Account  0663, p. A -430)  
ACS CAN support s the  ongoing funding for the Maine Hospice Council, contained in the Governor ’s biennial 
budget proposal. The mission of the Maine Hosp ice Council is t o address access to quality end -of-life and 
palliative care through innovation, education, creativity and advocacy . As part of their work, the Mai ne Hospice 
Council convenes and staffs the state ’s Palliative Care and Quality of Life Interdisciplinary Advisory Council . This 
council was establi shed in law in 20 15, as a result of legislation supported by ACS CAN to increase awareness of 
and a ccess to pal liative care.  Palliative care is a growing field of specialized medical care that improves the 
quality of life of patients and their families by focusing on relief from pain, stress and other often debilitating 
symptoms of treatment for a serious disease such as cancer.  Palliative care is appropriate at any age and any 
stage of a serious or chronic illness  and can be provided alongside curative treatment. It is delivered by trained 
specialists who work together with doctors and nurses in a team -based approach that focuse s on the patients’ 
needs, explains treatment options and gives patients and their families a voice in realizing their treatment goals.  
Numerous studies have found  that palliative care:  
• Reduces symptoms and pain  
• Improves quality of life  
• Reduces unnecessary emergency department visits, hospitalizations, and time spent in the intensive 
care unit  
• And typically results in o verall cost savings xxi,xxii,xxiii,xxiv  
The Palliative Care Adv isory Council has been meeting quarterly since 2015, convening leaders in palliative care 
across the state, as well as other stakeholders, to advance access to palliative care. Their work has res ulted in 
enhan ced analysis of strengths  and gaps in palliative care access, advocacy in support of policies to increase 
access to p alliative care (e.g., successful passage of legislation  to requi re MaineCare cove rage of palliative care) , 
and convenings and colla boration among stakeho lders. For  more information on the work on the council , see: 
Maine Palliative Care and Quality of Life Advisory Council (mainehospicecouncil.org)  
Children's Health Insurance Program ( CHIP)  (p. A -366) 
ACS CAN s upports  funding in the Governor ’s proposed b ienn ial budget to expand access to the Children ’s Health  
Insurance P rogram  (CHIP) . Because the changes to eligibility were passed in la st year's Supplemental Budget, we 
expected to see them implemented by now. We urge the Department to implement the changes before the 
unwinding of continuous eligibility in MaineCare begins on April 1st since many children who may lose coverage  
under the current eligibility rules would be eligible for CHIP under these improved eligibility levels. It would be 
 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Regional Government Relations Director  
North Atlantic Region  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc.  
207.888 .9826  / hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org easier for families who are now over income for MaineCare to know that they will be eligible for CHIP when they 
go through their redetermin ation process rather than needing to shift to some other private insurance provider - 
or even worse go without coverage - and then shift back to CHIP when the changes go into effect. We believe it 
would also be easier for the Department. Increase d access to  CHIP  coverage  will make a significant difference to 
many Maine families and will help reduce health  disparities for Maine ’s children, disparities that if not 
addressed earl y in life  often continue  (and even worsen)  into adult hood . 
Tobacco Taxes  
If revenue is needed to suppor t budget initiatives , ACS CAN recommends conside ration of increasing the 
cigarette  excise tax by $2.00/pack.  The 2014 U. S. Surgeo n General Report, The Health Consequences of Smoking 
– 50 years of Progress  concludes that increases in the price of tobacco products, including those resulting from 
excise tax increases, prevent initiation of tobacco use, promote cessation, and reduce the prevalence and 
intensity of tobacco use among youth and adults.xxv  This conclusion reaffirms findings from previous Surgeon 
General’s reports on tobacco use that raising the price of tobacco is one of the most effective tobacco 
prevention and co ntrol strategies, and that increasing the price of cigarettes and tobacco products decreases 
the prevalence of tobacco use, particularly among youth and young adults.xxvi Despite the clear evidence -base 
for this policy, Maine has not increased its cigarette excise tax since 2005.xxvii  
When a $2.00/pack in crease of  the cigarette tax was considered duri ng the 130th Maine Legis lature , it was 
estimated that the  proposal  would generate nearly $48 million in new annual revenue, decrease youth smoking 
by nearly 20% , and generate $ 3.4 million in state savings to the Medicaid program over the next five years.xxviii 
Increasing Maine ’s cigarette excise tax will  result in even more revenue as Maine statute ties all tobacco taxes 
together so as not to create loopholes in our tax code. R aising tobacco  taxes can help  reduce tobacco -related 
health  disparities.  Big Tobacco  has successfully targeted marketing of their products to low -income 
communities, and, as such,  low-income populations are more likely to use tobacco  and, thus, bear a larger share 
of the burden of cancer and other tobacco -related illnesses. Increasing the tax counteracts industry price 
reduction strategies and provides a strong incentive to quit  or to never start in the first place , especially  for 
those who are most price sensitive . Increased quitting saves those who use tobacco  money , reduces disease,  
and helps decrease health disparities.   
We appreciate your tim e and consideration of our comments. I would be happy to answer any questions about 
this testimony.  
 
i American Cancer Society, Lifetime Risk of Developing or Dying From Cance,  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancer -basics/lifetime -
probability -of-developing -or-dying -from -cancer.html , accessed on February 8, 2023.  
ii American Cancer Society, “Cancer Facts & Figures, 2023.” Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 2023. 
https://www.cancer.org/content/dam/cancer -org/research/cancer -facts -and -statistics/annual -cancer -facts -and -figures/2023/2023 -
cancer -facts -and -figures.pdf .    
iii Maine CDC, Maine Mortality Report: Leading Causes of  Death 202 0, July 2022, https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/public -health -
systems/data -research/data/documents/202 0%20Mortality%20Report%20Final%20071722.pdf .  
iv State adult smoking rates from the CDC 2021 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) data available online . Smoking -
related cancer deaths data from the American Cancer Society.  
v Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids.  The Toll of Tobacco in Maine. Updated Feb. 17, 2023 ,  
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/facts_issues/toll_us/maine  
vi Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids.  The Toll of Tobacco in Maine. Updated Feb. 17, 2 023,  
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/facts_issues/toll_us/maine  
vii Maine CDC, 20 21 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS), https://www.maine.gov/miyhs/2021 -results .  
viii Ibid.  
ix Ibid.  
 
 
Hilary Schneider  
Regional Government Relations Director  
North Atlantic Region  American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Inc.  
207.888 .9826  / hilary.schneider@cancer.org  
fightcancer .org  
x Ibid.  
xi Ibid.  
xii Lake Research Partners poll conducted on behalf of Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids of 800 likely 2022 voters in Maine, December 
2021, poll has a margin of error of +/ -3.5%  
xiii Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs, 2014.  
xiv This funding is in clude d as part of the ME CDC app ropriation (Account 0143), p. A -345.  
xv Throughout this section,  women refers to individuals assigned female at birth.  
xvi American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures 202 3.Atlan ta: American Cancer Society; 2023.  
xvii American Cancer Society. Cancer Prevention & Early Detection Facts & Figures 2021-22. Atlanta: American Cancer Society; 20 21. 
xviii Ibid.  
xix Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Screening Program Summaries . www. cdc.gov/ cancer/nbccedp/data/summaries/     
xx Ibid.  
xxi Meier, DE, Brawley, OW.  Palliative care and the Quality of Life. J Clin Onc:20:20:2750 -2752 ( 2011).  
xxii  Smith TJ,  Temin S, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology Provisional Clinical Opinion: The Integration of Palliative Care into 
Standard Oncology Care. J Clin Onc. Published online ahead of print on February 6, 2012 as 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.5161  
xxiiiTemel JS, et al, Early Palliat ive Care for Patients with Metastatic Non –Small -Cell Lung Cancer, N  Engl J Med 363;8 (2010).  
xxivMcCarthy  IM, Robinson C, Huq S, Philastre M, Fine RL, Cost savings from  palliative care  teams and guidance for a financially 
viable  palliative care program, Healt h Serv Res. 2015 Feb;50(1):217 -36, Epub 2014 Jul 15. Morrison RS,  Dietrich J,  Ladwig S,  Quill 
T, Sacco J,  Tang eman J,  Meier DE.,  Palliative care  consultation teams cut hospital costs for Medicaid beneficiaries,  Health Aff 
(Millwood).  2011 Mar;30(3):454 -63. Morrison RS, Penrod JD, Cassel JB, Caust -Ellenbogen M, Litke A, Spragens L, Meier DE , Cost savings 
associated  with US hospital palliative care consultation programs,  Arch Intern Med. 2008 Sep 8; 168(16):1783 -90. 
xxv U.S Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). The Hea lth Consequences of Smoking – 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the 
Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA. U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Health 
Promotion, Office of Smoking and Health; 2014. Available at http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50 -years -of-
progress/exec -summary.pdf.  
xxvi HHS, 2014.  
xxvii Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids, CIGARETTE TAX INCREASES BY STATE PER YEAR 2000 -2021, March 15, 2021,  
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/research/factsheets/pdf/0275.pdf . 
xxviii American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, Campaign for Tobacco -Free Ki ds, and T obacconomics, New Revenues , Public 
Health Benefits  & Cost Savings  from a  $2.00 Cigarette Tax Increase in Maine , January 12,  2021 .  
