207-568-4142 • www.mofga.org         PO Box 170, Unity, ME 04988
MOFGA Testimony In Favor of LD 258
February 28, 2023 
Good morning Senators and Representatives on the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry and the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is 
Hillary Barter and I am Educational Programs & Policy Coordinator at the Maine Organic Farmers and 
Gardeners Association (MOFGA), where I coordinate engagement in the Maine Harvest Bucks program 
by farmers who offer CSAs, or Community Supported Agriculture programs. Enabling food access by 
all Mainers is an important part of MOFGA’s mission, and I am speaking today in support of LD 258. I 
applaud our State for the pioneering efforts that have already been taken to help more Mainers gain 
access to local, healthy food. We passed the country’s 1st Constitutional Right to Food; we have a plan 
to end hunger. This appropriation of $600,000 for Nutrition Incentive Programs will help bring our state 
closer to its goals by increasing food access to low-income Mainers while also supporting Maine’s 
farmers.
In addition, I would like to request an ongoing commitment from the State of Maine to support the 
continuation of these programs so we can steadily work towards making these programs available to all 
who need them. To this end, I ask that you change the language in the funding appropriation for the 
Fund to Address Food Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives from a one-time $600,000 per year 
appropriation per year to a continuous appropriation per year to continue indefinitely beyond the current 
biennium.
MOFGA works closely with our partners at the Maine Federation of Farmers' Markets, Cultivating 
Community, St. Mary’s Nutrition Center, and Good Shepherd Food Bank to manage nutrition incentive 
programs in the state of Maine. As I mentioned, MOFGA’s role in the collaborative is to facilitate 
engagement in the Maine Harvest Bucks program by farms offering CSAs. Such programs, which are 
also called “farm shares”, take various forms; usually, they are boxes of vegetables delivered weekly 
through the summer and fall, though some farmers offer them throughout the winter.  
Our “arm” of the Maine Harvest Bucks program is growing. We expect at least 20 farmers to participate 
this coming season, up from 10 in 2020, and these farms are located in 10 of Maine’s 16 counties. In 
the 2022-23 season over $80,000 in local food has been purchased directly from these participating 
farms using SNAP and Maine Harvest Bucks, up by $20,000 from the previous season alone.
As you may know, the Maine Harvest Bucks program makes it possible for SNAP participants to stretch 
their SNAP funds, giving them bonus dollars to spend on fruits and vegetables for every dollar they 
spend on local foods. Within the CSA arm of this program, we have been fortunate to be able to offer 
bonus dollars on a 1:1 basis, meaning that SNAP participants pay 50% regular price for a vegetable 
CSA.
The impact of this discount on peoples’ lives is significant. In a survey of participants in our farmers’ 
CSA programs conducted last month, 100% of respondents said they were “able to afford essentials 
they might not otherwise be able to” due to their participation in the program. 97% said they found 
themselves eating more vegetables and 88% reported feeling healthier because they were able to 
afford a farm share. For the many people who participate in these subsidized CSA programs year after 
year, the regular commitment enables new relationships with farmers and neighbors to form, and has 
big impacts on budgets and diets alike. When people can afford to eat quality, fresh food, they are 
better able to feel more secure and pursue their other goals.
To quote one participant, 
“This program has impacted us greatly. We feel healthier, we’ve stopped buying so much 
processed food and cook more at home now than ever before. This program has made it so we 
can afford all the food we want to eat but normally can’t afford.” 
These important programs desperately need your support. We are facing a substantial budget deficit 
due to the reduced availability of federal funding, as are similar programs nationwide. Administrators of 
similar programs in other states are also turning to their state governments to make it possible for these 
programs to continue. We need funding for the direct payments to farmers to cover the incentives 
themselves (the Maine Harvest Bucks portion of a transaction), as well as for program administration, 
outreach and, if possible, to help farmers with equipment costs. 
Thank you so much for your consideration of this request.
The Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association (MOFGA) started in 1971 and is the oldest 
and largest state organic organization in the country. We’re a broad-based community that educates 
about and advocates for organic agriculture, illuminating its interdependence with a healthy 
environment, local food production, and thriving communities. We have 15,000 members, we certify 
more than 500 organic farms and processing facilities representing $90 million in sales, and we are 
working hard to provide training and create opportunities for Maine’s next generation of farmers. Each 
of these farmers is a Maine businessperson for whom economic health and environmental health are 
interdependent. While MOFGA envisions a future of healthy ecosystems, communities, people and 
economies sustained by the practices of organic agriculture, we attribute our success to collaboration 
and outreach to growers across the management spectrum.
