Jake Adams
Holden, ME
LD 258
Good Morning, and thank you for your time.  I would like to testify in favor of the 
additional funding for Maine Maritime Academy.  A little bit about myself, I live in 
Holden and work at Maine Maritime Academy in the IT department as a Systems 
Integration Specialist, primarily working with Admissions and Financial Aid; I also 
on the board of MSEA-SEIU.
Additional funding for Maine Maritime Academy is critical.  We have the opportunity
to be recognized as the #1 Maritime Academy in the US and perhaps the world but we
cannot achieve this running at our current levels of funding.  Presently, comparable 
institutions SUNY, Texas A&M, Cal Maritime, etc receive roughly 44% of their 
operating budget from their state.  We receive 22% of our operating budget from the 
state.  Similarly, institutions within the state that have a comparable number of FTEs 
receive around 44% of their operating budget from the state.  This leaves us at a bit of
a loss and while we do quite well, according to a study from the Georgetown Center 
on Education and the Workforce out of 4500 colleges studied we are number 6 in 
terms of return on investment.
The lack of parity with regard to funding however has a lot of negative consequences 
the main one being that we have higher tuition than most comparable schools.  Other 
schools are able to capitalize on that fact.  Maine Maritime Academy is 483% more 
expensive to attend than Mass Maritime for in-state tuition and out of state tuition is 
49% higher (source the US Department of Education and College Scorecard). Mass 
Maritime is able to use this information to attract students who may otherwise choose 
to attend Maine Maritime Academy.  
I also know that our graduates tend to become endeared to our state.  I know of a 
number of former students that purchase property in the state, vacation in the state, 
and after some seatime even become employed in the state.  I feel strongly that an 
investment in our institution brings a good return on investment for our state.
I thank you for your consideration and I implore you to keep the additional funding for Maine 
Maritime Academy in the budget.  

