 
 
 
 
 
JAMES I. COHEN 
PARTNER 
jcohen@verrill-law.com 
207-253-4708 
 One Portland Square 
Portland, Maine 04101-4054 
 Main 207-774-4000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 23, 2023 
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair    Sen. Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair    Rep. Michele Meyer, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations   Joint Standing Committee on Health 
& Financial Affairs      and Human Services 
Maine State Legislature     Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station     100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333     Augusta, ME  04333 
 
Re:  Letter in support of the Biennial Budget, Part A, related to MaineCare rates for behavioral 
health and substance use disorder treatment  
 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee; 
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyers, and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee: 
 
On behalf of the Coalition to Ensure Fair Access to Opioid Addiction Treatment, we are pleased to write 
in support of the provisions related to the MaineCare rates related to substance use disorder treatment in 
Part A of the Governor’s Biennial Budget proposal (pp. 377; 410).  
 
About us.  Our Coalition is comprised of all twelve opioid treatment provider (OTP) clinics licensed by 
the State of Maine to offer medication-assisted treatment services utilizing methadone. Our Coalition 
serves thousands of Mainers with opioid use disorder from clinics located throughout Maine, 
approximately 70% of whom are MaineCare eligible.  
 
Discussion.  Substance use disorder treatment is a bipartisan issue that affects the lives of all Maine 
people. In the last biennium, the Legislature directed the Maine Department of Health and Human 
Services to conduct a process to review MaineCare rates for behavioral health services, including 
providers of substance use disorder treatment. The rate setting review process, which included rate studies 
conducted by Burns & Associates, was conducted during the latter half of 2022 and involved multiple 
stakeholders, including our Coalition.  As a result of the review process, MaineCare rates for OTP services 
were increased to reflect substantial increases in costs faced by providers. The increase was essential to 
help thousands of Mainers afflicted with opioid use disorder.  
 
By way of background, MaineCare rates for OTP services in Maine have historically not kept pace with 
inflation – and only very recently have rates started to catch up. OTP services are paid for through a 
bundled weekly rate that was originally set in the late 1990s, and this rate was not increased for more than 
a decade. In the early 2010s, MaineCare rates for OTP services were cut by 25%, which led to a reduction 
in Mainers receiving treatment. In 2018, rates were restored to 1990 era levels, and in 2019, the Mills 
Administration instituted the first significant rate increase in decades. In response to the new rates, for the 
first time in years, several new OTP clinics were able to open in parts of the state which previously did 
Letter in support of Biennial Budget, Part A, MaineCare rates for SUD treatment 
February 23, 2023 
Page 2 
 
25000620_6 not have service. One of the new clinics is set to open within the next month in the Augusta area. Other 
new clinics have opened in Presque Isle and Saco. 
 
Thanks to the rate review process set in motion last year by the Legislature, OTP rates were further 
increased this year. Although the new rates remain below the 1990’s rates when adjusted for inflation, and 
below the rates used for OTP services in the Medicare program, the new rates will be instrumental in 
helping OTP clinics hire and retain needed staff, allow new clinics to open, and help make life-saving 
OTP services available to more Mainers. 
 
For these reasons, we urge the Legislature to appropriate the funds set forth in the proposed budget to 
support the MaineCare rate increases resulting from the recent rate-setting process directed by the Maine 
Legislature. These rates will help improve treatment services, improve access, and keep more Mainers 
alive.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide comments in support of these provisions of the 
Biennial Budget proposal, and if you have questions or need any other information, please do not hesitate 
to let us know.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
  
James I. Cohen 
Counsel to OTP Coalition 
       
 
cc: Gordon Smith, Director of Opioid Response, State of Maine 
 Katherine Coutu, State Opioid Treatment Authority, State of Maine 

