Maine Center for 
1 Economic Policy '°' 
..“.iiZi.‘ii 
Testimony on LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from 
the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Endingjune 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025." 
February 10, 2023 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Tipping, Representative Sachs and Roeder, and the 
members of thejoint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Labor and Housing. My name isjames Myall, and lam an Economic Policy Analyst at the 
Maine Center for Economic Policy. I'm before you today to testify neither for nor against 
the Governor's proposed budget relating to labor issues. 
in particular, I want to urge your committees to set aside an appropriation to cover the 
implementation of a statewide Paid Family and Medical Leave program. As I'm sure you're 
aware, a broad coalition of advocates and member organizations from across the state are 
supporting the recent findings of a legislative commission which recommended the 
implementation of a paid family and medical leave system.‘ The Labor and Housing 
Committee will consider these recommendations soon and will hopefully agree with the 
commission and pass a bill to establish a program. 
The commission's recommendation follows the model used by programs in other states —a 
self-sustaining program that funds both benefits and administrative costs through a payroll 
tax. This structure means the program would not require ongoing appropriations. 
However, it is likely that the program will require some one-time funding to cover its start- 
up costs. The biggest single one-time cost is the cost of creating computer software to track 
benefit eligibility and payments. lt is common for states to invest in these systems when 
they create a PFML program. Maine's Department of Labor has estimated this cost at $65 
million? There are options to reduce this upfront cost. Other states, for example, have 
estimated lower costs for IT systems? ’ It may also be possible for the new program to issue 
a revenue bond to cover some of its expenses. 
Nevertheless, l would urge you to set aside funding in the biennial budget to ensure the 
smooth implementation of the program. 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maullan Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chln, Secretary Jessica Maurer
Appropriating these funds will be a critical component of creating a paid family leave 
system for Maine - an initiative that is supported by 70 percent of Mainers" and which has 
the power to be transformative for our workforce. Not only will it provide financial security 
to hundreds of thousands, but we're already seeing in other states that paid family and 
medical leave helps keep people, especially women, in the workforce. It's a key piece of 
solving our workforce shortage? 
This budget cycle is a perfect time to set aside this money, since the state has a large 
surplus. What's more, this one-time expenditure will set us up for future success without 
incurring future ongoing costs. it's an excellent long-term investment. 
Thank you for considering this request. I've worked closely on this issue for several years, 
and l’m happy to answer any questions you might have. ln addition to taking questions 
now, l’m available at' 
|myall@mecep.org. 
Notes 
‘ 130i“ Legislature, Commission To Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program, 
December 2022 https://legislature.malne.gov/doc/9693. 
2 130"‘ Legislature, Commission To Develop a Paid Family and Medical Leave Benefits Program, 
December 2022 https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9693, page 229' 
3 lMPAQ international, A Review of the Administrative Costs of Establishing a State Paid Family and 
Medical Leave Program, 
https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/OASP/evaluation/pdf/microsim doc admin cost 508.pdf. 
4 Pan Atlantic Research, 59"’ Omnibus Poll, October 2022. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1wmii1yM- 
GwC9;;jl 7gXyChBy9NCJ8m0e/view 
5 Courtney Coile, Maya Rossin-Slater & Amanda Su, The Impact of Paid Family Leave on Families with Health 
Shocks, National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper 30739, December 2022. 
https:1/www.nber.org[papers/w30739
