Testimony of James Bailey  
  
In Support of the Health and Human Services Portion of LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations 
and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" (Emergency)  
(Governor's Bill)  
 Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs  
  
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee o n Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and member of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, I’m James Bailey, a licensed social worker employed at Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center and 
president of the Maine Servi ce Employee Association Local 1989 chapter that represents the hospital.   I 
am submitting this testimony on my own time in support of LD 258 and to highlight the needs of the 
hospital.    
Consider that the average length of a medical hospital stay is about 4.5 days, whereas a typical 
commitment at our state psychiatric hospitals is measured in months.   The consistency of staffing in a 
psychiatric hospital, with patients that have been hospitalized months and sometimes years, is of vital 
importance to the fun ctioning of the hospital.   In previous supplemental budgets, money has been 
appropriated to DDPC to fund expenses related to travel nurses.   The frequent turnover of staff – 
especially nurses, but also therapeutic staff, clinical staff, recreational staff,  and more – makes our jobs 
not only more difficult, but more dangerous.   A patient that doesn’t trust their staff in a state hospital is 
a patient that has a higher risk of violence due to their mental illness.    
You are likely well acquainted with the inc rease in violence against healthcare workers in emergency 
departments both across the state and the country.   Every employee at both state hospitals, regardless 
of position, must train to physically restrain violent and unsafe patients against walls for em ergency 
medication administration, to use non -restrictive blanket wraps to safely seclude, and place them in a 
multi -point restraint chair if they persist in unsafe behavior.   Not only is one’s training important in 
these unfortunate events, but trusting t hat those working with you are equally trained and prepared is 
essential.   Frequent turn -over erodes that trust.   Staff being mandated to work past their shift end time 
due to poor staffing erodes that trust.   Nickel -and-diming staff compensation and benef its erodes that 
trust.  
Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center and Riverview Psychiatric Center need consistent staffing across the 
board to keep the staff safe and the patients safe.   Money invested in travel nursing and contracted 
employees should be invested in  the staff committed to the hospitals, the state, and the people they 
serve.   Please ensure that the State seriously address the known 15% average pay gap across state 
employees with regional peers, please ensure that the State prioritize the safety of the ir staff and 
patients, please ensure that the State operates the hospitals with equity, opportunity, and fairness.  
Thank you for your time and consideration and feel free to follow -up with any questions you may have.   
 
