1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
 
In Support of LD  258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal 
Year s Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" (Emergency)  
(Governor's Bill)  
Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs , 
and the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Friday, February 10, 2023, State House Room 228, and Electronically  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs , members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs , Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing, I’m Jeff McCabe , Director of Legislature and Politics the Maine Service 
Employees Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine 
Servic e Employees Association represents over 13,000 workers across the state, including but 
not limited to workers in all three branches of Maine State Government, the Maine Community 
College System, Maine Maritime Academy  and Child Development Services , the Maine 
Educational Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing/Governor Baxter School for the Deaf, as 
well as public workers for the City of Lewiston, Lewiston Schools, City of Auburn and York 
County Government . 
 
Members of our union are encouraged by many initiatives impacting them in the Governor’s 
proposed State Budget.  
 I’m here today for two reasons , the first to provide support to the Department of Labor and its  
budget request . MSEA has been fortunate to work with Commissioner Fortman on a number of 
issues. Commissioner Fortman knows what the department needs because she engages with 
workers to understand work loads, technology needs and more. Supporting the department ’s 
requests associated wi th reclasses, reorganizations  and positions is vital at this time . You will 
hear more from our members at DOL in strong support of the propo sals presented.  
 The second reason I ’m here is to answer questions  that I would  even  call homework that came 
up in the Labor and Housing Committee , around which bills did not get funded off of l ast 
session ’s special appropriations table and that are not included in the budget so far this year.  
For that I draw the two committees’ attention to the items below : 
 
• LD 1746 An Act To  Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan To Include Employees 
Who Work for the Office of Chief Medical Examiner  
 
• LD 1808 An Act  To Address Retention at the Maine State Police Crime Laboratory and 
the Department of Public Safety Computer Crimes Unit  
 
• LD 1840 An Act To Amend the Laws Governing Retirement Benefit Reductions for 
Corrections Supervisors Currently Included in the 1998 Special Plan 
 
 
2 
 Member s of 131st Legislature have reintroduced these bills in the 130th and currently not 
included but should be included in the budget are these retirement issues.  
 
• LD 197 An Act to Address Employee Retention at the Maine State Police Crime 
Laboratory and the Computer Crimes Unit in the Department of Public Safety  
 
• LD 483 An  Act to Amend the Laws Governing Retirement Benefit Reductions for Certain 
Employees Currently Included in the 1998 Special Plan 
 
• LR 377 which mirrors LD 1746 An A ct To Expand the 1998 Special Retirement Plan To 
Include Employees Who Work for the Office of Chief Medical Examiner  
 
Additional ly, there is no language or funding in the proposed budget to address the retiree  
COLA crisis.  
 
Thank you and I would be glad to answer any questions.  
 
 
