1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe  
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
 
In Support of LD  258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 
30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" (Emergency)  
(Governor's Bill)  
Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs , 
and the Joint Standing Committee Education and Cultural Affairs  
Monday , February 1 3, 2023, State House Room 228, and Electronically  
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs , Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan and member s of the Committee on  Education and 
Cultural Affairs , I’m Jeff McCabe , director of politics  and legislation for the Maine Service Employees 
Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees 
Association represents over 13,000 workers across the state, including workers for the Maine 
Community College System  and Maine Maritime Academy . 
 
Members of our union are encouraged by many initiatives impacting them in the Governor’s proposed 
State Budget  and welcome engagement by the Legislature. We want to draw your attention to MSEA 
member testimony being submitted by members on  the Maine Maritime Academy and Maine 
Community College System initiatives in the proposed budget.  
 Maine Community College System  
We are extremely proud of the work  of our members at the Community College System. We proudly 
represent the staff and adjuncts across the Community College System. The proposal in the budget associated the Community College System is supported by MSEA members, who have in recent years 
fought hard for more equity, safety and respect  in the system statewide.  Whenever the Community 
College system adapts to meet the needs of our great state, it is our members who step up to meet 
those changes. The Community College  System is vital to workforce development and training. It meets 
the needs of recent high school grads, those displaced from layoffs, those seeking career changes and so 
much more. The MSEA Adjuncts provide the majority of that education.  We ’re thankful f or the efforts 
of the Community College System leadership during the pandemic and for recent invests made in the 
system.  
 Maine Maritime Academy  
We’re also  here today in full support of those portions of the proposed budget relat ing to Maine 
Maritime Acad emy. The staff and faculty on the campus at MMA are an integral part of training the next 
generation of Maine mariners. MMA also is a STEM college offering  degrees in engineering, 
oceanography and logistics, among others. As Maine's special- purpose college  and one of only six state 
maritime academies in the nation, it is critical we all share in ensuring MMA's success.   
 
However, chronic underfunding of Maine Maritime  Academy has left it  in a situation where it must 
make up an undue share of its base operating budget that similar institutions count on  their states  to 
pick up. Currently, Maine Maritime Academy receives roughly 23% of its operational budget from state 
2 
 funding, which compare s to an average of 40%+ enjoyed by its peer institutions here in Maine within +/ - 
50% enrollment. This funding disparity means Maine Maritime  Academy must make up the gap through 
a myriad of ways that inevitably result in raising tuition, limiting programm ing, and, most concerning to 
us, minimizing labor costs.   
 
Recently, we have partnered with Maine Maritime Academy to advocate for closing this funding gap. 
Equitably funding MMA means ensuring success on campus for students and faculty alike, and doing so  
will put Maine  Maritime  Academy in a strong position going forward. That is why we are so pleased to 
see $2 million added to MMA's base operations budget in each year of the biennium, as well as the 4.5% 
baseline increase made available to all institution s of higher education. These meaningful investments in 
the Academy are a significant step toward closing the funding disparity and we would like to thank the Administration for recognizing the importance of beginning to narrow that gap.   
 
However, there is  still more to be done and we look forward to partnering with Maine Maritime 
Academy, members of the se committee s and the L egislature as a whole to ensure students and faculty 
alike can count on MMA being fully funded.  
 
We ask the L egislature to support all higher education in the propose budget and look to make 
additional investments.   
 Thank you and I would be glad to answer any questions  and to put you in touch with our members to 
answer question s and to help you understand the important work they do.  
  
