 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony of Jeffrey A. Stone, DO for LD 258: An Act Making Unified 
Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the 
Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the La w 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025.  
 
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee and the Health and 
Human Services Committee  
Public Hearing: Febr uary 22, 2022  
 
Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative Meyer, and 
esteemed members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services Committees, my name is Dr. Jeff Stone. I have been a pediatrician for 30 years in my hometown of Waterville and am the founder of Waterville Pediatrics and on the Board 
of Directors for the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. I’m testifying 
today to encourage the Committees to add the necess ary funding into the budget to ensure 
Maine CDC’s School Oral Health Program has the resources to expand to all schools by 2025, as enacted last legislative session.  
 
As a pediatrician I repeatedly saw the devastation that results with a lack of adequate 
access to dental care in my patients. I would see kids with multiple dental cavities, painful 
teeth, and tooth abscesses due to inadequate or nonexistent dental care. It is heartbreaking to see these children suffering when it could have been prevented.  
 
I have been involved with organizations such as From The First Tooth and the Children’s 
Oral Health Network for many years now. We were making great strides in improving the dental care for Maine children, then along came Covid- 19. The response to the pandem ic 
demanded a lot from all of the systems that serve children, and much of the progress we 
had been seeing was lost. Oral health took a big hit when kids were unable to come to 
routine well -child appointments, and we lost that opportunity to provide dental  care and 
education, and the ability to refer kids when they have serious dental issues.  
 
We have a lot of catching up to do and it’s going to take a lot of work, but there is 
significant momentum behind the effort to bring preventive services to children.  From my 
decades of experience, the cost to do so is insignificant compared to the health benefits 
Maine children will get from the School Oral Health Program.  
 
As a pediatrician, I know that the children of Maine need and deserve these core health 
services. Please ensure that the funding for the program is included in the budget.  
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony on this important issue.  
 
Sincerely,  
Jeffrey A. Stone, DO  
Waterville, Maine  
 
  
Jeffrey Stone, DO
Maine AAP
LD 258
attached
