Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SElU Local 1989 
In Support of LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal 
Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" (Emergency) 
(Governor's Bill) 
Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, 
and the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Friday, February 17, 2023, State House Room 228, and Electronically 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and member of the Committee on 
State and Local Government, l’m Jeff McCabe, director of politics and legislation for the Maine 
Service Employees Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The 
Maine Service Employees Association represents over 13,000 workers across the state, 
including workers in all three branches of Maine State Government. 
ln testimony both from our members and the departments of Maine State Government before 
these committees and others on the proposed State Budget, it is apparent the various 
reclassi ﬁcations and reallocations across all Executive Branch departments must be fully 
funded. 
We’re hereto ask, as an important next step in addressing the State’s broken classification 
system, that this Legislature provide the funding necessary for the Executive Branch to both 
complete and implement the ongoing review of the State compensation and classiﬁcation 
systems. 
The current compensation and classification systems were put in place in the late 1970s, and 
both under statute and the civil service rules the State, through the Bureau of Human 
Resources, is required to perform active management and oversight thereof, including regularly 
reviewing all positions (5 MRSA § 7061(4)), and regularly performing comparative studies of 
salaries for State workers (Chapter 18, Section 389, chapter 5(2)(B)). However, the State’s 
oversight has been haphazard, it has failed to adequately manage the systems in any 
comprehensive manner since the 1980s. As a result, the overall architecture of the classification 
system is in shambles, and pay for State workers has lagged far behind those of their peers. 
ln 2019 we sought the legislative resolve “to Conduct a Comprehensive Study of the 
Compensation System for State Employees." At hearing, the_Administration testified in support 
of the bill, LD 1214, and Commissioner Figueora detailed at length how the lack of systemic 
oversight and years of neglect had bred numerous “inadequacies and inequities. ” 
Following the Administrator ’s signal of support for the study, MSEA and the State entered intoa 
separate Memorandum of Agreement which required the State to undertake the study — at 
which point the resolve was pulled. The Agreement required the State to contract with an 
outside consultant to complete the study and to make recommendations by August 1, 2020. lt 
also obligated the State to share the results with MSEA, and allowed either party to then bring 
the results back to the legislature in early 2021.
1
And finally, we are asking this Legislature to set aside funds necessary and sufficient to 
substantially close the pay gap between State workers and their peers. 
Thank you and l’d be glad to answer any questions.
1
A 89 
%4 
DEAN E. STAFFIERI 
President 
CALVIN PAQUET 
Vice President 
ALEC S. MAYBARDUK 
Executive Director 
MAINE SERVICE 
EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, 
LOCAL 1989 SERVICE 
EMPLOYEES 
INTERNATIONAL UNION 
65 STATE STREET 
AUGUSTA, ME 04330-5126 
207-622-3151 
Fax: 207-623-4916 
mseaseiu@mseaseiu.org 
www.mseaseiu.org 
@mseasei1 Dec. 19, 2022 
Dear Governor Mills, 
On behalf of the members of MSEA-SEIU Local 1989, congratulations on your reelection as 
Governor. We look forward to advancing our shared goals of rebuilding State Government, 
adequately staffing state agencies, strengthening retirement security for Maine’s seniors 
and increasing working families ‘ wages. The forthcoming Supplemental Budget, the 
Biennial Budget and the Executive Branch contract negotiations offer a unique opportunity 
to advance these shared goals. 
As you build these budgets, we respectfully request your administration include the 
following investments:V 
0 Include sufficient resources necessary in the biennial budget to fully eliminate the State 
Employee Pay Gap; 
0 Include sufficient funding necessary in the next supplemental budget to complete the 
classification study in 2023; 
0 Fully fund a retiree cost of living adjustment (COLA) that matches inflation for 
MainePERS participants;- 
0 increase funding for Maine Maritime Academy. 
Addressing the State Employee Pay Gap_ 
The State Employee Pay Gap: 
In January 2009, in response to a request by the Maine Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services (DAFS), Crescendo Consulting Group, LLC, produced a labor market 
survey comparing Executive Branch employees to private sector and other public sector 
employees employed by 250+ companies and 100+ municipalities. The results were 
striking. On average, Executive Branch employees were paid between 7.5% and 21.7% less 
than comparable private sector workers. Specifically, on average, administrative employees 
were paid 7.5% less, operations and maintenance employees were paid 21.6% less, 
professional and technical employees were paid 21.7% less and supen/isors were paid 9.6% 
less than comparable private sector workers. 
In 2020, The Segal Group Inc. performed yet another pay study at the request of DAFS per 
the collective bargaining agreements between MSEA-SEIU Local 1989 and the State of 
Maine. According to the market pay study commissioned by DAFS, state employees earn on 
average 15% less than what their peers make from other public employers in Maine and 
throughout New England, even after adjusting for regional pay differences. This pay gap is 
unfair to State employees and their families and it harms the essential services the people 
of Maine rely on. ln addition to using aggregated data on private sector compensation, 
Segal also compared State of Maine wages to public employers, including: the cities of 
Augusta, Bangor, Portland_and South Portland; Cumberland County; four other New 
England states: Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont; and the U.S. 
Government in Maine. This study confirms the findings of the labor-market survey the
