 
  
 
Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of  
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
 
In Favor of LD 258 – An Act Making Unified 
Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State 
Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
 
Provided on May 1 7, 2023  
 
Good afternoon, Senator  Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and the members of the Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs Committee.  
My name is Jena Jones, and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidis ciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged, and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testi fying in favor of LD 258.   
The Governor’s Change Package represents an important investment in Maine’s economy and its 
people. The Housing First Program, for example, will work to aid Maine’s chronically homeless 
population .  By the very definition, one can see that people who are chronically unhoused 
eventually grow old, and we’ve seen this trend so significantly in Maine that we’ve had to 
modify shelters to accommodate the changing needs of older people who are unhoused.  Older  
adults also represent the fastest growing homeless population in the country.1  Again, we’re 
seeing this alarming trend here, with older people being unable to afford current housing nor find 
other affordable housing, or worse, becoming homeless bec ause they cannot find home care or 
homemakers services because of our severe direct care workforce crisis.  
We support these efforts, but also want to emphasize that  many of these initiatives will  take 
significant time to implement  and do not address the cu rrent crisis facing older Mainers .  In fact,  
there is nothing specifically in this change package focused on the urgent needs of older Mainers , 
many of whom are facing homelessness, cannot access or afford care, are waiting to receive 
home delivered meals,  and will never have enough money to afford rising food, housing and 
homecare costs .  
Despite years of efforts and resources, Maine’s older adults are still struggling to meet their basic 
needs . Providers who offer care and support services continue to face financial insolvency 
secondary to a workforce crisis that was exacerbated by a multi -year pandemic . The systems of 
support that Maine  people  rely on have continued to erode and we see the conseq uences daily.  
 
1 Kushel, Margaret. Homelessness Among Older Adults: An Emerging Crisis, 2020.  

 
 We must do more, we have the financial resources available to do more, and we must act with 
the kind of  urgently  the situation demands . With resources readily available we need investments 
in affordable and equitable housing options and conn ection to community services to ensure 
older people have every means necessary to remain safely housed and active in their 
communities as they age.  
Currently, the Change Package does nothing to direct ly address the needs of older Mainers . A bill 
that only address es the needs of some but not  others is not equitable public policy , nor does it 
ensure that we are lifted up in all stages of our lives . There are, however, other bills to be 
considered by this Committee that do address the supports an d services that we will need as we 
age. 
We urge the Committee to use LD 258 to fund LD 1684, a bill to fund critically needed case 
management services provided by Maine’s area agencies on aging – they are the frontline 
workers who are trying to keep older people from becoming unhoused even wh en there is no 
housing available, and trying to find care for older people, even when there are no available care 
workers.  This funding is urgently needed to help people now, not in the future.   
We urge the Committee to use LD 258 as a vehicle to fund LD  1522, a bill to address systemic 
economic injustices that have left some older people in Maine significantly less well off 
financially than others.  This bill lifts tens of thousands of older Mainers out of poverty by 
expanding eligibility for the Medicar e Savings Program.  This single act will reduce the number 
of older people likely to experience a life crisis and need other assistance.  It will save us so 
much more in the long run and help people remain healthy, productive members of our 
communities and  workforce.   
Finally, we urge the Committee to use LD 258 to fund LD 1718, a bill that creates a tuition credit 
for direct care workers.  According to a recently published report by the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy, the direct care workforce crisis is keeping more than 8,000 Mainers from 
employment due to the need to care for a loved one as too few direct care workers are available 
and it’s costing us more than $1 billion annually in lost economic activity.2  LD 1718 is a bill that 
incentiviz es people to join this workforce and remain in it for a period of time.  It would increase 
and stabilize this workforce.   
We support efforts to make child care more affordable through LD 258, and note there is no 
corresponding effort to make elder care se rvices more affordable or available.  LDs 1718 and 
1522 are efforts to address accessibility and affordability of direct care services and should also 
be included in the change package.  
You have the opportunity to craft solutions through the lens of age -equity as you do your work. 
Ask yourselves what population is left behind in funding recommendations and correct the 
inequities within this bill. It’s hard to see what’s not there, but we ask you to do just that.  
Thank you, I am happy to answer any questions.  
Jena Jones  
 
 
2 Philips & Philips. The High Cost of Undervaluing Direct Care Work. 2023.  
