Testimony of Jennifer Vachon
Owner of Parkside Children’s Learning Center
In support of LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from 
the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025" 
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and 
the Joint Standing Committee on on Health and Human Services 
Tuesday, February 21, 2023, State House Room 228
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, 
members of the Health and Human Services, my name is Jennifer Vachon, I am the 
owner of Parkside Children’s Learning Center in Bangor.
Initiative: Provides funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 
635 for salary supplements awarded to individuals who provide childcare or are 
early childhood educators.
I’m testifying to support the salary supplement investments for early childhood 
educators working in child care programs. I’m also asking for you to increase the 
investments in this salary supplement program.  
Costs of living continues to increase.  I have an employee who lives paycheck 
to paycheck.  She works a full-time job.  She is an amazing toddler teacher!  She 
commutes about 20 miles each way to work a day.  And I know that she is doing 
her very best to crate a budget for herself with the pay that she receives: her 
hourly wage is $18.50, which is among a high earning wage in child care.  She says 
that she pays $900 for rent, and by the time she buys her groceries and pays her 
utilities, she has just enough for the raising costs of gas to get to work.  The 
supplemental pay allows her to not feel the stress of paying her bills as well as 
sometimes able to put money into her savings account.
For Parkside: she is a valuable team member for our program.  The kids in 
her class and their families love her.  She loves her job; she is the person who just 
by talking can tell how much she loves her job with her passion.  I worry when she 
says to me, “My family told me that ________ is hiring.”  I know I am not able to 
compete with other businesses in our community without putting our whole 
business at risk.
Currently, payroll to keep our wages competitive to other professional 
occupations in our area is 78% of our budget.  I am barely able to put any money 
aside in our savings account after paying for our rent, (which is $11,000), utilities 
and all that is needed to provide a high-quality environment for our children and 
staff.  Our program is running month to month and if there was an emergency, we 
would need to either take a loan out or use our credit line.  We need your help.  In 
order to keep the staff who are so wonderful to the children in our program we 
need you to recognize the support that is needed for child care in Maine.  When the 
announcement for the $200 supplement checks was made it was in order to try to 
keep our current employees or encourage others to look at joining our team.  This 
money was (in my eyes) a recognition from our state that our profession is 
important, in fact essential.  For the first time since the pandemic, I have not lost 
an employee in the past 4 months.  4 months!  That is how unstable our 
employment is in this field!  It costs our business more than the $200 for 
advertising, interviewing and orientating when hiring an individual.  Please help us 
continue to provide the support our staff needs.  In order for my business to stay 
competitive in the labor marker and offer the care families need to get to their jobs, 
increased investments in the salary supplements will help keep my classrooms 
staffed and parents at work.  It will also help keep tution increases to families down 
as we try to support our employees in the labor market.
Later this session there will be a bill to propose increases to the salary supplement 
program and I ask you to support these measures to help save child care in the 
state of Maine.
