
The balance of the current funding disparity must be “made up” with additional sources, 
including tuition paid by students, which promotes declining enrollment in a competitive market, 
reduces access to low-income Maine families, and results in additional constraints on balancing 
MMA’s budget. Higher tuition for MMA students impairs the Academy’s ability to compete for 
students (including Maine residents) who may choose State Maritime Academies of other states 
such as Massachusetts. 
The funding disparity that has emerged over the years is not to be ascribed to the State alone. 
MMA has long-prided itself in being a self-reliant institution and has not traditionally requested 
much. However, due to rising costs, a changing global economy, changing expectations and 
competitiveness among college applicants, as well as other factors, we at MMA have realized we 
must now ask the executive and legislative branches to collaborate with us over this biennium 
and beyond on reaching the funding parity necessary for Maine’s state maritime academy. 
Today we openly thank Governor Mills’ for recognizing the merits of this effort to update 
MMA’s funding through her proposed budget. She has taken a meaningful step toward updating 
MMA’s funding. In addition to the 4.5% baseline increase made available to all institutions of 
higher learning, Governor Mills’ budget appropriates an additional $2 million in each year of the 
biennium to Maine Maritime Academy’s operating budget. This is helpful, although it increases 
the state funding percentage to only about 23.6% for the projected 2024 budget compared with 
the current 23%. (Note: The Governor ’s proposal represents a signiﬁcant increase from FY23 to 
FY24 but, due to rising costs and the increased costs due to projected increased enrollment, the 
Govemor’s proposed budget mostly just keeps pace with projected growth. MMA will try to 
make budget cuts where possible to account for expenses in other areas necessary for growth 
although some additional base budget funding will still need to be requested). 
Governor Mills and Commissioner Figueroa have also worked with us on ﬁnding solutions to 
critical renovations needed at our primary dormitory building, Curtis Hall. Curtis Hall is the 
largest student housing building currently owned by the State of Maine, and home to more than 
600 Maine Maritime Academy students. Renovations have been deemed necessary to the Hall’s 
heating, ventilation, and air ﬁltration systems, among others, for some time now. However, 
securing funding for these critical safety upgrades has been challenging in an enviromnent of 
rapid inﬂation and increased building costs. LD 258 would help us address this matter by making 
$3 million of debt service available across the biennium to ﬁnance these long overdue 
renovations. 
This Budget also allocates $3 million in each year of the biennium to the Maine Economic 
Improvement Fund for research, development, commercialization, and grant partnerships 
between Maine Maritime Academy and the University of Maine System. These dollars will 
support our future goals for MMA to expand research and development on emerging trends in 
the global maritime industry including reduced enviromnental footprint, decarbonization, 
electriﬁcation, and digitization. This will help us bring research revenue from all across the 
global maritime industry to the State of Maine to be shared by other colleges and Maine’s 
economy. We are also eager to partner with our peers in the UMS and Maine Connnunity 
College System and leverage our relationships with global industries to beneﬁt everyone. This
support of the Maine Economic Improvement Fund greatly aids in that purpose. It will also help 
support our goal of becoming America’s leading Arctic Maritime Academy. 
MMA is also home to the Schooner Bowdoin, an Arctic vessel that serves as the state ﬂagship, a 
training vessel for our students, and a platform for ocean science research. We are hopeful the 
Schooner Bowdoin will soon make its ﬁrst visit to the Arctic in nearly a decade, supported by 
maintenance funds and expeditionary funds found in LD 258 totaling $147,000. 
Finally, this Biemiial Budget allocates small sums related to the casino fund and in support of 
homeless youth, which we are fully supportive of. 
However, despite all this good news Maine Maritime Academy will continue to face hurdles in 
the future and we must ask the Legislature and Administration to join us in collaborating on 
solutions. The current proposed budget provides much-needed funding but a disparity will still 
leave us with no more than 23.6% of our operating budget supported by the state while, ina 
competitive environment, our peers inside and out of Maine are supported by more than 40% of 
their budgets. 
Signiﬁcant investment in MMA will continue to be needed if we are to ensure the Academy’s 
strength in the future and if we collectively believe in the role it has to play for Maine ina 
rapidly globalizing world. These investments would allow us to accommodate lower tuition for 
students. They would also allow us to leverage our unique brand to capture maritime technology 
research funds from around the world and share it with colleges across Maine through 
collaborative projects. 
We look forward to partnering with you in this biemiial budget process - and beyond - to 
strengthen Maine’s State Maritime Academy. I look forward to speaking with you more in the 
coming weeks and getting to know you individually. 
Thank you. 
Respectfully, 
Jerald S. “Jerry” Paul, MMA 89 
President 
Maine Maritime Academy
Background and Summary 
Maine Maritime Academy 
2024-2025 Biennial Budget Request 
Below is a summary of Maine Maritime Academy’s six (6) 2024-2025 Biennial Budget Requests 
as follows: 
Request #1 (Highest Priority), Baseline Budget: $18,368,000, $18,919,040 
Request #2, Debt Service: $1,465,125, $1,469,375 
Request #3, Schooner Bowdoin Maintenance: $50,000, $50,000 
Request #4, Schooner Bowdoin Arctic Expedition 50% Cost Share: $97,500, $97,500 
Request #5, Casino Scholarship Funds: $166,133, $167,179 
Request #6, Homeless Student, PL 2019, chapter 538 
Request #1: ME MARITIME ACADEMY Baseline Budget 01075A003501 
o 2024 $ 18,368,000 2025 $ $18,919,040 
o Updating the state share of operational expenses in parity with peer Maine colleges 
that have enrollment within +/- 5 0% of MMA will allow the Academy to increase its 
in-state enrollment and compete with other State Maritime Academies which receive 
between 40% and 60% of their revenue from their states. The funding will allow 
MMA to leverage its niche brand in the global maritime industry to bring research 
funds to Maine in partnership with each college in the UMaine system and MCCS 
system. The funding will allow MMA's continued ability to produce Maine resident 
graduates who receive compensation at rates that afford the rising costs of staying and 
living in Maine to contribute to economic development, workforce development and 
tax revenue. Finally, the funding will facilitate MMA's goal to compete 
internationally to become recognized as the #1 Maritime College in the world.
1
See attachment “A” , Outcomes and Return on Investment (ROI) for Budget Request 
2023. 
Maine Maritime Academy, established in 1941, is one of six (6) State Maritime Academies 
(along with Massachusetts Maritime Academy, SUNY Maritime Academy, California Maritime 
Academy, Texas A&M Maritime Academy, and Great Lakes Maritime Academy in Michigan). 
MMA serves as the basis for the State of Maine to be one of only 6 states in America to host 
these special-purpose Academy’s. 
Maine Maritime Academy also maintains and operates Maine’s Flagship, Schooner Bowdoin, as 
a platform for student training, research in the Arctic, and promotion of the State of Maine. 
MMA also maintains versatile and active college-based waterfront infrastructure, including 
vessels, which it makes available to other Maine colleges for activities necessitating waterfront 
activities. 
These State Maritime Academies provide undergraduate and graduate degrees but also support 
the maritime interests of the United States. They receive some partial contributions from the U.S 
Government although such funds cover only some of the costs associated with the federal 
programs. These are primarily partial pass-through costs of some training such as those related 
to the training ship (owned by the U.S. Govermnent) on which students earn sea-time qualifying 
them to take examinations for a U.S. Coast Guard license. The federal government does not 
provide funds for costs of operating the college. 
The other State Maritime Academies receive funding from their host states ranging from 
approximately 34.39% to 46.23%. Maine Maritime Academy, however, receives recurring 
funding from its host state totaling only 23%. This results in higher tuition for MMA which 
impairs MMA’s ability to compete for students (including Maine residents) who may choose the 
other State Maritime Academies. Other State Maritime Academies are now offering a level of 
“in-state tuition” to out-of-state students, in part due to their comfortable levels of state funding.
2
21.80% State Maritime Academies 
Percent Funding from Host State 
Q<llGﬂ? 
46'23% 45.20% 
~28 60% 
34.69% 
33 ,ﬁt‘F%£     
0 06/     
~41        
z5.C-(1% 
'33    
Lg Z0 .OG"%%= 
l5.ti(f€>€-. 
IF! (‘(0% 
2(2). 
V; 
tr: .1 i
i 
K? ::=- . 
Q (eyvV 
. . _ 
Maire Maritime academy tAas<arhua§t1s MI-lﬁHTY?r? /Mademy Faiilrensa state \J:W@rsit=,v Maritime SUN‘! Maniirne College 
Acadernv 
Figure1 
In Maine, MMA is proud to be among world class colleges of the University of Maine System 
and the Maine Community College System. We extend the highest possible respect and 
admiration to each along with appreciation for the opportunity to partner with each in ways that 
allow us to all maximize our collective potential. With an update to our available resources, 
MMA can be an even more effective partner. 
MMA’s peer cohort of colleges having enrollment within +/- 50% of MMA’s receive, on 
average, 44.8% of their operational budgets from base recuring funding from the State. MMA, 
however, receives only 23%. An analysis can be broadened to compare two categories of 
colleges in Maine: 
A. Maine colleges having enrollment within +/- 50% of MMA’s enrollment (UMl\/lachias, 
EMCC, NMCC 1: Based upon enrollment, this is the category that is closest to MMA as 
peers. The average percentage of operating budget that these colleges receive from the 
State is 48.71%. MMA’s percentage is 25.71% below this rate.
I103: If adjusted to Category 1, which is the most accurate ﬁt by enrollment, MMA’s 
base funding would be 48.71% of its operating budget ($41M) or approximately 
$18,368,000. This would be an increase in base budget funding to MMA of about 
$9,000,000 which, due to the small size of MMA, is less than 3% of the State funds 
allocated to higher education. 
B. Maine colleges having enrollment that is more than 50% greater than MMA (UM So. 
Maine. UM Augusta. SMCC. CMCC): The average percentage of operating budget that 
these colleges receive from the State is 41.11%. MMA’s percentage is 18.11% below 
this rate. 
Maine Colleges (UMS + MCCS + MMA) Percent Funding from state 
2020 Percent of Uperatirig State Funding for Maine Ceilegas 
:~.s (17%,                                                                                                           
,. Emuﬂmertgigzler 
Q; (22% (amiss Avg Opszmmgﬂateﬁanﬁrmgg g 
1 , _ W" W_.,,_._,.......d _..., ,< ~,,_‘,,,,.. _.__.n_W. .,.,.._n..._,\. ”. .-...,..._._... .. 
ta. €:'I.% 
Qpgfﬂiﬁg 
State 
ﬁmﬁhgj Q1 
‘Pg1 
ii15§§£* ’e- 
1:»V 
Iefesams :41 if»: 4;"//z»e Vi we ~."-s € Q n-#1.:";s§ kt saw: Ci H Ma war ?;7 1»:;g~1,/.'sz tn 127%. P" ~14 we 
asrar-am; rm r »,/agar) ’: 
Figure2 
The general pattern is that lower enrollment translates to a higher percentage of funding. As to 
MMA, however, which is one of Maine’s smallest colleges by enrollment, the percentage of base 
funding it receives is not only lower (opposition of the trend) but lowe_st of all. 
Accordingly, MlvlA receives only about $9,700,000 of its $41,000,000 operating budget from the 
State. The balance of MMA’s budget (approximately $32,000,000) currently must be “made up” 
with additional sources, such as tuition, which promotes declining enrollment in a competitive 
market, reduces access to low-income Maine families, and results in additional constraints on 
balancing its budget. 
4i
1
1
1
Nonetheless, as a self-help institution with a can-do spirit, MMA has still worked hard to ensure 
that its students receive an education that positions them for employment at levels of 
compensation that allow Maine students to still afford the rising costs of Maine housing, thus 
allowing MMA graduates to continue raising their families in Maine and directing their income 
to Maine’s economy. The following are key indicators of MMA successes and challenges. 
Economic hnpact. Maine Maritime Academy contributes greatly to Maine’s economy 
and tax revenues each year. 
MMA contributes $13.7 million in tax revenue annually to local and state 
government. Over a five-year period, lVIMA contributed $67.1 million in state and 
local taxes. 
MMA amiually contributes an estimated $74.3 million in total economic output, $33.4 
million in earnings, 560 jobs. Over a ﬁve-year period, MMA’s economic contribution 
totaled $371.3 million in output, $167.2 million in earnings, 2,800 job-years, and $67.1 
million in state and local taxes. 
,K~~ . , T"- 
;K 
a“ lL                   
?t§AIN¥~ “l 
E~¢’1»\Rl‘FIIvt1~‘. 
A€‘IAI§F.MY 
Figure3
it 
SKW5 
?G‘i£> 
60% 
50% 
133% 
30% 
211% 
126% 
¢Zl%                           
u.” 
‘An       
Graduation Rate. Notwithstanding its budget constraints, MMA maintains the highest 
graduation rate by its students of all colleges in Maine. 
Graduation Rate 
source: Sept of Ed Cottage Sccrecarc! 
. .. .__,_ V. . _ 
k 2, __, __ ; —— 
_ ___ ,~;¢' l,;-!)i§;;;fi£,_=; my ==-- ,r'=_a-                                                                                                              
Q/ . .._ 
=..                                                                            
.1: 
., wgr g 
317$ "' 
., “,5,M                                                                        
W‘ ...a 
a_,L 
Figure4 
Tuition. The average percentage of operating budget paid by students in tuition and fees 
among all other Maine colleges is approximately 30%. MMA is forced to charge tuition 
and fees at a rate of 51%. Accordingly, MMA is driven to higher tuition (even though it 
produces the highest “Return on Investment ” for low-income students of any public 
college in America. See Georgetown University Report, below). This contributes greatly 
to a relatively high average annual cost to students. This contributes greatly to a higher 
college loan debt compared to our competing State Maritime Academies. 
Hiring rate. MMA maintains exceptional hiring rates among colleges. 95% of our 
students are hired within 90 days of graduation which is the highest rate of any college in
6                         
1»      
Maine. MMA’s students are in high demand within the competitive marketplace, 
especially in the maritime industry. This competitive hiring rate, at high wages, provides 
our students with compensation that afford them to accommodate the high cost of 
housing and other expenses in the State of Maine which, in turn, maintains a source of tax 
revenue within this state. 
Diversigg. MMA is a special purpose college with a high percentage of STEM majors 
which, demographically, affects the percentage of high school students applying from 
varying gender and diversity sectors. Still MMA maintains one of the highest percentages 
of women students among other State Maritime Academies with similar special purpose 
STEM focus. MMA has historically been a leader in producing alumna professional 
women mariners including the ﬁrst ever woman licensed captain of unlimited tonnage 
vessels. Moreover, MMA is the only State Maritime Academy that joined and maintains 
the NASPA (Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education) “Culture of Respect” 
program focused on reducing sexual violence. Still, MMA would like to dedicate more 
resources toward recruiting efforts to increase the offering of l\/IMA’s educational and 
training opportunities to more persons from a broader host of diverse populations, 
especially in Maine. 
Maine Residency. MMA graduates earn compensation allowing them to afford to 
maintain residency, including housing costs, in Maine. For example, approximately 70% 
of graduates over the last 5 years remain as Maine residents, thus contributing the Maine 
State economy and tax base. 
Veterans. MMA is ranked as America’s #1 College for Veterans including Veteran’s 
dependents. MMA proudly provides education to Veterans at a higher percentage of its 
student body than any college in Maine even though the funding is not favorable to the 
operating funds received. 
Graduate Earnings. Among all public colleges in Maine, MMA maintains the highest 
“median earnings ” of its graduating students. This promotes graduates ’ ability to continue 
affording the cost of living in Maine, continue contributing to Maine’s economy, and 
continue contributing to Maine’s tax base long after graduation. Many of MMA’s out-of- 
state students later leverage their earnings to own second homes in Maine and continue 
contributing to Maine’s economy and tax base. 
Veterans + National Guard 
MMA is proud to be ranked by U.S. News & World Reports as “The #1 College in 
America for Veterans ” . Among its student body enrollment, MMA maintains the highest 
percentage of veterans and the highest percentage of National Guard students of any 
college in Maine. MMA is proud of this but, of course, this results in over $1,000,000 of 
net revenue loss to our budget, representing ___% of our current deﬁcit. 
Employee Retention During Covid
7
During Covid, MMA did not lay off any members of the Maine State Employees Unition 
even though the standard had been met for retrenchment. We are proud of this but, of 
course, it contributes to our current deﬁcit. 
Current Budget Deﬁcit 
Due to circumstances beyond MMA’s control, our current projected budget deﬁcit for 
FY24 is approximately $6,000,000. Examples include:                
. Lowest state contribution to operational budget; 
. Retention of employees during Covid; 
. Maintaining a high percentage of Veterans and National Guard students; 
Rising costs due to inﬂation; 
. Rising costs of wages; 
Rising costs of housing; 
Note: If MMA is funded at the requested percentage, in parity with its peer colleges in 
Maine, coupled with our aggressive enrollment and fundraising strategies and internal 
cost efﬁciency proposals, MMA would no longer have any deﬁcit in our budget.
K 
Martian Earnings 
.r:e1r;'¢:: et £6 ieltega 
{amt-si teams fairer». units; Cettege ;if;_f:“f_;>__ 33'7‘}‘*4\Ci{) 
team i‘*‘i%%=‘*?»*3"*Y1 ’“rtF“iﬂl¥"! 5-wti M1 
Yzewe 
eaters»: £’e¢mrraw"|&z*y inéege Qt-3g92=:._{ii§ 
The median annual 
H ~ M »A 
earnings of individuals 
i#e1;.a?ze§n taiaézie £c11'21rs.i@1%t*¢ iﬁeéege 3S_t}%§>7.0i) 
~ 
that received federal 
wet-1» ¢»@.s1ﬁa@A 
5“1d@"* aid W beta" 
' 
college at this 
i-teweetvv Wee at »'=¢eiaia 3a,2a2.ae institution 10 years ago, 
regardless of their 
Lioiearaiza tam at Farralrgzcs 35,651.03 completion SlI3$US_ 
%...l1’me:'si¥*{ o‘t=€?s%1e‘a¥ ton Kent ” "W “’”‘“5T' .‘l‘“ 71-'-'i‘“”‘T“‘ 
Y7 3? ?'C‘r’9 £343: Eanfmgs are measured 
’ " ‘ “ ' 
* ~- a * 
for ¥t'§(ltVidU3|S that were 
" 
working and were not L51‘»§‘.'*§i‘;i@§ ca‘ tvtakieat Heiress ~
_ e 
enrolled in school. 
$%?:"""*e=~*~> aa,aer.ar: - . . " ". 
Uﬁlretiittg §i*’~*¥?‘*§“‘= triﬂe’ :' 
*t§,2?3» ﬁﬁ 
A 3€§,Qaf§*3. €fa§ é¢f2,if€§ 2-»e,xet ‘ai 7t§,C§fiQ_C%§f 8t”J,£;Yll% ’J Qt! 
Figure5 
Return on Investment. MMA has the “highest return on investment for low-income 
students among all public 4-year institutions ” in America. See, Georgetown University 
Study, Inside Hither Education, 
https://wvvvv.insidehighered.com/news/2022/01/25/returns-investment-low-income- 
students?ibclid=IwAR2-NMr7s6vNgsTxKhi2I-B-EbA- 
z0O_EpgWnQSSjab3TEkA4iG3c3xeWY4 
Faculty Support. MMA faculty are valued professionals provide world-class service 
within a remotely located special-pm'pose college that requires additional professional 
dedication and commitment. In addition to providing a high-caliber college education, 
MMA faculty perform these duties in conjunction with the logistical challenges of 
integrating a majority cohort of students in the Regiment of Cadets which includes many 
additional challenges and constraints. MMA Faculty also integrate unique hands-on 
training including service aboard the Training Ship State of Maine which provides Maine 
students with exposure to world travel and training across oceans. These efforts position 
MMA to allow Maine to be one of only 6 states in America to provide this special 
purpose maritime academy mission for Maine and America. Moreover, their service
9
positions MMA to be competitive globally in the international maritime industry and 
academia. These professionals are also committed to a new vision launching MMA into 
a multi-year effort to become recognized as the #1 Maritime College in the World, thus 
establishing the State of Maine as the world leader in maritime education. 
Alumni. MMA has produced more than 10,000 graduates, the vast majority of which 
have been Maine residents. Currently there are 4,328 Maine Residents or property owners 
along with their families. MMA’s alumni are some of the most successful people in 
Maine. Many of MMA’s graduates are the most successful professionals throughout the 
State. MMA Alumni are generous in their giving to the Academy. However, due to the 
relatively small size of MMA, its alumni base is not as capable of closing the state 
funding gap compared with other colleges. 
Historical perspective 
MMA prides itself in being a self-help organization. For decades, MMA has operated with the 
lowest state percentage contribution toward its g operating budget and has not requested an 
increase in bisg recuring budget relative to other colleges in Maine (with the exception of equal 
incremental ftmding increases received recently by all Maine colleges). 
For example, in the 1980’s, MMA President Ken Curtis (former Governor of Maine) pointed out 
in his annual report to the Maine Legislature that “[t]he Academy budget continues with 
difficulty to remain in balance with ... state appropriations that comprise 58% of Educational 
and General Expenditures. ” 
Today the percentage of state contribution toward MMA’s operational budget is only 23%. 
Also, MARAD does not provide funds to cover the operational costs of the state maritime 
academies. Each state maritime academy is obligated to fund its operational costs through host 
state funding and other sources. 
Return on Investment to the State of Maine from MMA Request #1 
MMA will be able to remain in the top colleges in America for Return on Investment, 
particularly for low-income Maine students. 
MMA will be able to remain “The #1 College in America for Veterans ” , providing education toa 
greater percentage of Veterans in its student body than any other Maine college. 
MMA will be able to continue to host the highest percentage Veterans and National Guard 
students within its student body. 
MMA will be able to make progress on restoring its facilities (84% of which are currently listed 
in the Gordian Report as “High Risk”.
10
MMA will be able to return to contributing funds to reserves for ﬁscal sustainability. 
MMA will be able to continue producing the highest hiring rate for graduates including high 
wages. 
MMA will be able to continue producing graduates with starting compensation that facilitates 
continued in-state residency with resulting contribution to Maine’s local and state economies and 
tax bases. 
MMA will be able to invest even greater in recruiting to increase diversity of its student 
population and faculty population. 
MMA will be able to continue providing housing to students at affordable rates. See, Affordable 
Housing Creates Addition Challenge for Maine College Students, Portland Press Herald, Aug 28, 
2022. https://www.pressherald.com/2022/08/28/affordable-housing-crisis-creates-another- 
barrier-for-maine-college 
studentsl ?utmWsource=Newsletter&utm_medium=emai1&utm_content=Daily+Headlines%3A+A 
ffordable+housing+crisis+creates+anothe1+barrier+fo1+Maine+college+students&utm_campaig 
n=PPH+DH+-+SUNDAY+%2 8HTML%29 
MMA can become the #1 Maritime College in the World. Maine would therefore host a college 
that is the preeminent college in its class Worldwide. 
MMA can partner with colleges in the UMaine System and Community College System on the 
following key projects, programs and disciplines on which MMA is positioning itself as a leader 
within the Maritime Industry: 
A. Advanced technologies for reduced enviromnental footprint of maritime shipping 
B. Global Decarbonization including advanced fuels, vessel optimization, and application of 
Carbon Intensity Index models 
C. Advanced Data Integration into Global Maritime Shipping Operations & Management 
data 
D. Advanced maritime software engineering applications 
E. Development of one-of-a-kind master’s degree in International Business & Logistics with 
Seaport Certiﬁcation 
F. Establishing Maine as a leader on global improvement to supply chain and shipping 
backlogs 
G. Transformational clean maritime fuels (green methanol, fuel cells, etc.) including 
logistics, operations and METEL Labs 
H. Development of world class Maritime Reliability Engineering curriculum and degrees
11
I. Electriﬁcation of vessels 
J. Autonomous Vessels 
K. Offshore Wind (workforce, inﬁastructure, logistics) 
L. Providing Maine students with opportunities to training and education at shipyards 
M. l§)cfr(ife(stic remote locations such as shipyards and potential satellite campus(es) 
N. New research facilities and simulators for each of the above items 
O. Supporting Workforce Housing and Affordable Housing 
Q&A - MMA Request #1 
How did MMA become the lowest percent funded college in the State? [Need time graph 
showing decline over time] 
What contributed to MMA’s budget deﬁcit? 
Answer: 
Multiple factors contributed to MMA’s current budget deﬁcit including the following: 
1. The host state contribution to MMA’s operational budget declined from around 58% 
in the 1980’s to its current level of 21.8% which is the lowest among all colleges in 
Maine and the lowest among all State Maritime Academies nationwide. 
2. MMA maintained high employee retention with no layoffs throughout Covid; 
3. MMA maintains the highest percentage of Veterans and National Guard students 
which requires net cost to MMA of over $1,000,000; 
4. 
Doesn’t MMA receive funds from the Federal Government? 
MMA receives some ftmding from the U.S. Maritime Administration (MARAD), but this 
funding only covers a portion of the expenditures for training ship cruise-related 
expenses. For example, by federal law, MARAD is not even obligated to provide the full 
costs of fuel for operating the training ship. The training ship itself is owned by the 
federal government and loaned to the Academy for the purpose of providing training to 
students.
12
MARAD does not provide funds to cover the operational costs of the state maritime 
academies. Each state maritime academy is obligated to fund its operational costs 
through host state funding and other sources. 
What would be the increase in appropriated funds to bring MMA in parity with its peer colleges 
in Maine‘? 
Answer: 
Approximately $9,000,000 which is less than 3% of the overall funds provided for higher 
education in Maine. The amount requested is a large increase by percentage but stilla 
small amount compared with other colleges in Maine and other State contributions to 
SMAs. Under our proposal, MMA would still be funded by its host state at a rate that is 
less than the average of its other peer State Maritime Academies. 
What percentage of the overall State Higher Education Funding Allocation would this request 
represent? 
Answer: 
Less than 3%. 
MMA Funding 
as *i§ 
Percentage of Higher Education Budget Figure6 
rams 
Conclusion — MMA’s Request #1 
MMA’s Request #1 would be a long-awaited update to place MMA’s budget in relative parity 
with its in-state peers. Although the request would still leave MMA at the low end of host state 
contribution compared to its peer State Maritime Academies, the request would close much of 
the gap and help facilitate competitiveness within that cohort. 
The funds from Request #1 would be an investment that returns value to Maine through 
increased in-state enrollment, reduced tuition, greater contribution to Maine’s economy and tax
13
base, and generation of revenue from research funds to be shared with other colleges throughout 
Maine. 
Maine Maritime Academy, its many Maine Alumni, and families of MMA Students would be 
most appreciative for the support of the Governor and the Maine Legislature in approving this 
budget update request. 
Request #2: MAINE MARITIME ACADEMY - DEBT SERVICE 0l075AZ30401 
o 2024 $1,465,125 2025 $1,469,375 
o Debt service payment for borrowing to upgrade mechanical, plumbing, electrical, fire 
protection and heating systems of Curtis Hall Dormitory, MMA's primary on-campus 
student residential building. 
o This funding supports MMA’s ability to provide affordable housing to college 
students. 
Request #3: MARITIME ACADEMY - SCHOONER BOWDOIN 
Maintenance of Schooner Bowdoin 01075AZ25301 
o 2024 $50,000 2025 $50,000 
o Maintain the Schooner Bowdoin, the Official Vessel of the State of Maine, and the 
ﬂagship of Maine Maritime Academy's Vessel Operations. 
Request #4: MARITIME ACADEMY - SCHOONER BOWDOIN Partial 
(50%) Funding of Arctic Expedition Schooner Bowdoin 01075AZ25301 
o 2024 $40,836 2025 $106,406 
o The request represents a one-time 50% cost of the Schooner Bowdoin expeditions. 
MMA would raise the additional 50% funding. 
o If received, MMA will organize, plan and lead a centemiial cruise expedition of the 
Schooner Bowdoin to the Arctic for student training, environmental research and 
promotion of the State of Maine. This funding will cover half of the costs for an 
initial Labrador Expedition training cruise in 2023 and the full Arctic Expedition 
training cruise in 2024.
14
MAINE MARITIME ACADEMY SCHOLARSHIP FUND — CASINO 
01475az16701 
o 2024 - $166,133 2025 - $167,179 
o Casino Scholarship Funds 
Attachment “A” 
M1\/IA Budget Request 
Summaly 2023 
Outcomes and Return on Investment (ROI)
15
Budget Request by Maine Maritime Academy 2023 
If MMA’s host state funding percentage is updated as requested, the following Outcomes and 
Return on Investment are expected. 
1. 
2. 
3. MMA will have the resources necessary for the Key Factors affecting competitiveness 
with A1nerica ’s other State Maritime Academies which receive an average of 42.04% of 
their operational budget from their host state compared with 21.8% received by MMA. 
Such Key Factors for competitiveness include but are not limited to the following: 
a. Strategies for sustainable Enrollment through Recruiting 
b. Marketing 
Advancement, including expanded host of revenue sources 
. Faculty hiring, retention, scholarship, and professional development 
. Faculty compensation 
Staff hiring and retention 
. Program offerings that are attractive to high school students and synchronized 
with emerging trends within industry 
h. Student services which affects student quality of life, retention, attrition and 
revenue              
In addition to funding the above listed Key Factors for competitive recruiting, an updated 
level of funding for MMA will, over time, allow the us to rebalance our high rates of 
student tuition and fees, improve affordability for Maine students and compete on a level 
playing ﬁeld of both quality §_11 __(1 price. 
The following is a more detailed list of outcomes that will result from an updated re- 
balancing of the funding disparity, as requested: 
1) Global Competitiveness for Maine. MMA has stated a new goal that, if the funding 
can be updated, we can position the State of Maine to host the “The #1 Maritime 
College in the World” . This bold goal incorporates many strategies which can be 
described in detail upon request. 
2) New resources for Maine. MMA is in a position to leverage its reputation, faculty, 
brand and role in the global maritime industry to bring signiﬁcant funding to the State 
for research initiatives that had emerged within the maritime industry including 
decarbonization (reduced carbon footprint of shipping), electriﬁcation of vessels, 
autonomous vessels, offshore wind, vessel digitization and others. These strategies 
require resources that are not currently available within the above-described funding 
disparity. Moreover, MMA has pledged that it will establish enhanced partnerships 
with all Maine colleges to share the outside ftmding that would be brought to Maine
16
for these initiatives. By updated MMA’s base funding as requested, the investment by 
our State would allow MMA to pursue this productive initiative to produce net 
revenue to the State. 
Operational Modernization. The updated funding investment would allow MMA 
Additional staff resources (employees, equipment, etc.) for the following items that 
will enhance MMA’s competitiveness: 
a. Development of a grant writing program 
b. Enrollment strategies 
1. Greater outreach to Maine high schools 
2. Greater outreach to select out-of-state high schools 
c. Leveraging the incoming new Training Ship State of Maine to train more 
Maine students for high paying jobs 
d. Expansion of waterfront facilities and associated programs 
e. Enhanced Student Services and Student Quality of Life 
l. Additional counselors and counseling services for students 
2. Enhanced Athletics opportunities for Maine Student-Athletes 
a) Additional coaches 
b) Additional trainers 
f. Offer MMA’s new Fire Training Facility to beneﬁt ﬁrst responders from 
towns throughout Maine. 
g. Provide adequate resources to maintain facilities, thus preventing costs of 
replacement. 
h. Modernized campus safety. 
i. Modernized campus security. 
j. Assisting students (especially low-income students) with ﬁnancial costs 
1. Scholarships 
2. Affordable tuition 
k. Development of graduate program offerings to bring in more in-state and out- 
of-state revenue. 
1. Enhance our online learning program to bring in more in-state and out-of-state 
revenue.
17
m. Development/reprograming curriculum and programs (undergraduate, 
graduate, micro-credentials) to adapt to the changing maritime marketplace 
synchronizing it with wants and needs of Maine students. 
n. Micro-credential program as discussed with Senator Daughtry. Details 
available upon request. 
0. Additional Faculty (including faculty exchanges within Maine and 
Internationally). 
p. Increased faculty compensation to maintain competitiveness in the global 
talent search 
q. Expanded offshore wind training opportunities and programs. 
r. Development of new and enhanced programs in key areas 
l. Support for Maine’s growing aquaculture industry 
2. Enviromnental programs including decarbonization 
. Electric vessels 
Automated vessels 
. Vessel digitation 
. Maritime cyber security 
. Enhancement of degree programs with Bath Iron Works in Bath, ME 
. Development of MMA’s Center for Professional Maritime Training in 
Bucksport, ME 
9. Development of Micro-Credential Program in partnership with 
Community Colleges               
s. Modernizing campus communications (I.T. and cellular). 
t. Modernizing classroom technology resources including industry-standard 
equipment.
18
