§°I. ~/53% 21347;??? 1‘ 14/ 1 
. < 
xix: 1::g 
Testimony of Jess Maurer on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging 
to the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs and Health and Human 
Services 
if ' 
Testifying in favor of LD 258 
MGM > Iltilllll THE WAY ll Sllllillll BE 
Greetings Senators Rotundo and Baldacci, Representatives Sachs and Meyer, and members of 
the Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services. 
My name is Jess Maurer and I’m the Executive Director of the Maine Council on Aging 
(MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged, and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 258. 
Mainers have successfully met the challenge of each new era with hard work and innovative 
spirits. We moved rocks to farm, cut timber to build ships, built factories to-produce quality 
goods, and embraced technology to lead world-class research. That’s why I know that Maine can 
lead again —~ in building a state that is fully able to support our new longevity. ‘ 
Over the past decade, we have made some important gains toward this goal: building affordable 
housing, changing how we think about zoning, expanding insurance options, investing ina 
stronger direct care workforce, and funding programs that support older Mainers. Unfortunately, 
many of these gains have been incremental, and We are learning that they have not gone far 
enough. That’s why we offer our full support for the healthy aging investments in the 
Governor ’s budget, and also say that they do not go far enough. 
Here’s what we’re hearing — older people in Maine are being evicted from apartments, not 
because they cannot pay their rent, but because they’re not able to get the home care they need. 
Some of these folks are entitled to care, but there are simply no care workers available. Others 
might be able to find a worker, but cannot afford to pay for care. Finding new housing or care 
can take considerable time and may leave older people homeless. Older people who are 
hospitalized often cannot be discharged because of home care and facility stafﬁng shortages, 
leaving too many older people living in hospitals. These are becoming chronic problems. 
Because of the efforts of the Maine Legislature, Maine just ranked 4*“ in the nation in PHI’s 
Direct Care Workforce State Index. We’ve made real progress in valuing this workforce, but as 
we leamed yesterday in a report issued by the Department of Health & Human Services, these 
efforts have only stabilized our workforce; they have not grown it. This report shows that 40% of 
people who are entitled Section l9 waiver home care services — mostly women, all nursing home 
eligible, are receiving no care or only partial care because of the workforce shortage. While we 
1 
https://Ion gevity.stanford.edu/wp-contentfuploacls/2022/04/new-map~of~life-full~report.pdf
don’t know where these people reside, we do know there are “care deserts” in Maine, areas 
where there are no workers available to provide services. 
This session, we’ll be asking you for more investments to help grow the workforce to reduce this 
gap in care. We’ll also be asking you to increase funding for Maine’s area agencies on aging, so 
they can help people who need housing and care navigate to those supports — something that 
takes months, not hours. We’ll also be asking you to help put more money into the pockets of 
lower income older Mainers who have suffered economic injustice across their lifetimes, making 
it impossible for them to meet their basic needs much less pay out of pocket for the most 
expensive home care in the country? 
We also need the investments outlined in the Govemor’s budget. Notably, the budget includes 
more than $3 million for Meals on Wheels. This program was operating at a deﬁcit before the 
pandemic. The number of people served during the pandemic doubled. What the State found 
was that about 2/3 of the new pandemic recipients actually qualiﬁed for the program. Indeed, the 
numbers of recipients hasn’t dropped off since mid-2020. Federal pandemic funding is 
exhausted and people will have to be removed from the program if this allocation isn’t made. 
Meals on Wheels recipients are homebound people who cannot prepare a meal and don’t have 
others to prepare a meal for them. These meals keep people at home longer, and the social visits 
by the people who deliver the meals fend off isolation. This is a low cost program that delivers a 
huge return in investment, and we urge you to include this as on- going funding in the budget. 
LD 258 also proposes a critically needed investment to operationalize many of the 
recommendations in the Elder Justice Roadmap. We are particularly pleased to see on-going 
funding for the Elder Service Connection program, and increased funding for Adult Protective 
Services and Legal Services for the Elderly. 
We are fully in support of the proposed MaineCare rate increases for Adult Day Services, 
Independent Housing with Supports Program, and Adult Family Care Homes, as well as 
permanent ftmding to reduce the Section 63 waitlist. We further support the additional funding 
for nursing homes, behavioral health providers and PNMIs. 
This is a yes. . .and. We support all of the investments proposed in the Govemor’s budget — they 
are critically important. And, we need to make additional investments if we are going to stem 
the tide of harm being experienced by too many older Mainers because we haven’t yet built the 
systems that reliably support people living into their 80s, 90s, and 100s. 
Maine has the opportunity to lead the country in capturing the beneﬁts of a doubling of life 
expectancy. Now that we know this longevity is here to stay, we need to act with urgency to 
address the short-term system failures that have resulted from not being prepared for this new 
long life, and then build longevity-ready communities and systems that promote health and 
productivity long into later life. We urge you to vote in favor of LD 258 and hold allocations out 
to make other investments. 
2 htt s://www.longtermscorecarcl.or"g/databvstate/state?state=l\/[E — Maine ranks 50“‘ in median annual home care P _ .. . 
costs.
