To: Maine Legislature
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON
APPROPRIATIONS AND
FINANCIAL AFFAIRS; JOINT COMMITTEE ON HOUSING
From: Jess Falero, Maine Climate Action Now
Date:  February 8, 2023
Re: LD
258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and
Allocations from the General Fund and
Other Funds for the Expenditures of  State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal  Years Ending June
30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  OUGHT TO PASS
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs,
and members
of the Joint Standing Committee on
Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the
Joint Committee on Housing, my name is Jess Falero. I am a resident of Portland and a Climate
Justice Coordinator for Maine Climate Action Now, a statewide coalition of grassroots
organizations who support transformative action in response to the climate and ecological
emergency. We hold social, racial, and economic justice as critical to the transition to zero
carbon emissions by 2030
and demand the equitable
implementation of clean renewable
energy, ecological land-use practices, and bold community-led action for a more resilient Maine.
The climate crisis is an issue that affects all communities differently in this state and it affects
communities unequally. We recognize that many communities and groups may not have the
resources to act on climate change, even if they recognize it as a threat. The unhoused and low
income or asylum seeking residents are even more unable to react to the climate crisis as their
basic need of shelter is either unmet or at risk.
Maine Climate Action Now is in full support of this budget that provides
$15M for the Rural
Rental program for 5-18 unit rental properties in areas and at a size where traditional Low
Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) projects are not generally feasible and $15M for LIHTC
projects that are often larger and in more urban areas. This powerful program will invest in
building affordable housing for people in need throughout the state.
Too many Mainers are struggling to secure safe, affordable housing. This budget tackles the
need for more affordable housing and services and can commit $30 million in funding for
affordable housing development in both rural and urban communities. This will go towards
establishing long term investments urgently needed to address Mainers’ lack of affordable
housing.
As someone who has personally experienced being chronically unhoused, I know first hand the
urgency that is the housing crisis. At a time when our poor and unhoused community has
1

suffered an unmentionable amount of loss from overdose deaths, suicides or homicides, our
poor and unhoused communities deserve the people in power to act on the urgency that we’ve
known and felt for years.
We saw the need when the entire world was asked to quarantine inside their home. We saw the
need when hundreds of unhoused people camped on the steps of Portland City Hall during July
of 2020. We saw the need this past weekend when arctic temps were upon us and there was a
rush to open warming shelters to keep our unhoused community from freezing to death.
The time for long term solutions to address the housing crisis is long overdue. For the urgency
to solve the climate crisis, the overdose crisis, the housing crisis can only begin with this first
step. The creation of affordable housing. We urge you to vote OUGHT TO PASS.
2

Jess Falero
Maine Climate Action Now
LD 258
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Pierce, Representative 
Gere, and members of the Joint Committee on Housing, my name is Jess Falero. I am 
a resident of Portland and a Climate Justice Coordinator for Maine Climate Action 
Now, a statewide coalition of grassroots organizations who support transformative 
action in response to the climate and ecological emergency. We hold social, racial, 
and economic justice as critical to the transition to zero carbon emissions by 2030 and
demand the equitable implementation of clean renewable energy, ecological land-use 
practices, and bold community-led action for a more resilient Maine.
The climate crisis is an issue that affects all communities differently in this state and it
affects communities unequally. We recognize that many communities and groups may
not have the resources to act on climate change, even if they recognize it as a threat. 
The unhoused and low income or asylum seeking residents are even more unable to 
react to the climate crisis as their basic need of shelter is either unmet or at risk.
Maine Climate Action Now is in full support of this budget that provides $15M for 
the Rural Rental program for 5-18 unit rental properties in areas and at a size where 
traditional Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) projects are not generally 
feasible and $15M for LIHTC projects that are often larger and in more urban areas. 
This powerful program will invest in building affordable housing for people in need 
throughout the state.
Too many Mainers are struggling to secure safe, affordable housing. This budget 
tackles the need for more affordable housing and services and can commit $30 million
in funding for affordable housing development in both rural and urban communities. 
This will go towards establishing long term investments urgently needed to address 
Mainers’ lack of affordable housing.
As someone who has personally experienced being chronically unhoused, I know first
hand the urgency that is the housing crisis. At a time when our poor and unhoused 
community has suffered an unmentionable amount of loss from overdose deaths, 
suicides or homicides, our poor and unhoused communities deserve the people in 
power to act on the urgency that we’ve known and felt for years.
We saw the need when the entire world was asked to quarantine inside their home. 
We saw the need when hundreds of unhoused people camped on the steps of Portland 
City Hall during July of 2020. We saw the need this past weekend when arctic temps 
were upon us and there was a rush to open warming shelters to keep our unhoused 
community from freezing to death.
The time for long term solutions to address the housing crisis is long overdue. For the 
urgency to solve the climate crisis, the overdose crisis, the housing crisis can only 
begin with this first step. The creation of affordable housing. We urge you to vote 
OUGHT TO PASS.
