Testimony in Support of 
Rural Rental Affordable Housing in the Budget in LD 258 
Hello Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and Senator Pierce and Representative Gere, and members 
of the Joint Select Committee on Housing. 
My name is Joanne Joy, I live in Bowdoinham, ME where I am honored to serve on the 
Comprehensive Planning Committee as the Chair. 
I am here in support of the Rural Rental Program in Budget 
I have three points to make today — and a theme — the Rural Rental Program not only helps 
support rural Mainers today it is an essential component of us planning into the future. 
l. 
2. 
3. The Rental Program is an essential component of keeping and attracting young families 
and individuals to Bowdoinham as well as to other small towns, so we can thrive. It also 
supports some older community members to downsize and stay in the town they love. 
Current rental options are very minimal in our town, representing less than half the rate 
of rental options across Sagadahoc County and assistance with paying rent and 
development of rental properties will help us be more inclusive of who ﬁnds renting asa 
better or only option. 
Housing in the village districts and in the agriculturalsections of Bowdoinham, as 
planned for in the Comprehensive Plan to be approved in 2024, needs to grow in ways 
that continue to support the rural nature of our community, allow open spaces and 
agriculture to thrive while increasing he density of housing in the Village. The Rental 
Program also works to support a diverse population — we have been examining data 
primarily related to age, and income, in the Comp Planning meetings and in Two 
Housing Community Conversations in the past few months, but we also know that 
people from diverse racial, ethnic, immigrant/refugee/asylum seeker status, who identify 
as LGBTQ+, as well as other identities, also may need the supports afforded by the 
Rural Rental Program 
Housing is a human right, an important component of the Social Determinants of Health 
in that it supports the ability of individuals to go to school, to work or volunteer; to 
prepare meals and eat healthy foods — maybe have a ‘kitchen garden’ , to get out-of-doors 
to play, work, etc.; to get restful sleep, and I could add more. In my professional role in 
Public Health, we also know that unhoused and inadequately housed people are more 
likely to also be food insecure, have at risk for chronic health conditions, miss school or 
work, etc. Housing is a backbone element that supports and increases the workforce, 
decreases medical and mental health costs of MaineCare, reduces criminal involvement,
risk of substance use disorder and more. Access to and good housing for all of us can 
help reduce other budget line items over time. 
The Housing Community Conversations in Bowdoinham included diverse voices and quite a few 
participants — in October over 50 people were in attendance, and just last week during bitter cold, 
over 30 people provided their input. The priorities were clear— 
0 Focus on both increased housing/ rentals for younger families and individuals, and 
increase smaller housing units so older community members can downsize and stay in 
town. At the moment about l/3 of Bowdoinham people are ages 60-69 and the 0-9 year- 
olds cohort is the largest we have seen in decades. All other population age cohorts are 
smaller than state averages. These two age groups have helped to inform our age-related 
focus re: the housing needs for the future. As I noted above, these two groups are likely 
users of the Rural Rental Program 
0 What do small rural towns need? Bowdoinham community members prioritize 
investigating and approving modifications to local land use ordinances to both- 
o Increase housing density in the village — where water is accessible via the 
Bowdoinham Water District, where joint septic solutions can be considered, and 
the town facilities are available — the beloved Library, Merrymeeting Hall, etc. 
o Plan for modiﬁcations also in the agricultural areas ~ to support options like 
cluster housing, or modest developments on a smaller portion of land when the 
majority of the property remains in open space. Consideration for our seasonal 
workforce - in Bowdoinham people who work on our farms — is also vital. 
I would be remiss if I did not close by reinforcing the public health comments — housing supports 
our economic development and stability both locally in across the state, as well as our families, 
our workforce, and our health. 
Bowdoinham ’s planning and focus on meeting diverse housing needs continues — and we hope 
that the Rural Rental Program will be a robust element in our discussions and solutions. 
Thank you for all the good work you are doing — both in your Standing Committees and on the 
Select Committee on Housing. 
If you have questions — I may be able to answer some and I believe there may be others in 
attendance with deeper understanding of the intricacies of funding. 
Joanne Joy, Chair of the Comprehensive Planning Committee 
Bowdoinham, ME 
207-446-6569 
J oanne _j oy@con1cast.net
