TESTIMONY OF ND PAPER 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 258 PROPOSED CHANGES TO 
PINE TREE DEVELOPMENT ZONES 
"Before the Joint Standing Committees on 
A Appropriations and Financial Affairs
' 
_ 
and . 
~ 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
February 15, 2023'
V 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and
‘ 
members of the Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business.- 
My name is Joel Pike, l am the Director of Energy Strategy for ND Paper, and _l am 
a resident of Jay. l came to Augusta today to testify in support of the extension of the Pine 
Tree‘ Development Zone Program as proposed in LD 258.' 
ND Paper is a leader in the manufacture of Containerboard, Kraft Paper, Printing 
Papers, and Pulp. We operate mills across the country including our two integrated 
facilities located in Rumford and Old Town. As members of the committees remember, 
ND Paper purchased and restarted the Old Town Mill after it had been shut down for three 
years by a prior owner. Today, there are over 770 employeesin total at the two Maine 
facilities and eachfacility plays a vitalrole in their local economies. Both mills have seen 
significant changes through the years and ND Paper continues to invest in their future. 
The Pine Tree Development Zone Program is a tool for the State to help attract, . 
develop, and sustain businesses. This program is more than a benefit to any one 
businesses the positive impacts of having more employers in the State that often work 
together provide fuel to the State's economic engine that is needed now more than ever, 
especially in rural Maine. As you look around the State at its remaining paper mills, they 
still provide a significant boost to their local and regional economies through their payroll, 
wood procurement activities, trucking and support services, and in so many other ways.
Over these past several years as the entire world has been managing through the 
impacts of the pandemic with the resulting swings in the demand and supply of many 
products, it has been a significant challenge for any business to make it through. Add on 
to that all of the ongoing headwinds created by higher inflation and limited access toa 
once robust supply chain, and it is crystal clear that the benefits provided by the Pine Tree 
Development Zone Program have definitely helped us, and l’m sure other participating 
companies, to make it to today. New England continues to consistently have the highest 
energy prices across the country, so the benefits of this program provide some level of 
assistance to help partially offset those higher costs. V‘ 
We support LD 258's proposed extension of time to allow more businesses to 
become part of the program along with allowing those already in the program to continue 
participation. lt is important for any business to see some stability into the future and 
especially-in ways that ‘allow them to continue to invest and support their employees and 
the economy of the State. ~T
' 
Maine is a wonderful place to live and work with abundant resources. The Pine 
Tree Development Zone Program is well designed to support a wide range of businesses 
from legacy industries to the newestcutting-edge technologies. While many may consider 
pulp and papermaking an old and mature industry, it is with the program's assistance that 
the mills that are operating today are able to invest in some of the newest technologies in 
order to stay competitive and meet the demands of their increasingly global markets. 
Thank you for yourtime, and on behalf of ND Paper, I urge you to vote in favor of 
LD 258's proposed changes to the Pine Tree Development Zone Program.'
