South Berwick Water District 
80 Berwick Road 
South Berwick, ME 
 
May 17, 2023 
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair 
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: Letter of Support of the Governor’s Change Package Part MMMM funding for water and 
wastewater infrastructure investments 
 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee: 
 
The South Berwick Water District appreciates the opportunity to provide the following testimony in 
strong support of Part MMMM of the Governor’s Change Package for LD 258 which proposes to fund 
critical investments in drinking water system investments throughout our State.  
 
 
Governor Mills has submitted a “change package,” which provides more than $16 million over the 
biennium for water infrastructure investment.  These funds will provide the necessary state match to 
secure federal funds from the US Environmental Protection Agency used for the replacement of aging 
water infrastructure around the State. 
 
These funds go to the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) as part of the Drinking Water 
State Revolving Fund (DWSRF). The DWSRF provides funding for public water system infrastructure 
improvements.  
 
South Berwick Water has been fortunate to be the recipient of numerous SRF loans that have had a 
great impact on upgrading our infrastructure. 
 
The DWSRF has been amazingly successful with more than $350 million invested in water systems across 
the State of Maine in the past 25 years.  Congress has recently increased infrastructure funding available 
to states through the DWSRF.  Therefore, the state match needs have increased. 
 
We strongly urge the Committee to support Part MMMM of the Change Package so Maine can continue 
to provide the state match necessary to secure five times more in federal funds to support water 
infrastructure investments. 
 
Regards 
John Leach 
Superintendent 
South Berwick Water District 
 
 
South Berwick Water District 
80 Berwick Road 
South Berwick, ME 
 
 Senator David LaFountain 
 Amy Stabins, KWD Board President 
 
