1 
Genesis COMMUNJTV LOAN FUND 
Testimony ofJohn Egan 
On behalf of the Genesis Community Loan Fund 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
In support of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations for the 
Expenditures of State Government, General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
May 18, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. l'm John Egan 
and I'm the Senior Program Officer for Strategic Initiatives at the Genesis 
Community Loan Fund. 
The Genesis Fund is a nonprofit Community Development Financial Institution 
that connects communities with the capital and expertise they need to create 
affordable housing and other essential community resources. We have a 30-year 
track record of providing financing as well as expert project assistance to 
nonprofit organizations and mission-oriented developers throughout Maine and 
Northern New England. 
Today, l speak in support of LD 258. I am asking you to appropriate the significant 
funding that is so urgently needed to help Maine developers create housing 
statewide, including in places that haven't seen the development of new 
affordable housing in a very long time.
2 
I appreciate that in this session, members of the Legislature have sought 
information, asked excellent questions, and deliberated thoughtfully on how best 
to address the critical need for affordable housing in every region of our state. 
I know you've heard stories about how Maine's housing crisis is at the center of 
challenges across communities. You've heard heartbreaking stories about how 
our state's lack of housing is taking a toll on people's health and wellbeing. You've 
heard data and reports about how worker shortages are taking a toll on Maine's 
economy. 
In previous hearings, you've heard from small-scale developers who stand ready 
to build housing that workers, older I\/lainers, and others can afford. They've put 
together plans for projects in places like Houlton, Washburn, Winslow, 
Carrabassett Valley, Springvale, and many other rural communities in need of 
affordable housing. 
Developers who have more typically built market-rate housing are ready now to 
create affordable units for the benefit of rural as well as urban communities. It's 
significant that the Rural Affordable Rental Housing program creates the 
opportunity for developers who are new to MaineHousing, and new to creating 
affordable housing, to enter this market. These developers are now part of the 
community of people working in our state to address Maine's housing crisis. 
But they can't complete planned projects without funding. 
That is why I urge you to support LD 258. By doing so, you will ensure Maine 
expands housing now, and you will fund programs that are building our state's 
capacity to create affordable housing for years to come. 
Thank you.
