northernlighthealth.org  This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer.   
 
 
 
43 W hiting Hill Rd.  
Brewer, ME 04412  
 
Northern Light Health  
Acadia Hospital  
A.R. Gould Hospital  
Beacon Health  
Blue Hill Hospital  
C.A. Dean Hospital  
Eastern Maine Medical Center  
Home  Care & Hospice  
Inland Hospital  
Maine Coast Hospital  
Mayo Hospital  
Mercy Hospital  
Northern Light Health Foundation  
Northern Light Medical Transport  
Northern Light  Pharmacy  
Sebasticook Valley Hospital  Testimony in Support of  LD258: An A ct Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations  
from the General Fund and Other  Funds for the Expenditures of State G overnment and 
Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operation s of State 
Government for the Fiscal  Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024,  and June 30, 2025  
May 17th, 2023  
Senator Rotundo, Representative  Sachs, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropria tions and Financial Affairs:  
My name is Joe Kellner,  and I am here today , on behalf of Northern Light Health, to 
speak in favor o f the sections  of the supplemental appropriations  related to Emergency 
Medical Servic es. Emergency Medical Services in the S tate of Maine continue to face 
substantial headwinds in  the sustainable provision of emergency medical  response . The 
Governor ’s support of the Blue R ibbon Commission recommendations a nd the 
allocation of $31,000,000 will undoubtedl y offer some additional s tability t o the fabric 
of the system that allows EMS to come every time someone calls 911.  
Personally, I am a licensed paramedic; I have worked for municipal, taxable , fully 
volu nteer and non -profit EMS services. Through my 20 years of experience, I have 
witnessed firsthand  how the system in many parts of the state would not exist  except 
for the sacrifice of ind ividuals dedicated to servi ng the ir communities. The struggles 
services are facing t oday vary, but can be placed into a handful of categories:  
Staffing : many of our services have on ly one or two steadfast providers that 
enable services to keep the lights  on. These services find them selves one back 
injury or illness away from catastrophe . Declining volunteerism  and low wages 
have inhibited EMS fr om effective recruitment and retention.  
Finance:  EMS , especially  in rural areas like Maine, is not well financed. I would 
postulate  that when all inputs are considered, there is  not a service in our state 
that can demonstrate financial viability  without subsid y. The traditional “pay for 
transport ” model no longer works. I urge you to pay close attention to proposals 
like those in LD160 2, implem enting recommendations  of a committee  that I 
chaired, that improve re-shape reimbursement  in a way that increases 
sustainability without a fi scal note.  
Efficiency : While many s ervices are operating as efficiently as they possibly can, 
Maine needs to take a hard look at the structure of the Emergency Medical 
Services system. To some extent, this is being accompli shed through strategic 
planning and will be enhanced by the cost  reporting components of LD1602. 
However , it needs to be taken seriously that proliferation of multiple  EMS 
services generally linearly  increased fixed costs w hile decreasing efficiency . In 
 other wor ds, as th e number of services increases, the value of a reimbursement 
dollar decreases.  
Notably, every service  is struggling from the City of Portland to A mbulance Service Inc. 
in Fort Kent. The ir struggles may look  different, but each is worthy of funding to support 
enhancing the provision of service  so that EMS can continue with it s timeless promis e; 
“If you call us, we will come. ”   
Although  I have authored  the draft allocation formula , I am concerned with the process 
by which the funding  is distributed. I am in agreement  with the language regarding h ow 
the money may be spent, and further I am supportive of ha ving a mechani sm to ensure 
compliance. However, requiring a complex grant application is likely to add months to 
the process.  Rule promulgation in my experience will take six to nine months  (as 
evidenced by the Maine EMS co mmunity grant program from the 130th with rules still in 
draft form). I recommend a n immediate distribution of the major ity of t he funds based 
on the formula I have cr eated , saving some percentage for targ eted grant projects.  A 
simpler  approach would also save tax dollars by not needing four additional positions in 
governm ent to support this program.  This methodology is consistent  with the HCBS 
funding and the federal provider relief funding. Frankly I don ’t feel much is t o be gained 
by the more complex process that is being proposed  – the downsides outw eigh the 
upsides.  
Finally, I have concern  with limiting distribu tion based on service structure. Not allowing 
for-profit services to partic ipate seems short -sighted. In fact, there is only one taxable 
service that would qualify, and that service  has shown substantial commitment to 
inno vation and comm unity collabor ation.  It is my opi nion that the restriction  should  
only be that the service is providing 911 response , which the funding formula 
contemplates.  Should services not use the money appropr iately, a claw -back provision 
would seem appropriate. However, services need  this money,  and they need it soon. I 
am confident , based on the restrict ions on h ow the money is to be spent, that the 
appropriate guardrails will exist.  
Thank you for your time today. I would be honored to have the priv ledge of helping 
draft a suitable amendment that improves this process while being good s tewards of tax  
dollars.  
 
Proposed funding formula ( concept  / simplified ):  
USDA Frontier Rural Score x 911 Calls by Zip Code (2022) = wei ghted score  
Weighted  score / total score (all services) = percentage of distribution  
Minimum distribution *: $15,000  
Maximu m distribution *: $500,000  
*Non-transporting services would follow the same form ula with low er allocation 
minimum and maximum numbers  
