 
Testimony in Support of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations 
from the General Fund and Other Funds... June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 , and June 30, 2025  
 
Climate Resilience Partnership Provisions  
 
To the  Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
by Josh  Caldwell , Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
February 17, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate & Clean Energy  Outreach 
Coordinator  at the Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more than 
60 years to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 
members and supporters. I  am submitting testimony in support of the Community Resilience 
Partnership  provisions proposed in LD 258.  
The Community Resilience Partnership (the Partnership) funds projects that tie directly to the 
goals laid out in the Maine Climate Action Plan by improving energy efficiency, electrifying our 
transportation system, generating new clean energy, planning for climate impacts, and more. The 
proje cts enabled by the partnership are directly reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Maine and 
preparing communities for the impacts of climate change.  
In the Partnership’s first year, it has been successful in engaging communities all a cross the state. 
Since  the program was announced in 2021, 131 cities, towns and Tribal governments in Maine 
have chosen to participate in the program either as individual communities or through regional 
coalitions.1 The Partnership is catalyzing  local conversation and processes around climate change 
that would not have otherwise happened. We’ve heard from service providers and municipal 
officials around the state that the Partnership  has brought community members together to 
discuss their collective future in the face of a changing climate, and the Partnersh ip ensures that 
those conversations are solutions -oriented and result in projects with tangible community 
benefits . Mainers are alrea dy seeing the effects of climate change, and this program is enabling 
them  to see the solutions as well.  
The geographic and economic diversity of grant recipients is proof of the  popularity  of the 
program and the efficacy of the service provider relationships with local communities.  The 
Partnership strengthens connections between service providers and the communities they serve 
and prepares municipal governments for continu ed community clima te work.  
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/files/inline -
files/Resiliency%20Partnership%20Annual%20Report_2023.pdf  

Responding to the climate crisis requires an all -of-society approach. The Community Resilience 
Partnership illustrates how federal and state funding can be effectively directed to the community 
level to facilitate projects that support local climate resilience. Mainers know what is best for 
their own communities, and making funding available for those communities to enact self -
determined climate solutions  has proven to be an  effective  model.  
The Partnership is a bright light in the implementation  of Maine’s Climate Action Plan , and 
funding this program shows the state’s commitment to localized climate action and building the 
long-term social and physical infrastructure needed to respond effectively to climate change.  
For these reaso ns, we urge the committee to fully support the provisions in the budget pertainin g 
to the C ommunity Resilience Partnership.  
Thank you.  
