  Mailing: PO Box 437
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103
  Augusta, ME 04332
  207.622.7381
  mecep.org
Board of Directors
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lucy Van Hook
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica MaurerGood afternoon, chairpersons Rotundo and Sachs, Gere and Pierce, and the rest of the esteemed 
members of the committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Housing:
My name is Josie Phillips, and I am a budget and tax policy fellow with Maine Center for Economic 
Policy. Maine Center for Economic Policy is testifying neither in favor nor against the proposed $30 
million investment in affordable housing. While public investment is necessary to alleviate Maine’s 
affordable housing crisis, $30 million is insufficient to address the shortage of affordable housing.
Until sufficiently addressed, Maine’s affordable housing crisis will remain a serious threat to public 
health, safety, and prosperity in both rural and urban areas across the state. Housing insecurity and 
homelessness — driven by high costs of housing — have been repeatedly shown to endanger personal 
health, educational outcomes, and financial security.1 Maine’s State Economist has also identified a lack 
of affordable housing to be one of the most significant challenges facing the state economy, particularly 
as it deters younger adults from migrating into the state and offsetting the aging population and 
declining labor force.2 
Maine’s housing affordability crisis is driven by the fact that there is not enough housing available to 
meet the needs of low- and middle-income Mainers. Recent estimates place the magnitude of the 
shortage at around 20 to 25,000 housing units across the state.3 This shortfall of available units has 
increased the cost of housing to the point where in every county in the state, the median home price is 
unaffordable for a household earning the median income.4 The situation is even more dire for renters, 
more than 40 percent of whom are considered cost-burdened by rent5 and whose average income is 
approximately half that of homeowners.6
Significant public investment is necessary to alleviate Maine’s affordable housing crisis. Funding should 
be focused on bolstering Maine’s construction workforce, preserving currently existing affordable 
housing, and developing new housing that will remain affordable to Mainers with low and middle 
incomes. However, the proposed $30 million is inadequate to meet the need for affordable housing 
1 Health Affairs, “Housing And Health: An Overview Of The Literature.” 
https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hpb20180313.396577/
2 Courier Gazette, “State Economist sees challenges from inflation, housing crisis, workforce shortage.” 
https://knox.villagesoup.com/2022/11/04/state-economist-sees-challenges-from-inflation-housing-crisis-work-
force-shortage/
3 News Center Maine, “Affordable Housing Units Open in Heart of Portland.” 
https://www.newscentermaine.com/article/news/local/avesta-housing-mainehousing-affordable-housing-units-
open-at-heart-of-portland/97-f9c175be-9748-4a03-b0ef-116482d95a9a
4 Maine Public Radio, “Agency: Median-priced homes unaffordable for median-income earners in every Maine 
County.” https://www.mainepublic.org/business-and-economy/2023-01-19/agency-median-priced-homes-
unaffordable-for-median-income-earners-in-every-maine-county
5 Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, “Renters were particularly burdened in the first year of 
the pandemic.” https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/son-2022-cost-burdens
6 Maine Housing, “Report to the Maine Legislature on HOME Fund uses 2019-2020.” 
https://www.mainehousing.org/docs/default-source/policy-research/policy/maine-home-fund-2019-
2020.pdf?sfvrsn=344c8915_4
development and falls significantly short of the $60 million recommended by the Commission to 
Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Land Use Regulations and Short-term Rentals.7
Any investment in affordable housing would be an investment in our communities’ collective wellbeing, 
as well as the lives of Mainers with low and middle income. The considerable benefits of increasing the 
stock of affordable housing should be reflected in the funding the state legislature dedicates to this 
purpose. As such, Maine Center for Economic Policy supports dedicating no less than the recommended 
$60 million to develop affordable housing across the state.
7 Report of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Land Use Regulations and 
Short-term Rentals. https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9239
