l\/l 17, 2023 ay 
Th@Nature 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director CO1’1S€I'V21I1C ‘y 
The Nature Conservancyin Maine Mama kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org"
- 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
RE: LD 25§ - Change Package to the Biennial Budget, with attention to Provisions 
Relating to Culvert Infrastructure and Climate Resilience 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of theloint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations & Financial Affairs, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and l am the 
Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this 
opportunity to testify in support of the “Change Package" to LD 258 and this latter 
part of the Biennial Budget. Specifically, our testimony today relates to Language 
Part JJJJJ and its corresponding initiative in the Highway Fund. This is the initiative 
that relates to the funding and transfer of the Municipal Stream Crossing Upgrade 
Grant Program. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on—the—ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments. the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of l\/laine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
Today we strongly support Language Part JJJJJ (found on Page 55), which relates to the 
Municipal Stream Crossing Upgrade Grant Program, better known as the municipal 
culvert program. As Commissioner Figueroa outlined earlier this week, this proposal 
strengthens the culvert program by transferring it from the Department of 
Environmental Protection to the Department of Transportation's Infrastructure _ 
Adaptation Fund with a $10 million transfer from General Fund unappropriated surplus. 
This move will‘ 
ensure the program has the staffing and engineering expertise to be 
most appropriately and efficiently administered with long-term planning in the future. 
The culvert program is a competitive grant program that matches local funding for the 
upgrade of municipal culverts at stream crossings in order to improve fish and wildlife 
habitats, increase community safety, and ensure regional economic vitality. 
Under this grant program, eligible ‘ project sponsors include local governments, 
municipal conservation commiss.ons, soil and water conservation districts, and private 
nonprofit organizations. Culverts are an essential but often overlooked element of 
Maine‘s transportation infrastructure. They provide water passage and drainage 
beneath roads and crossings and serve as connectors for fish and wildlife. 
Unfortunately, the vast majority of culverts in Maine were designed to meet standards 
from 50+ years ago and are not keeping up with the current realities of our storm 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, l\/lainel 04011 natureorggmaine ll 
ii 
ll 
l,
l
patterns. As a result, they are rapidly deteriorating, putting fish and wildlife habitats, as 
well as community safety, at risk. The provisions of tf a existing Grant Program for 
"Stream Smart" structures are essential to include in replacement crossings, and the 
funding provided through this program is the key element allowing communities to 
upgrade their roadways. 
Moving the program to the DOT's Infrastructure Adaptation Fund with the proposed 
$10 million transfer will ensure it is surrounded by the staffing and attention it needs to 
thrive on behalf of l\/laine communities. We urge the Committee to support Part' 
Quadruple] and the corresponding initiative found on Page 4 of the Highway Fund. 
I would also like to emphasize TNC’s support for other initiatives found within the 
Change package, particularly those relating to climate and resilience, clean power, and 
sustainable communities. 
The Change Package invests $400 million in l\/laine's transportation infrastructure, 
leveraging $1.2 billion in federal funding that will support state and local transportation 
systems. These may include resilient bridge and road programs designed to anticipate 
future climate impacts, in addition to fulfilling a state/federal match that will support 
programming around clean transit, rail investment, and electric vehicle charging 
infrastructure, and other areas that make use of federal dollars to benefit Maine. 
Recognizing the critical role of energy independence and renewable power in the 
future, the Change Package also nurtures Maine's emergent off-shore wind industry 
with $12 million to develop a deep—water port and funds that support the Maine 
Offshore Wind Research Consortium. These are critical steps in animating an industry 
of the future that Maine can be a national and global leader in. 
TNC is also supportive of initiatives found throughout the Change Package that invest 
in the Resilient Water infrastructure Program, Soil and Water Conservation Districts, 
l\/laine Housing's Low—lncome Heat Pump Program, the Community Resilience 
Partnership Program, and coastal monitoring programs overseen by DEP. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify in support" of critical provisions within the 
Change Package. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee, and 
thank you for yourtime.T
.
