TESTIMONY OF 
Karynlee Harrington, Executive Director, Maine Health Data Organization 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Hearing Date: March 1, 2023 
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" 
Senators Rotundo and Bailey, Representatives Sachs and Perry, and members ofthe Joint Standing 
Committees on Appropriations and FinancialAffairs and Health Coverage, insurance and Financial 
Services, my name is Karynlee Harrington. lam the Executive Director of the Maine Health Data 
Organization (MHDO), and I am here today to present testimony in support of those items presented 
in the Governor's proposed Biennial Budget forthe MHDO. 
Overview of the Maine Health Data Organization (MHDO) 
The MHDO was established as an independent executive agency in 1996 because of the 
recommendations ofthe Hospital Deregulation Task Force, that the Maine Health Care Finance 
Commission be abolished but that its data collection functions be retained, expanded, and 
transformed into what is the Maine Health Data Organization. 
The MHDO is governed by a multi stakeholder board of directors that are appointed by the Governor 
and represent consumers, employers, payers, providers, hospitals, and government. 
The purpose of the MHDO as defined in Title 22, Chapter 1683, is to create and maintain a 
useful, objective, reliable, and comprehensive health information database. This data is accessed 
by a broad group of authorized data users to improve health care costs, quality, and access for 
Maine people; and used to promote the transparency of the cost and quality of the most costly 
and highest utilized healthcare services in Maine, including the costs associated with prescription
1
drugs. MHDO in partnership with the Maine Quality Forum created a website that shows the 
average payment for commercial insurance for over 300 common health care procedures at 
different facilities in the State of Maine as well as several health care quality measures including 
preventing falls with injury and preventing healthcare-associated infections. This website is 
www.CompareMaine.org. For over ten years MHDO's data has been one of the most timely and 
complete sources of health care data in the State of Maine for the analysis of health care costs, 
utilization, and outcomes. Specifically, MHDO's data supports policy discussions and legislation in areas 
including Transparency of Health Care Costs and Quality, Surprise Billing, Workers Compensation, 
MaineCare Rate Setting, Opioid Analyses, Insulin Costs, Primary Care and Behavioral Health Care 
Spending in Maine, Ambulance Costs, Prescription Drug Costs, Right to Shop, Maine's Reinsurance 
Program, and the Office of Affordable HealthCare. I am pleased to report that because of legislation 
that was enacted a few years ago requiring the data from the cancer registry and vital statistics to be 
linked to MHDO's data sets, the Maine Cancer Foundation, is able to create Maine's first Cancer 
Blueprint, a comprehensive, interactive, data-driven tool designed to, increase knowledge and 
awareness of issues related to cancer, expand access to care, and support lifestyle changes to reduce 
cancer risk. 
MHDO collects the following data sets: 
0 claims data (medical and pharmacy) is submitted monthly from over 40 licensed 
commercial insurance companies in Maine, MaineCare and Medicare; this data set 
represents over 90% of Maine's population. 
¢ hospital encounter data is submitted quarterly from all licensed hospitals in the State of 
Maine for all encounters (inpatient, outpatient, emergency department and physician 
practice data from practices owned by the hospitals). 
0 hospital and nursing home quality measures including rates of healthcare associated
2
infections including MRSA, C. diff, central line catheter-associated blood stream 
infections. 
0 Pharmaceutical pricing component data from manufacturers, wholesale distributors and 
pharmacy benefit managers. 
0 hospital ﬁnancial information (audited financial statements and a standardized financial 
template that includes Profitability, Liquidity, Capital Structure, Asset Efficiency, and other 
common financial ratios). 
0 hospital organizational data that identifies the health care system, the hospital and 
physicians and practices affiliated with the hospital. 
MHDO's database holds over 1 billion records, and that number grows each year with the 
addition of new data. Attachment A in my testimony is a list of links to various reports where 
MHDO data was used to develop the reports. 
The MHDO is not funded by the state's general fund but rather it derives its revenue from two 
sources as described in Title 22, Chapter 1683: an annual assessment on health care providers 
payers, pharmaceutical manufacturers, wholesale distributors and pharmacy benefits managers; 
and user fees from authorized MHDO data users accessing data pursuant to the criteria deﬁned 
in Rule Chapter 120, Release of Data to the Public. The amount of the MHDO annual assessment 
is contingent on the budget you approve minus any unallocated funds remaining from the prior 
fiscal year. 
FY24-25 Proposed Budget 
The Governor's proposed budget for MHDO is on page A-301 of your budget document. As 
mentioned earlier in my testimony there are no general funds for the Maine Health Data 
Organization. The proposed budget contains no initiatives for FY24-25; however, we are 
requesting that the committee add language to continue the authorization a p p rove d in the
3
FY2 2-23 biennial budget to transfer available Personal Services balances up to a speciﬁed 
amount to the All-Other category by ﬁnancial order. A copy of the proposed language is 
contained in Attachment B. 
That concludes my testimony on items for the Maine Health Data Organization. lam 
happy to answer questions.
4
Attachment A 
MHDO and MO_F's Health Care Costs and Quality Transparency Website: 
https:[/www.c0mparemaine.0rg[ 
Annual Prescription Drug Pricing Transparency Report 
Data Availability Tableau Reports for both MHDO claims and hospital data 
Health Care Expenditures and Health Care Quality in Maine: Baseline Report: 
https:[/mhdo.maine.gov/tableau/baselineHealthcareExpQuality.cshtml 
Top 25 costliest and most utilized prescription drugs in Maine 
https:[/mhdo.maine.gov/tableau[prescriptionReports.cshtmI 
MHDO Healthcare Procedure Cost Drivers: 
https:[/mhdo.maine.gov/tableau/healthcareProcC0stDrivers.cshtml 
MHDO's Standardized Hospital Financial Reports: 
https:[/mhdo.maine.gov/hospital financials.htm 
Best Methods and Definitions to Use in Collecting Data to Better Understand Racial and 
Ethnic Disparities in the Provision of Health Care in Maine
5
Attachment B 
Proposed Language 
Personal Services balances; Maine Health Data Organization; transfers authorized. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the 2024-2025 biennium, the Maine Health Data 
Organization is authorized to transfer up to $310,000 in each ﬁscal year, available balances of Personal 
Services allocations, after all salary, benefit and other obligations are met, to the "All Other" line 
category in the Maine Health Data Organization, Other Special Revenue Funds account.
6
