A I H Maine Municipal 
Association 
60 COMMUNITY DRIVE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-9486 
(207) 623-8428 
wwwimemun org 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association (MMA)i 
In Support of 
LD 258, An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State 
Government, General Fund...for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Property Tax Provisions (A-28, A-3 8, A-638 & A-641) 
February 8, 2022 
Senators Rotundo and Grohoski, Representative Sachs and Perry, and members of the 
Appropriations and Taxation Committees. My name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering 
testimony in support of the property tax provisions proposed in LD 258 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association ’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest. 
To put it simply, municipal leaders across Maine appreciate Governor Mills’ commitment 
to her local government partners and support for programs that help to reduce the burdens placed 
on property taxpayers that are associated with providing state mandated and locally desired 
programs and services. 
While local ofﬁcials continue to have grave concerns with the administration and ﬁscal 
sustainability of the property tax stabilization program, the appropriation of $15 million in FY 
2024 and $31 million in FY 2025 is of signiﬁcant relief to municipal ofﬁcials. 
Although the program is in place, applications have been accepted and processed, and 
property taxes stabilized, reimbursement for 100% of the lost property tax revenue, envisioned as 
part of the program, has not yet been appropriated. Without it, councils and town meetings will 
be left to make difﬁcult decisions regarding budgets and mil rates, which could result in shifting 
additional burdens to non-senior property owners, a reduction in services, or both increases in 
taxes and reductions in services. 
For this reason, municipal ofﬁcials urge your support for the appropriation, as well as the 
$1.05 million proposed in the budget to reimburse municipalities for the cost of administering 
the program. Although touted as a program that would be easily administered, that prediction 
did not come to fruition, as assessors tirelessly responded to inquiries and conducted the research 
necessary to verify program eligibility.
A 
Municipal ofﬁcials also appreciate and urge support for the provisions in LD 25 8 that 
honor traditional and historic state/municipal partnerships by appropriating the funds necessary 
to incrementally reimburse municipalities for a greater portion of lost property tax revenues
associated with the homestead exemption. As a result, in FY 2024 the budget proposal increases 
the reimbursement to 76% ($103.5 million) and to 79% in FY 2025 ($108.5 million). 
And ﬁnally, municipal officials strongly support the governor ’s proposal to share with 
municipal partners 5% of state sales and income tax revenue via the revenue sharing program, 
which is projected to distribute $252 million in FY 2024 and $259 million in FY 2025 to towns, 
cities, and plantations across the state. Since its inception, revenue sharing funds have been 
prescribed by law to reduce the property tax rate. As a result of that requirement, the amount of 
revenue sharing distributed to a municipality must be subtracted from projected expenditures. 
This lowers the mil rate, and consequently, the taxes assessed on all properties within the 
community. 
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue. If you have any 
questions about our position, please contact me at kdufour:?1 ‘1memun.org or 592-4038.
