P.O. Box 2490  
Augusta, ME 04338  
 
Telephone: 1 -800-965-7476  
Fax: 1 -888-214-5233  
www.mainecahc.org  
consumerhealth@mainecahc.org   
 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers.  
Testimony Neither For Nor Against  
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
 
Tuesday , February 2 1, 202 3   
Senators Rotundo and Baldacci , Representatives Sachs and Meyer, and esteemed members of 
the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human 
Services. Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments regarding aspects of the 
Recommended 202 4-2025 Biannual Budget  related to Children’s Services .   
My name is Kate Ende and I am the Policy Director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
(CAHC), a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for Maine people to be heard, 
respected, and well -served in a health system that provides coverage, access and quality, 
affordable care to al l.  
 
CAHC is designated by Maine’s Attorney General and Bureau of Insurance as Maine’s Health 
Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP). The CAP program provides toll -free and in -
person access to certified application counselors and trained individuals w ho help Mainers 
understand their health coverage options and apply and enroll in private health insurance. The 
program also provides assistance to Mainers in appealing inappropriate health insurance 
denials and links people to safety net programs when nece ssary, to meet health care and other 
basic needs. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine’s Medicaid program, 
MaineCare, and helps people with applying for and navigating the enrollment process for 
MaineCare coverage. It is from our experience assisting Mainers in navigating health coverage 
programs that we offer the following comments.    
 
Medical Care – Payments to Providers Waive Children's Health Insurance program premiums 
and expand eligibility for specified insurance program (p. A-366)  
 
MaineCare and  the Children’s Health Insurance Program (“CHIP”) help Maine children  get the 
care they need to be healthy  and reach their full potential. Studies show that kids with health 
insurance are more likely to get the medical care they need, including essential preventive 
services to keep them healthy. Insured children are also better equipped to do well in school.  
 
We appreciate that the biannual budget proposal includes funding needed to expand eligibility 
and to eliminate waiting periods an d premiums in Maine’s CHIP program.  However, we have 
questions regarding the proposed timeline included for these changes.  
 
Section CCC of the  2022 -2023 supplemental budget  made several changes to Maine’s CHIP 
program, including : 
• increas ing income eligibility from 200%  to 300% of the Federal Poverty Level (PLF);  
• expand ing eligibility to 19 - and 20 -year olds;  
• eliminat ing premiums; and  
• eliminat ing waiting periods  for children previously covered by an employer -sponsored 
plan.1, 2   
 
The 2022 -2023 supplemental budget was enacted on April 20, 2022. However , the changes to 
CHIP eligibility listed above have not been implemented yet.   
 
The 2024 -2025 biannual budget  proposal “provides funding to waive all Children's Health 
Insurance Program premiums and expand eligibility for the current Medicaid Expansion 
Children's Health Insurance Program population from 157% to 208% Federal Poverty Level for 
March 1, 2023, then to expand Children's Health Insurance Program eligibility and coverage for 
19 and 20 year olds to 300% Federal Poverty Level for October 1, 2023.”  
 
We have concerns about the delay in implementation until October 1, 2023 for some of the key 
changes t o CHIP eligibility that were enacted in last year’s supplemental budget , particularly 
given that the federal continuous coverage requirement for Medicaid will be ending soon , 
which will cause  many Mainers to lose  their MaineCare and CHIP coverage.     
 
On January 31, 2020, the U.S. Health & Human Services (HHS) declared a Public Health 
Emergency (PHE) due to COVID -19. The Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) , which 
passed in March of 2020 provided an increase in the regular Medicaid matching rate , 
contingent on states not terminating Medicaid coverage for most members. This continuous 
coverage requirement means that most people with MaineCare or CHIP have been able to keep 
their coverage since the start of the PHE even if they experienced an incom e or household 
change that would have otherwise made them ineligible for coverage.  
 
In December 2022, Congress passed a spending bill that ends the Medicaid continuous 
coverage provision after March 31, 2023. The Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS ) will begin initiating eligibility redeterminations for MaineCare and CHIP in April 2023  
and must complete redeterminations for all enrolled members by the end of May 2024. DHHS 
projects an estimated 65,000 to 90,000 members may lose their M aineCare eligibility during 
this process.3  
 
 
1 An Act To  Make Supplemental Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State Government, General 
Fund and Other Funds and To Change Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30,  2022 and June 30, 2023 . Available at: 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=HP1482&item=3&snum=130   
2 Part A, Section A -17, Medical Care - Payments to Providers 0147 .  
3 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline -files/Presentation_0.pdf   
If the changes to CHIP eligibility are not implemented when eligibility redeterminations resume, 
we are putting Maine children at risk of losing or experiencing gap s in their health coverage . 
While some childre n may be eligible for other types of coverage, such as through the 
Marketplace, these plans include premiums and out -of-pocket costs, such as deductibles and 
copays that may make it difficult for families to afford the coverage or medical care their 
childr en need. Furthermore, a recent issue brief from the Medicaid and CHIP Payment Access 
Commission ( MACPAC ) summarizing national eligibility and enrollment data in insurance 
affordability programs found that only about 3% of people who had Medicaid coverage 
enrolled in a Marketplace plan within a year of losing Medicaid. It also found that most of the 
people who did transition from Medicaid to the Marketplace experienced a gap in coverage.4  
 
Implementing  CHIP eligibility changes after redeterminations resume  will likely  cause 
unnecessary confusion for many families with children who become newly eligible for CHIP  due 
to the changes in eligibility . Will families with children who lose coverage  due to being over -
income  during their redetermination be contacted once the income limit increases to 300% 
FPL? Will 19 - and 20 - year olds who lose coverage due to their age be contacted once expanded 
CHIP eligibility is implemented? Will they have to submit a new application? Ho w will we 
educate people about the changes in eligibility and encourage them to reapply for CHIP after  
they were told  they were not eligible for coverage  just a few months earlier? We are concerned 
that if a child is found to be ineligible during their  annual redetermination, it will be difficult to 
subsequently reach and re -enroll that child in CHIP once  the changes in eligibility are 
implemented.  
 
Health coverage is vitally important for children. It improves their access to needed services, 
such as well -child checkups and medications, and provides better access to a usual source of 
care. Public coverage is also associated with improved educational outcomes and long -term 
health and economic gains.5 For these reasons, it is important the eligibility  change s to Maine’s 
CHIP program that were enacted in Part CCC of the 2022 -2023 supplemental budget , are 
implemented as quickly as possible  to ensure  Maine children can get and keep the health 
coverage they need.  
 
We appreciate your consideration and thank you for the work you do in these committees on 
behalf of all Maine people.  
 
 
4 https://www.macpac.gov/wp -content/uploads/2022/07/Coverage -transitions -issue -brief.pdf   
5 Medicaid is a Smart Investment in Children (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Center for Children and 
Families, March 2017  
