126 Sewall Street Kathy Kilrain del Rio 
Augystal Maglne 04330‘5822 Advocacy & Programs Director 
'iTY VOICE: 207) 626-7058 . . 207 626-705s c 210 
www maineequaljusticeorg PEOp|9 PO|lCy sO|LltlOl1S () 
kathycéniglp org 
MEJ Testimony Opposed to certain proposals in the DHHS Public Welfare section of LD 258, 
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
February 22, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative 
Meyer, members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee, and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, l use she/her 
pronouns, and I'm the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit 
legal aid provider working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in 
Maine. While we support the DHHS sections of the budget overall, there are several proposals 
that we oppose, and we have a couple suggestions we believe would strengthen the next state 
biennial budget. 
Sweeps of Unallocated Funds 
Sweeping unallocated funds from basic needs programs like MaineCare, ASPIRE, and TANF that 
have always carried over to meet the need in future years eliminates flexibility when 
technology, or basic requirements like rulemakings, require additional funds. Moreover, it 
weakens Maine's ability to address some of the most harmful conditions that continue to face 
Maine people. These programs result in greater financial security and improved health for 
thousands of Mainers. Maintaining flexibility to respond to unmet needs in these programs is 
critical to maintaining the health and wellbeing of those struggling the most today and address 
economic and health disparities for Black, Indigenous, and Mainers of color throughout our 
state. As one in six Maine children continue to live in poverty, and given the lifelong 
consequences faced by children growing up in poverty, we strongly urge you to leave these 
funds with the Department so that they may take steps needed to improve the wellbeing of 
Maine families with limited incomes. 
General Assistance 
As you know, Maine is experiencing a housing crisis that has led to a growing number of 
unhoused Mainers and an increasing number of individuals and families who are at risk of 
losing stable housing. Because of rising housing costs and insufficient and aging housing stock,
2 
many low-income Mainers are left without options they can afford. To put this into perspective, 
an overview from MaineHousing to the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities by 
Studying Land Use Restrictions and Short-term Rentals included the following facts: 
HUD’s Fair Market Rent for a 2-bedroom is unaffordable for the average renter 
household in all 
areas of Maine. 
~ 41.5% of renters are cost-burdened, paying more than 30% of their income on 
housing. Low income renters are of course hit hardest by cost burden. 
- Approximately 39, 716 renter households are extremely low-income (at or below 
30% Area Median Income). 
- Extremely low-income renters paying over 50% of their income on housing 
comprise 16% of all renters. 
o 45% of all renter households are be/ow 50% Area Median Income. 
~ Small family renter households comprise the largest share of extremely low- 
income households. 
~ 54% of extremely low-income renters have substandard housing (defined as 
lacking complete plumbing or kitchen facilities). 
- Small single parent and older adult renters face the greatest housing challenges 
and greatest need. Nearly 15% of households with at /east one person over 75 
have extremely /ow incomes. 36% of households with one or more children aged 
6 or under have extremely low incomes or low incomes? 
These circumstances coupled with the end of the Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA) program 
have put increasing pressure on our General Assistance (GA) program to keep Mainers in all 
counties housed. We look forward to working with the Legislature to create a comprehensive 
solution to this challenge. However, while those solutions are being developed it is imperative 
that GA be available to address the urgent needs of our neighbors who are experiencing 
housing insecurity as well as other challenges providing for their basic needs. For these reasons, 
we support the additional investments in GA on page A-336 of the Governor's proposed 
budget, General Assistance - Reimbursement to Cities & Towns - Line 0130. However, while we 
are happy to see additional investments of $7,527,347 and $3,000,000 in 2024, we are 
concerned that there is not a similar investment for the second year of the biennium. There are 
several bills being considered outside of the budget process that seek to make the GA program 
work better for individuals in need as well as for municipalities. We urge you to consider those 
pieces of legislation as you determine the spending for GA across the full biennium. 
We oppose the proposal in Language Section VV to set the hotel per diem reimbursement rate 
for GA to the federal reimbursement rate. While hotel rates vary widely across the state, it is 
important to ensure that in areas with higher costs, people can access a safe place to stay ata 
hotel if no other options are available. That means municipalities need to have the flexibility to 
exceed the maximum rates if a hotel is the only option to provide an individual or family with
1 
https2,//iegislaturemaine.gov/doc/ ’8866#:~:text=Renter%20median%20income%20%2434%2C018%20vs. 
was%20%2429%2C3S0%20and%20%2464%2C679%Z ﬂrespectively
3 
housing. We also urge you to reject the proposal also in Language Section VV to limit hotel stays 
to 30 days unless the municipality is providing case support services. While those services area 
valuable tool to help move individuals and families to more stable, longer-term housing, the 
reality is that most municipalities do not have the capacity to provide those supports today. 
While making this requirement, this budget does nothing to provide any funds to ensure that 
these services will be available to people in need who live in municipalities that do not have 
them. ln some areas of the state, hotels can be a more affordable option for municipalities and 
keep people housed longer. Like the Governor, DHHS, and MaineHousing, we want to work to 
create safe, stable long-term housing solutions for all Mainers, but until those options are 
available, we need to ensure GA can provide housing stability to Maine people in 
need. Without the housing people access through GA - even hotels - it is harder for Mainers to 
build toward financial stability that can help them move off of GA. And given the challenge of 
finding rental options today, the flexibility to stay in a hotel often needs to go beyond 30 days. 
A Strong State Workforce 
lVlEJ works closely with multiple state agencies and especially with DHHS. Strong state 
government is necessary for our safety net programs to run smoothly and meet the needs of 
low-income Mainers. Our state workers are the backbone of state government. As you are all 
aware, promptness is a vital consideration in delivering safety net services to older Mainers, 
families with children, and others in need. Chronic problems with recruiting and maintaining 
staff for these important positions prevent Maine people from getting the services they need 
when they need them. For these reasons, we urge you to provide funding so the Administration 
can complete and implement the review of our state compensation and classification system. 
State positions must be competitive to attract and keep a strong workforce. 
Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) 
We are glad to see funding to expand access to CHIP on page A-366 (Initiative: Provides funding 
to waive all Children's Health insurance Program premiums and expand eligibility for the 
current Medicaid Expansion Children's Health Insurance Program population from 157% to 
208% Federal Poverty Level for l\/larch 1, 2023, then to expand Children ‘s Health Insurance 
Program eligibility and coverage for 19 and 20 year olds to 300% Federal Poverty Level for 
October 1, 2023.) Because the changes to eligibility were passed in last year's Supplemental 
Budget, we expected to see them implemented by now. We would still urge the Department to 
implement the changes before the unwinding of continuous eligibility in MaineCare begins on 
April 1st since many children who may lose coverage under the current eligibility rules would be 
eligible for CHIP under these improved eligibility levels. It would be easier for families who are 
now over income for MaineCare to know that they will be eligible for CHIP when they go 
through their redetermination process rather than needing to shift to some other private 
insurance provider - or even worse go without coverage - and then shift back to CHIP when the 
changes go into effect. We believe it would also be easier for the Department. But even with 
the delay, the new CHIP eligibility changes will make a significant difference to many Maine 
families and based on the racial impact statement conducted on a related bill last year, these 
changes will also have a significant impact on disparities Black and Brown children.
4 
Children's Oral Health 
Finally, as many of you know, MEJ has long worked to ensure that low-income Mainers have 
access to vital oral health care through the MaineCare program and through other innovative 
service delivery models like the School Oral Health Program. ln 2022 - 2023, the School Oral 
Health Program will serve about 220 schools. Last year both of your committees and the 
Legislature as a whole supported expanding that program to all schools by 2025. We expected 
to see additional funds above the baseline to begin that expansion in the next biennium given 
the fiscal note for LD 1501, which was the bill on which the language in last year's Supplemental 
Budget was modeled; however, we do not see those funds in this proposal. As chair of the 
MaineCare Advisory Committee's Dental Subcommittee, I have been deeply engaged with low- 
income people, providers, and oral health advocates to ensure we have a strong oral health 
system for children and adults. The School Oral Health Program is a vital part of that system and 
the funding to expand to all schools by 2025 is needed so that early oral health issues can be 
identified for more children and so that as children grow up, they have better oral health, which 
will take pressure off our overall oral health system. We ask that you include funding to begin 
that ramp up in the biennial budget. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts with you today. Maine Equal Justice can 
be available at any of your work sessions and l’m happy to answer any questions you have 
today.
