 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 258  
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the 
Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper 
Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30 2024 and June 30, 
2025   
February 23, 2022  
Good afternoon,  Senators Rotundo and Baldacci, Representatives Sachs and Meyer , and members of 
both the Appropriations and Fi nancial Affairs and the Department of Health and Human Services 
Committees. I am Kate Marble, resident of Auburn and Licensed Clinical Social Worker. I am a member 
of the Policy Committee of NASW -Maine, which represents Maine Social Workers, and am the Cas e 
Management Program Director at Health Affiliates Maine, a large statewide behavioral health agency 
which providers community based behavioral health services to over 10,000 Mainers each year. I have 
been providing community -based social services and beha vioral health for over twenty years.  
On behalf of both NASW -Maine, my organization and myself, I am here first to applaud the 131st 
Legislature for the overall increase in the rates to behavioral health providers to ensure a living wage for 
the behavioral health workforce.   We applaud the $4 million in funding for the Health Professions 
Education Loan Repayment Program to provide relief to our dedicated frontline workers and to increase 
the number of behavioral health professionals staying in Maine with the ir skill set. This investment in 
our behavioral health workforce is crucial to ensure we can staff the hundreds of vacant behavioral 
health positions that are currently forcing both children and adults to be on long waitlist s for service s 
(over 4,000 curre ntly waitlisted at our agency alone). Given only three  of last year's nineteen  awardees 
in the program were social workers, we hope for more focused effort and funding to support the 400 or 
more social workers who currently report devastating educational l oans and who consider or have 
already left the field. We need to bring them back.  
I am also here to share that , while the investment is the greatest in years, it is still not going to be 
transformational due the historical lack of investment in behavioral health. My colleagues and I have 
watched the behavioral health system be decimated brick -by-brick with decreased funding over three 
decades, and that is not going to be repaired with this budget alone. We warned past legislative bodies 
about  how a reductio n in funding of prevention and early intervention would result in increased  higher 
levels of care such as hospitalization, out -of-state residential treatment , and adults who are stuck in 
emergency rooms, sent to  jail or are homeless and living on the stree ts. Those past legislative bodies 
turned away from the expertise of providers, clients, and their support people.  
 
 
Our warnings have borne  out, resulting in many Mainers now being  in a more vulnerable place. Case 
managers used to help people access the res ources they need to be employed and regain stable 
housing . Since even before COVID, however, their role ev olved to placing client names on waitlists and 
helping them figure out ways to survive day -to-day. Some clients do not survive. These losses hit almos t 
everyone in this room.  
The state of emergency during COVID and the opioid pandemic shed a bright light on what has been a 
deteriorating behavioral health infrastructure, resulting in support during the 130th Legislature to start 
rebuilding our system. Th ere is a growing understanding that we are losing the lives of our friends, 
neighbors, and family members to preventable and treatable behavioral health issues due to lack of 
access to services. We hope that the 131st Legislature will continue this recogni tion and work to ensure 
that every Mainer who asks for help can receive it . Right now, that is not happening, and Mainers are 
still very much at risk.  
Thank  you for y our time and attention to these crucial matters.  
 
