Portland Connect
ED
February 20, 2023
Testimony of Kathryn Soucy on behalf of Starting Strong in support ofLD 258, “An Act Making UnifiedAppropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of StateGovernment and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of StateGovernment for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025"
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs before the Joint Standing Committee onAppropriations and Financial Affairs, and the Joint Standing Committee on on Health and Human Services
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, andSenator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Committee on Health and Human S
e r v i c e s ,my nameis Katie Soucy and I am the dir ector of a c oalition of o ver 35 or ganizations in P ortland c alled St artingStrong. T ogether, Starting Str ong w orks to impr ove out comes f or young childr en and f amilies in thePortland c ommunity . I submit this t estimon y on behalf of St arting Str ong in support of LD258 andspecific ally the in vestmen ts being made in Maine's early childhood educ ation w orkforce, Head St artand the E arly Childhood Consult ation Pr ogram.
Starting Str ong is f ocused on incr easing access t o high quality early childhood c are and educ ation as akey strategy t owards supporting the o verall success of y oung childr en, their f amilies and ourcommunity . Our c ommitmen t to ensuring tha t childr en and f amilies r eceiv e high quality earlychildhood c are and educ ation is based on y ears of e xtensiv e resear ch which poin t to the positiv elong-t erm success of such pr ogramming. Despit e our c ollectiv e efforts, signific ant gaps and barrier s tohigh quality child c are and early childhood educ ation e xist in P ortland and acr oss Maine. Mor especific ally, recen t data indic ates tha t the a vailability of early c are and educ ation ser vices is gr osslyinsuf ficien t and tha t Portland childr en fr om lo w-income or cultur ally and linguis tically div erse familiesdispr oportionally lack access t o high quality ser vices c ompar ed to childr en fr om other popula tions.Unfortuna tely, the cir cums tances c ontributing t o Maine’ s early childhood c are and educ ation crisis ar ecomple x, long-s tanding and incr easingly dir e.
That said, the barrier w e find mos t key to addr essing t oday’s child c are crisis is the early childhoodworkforce short age. In P ortland w e ha ve several child c are, pr eK, and Head St art classr ooms tha t arelicensed and pr epar ed to welcome s tuden ts yet remain emp ty due t o a lack of qualified t eacher s. I c anthink of thr ee specific e xamples on the P ortland peninsula alone. Without t eacher s these pr ograms c an

not enr oll studen ts.  As man y of m y fellow adv ocates ha ve or will not e, attracting and r etaining qualityearly childhood educ ators is dif ficult f or man y reasons, not the leas t of which is the lo w pa y and lack ofpublic s tructur es and support f or their pr ofession.
The funding included in LD258 is gr eatly appr eciated and is part of a critic al step towards addr essingthe lo w wages tha t plague the child c are indus try.  As y ou ma y kno w, early childhood educ ators workingin licensed pr ograms ar e curr ently receiving $200 per mon th under this funding initia tive. By July 1s t,the salar y supplemen ts will bec ome tier ed based on an educ ator’s experience, cr eden tials, and highereduc ation.
This fundingand mor eis critic al to addr essing thechild c are workforce short age. Acc ording t o the U .S.Treasur y, child c are educ ators are paid in the bot tom 2% of w age earner s in the c ountry. This critic allyimport ant workforce is gr ossly underpaid lar gely in an a ttemp t to keep child c are affordable f or w orkingfamilies. Ho wever, without public in vestmen t, the sect or will r emain in crisis. P arents will a ttemp t topay higher and higher tuition r ates un til the y eventually c an not - which will lik ely r esult in thecontinued decline of a vailability and incr ease inequity of access. F or man y families, childc are willbecome c omple tely out of r each.
Mos t families c an not a fford to pa y wha t early childhood educ ators deser ve to mak e. This dif ficultproblem is not ne w, but one tha t has bec ome gr eater and mor e glaringly ob vious as a v ast majority ofchildr en in Maine no w ha ve all a vailable par ents or c aregivers in the w orkforce. W e are on the pr ecipiceof a br eaking poin t.
As the par ent of a f our-year-old, this ma tter touches close t o home. My o wn f amily has s truggled t ofind child c are when our pr ovider permanen tly closed. Aft er se veral mon ths, w e were thrilled when ourturn c ame on one of the w aiting lis ts we had been on. Un fortuna tely, we also learned tha t due t ostaffing short ages at the cen ter our son w ould be shuf fled be tween classr ooms and c ared for by aseries of short t erm sub stitut es un til the y could find qualified t eacher s - har dly an ideal situa tion. Myfamily is not alone in s truggling t o find c are tha t supports our child while allo wing both par ents toremain or en ter w ork.
In this da y and ag e, when mos t families need tw o inc omes t o sur vive and our ec onom y needs e veryworker w e ha ve, it seems mor e than logic al to publicly in vest in Maine’ s child c are system no w and in tothe futur e. And, a t the heart of this s ystem ar e early childhood educ ators. Investing in the t eacher s whowork in child c are will mak e cert ain tha t our y oung est childr en receiv e the e xperiences tha t build thefounda tion f or lif elong learning while f amilies ar e able t o work and c ontribut e to their c ommunities.
Maine c an not a fford to ignor e the child c are crisis an y long er.  The c onsequences of a f ailing s ystemripple acr oss c ommunities impacting childr en, their f amilies, emplo yers and the futur e health andprosperity of our en tire state.Please support LD258and the import ant investmen ts it mak es in earlychildhood c are and educ ation.
