Testimony of Kathryn Harnish on Behalf of the Elder Abuse Institute of Maine
To Joint Standing Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs
In favor of LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government
—
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer , and
distinguished members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs and Health & Human Services
committees, thank you for the opportunity to present testimony in support of the Governor ’s
2023-2025 biennial budget as it pertains to appropriations to the Department of Health & Human
Services.  My name is Kathryn Harnish, and I am the Data and Communications Specialist for
the Elder Abuse Institute of Maine, on behalf of which I am testifying today .  The Elder Abuse
Institute of Maine is a statewide or ganization committed to ensuring that all older Maine people
impacted by abuse have access to the resources, services, and support they need to live the lives
they choose. Toward this end, my agency designs, delivers, and evaluates elder abuse prevention,
detection, and intervention programs that have become, in conjunction with the work of our
partners in the Adult Protective Services unit, a critical part of Maine’ s aging services landscape.
I am grateful to see the ways in which the Governor ’s budget responds to the
recommendations
of the Elder Justice Coordinating Partnership
, allocating
$4M to bolster Adult Protective
Services’  work as “first responders” in addressing situations of abuse; expand resources for civil
legal services to protect the rights of older adults; and make permanent Maine’ s innovative Elder
Service Connections (ESC) Program.  Together , these investments will strengthen safeguards in
place for Maine’ s older adults,
one in ten
of whom
will experience some form of abuse, neglect,
or exploitation, and ensure that the state is well-prepared for the rapid growth in residents aged
60 or older .
Since 2019, the Elder Service Connections Program, a cross-sector partnership between Maine’ s
APS or ganization and the nonprofit Elder Abuse Institute of Maine, has been working with older

adults across Maine to ensure that critical needs are met in a way that honors their wishes and
promotes their well-being.  In an environment of overburdened systems of care, our program
provides older adults and their families with wraparound services that help to meet their longer
term goals and needs.  Where APS caseworkers focus on the immediate safety needs of an older
person, a referral to the ESC program allows an Advocate to develop deep relationships and
meaningful change with clients, important steps in our evidence-based intervention model.
Working collaboratively with clients and their supporters, our Advocates strengthen family and
social supports and help to mitigate the risk factors faced by these individuals.  In fact,
research
shows that the ESC program ef fectively reduces repeated referrals
, lessening the burden on APS
and allowing them to serve more clients.
The people we support through ESC are our neighbors – the 83-year -old man in Oxford County
whose worsening dementia causes him to wander at night; the older couple in York County
whose retirement savings have been gutted by a child’ s misappropriation, leaving them at risk of
foreclosure; the 79-year -old Aroostook County woman who was physically assaulted by a
caregiver and no longer trusts anyone to come into her home to assist with personal care.  These
examples represent just a few of the stories that more than 400 clients to date have shared with
our Advocates, underscoring the fact that elder abuse doesn’ t manifest in just one way or af fect
only “other people.”
It’s also not uncommon for clients to tell us that the work we did in partnership with them
“saved” their lives.  To quote one client: “My Advocate came into my life at a time when things
were very dark, and I didn’ t think I deserved any help.  But she stuck with me, and because she
treated me with respect and dignity , I began to see myself and my opportunities very dif ferently .”
There truly are no better words to reinforce the importance of our work and the ur gency for
continued funding.
I’m thankful for Governor Mills’  vision and commitment to Maine’ s older adults and your
consideration of my testimony .  I encourage you to advance the biennial budget before you with
full funding for health aging programs, including the investments necessary to support those
individuals who, like our clients, are at greatest risk.
