l\'laineHe:1ltli 
Local Health Systems 
Fr-.1nklin Community 
I-"lo-.=.lth Network 
Llncolnl lealth 
Mzlinel-"lealth Care At l lome 
Mztllie Belr.1\»'ior:1l l"ieultlicurc 
Mcmo|'ial Hospital 
Muiiic l\“lcdical Center 
i\/lid C<.>11st —Purkview Ilcalth 
N(,)l'DX 
Pen Bay l\/ledicnl Center 
Southern l\’laine Health Care 
\'\/Aldo County General Hospital 
\*Vcstc-rn i\"l~.\ine Health 
Part ofthe 
l\"laincHcaltl\ Family 
l\"laineHcaltli /\cc0untable 
Care Qrganizutioii 
l\’lz1inel-lcalth :\i‘iiliatcs 
l\’laine(§ener-.11 Health 
New l"‘lnglaml RCl];ll7llllI1llIl()[l 
llo.<pit;1l of Portland 
St. Mary' s Health Systein l\/lainel-iealth 
Testimony of Katie F ullam Harris, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 258, “An Act to Make Uniﬁed Appropriations 
and Allocations for the Expenditures of State Government, 
General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of 
State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, 
June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
Thursday, February 23, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Baldacci, Representative 
Meyer and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services, I am 
Katie Fullam Harris, Chief Government Affairs Ofﬁcer at MaineHealth, andI 
am here in overall support of the investments included in the Governor ’s 
proposed Biemiial Budget and to note several areas in which additional 
investments or changes should be considered. 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-proﬁt health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to cormnunities throughout Maine and New 
Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support our vision 
of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest in America” by 
providing a range of services from primary and specialty physician services toa 
continuum of behavioral health care services, community and tertiary hospital 
care, home health care and a lab. 
My testimony below is broken out by proposed Budget section. 
Background: 
As we have noted in previous testimony before your committees this Session, 
MaineHealth, like all health care providers, is experiencing signiﬁcant 
challenges maintaining access to the continuum of services upon which our 
communities rely. Stafﬁng shortages resulted in contract labor costs that were 
nearly six times our budget in FY ’22, costing our hospitals more than $284 
million. At the same time, other providers, including those that provide long- 
term care and residential treatment, have been forced to close beds and reduce 
access to those services that are critical to ensuring that patients can be 
discharged from our hospitals to the next appropriate levels of care, allowing 
hospital beds to be available for those who truly need hospital-level services.
1 
110 Free Street ' Portland, l\'lE 04101 Plmne: 2()7—(>(>1~70l)l Fax: 207—(»6l—702‘) mzlinehealth mg
MaineHealth has invested in efforts to address this crisis, including: 
0 Hiring contract labor to staff 41 additional long-term care beds at one of our nursing homes, 
at a $1 million loss each month; 
0 Maintaining access to a full complement of outpatient and inpatient behavioral health 
services, in spite of accruing signiﬁcant losses;' 
v Increasing our use of expensive contract labor at a cost of over $284 million last year alone; 
and 
0 Increasing wages for our care team ﬁve times since January of 2021, totaling $223 million. 
These investments have been necessary in order to continue meeting the needs of our 
communities; and they have come with a cost. In FY ’22, the MaineHealth system sustained a 
net loss of $45 million after including $102 million of Covid relief funds. We are grateful for the 
one-time support for hospitals and nursing facilities that was included in the Supplemental 
Budget, however we will be forced to make painful choices that could impact access to care if 
we do not experience additional relief in the coming months. 
§pecific Budget Initiatives: 
We are grateful to the Administration for proposing a budget that lays a new and much improved 
ﬂoor for services that are provided to our most vulnerable populations in Maine. The 
combination of Cost of Living Adjustments (COLAs), MaineCare rate updating, and a number of 
new initiatives will help disintegrating services to stabilize, however more support is needed to 
rebuild a system of health care services that will meet the needs of Maine’s population. There 
continue to be serious gaps in the care continuum that require short-term attention, even while 
broader systemic change is planned. 
Behavioral Health 
The behavioral health investments included in this Budget create a signiﬁcantly improved ﬂoor 
for MaineCare rates; however, some important services did not receive rates sufﬁcient to cover 
the substantial increased costs of wages. Many are services that have shrunk already, and absent 
adequate investment, we could risk losing them altogether. 
The following represents services provided by Maine Behavioral Healthcare that continue to 
sustain signiﬁcant losses after the rate setting process:
2
I 
is 
ti 
ll 
ll 
it 
i)
2 
ll 
it 
1: Service MeCare 
Section Est annual 
add'l 
revenue 
(annualized) FY22 adjusted surplus (deﬁcit) 
restated to adjust for MaineCare 
rates 
ASSERTIV E COMMUNITY 17 1,068,00 0 (26,677) 
MULTI SYSTEMIC THERA TREATMENT (ACT) 
P Y 65 72,000 (173,126) 
OUTPATIENT THERAPY 65 180,000 (1,951,062) 
SUBSTANCE USE DISORD ER 65 36,000 (1,076,759) 
OUTPATIENT PSYCHIAT 65 0 (3,706,659) RY 
These services provide a foundation for community behavioral health systems of care. Maine is 
experiencing an epidemic of overdose deaths, yet Maine Behavioral Health’s program operates 
in the red. As our state is experiencing a mental health crisis, our psychiatry program is 
continuing to incur substantial losses. Though Maine Behavioral Health has maintained these 
services at signiﬁcant loss, we cannot provide the access needed to meet community demand. In 
2022, we were forced to turn away 41% of referrals to outpatient psychiatry and 46% of referrals 
to outpatient therapy. 
In addition to insufﬁcient access for outpatient community services, residential treatment for 
children who clinically need that _level of care remains extremely difﬁcult to access. Children 
who do not need inpatient levels of treatment are left at hospital Emergency Departments for 
days, weeks, and sometimes months awaiting placement in a residential facility. In fact, DHHS 
recently released a report that found 861 children languished in hospital Emergency Departments 
across the state for an average of 7 to l0 days. And we are told that a signiﬁcant number of beds 
are licensed but not staffed. 
While we appreciate that the Budget includes support for children ’s mental health services, there 
is no line item to address the immediate need of supporting residential providers to a degree that 
they can pay staff and reopen beds to meet the needs of our vulnerable children. We encourage 
the Committees to ensure that the funds in the Budget are sufﬁcient to meet the immediate needs 
of these vulnerable children going forward. 
Long-Term Care 
Like behavioral health, long-term care providers are struggling to maintain access for their 
communities. But they, too, are experiencing unprecedented stafﬁng challenges that have been 
exacerbated by rates that have not remained competitive in this economy. According to a report
3
prepared by the Muskie School of Public Service, 1248 nursing level beds were closed as of 
November 15, 2022. The result: hospital patients who are ready to be discharged but for which 
there is no safe discharge option “live” in the hospital for extended periods of time. A mid- 
February report from Maine Medical Center identiﬁed 66 patients who were ready for discharge 
but for which there was not a residential option available. Their inpatient stays ranged from 8 to 
359 days, with an average length of stay of 89 days. 
The Barron Center, a City-owned nursing facility in Portland, has 219 licensed beds and a census 
of just 92. Maine Medical Center has between 65-70 patients on any given day who are cleared 
for discharge, yet there is no access to the appropriate level of residential care they need. The 
crisis at Maine Medical Center has become so severe that the hospital recently announced that it 
is starting a new program called “Transitional Care Communities ” which will cohort the 
hospital ’s long-stay patients and introduce an activities coordinator who Will help the patient 
maintain cognitive, physical, and emotional well-being while awaiting appropriate placement. 
There is something wrong with this picture: the hospital is being forced to support services that 
should appropriately be provided in a residential setting, yet the residential providers are not able 
to open the access needed to meet the needs of their cormnunities. 
Hospitals have become the backstop for failing community systems. In turn, patients who need 
hospital level care are experiencing reduced access to inpatient care, as we do not have sufficient 
beds to meet their needs. Cancelled surgeries and delayed care have signiﬁcant health 
consequences as patients are unable to access screenings and surgeries early in a disease 
progression. And patients who are unable to move to appropriate levels of care create ﬁnancial 
strain on hospitals as the patient flow is severely interrupted; a bed that should accommodate six 
patients in a month instead accommodates just one. And in most instances, the hospital receives 
only the case rate for those patients, absorbing the cost of the additional days they languish in the 
inpatient setting. And, most importantly, these gaps have forced patients to stay in the most 
restrictive setting long after they are ready for discharge to lower levels of care. 
We strongly support the premise behind the Department ’s MaineCare rate setting process. ii 
the methodology should take into account real time rising costs experienced b _v_providers to 
ensure that new rates reﬂect the costs experienced bgproviders. For example, the Legislature had 
to add language to the Supplemental Budget to ensure that the revised inpatient psychiatric rates 
are set at cost, as insufﬁcient funds have been allocated to meet that threshold and we were told 
that we would receive only 80% of cost, as a result. 
Recommendation: Ensure that MaineCare set a ﬂoor of 100% of the cost of delivering a 
service, and particularly for those services that rely heavily upon MaineCare for funding, as 
failure to fully fund these services will undoubtedly result in greater reductions in access going 
forward.
4
1
1 
it 
ll 1
1
s 
K1 
ti 
,3. 
;,§ 
1‘ 
i.
1 
21 
st 
it
1 
3 The Govemor’s proposed Budget also includes important investments in long-term care and 
behavioral health. While we strongly support these investments, it is important to ask: 
1. Will they be sufficient to increase access by opening beds that are closed? 
2. Will the rate structures sustain services into the future? 
3. Will the investments increase access to appropriate levels of care for those who need 
support? 
4. Will the investments ﬁll identiﬁed gaps in services? For example, will the children ’s 
behavioral health rates support the development of secure residential treatment 
facilities needed to meet the needs of some children who are languishing in our EDs 
or in out of state placements? 
We must invest in the services and supports that are needed to address the crises we face today as 
well as the longer-tenn system development that is needed to meet the needs of our population in 
the future. 
Workforce Development (FAME Section of the Proposed Budget) 
MaineHealth strongly supports the investment in loan repayment programs, and thanks the 
Administration for proposing the increased investment in health care workers (pg. 297). 
We Would note that the proposed Budget fails to include funds for 2024-2025 to support the 
highly successful Doctors for Maine’s Future scholarship program (pg. 294). This program isa 
public-private partnership between the State and Maine medical schools that have programs in 
Maine that provides annual scholarships to Maine students who attend these medical school 
programs. In turn, the medical school programs must match the scholarships, 1:1. Thus far, 148 
Doctors for Maine’s Future scholars have graduated from medical school, and of the 60 who are 
now employed, 58% are in Maine. The program is working! 
Recommendation: Provide $1 million in funding in FY 24-25 to the Doctors for Maine’s Future 
program to provide scholarships to ten additional Maine students who attend Maine-based 
medical school. 
Hospital Tax 
The budget rebases the hospital tax to 2019-2020 and proposes a corresponding reduction to the 
supplemental payment to hospitals (A3 67-368). In 2022, MaineHealth paid $51,268,871 in 
hospital tax, and received $40,143,180 in supplemental payments, resulting in a net loss of 
$11,125,691.
5
Recommendation: Given the signiﬁcant ﬁnancial challenges facing Maine’s hospitals, we 
request that the supplemental payment be increased to fully offset the net loss of the tax to 
Maine’s hospitals. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our appreciation for the investments included in the 
Governor ’s proposed Budget as Well as our experience with the gaping holes that exist in the 
care continuum today. The proposed Budget sets a good path forward, and we strongly 
encourage the Legislature to build upon the Budget and ﬁll the holes that remain. 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer questions.
6
