Testimony of Katie Ashley, Resident of Orono and University of Maine Graduate Student 
Representative to the UMS Board of Trustees, In Support of the Funding Provided in the 
Governor ’s FY24-25 Budget Proposal for the University of Maine System — Feb. 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, and members of 
the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations & Financial Affairs and Education & Cultural 
Affairs. My name is Katie Ashley, and I am a second year PhD student in plant science at the 
University of Maine. My research, which your investment in the University of Maine System and the 
Maine Economic Improvement Fund supports, currently focuses on innovative ways to improve soil 
health and consequently increase potato yields for farmers, including those in Maine.~ 
I am originally from Florida and grew up in a ﬁfth-generation citrus-growing family. I still love soil 
under my ﬁngernails as much now as I did growing up. However, challenges Within the citrus industry 
eventually resulted in my entire family shifting into other sectors. Like so many young people raised in 
agricultural families, I too was encouraged to consider a career in another ﬁeld. So, I earneda 
bachelor ’s degree in biology with a minor in environmental studies and planned to work in the health 
ﬁeld. Following the completion of my undergraduate degree and work in an orthopedic surgeon’s 
ofﬁce, I served in both the Peace Corps and Amen'Corps, before deciding it was time to return to 
school. 
Before I came here to attend UMaine, I had never even visited New England, but the opportunity to 
conduct meaningful hands-on research in Maine’s iconic wild blueberry industry was an opportunity 
too good to be true. To say my family was surprised is an understatement. But Maine felt right and was 
a nearly natural ﬁt for myself and my partner. I eamed my master’s degree in plant pathology, while at 
the same time living in a warm and welcoming community. Following the completion of my master’s 
degree, We moved away so I could work at North Carolina State University Cooperative Extension. 
However, when the desire returned to pursue another graduate degree, the decision was easy, even if it 
required another thousand-mile move. I am now pursuing a PhD with hopes to continue serving 
Maine’s agriculture industry through a career with UMaine Cooperative Extension. . 
At UMaine, I’ve been able to carry out independent research, and explore innovative solutions for 
agricultural problems, including a project which I am particularly excited about that unites the blue and 
green economies here in Maine and utilizes recovered lobster shell waste and repurposes it as a soil 
amendment to improve plant growth, and potentially suppress soilborne diseases. This is exciting work 
and exempliﬁes the potential solutions that can be unlocked within our state with your support of public 
university education and research. 
My UMaine education is giving me the opportunity to explore my curiosities, cultivate my natural 
affinity to agriculture and do great things for Maine. The funds you provide to UMS to keep public 
higher education and world class research learning affordable and accessible are critical components of 
developing the Workforce within Maine and strengthening innovation within essential industries, such 
as agriculture, which feeds our growing population, sustains our natural resources, and supports jobs 
especially in rural communities. 
Like so many other graduate students I represent to the System’s Board of Trustees, I am appreciative 
of the opportunities UMaine has provided me thanks to your past investment and I look forward to give 
back to this state by living and working here after commencement. I urge you to expand investment in 
UMS education and research as the Governor proposed in her budget so that others, and Maine, can 
beneﬁt from our incredible public university system. 
Thank you for your time.
