February 10, 2023
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs & 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business- In Support of Maine 
Development Foundation Funding
RE: LD 258 - An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 
30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025
Dear Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement & Business:
My name is Katie Shorey and I am the Director of Engagement for
Live + Work in Maine
(LWM). 
As an employer-led non-profit, Live and Work in Maine’s mission is to increase awareness about 
the great career opportunities that exist in Maine, and promote the world-class quality of life 
Mainers enjoy. We partner with employers, communities, nonprofits and individuals to develop 
and execute programming, events, marketing campaigns, and other initiatives to support the 
Maine employment brand, raise awareness of Maine as a career destination, and ultimately 
attract and retain the talented individuals Maine employers need to continue thriving into the 
future.
Our key partners are the young professional groups that make up the Realize Maine Network 
(RMN). RMN has been instrumental in cultivating active groups of people in communities across 
the state. These organizations are providing events, networks, resources and community to 
young professionals in our regions. This type of work is critical in helping individuals plant roots 
and stay in Maine. Though much of our work is focused on talent attraction, we are also very 
dedicated to efforts surrounding talent retention and RMN partner organizations are helping us 
achieve that goal.
If I were to take off my “work” hat and put on my “personal” hat, I am a Mainer who grew up in a 
small, 400-person town called Sweden near the Bridgton/Fryeburg area. As a young person I 
was encouraged to leave the state to pursue a career. I didn’t know the types of job 
opportunities that existed in my own state - and or what was possible for my future. After college 
I wasn’t aware of the young professional groups in Maine I could be part of, but through LWM’s 
partnership with RMN we are helping to change that. A major piece of our talent attraction and 
retention efforts is to support young professional organizations as they are networks of people 
who are Maine’s future leaders.
I strongly encourage you to approve and continue funding for the Realize Maine Network. Its 
mission and the groups it supports and convenes is a critical partner of our work as it relates to 
building the future workforce of Maine.
Thank you for your time and consideration.

Sincerely,
Katelyn (Katie) Shorey 
Director of Engagement,
Live + Work in Maine 
katie@liveandworkinmaine.com 
Cell: 207-831-6366 
Address: 93 Pleasant Street, Brunswick ME 04011

