Hello committee chairs, and members. My name is Katrina Ray -Saulis and I live in Augusta. I am an 
adjunct instructor, a member of MSEA -SEIU Local 1989, and the union chapter president for the 
adjuncts of the Maine Community College System. I’m testifying o n my own time on LD258.  
 
I know that I share many of my colleagues' feelings when I say that we are concerned about where the 
funding for the free community college program will be spent. We have seen some amazing students 
come through our classrooms beca use of this program, and we want them to keep on coming, but it can 
not be ignored that their education is being carried on the backs of underpaid, overworked adjuncts. It 
also can not be ignored that the majority of adjuncts are women.  
 
I am a product of  Maine’s community colleges. I have spoken here before about how my education at 
CMCC helped pull me out of generational poverty and recurring homelessness. I cherish this program 
and these schools. It is because of that experience that I am deeply concern ed about the fact that in an 
educational institution the majority of the educators are also the lowest paid people on campus.  
 
Adjuncts have the same professional level qualifications as full -time faculty members, and in a lot of 
cases we also have the sa me workload. We have adjunct faculty members in MCCS with ivy league 
degrees, PhDs, piles of publications, and decades of teaching experience. We have adjuncts who have 
taught every single semester for decades, and yet are not considered permanent employee s. On top of 
that our adjuncts have the same drive and passion to serve our student population as full -time faculty 
do. As one of my colleagues says frequently, we deserve equal pay for that equal work.  
 
I have watched over and over as full -time faculty r etire, and are replaced by adjunct faculty. On the rare 
occasion when a full -time position has opened up, that position is usually filled by people from outside 
of the college. Not one adjunct has been promoted in my department in my 5 years teaching, desp ite 
the fact that we all have proved semester upon semester that we are qualified for the job. This is the 
trend across all seven campuses where the last estimate I saw was anywhere between 60 and 75% of 
courses are currently being taught by adjuncts depen ding on the department. I don’t have the exact 
numbers on that but Representative Dodge, if you get that data I’d love to circle back. I can confirm that 
an adjunct like myself, who teaches four 3 credit courses a semester, which is the minimum full -time 
faculty are required to teach, earns less than $24,000 a year, and they earn more than twice what we 
earn.   
 
One adjunct recently told me, “I imagine myself as a volunteer, and I treat this like any other volunteer 
opportunity, because when I factor in the  hours I spend teaching, the wages are so low per hour that if I 
don’t treat it as volunteer work I feel badly about myself.”   
 
Adjuncts are teaching in these positions without healthcare options, paid time off, sick pay, or 
guaranteed employment. The titl e of adjunct, once used for temporary employees just helping out here 
and there, is now largely the only position available to us. On top of that we work two, three, and in the 
case of one adjunct I spoke with last week, four other jobs to supplement our i ncome. If we want to 
attract instructors to these schools the only way to do that is to offer actual careers, and stop relying so 
heavily on adjuncts.   
 
It is essential that funding be used to add full -time faculty positions at MCCS, and that the majority  of 
those positions go to those of us who are already doing that work. On top of that, this committee needs 
to guarantee this funding is used to increase adjunct pay, as all adjuncts deserve professional level pay 
for doing professional level work. We are doing the same work as full -time permanent faculty, and we 
deserve the same wages and respect.   
 
Thank you.  
 
