1
Testimony before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee, and Agricultural, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee
Neither for Nor Against of LD 258
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025
February 28, 2023
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee, and Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee.
I am Keith Crowley, Vice President of Program Services and Risk Management at Chewonki and 
a member of the Maine Outdoor School for All network. I live in Topsham.  I am submitting 
testimony neither for nor against LD 258, the Governor’s proposed fiscal year 2024-2025 biennial 
budget bill.  
Maine Outdoor School for All is a network of outdoor education organizations that provide 
overnight outdoor school programming. The network began in 2010 with the Chewonki 
Foundation, The Ecology School, The University of Maine Cooperative Extension, and later was 
joined by Schoodic Institute.  We will be expanding to other outdoor centers in the near future. 
The goal 13 years later, is the same and as simple as it was in year one… to ensure outdoor school 
is available to all Maine students.  
We are working closely with Senator Brenner as the sponsor and a group of bipartisan legislators 
as the cosponsors for a legislative proposal to fund Outdoor School Programming for All Maine 
Students. This is based on outdoor school for all models currently in place in the states of 
Washington and Oregon. 
An outdoor school program is a multi-day, hands-on field trip that combines team building, 
environmental science, and nature-based education. This can mean a lot of different things to 
2different people across the country, but our programs have a shared outdoor education model based 
on the following principles: 
Use systems thinking, ecology, and sustainability integrated into our program models
Provide three-day or longer residential (overnight) environmental learning programs
Couple outdoor and in-school experiences over multiple years
Foster teacher-driven professional development through ongoing collaboration
Have a robust social-emotional curriculum
Have a foundation in strong science and community-based/civics curriculum
For example, RSU 1 (Bath, Morse, Phippsburg, Woolwich) partnered with an outdoor school 
program and brought their 8th grade students on a multi-day paddle in the bay just miles from their 
town. The students paddled to Beal Island and found their art teacher waiting for them. The teacher 
led the students through an art lesson that captured the uniqueness of the natural surroundings and 
ecological systems. These students later showcased this artwork proudly at the local library during 
a celebration of learning. 
Our network of four Outdoor School providers currently serves 87 different schools across the 
State. We estimate that less than a quarter of Maine’s middle schoolers are provided with an 
overnight outdoor school program experience.  Children not receiving this program are at a severe 
disadvantage for three main reasons. 
First, outdoor education supports the child’s educational journey. Significant research supports the 
benefits of outdoor school and supports increased achievement and comprehension in math and 
science; improved testing scores and attendance; motivation to learn increases and class 
performance improves; and the programming directly supports systems thinking and STEM 
(science, technology, engineering, math) learning and meets state education curriculum 
standards.1 
Second, outdoor education also supports the child’s emotional and mental health. In 2019, a 
Journal of American Medical Association Pediatric study found that Maine children have the 
highest percentage of mental health problems in the U.S.2 This has only been exacerbated by the 
effects of Covid-19. All children would benefit from spending more time outside, and outdoor 
education helps boost a child's self-esteem by providing opportunities for them to gain leadership 
skills and make them more self-sufficient. 
Here is an example of what happen when one child returned home from outdoor school. On a rainy 
day, a mother offered to drive her son a quarter mile to school so that he could stay dry. Instead, 
he put on his rain jacket, and said "Mom, I just camped outside for 4 days, this rain is nothing, I’m 
walking." This young person learned how to properly equip himself for the elements and gained 
the confidence to be self-sufficient. 
1   For more information please see this brief prepared by an Outdoor School for All program in Oregon State. This 
brief was based on a literature review conducted by the Washington State Office of Superintendent of Public 
Instrucution. http://grayff.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/Empirical-Evidence-Supporting-Benefits-of-Outdoor-
School-and-Experiential-Learning-Programs_March-2015.pdf.
2 For more information please see the article from the Journal of American Medical Association Pediatric . 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2724377.
3Finally, outdoor education supports the child’s connection to Maine’s incredible outdoor heritage. 
Even beyond the important learning objectives, outdoor education provides opportunities for 
children to be outside learning about the bounty of Maine.  Like the depth of its marine and 
estuarine resources and how to promote and develop Maine coastal fishing industries. Or the 
importance of protection and management of fish, wildlife, and habitat. Or the value of our 
agricultural and forest management programs. Or how to safely enjoy the outdoors to foster a 
lifelong love of getting outside. All of this leads to teaching our youngest citizens about the magic 
of Maine. 
We think that all Maine students should benefit from the power of outdoor education. 
We also think that teachers and schools benefit from outdoor education. We work with the schools 
who are currently accessing our programs before and after their field program to integrate learning 
objectives in their curriculum. This allows for lasting educational impacts and helps support 
teacher’s learning objectives. We’ve also found that teachers’ relationship with their students 
grows after an outdoor education program, because it allows each to experience the other in a new 
light. For example, we have had students and teachers who struggle to build a relationship inside 
the classroom completely change course after an outdoor school program because they tackled a 
new challenge together that the outdoors can offer but the traditional classroom cannot. 
At the end of each experience, teachers commonly reflect about seeing their students in new lights. 
They use phrases like "I never knew she could do that", "It was phenomenal to see Johnny be so 
eager to learn during the saltmarsh lesson", or "I feel like I learned some really great tips on how 
to engage students back at school."
We also know that our community benefits from outdoor education programs. For example, it 
benefits in regard to workforce development. Outdoor education programs introduce students to 
natural-resource-based careers like technical jobs in farming, fishing, and forestry. These 
industries need a skilled workforce and introducing these jobs to children in middle school enables 
them to get excited and envision a future career path in the fields, forests, or waters of Maine. 
Further, the states that have implemented these programs have already seen that middle schoolers 
who participated in their program have a continued interest in outdoor education and have started 
internships for high schoolers to teach in the outdoor education programs. And this doesn’t just 
support future employment; it would have a significant impact on full-time employment jobs 
opportunities for people in Maine right now. Oregon, with about triple the number of students that 
Maine has, noted that outdoor school programming would support more than 600 jobs and more 
than 27 million dollars of income in Oregon on an annual basis. 
Our bill, LR 1018, is yet to be printed, but it has a likely fiscal note of $6.5 million that would fund 
a two-night, three-day program for 16,000 students which is the estimated cohort of students in a 
grade. This would allow for all Maine students to access an outdoor education program. This 
funding would be directed to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry which 
would then work with the University of Maine Cooperative Extension to distribute grant fundings 
to the outdoor schools. The outdoor schools would use those funds to partner with schools to get 
the students and teachers to their centers. 
4This bill would also support research opportunities so we can study the impact of outdoor 
education in Maine on our students, teachers and communities. Outdoor school is quickly gaining 
ground across the country, and Maine has the opportunity to be a leader in this field.
I began pursuing a career in outdoor education at Unity College 20 years ago, and I have seen the 
incredible impacts outdoor education has on children, teachers, and families. I must tell you that 
pursuing this bill has been an incredibly rewarding process with Maine leaders responding 
positively and eager to share their outdoor school stories. 
Thank you for considering this important mission in the budget this year. And please reach out if 
you have any additional questions. 

