Sponsor: Sen. Stacy Brenner 
dwall<er§ci*preti.com 
March 3, 2023 
LR 1018, Act To Support Outdoor School for All Maine Students 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 12 MRSA c. 928 is enacted to read: 
CHAPTER 928 
Immersive Outdoor Education 
§ 12864. Deﬁnitions‘ 
As used in thischapter. unless the context otherwise indicates. the following terms have the 
following meanings. 
_1_. Fund. "Fund" means the Outdoor School ‘for All Maine Students Fund established in section 
12867.'
. 
2. Program. "Program" means the Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program 
established in section 12866. 
Q. Outdoor School for All Program. Means an irnrnersive outdooreducation program 
offering outdoor education in a multiple day and overnight setting that involves students in 
experiential, holistic. interdisciplinary learning, including hands-on engagement. observation and 
discovery,_problem solving, teamwork, citizenship, reﬂection. self-awareness. responsibility and 
a strong academic component by encouraging intellectual curiosity, supporting overall academic 
achievement, linking science to other subjects and emphasizing connections between individual 
and community responsibility, health, environmental and natural resources issues, and the 
economy. 
Q. Students. “Students ” means publicly funded students enrolled in grades 4 through 8 in 
schools in the State. 
5. Student Class. “Student class” means the grade chosen by the sending school district and 
overnight environmental program provider. based on the community needs and curriculum, 
which will either be the 4"‘ . 5"‘ . 6“‘ . 7”" or 8m grade in their district. This grade will become the 
ﬁrst class of students involved in the program for that district and subsequent years will occur in 
the same grade such that every child has an opportunity for this program.» 
6. Overnight outdoor education program provider. “Overnight outdoor education program 
provider ” means a 501(c)_(3) organization that: 
A. Pursues a sustainable funding model;' 
B. Utilizes overnight environmental learning experiences. including lessons. meals. and on- 
campus living;t 
.i 
C. Engages in safe and age-appropriate activities; 
D. Pledges to provide equitable access to students in Maine; 
E. Partners with schools and teachers to access programming; 
F. Uses the outdoors and local ecosystems as the primary context to support learning; 
G. Primarily focuses on Maine outdoor heritagg. science. natural resources. and sustainability, as 
the core focal points of curricular offeringg; -‘ 
H. Trains educators in educational strategies and ﬁeld work; 
l9796S65.l
Sponsor: Sen. Stacy Brenner 
£i\Y3ll{ €l'{£iZQf6ti.C0l1 ‘§ 
March 3, 2023 
l. Operates in accordance with requirements set forth within Title section 12863 for educational 
trip leaders; and‘ 
J. Participates in an evaluation program that seeks to understand current and future demographics 
of students participating in the programs. 
§ 12865. Findings. 
A. Since the 1960s. many Maine students have attended Outdoor School programs. unique week- 
long, ﬁeld science programs giving students the opportunity to study natural sciences and 
responsible use of natural resources. including the Maine Outdoor Learning Initiative 
programming. 
B. Currently, less than a quarter of Maine students are able to attend Outdoor School 
programming, with rural and lower income districts having been particularly challenged in 
accessing these experiences. 
C. Every Maine student in the 4"‘ . 5"‘ , 6* . 7‘h’ or 8"‘ grade should have the opportunity to attend 
an outdoor school program or a comparable outdoor education program. 
D. Outdoor School builds self-suf ﬁciency and leadership skills, helps students understand the 
interdependence of Maine’s rural and urban areas, develops critical thinking skills, and improves 
school attendance and retention rates. 
E. Outdoor School for All Maine Students provides a unique setting that allows students to build 
conﬁdence by demonstrating strengths that may have been less apparent in the classroom setting 
and provides teachers with opportunities to see their students and peers in a new light. allowing 
for relationship building that adds to the in-classroom experience. 
H. Therefore, the Legislature intends to establish a statewide grant program and corresponding 
outdoor education program to address those needs and to ensure that all students have a chance 
to beneﬁt from an outdoor school education. 
§ 12866. Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program 
1. Program established. The Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program is established, 
and the University of Maine Cooperative Extension shall administer the program to assist school 
districts in partnering with overnight outdoor education program providers to create and provide 
outdoor school for all programming for students. 
2. Purposes of the program. The program is established to provide grants in order to 
accomplish the following:I 
A. Support immersive outdoor education program experiences for students that engage and 
challenge every student by_providing individualized learning opportunities that 
enhance student learning, and increase student achievement especially in science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics; and seek to support students and teachers to combat learning loss 
from the effects of Covid-l9. 
B. Support 
l. Students understanding of conserving and developing marine and estuarine resources; 
to conduct and sponsor scientiﬁc research; to promote and develop the Maine coastal 
ﬁshing industries; 
19796565.]
Sponsor: Sen. Stacy Brenner 
dwalker§éZ2preti.coirr 
March 3, 2023 
2. Students understanding of the protection and management of ﬁsh,_game and non-game 
wildlife. and habitats. as well as restoration of endangered species; and safe enioyment of 
Maine's outdoors; and/or'
~ 
3. Students understanding of agricultural. conservation. and forest and land management; 
and of the public health. and well-being of domestic animals; r 
C. Support students learning about careers in Maine’s outdoors and natural resources industries. 
D. Support the health and wellness of students in the State by developing in the students an 
gppreciation for education and recreation in the outdoors: and" 
E. Support collaboration between overnight outdoor education program providers and schools 
and teachers. _' 
3. Reguirements 
A. Overnightenvironmental program provider. Grants may only be received by an overnight 
environmental program provider as deﬁned in section 9924(6)_, which has partnered witha 
school or school district. 
B. Programming. The program will consist of hands-on learning experiences for the identiﬁed 
student class for three to ﬁve days in duration and up to four nights: are daypprograms when 
overnight programs are impractical due to health. cultural. or capacity considerations; and havea 
focus on outdoor education aligned with Maine learning standards and the development of social 
and emotional skills.' 
§ 12867. Outdoor School for All Maine Students Fund 
The Outdoor School for All Maine Students Fund is established under the jurisdiction and 
control of the Department of Agriculture. Conservation and Forestry. The Department will direct 
funding to the Universityof Maine Cooperative Extension to administer the grant funds and the 
program. The fund is non-lapsing and may be invested in the same manner as permitted for 
investment of other state funds.' 
1. Use of fund. p- 
A. Beginning in the 2023-24 school year. the Department of Agriculture. Conservation and 
Forestry will determine funding and direct funding to the University of Maine Cooperative . 
Extension to use the money in the fund to provide grants to overnight outdoor education 
providers for students to attend an overnight outdoor school program in an amount equal to the 
cost of attendance at the overnight outdoor school program for a two-night. three-day experience. 
The overnight environmental program providers shall partner with schools and districts in order 
to be eligible for the funds. In implementing student educational experiences under this chapter. 
the Department and the University of Maine Cooperative Extension shall ensure equitable access 
for students in all geographic regions and high levels of accessibility for students with 
disabilities.' 
B. The Department of Agriculture. Conservation and Forestry and University of Maine 
Cooperative Extension will be allotted appropriate funds for staff and administrative costs 
associated with managing the program. 
C. If funding from the government is limited. for any reason. their grants must be prioritized for 
schools and communities historically underserved by outdoor education. These schools and 
communities may include. but are not limited to. tribal nations. including tribal schools. migrant 
students. schools with high‘ populations of students who receive free and reduced-price lunches. 
l 9796565. l
Sponsor: Sen. Stacy Brenner 
dwalkei'G1>preti.coinA 
March 3, 2023 
rural and remote schools, students in alternative learning education environments, students of 
color, English language learner students and students receiving special education services. 
2. Sources of fund. The following must be paid into the fund:‘ 
A. All money appropriated or allocated by the Legislature for inclusion in the fund; 
B. All interest earned from investments of the fund: and 
C. Any money designated for deposit into the fund from any source._public or private. 
§ 12868. Reporting y 
A. The Department of Agriculture. Conservation and Forestry, University of Maine Cooperative 
Extension. and overnight outdoor education program .providers shall work together to develop an 
evaluation program that reports demographics of students to ensure equitable access and also’ 
seeks to develop longitudinal studies to understand the impacts of outdoor education on 
emotional, education and career trajectory_. 
B. Beginning in 2024, the University of Maine Cooperative Extension must submit an annual 
report to the committees havingjurisdiction in education, inland ﬁsheries and Wildlife with an 
evaluation of the program established by this chapter, with an emphasis on the accessibility of 
the program from a geographic, economic, ethnic. and disability focus, and the program’s effect 
on state workforce goals. - 
§ 12869. Advisory Committee 
A. The Department of Agriculture. Conservation and Forestry shall convene an advisory 
committee for the purpose of advising the Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program upon 
recommendations it desires to make and to seek new opportunities to ensure that Maine isia 
leader in outdoor education, including high school outdoor education career training_programs. 
B. When selecting the members of the committee, the Commissioner shall take into 
consideration geographic and demographic diversity and shall ensure that the committee has 
representatives of applicable agencies, University of Maine Cooperative Extension, outdoor' 
education provider community, the natural resources community, upper elementary and middle 
school education, and youth advocate position. A 
Sec. 2. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are made. 
Department of 
Outdoor School for All Maine Students Fund N183 
Initiative: Provides funds to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry for the 
funding of the University of Maine Cooperative Extension ’s administration and funding of the 
Outdoor School for All Maine Students program, which will provide grants to overnight outdoor 
education program providers partnering with schools and school districts to attend overnight 
outdoor education programs.V 
GENERAL FUND 2023-2024 2024-2025 2025-2026 
All Other $6,200,000 $6,200,000 $6,200,000 
GENERAL FUND TOTAL 
l9796565.l
Sponsor: Sen. Stacy Brenner 
dwalkei"§ci)1greti .com 
March 3, 2023 
SUMMARY , 
This bill establishes the Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program and Fund to support 
immersive outdoor education program experiences for publicly funded students in grades 4, 5, 6, 
7, or 8 in the State that operates in accordance with the Educational Trip Leader Program. 
Individual Maine students will be able to access the program once, and schools may access the 
funding annually. It provides grants for schools in the State to attend an overnight outdoor 
education program. Grants must be in an amount equal to the cost of attendance at an outdoor 
education program and must be distributed to schools in a manner that equitably ensures schools 
throughout the state attend overnight outdoor education programs. 
19796565. l
