Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, my name is Kellie D. Bailey. I am writing on my own personal time in support of LD 258, 
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from t he General Fund and Other Funds for the 
Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper 
Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025. In 2020, I left my job in public education after nearly 3 decades providing trauma informed speech 
therapy to children in Maine schools. It was my honor to join Commissioner Makin and to lead the state 
of Maine as the first Social Emotional Learning Specialist. Ove r the past 3 years I have had the privilege 
of working with some of the most dedicated human beings in the DOE and across the state. People who 
truly care first about people and building strong connections and relationships. This is the first time in 
the h istory of Maine education that we have prioritized social emotional learning and I was thrilled, 
energized, and impassioned to help bring this work forward. Within the first few weeks of accepting this 
job which came with a heavy responsibility of providin g statewide social emotional learning resources as 
well as training to administrators, educators,  and school staff in all things SEL, I was also informed that 
one of my colleagues had resigned and I would be expected to pick up 1/3 of her work responsibili ties. 
Part of my colleague’s job was to help schools follow bullying policy and to assist Maine families in equal 
access  to bullying law and resources. I was not trained in bullying prevention or bullying law. The other 
two thirds of her position were disp ersed to two of my co-workers,  none of us received training or 
compensation for this additional workload , the position was not filled and we continue to manage this 
lift to date.  Placing additional work assignments on the already full plates of MDOE emplo yees with 
little support, is not best practice. Within 1 years’ time, one of my colleagues who found it nearly 
impossible to perform the responsibilities of the job for which they were hired along with the added 
responsibilities for these new assignments, also resigned. Th at position remained unfilled for nearly  a 
year  and the hole left by their resignation fell to our team to carry.  In the 3 years that I have been in the 
MDOE  (all of which has been during one of the most unprecedented times in education d ue to the onset 
and continuation of COVID 19 ), several  of my colleagues have left the department to return to jobs 
either in Maine schools where they can earn similar pay  with greater time off, or to the private sector 
for higher pay . I am writing this to you to express my sincere concern with how my colleagues are 
contemplating, at alarming rates, the desire to leave state government service to return to the private 
sector because of wage disparity. The Maine Department of Education has specialized and ded icated 
employees who are dedicated to serving Maine schools in all capacities for the greater good of our 
youth . At the end of the day, regardless of how  rewarding the job, if we are not fairly compensated for 
the work we do, a pat on the back and a messag e of gratitude doesn’t help keep us motivated  the job 
for long.  Our highly skilled MDOE staff are leaving. We need to take a serious look at how we can turn 
this around. The work that we are doing here at the state is imperative to the future of our youth and 
humanity at large. By supporting our schools with folks who are dedicated and feeling well cared for by 
the department, we can continue to help schools do the work of ensuring that all youth know with 100% 
certainty that they are valued, safe, seen, ca red for, represented, loved and to know that they truly 
belong. That’s the work that we all do here collectively. I will continue to advocate for this work and to 
ask that we also be seen, cared for and valued for the work that we do every single day for t he 
betterment of all Maine people in our schools and communities.  
Thank you - 
Kellie D. Bailey, Northport Maine 02/12/2023  
