Testimony of Kelly Payson -Roopchand of Somerville before the 131 Legislature’s 
Appropriations & Financial Affairs Committee  
 
Good afternoon members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs Committee.  
 
My name is Kelly Payson -Roopchand, I am a resident of Somerville, and I am here 
today as both a farmer and a market organizer to express my support for the 
appropriation in the Governor's Budget to the Nutrition Incentive Fund.  
 
My family and I own and ope rate Pumpkin Vine Family Farm, a goat dairy in Somerville,  
and we sell 100% of our goat cheese, yogurt, and delicious smoothies  at farmers 
markets throughout the state.  
 
Farmers markets are celebrated for providing the freshest, most nutritious food to local 
communities – but they are also criticized as being accessible only to  the upper & 
middle class, those folks who can afford the higher price point of food that is prod uced 
by hand .  
 
The Maine Harvest Bucks program has changed that , by making fresh local food 
affordable for all.  
 
Over the past 7 years, our farm has sold at 7 farmers markets, only 4 of which offer 
MHB. Our very first farmers market, right here in August a, has one of the most 
successful MHB programs in the state.  
 
The difference between those markets that offer MHB and those that don’t are strikingly 
obvious in their customer composition. In those market s that don’t offer MHB, a  whole 
segment of the comm unity is missing .  
 
I miss the elderly customers, who unwrap their EBT card from a small bundle of cash,  
carefully budgeting for just one  quart of our delicious probiotic yogurt,  in order to support 
their digestive hea lth and immune system  
 
I miss the new mothers who come surrounded by a bevy of children, pushing a stroller  
overflowing with produce. Many have been sent by their pediatrician s to try goat’s milk 
for their babies , who have trouble digesting cow’s milk products.  
 
I miss the immigrants who are still learning English, who try to figure out what exactly I 
am selling, and suddenly smil e when I point to  a photo of a goat , reassured when I hand 
them a familiar  feta or goat cheese .  
 
Is this the world we want, where only some families are able to enjoy the fruits of the 
land?  
 
That is not why I became a farmer … 
and that is why I  support the  Maine Harvest Bucks program, because I have seen the 
difference it make s.  
 
With the current  decrease  in federal funding, I have joined  the fundraising committee for 
three of our markets . I will do whatever is necessary to support this critical program, but 
it has required a lot of time for meetings, filling out applications , and making appeals.  
 
At this  time of year , our farm  has a barn full of pregnant goats, that are due to start 
kidding in a few weeks, and honestly, it is stressful to be out pounding the streets when 
I need to be preparing to welcome an avalanche of baby goats and a flood of fresh milk. 
So far, the  fundraising team s have only  secured about $1500 in funding, which means  
we have almost $10,000 more to rais e…  
 
I don’t want to have to choose between caring for my animals and caring for my fr iends 
and neighbors, so I am asking for your leadership to support the appropriation in the 
Governor's Budget to the Nutrition Incentive Fund,  on a continuous  basis.  
 
This is  an opportunity to make a difference in so many lives…Please don’t miss it . 
 
 
 
