Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee; Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, m y name is Kerem Gungor. I am a senior envir onmental engineer at DEP Bureau 
of Land Resources.  I am writing this testimony to express my personal experience with engineer 
recruitment and share my personal thoughts with the Committee.  I am currently supervising two 
environmental engineers and one as sistant environmental engineer. I have two vacancies in my team: 
one environmental engineer, one assistant environmental engineer.  The Bureau of Land Resources 
relies on my team’s technical expertise to ensure that the land development projects are permitt ed in 
compliance with the state’s stormwater regulations so that their impact on Maine’s waters is mitigated.  
Since I assumed this supervisory position in March 2022, I tried to recruit for the vacant environmental 
engineer position which requires the succ essful candidate to have “professional engineer ” license issued 
by the State Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers.  None of the applicants was qualified for the 
position; hence, we could not move forward with interviews  and fill the position. Unfor tunately, this is a 
common occurrence. Before I assumed the senior environmental engineer position, the Bureau 
attempted to hire an environmental engineer. This attempt was also unsuccessful. Non -competitive 
salary is a major reason hampering recruitment. I must note that DEP provides 11% stipend on top of 
the base pay  for the engineers. Even the pay augmented with this stipend does not attract qualified 
professionals. Another evidence that demonstrates the non -competitive nature of the current pay 
schedule  is as follows: successful candidates almost always negotiate to start at a higher step since Step 
1 pay offered to new employees by policy is too low for most candidates to accept. Supervisory staff like 
me allocate a significant amount of their time into  employee recruitment efforts  and find themselves 
unable to fill vacancies due to the pay gap which is beyond their control.  
I believe that it is past time to address the pay gap and re -adjust the base pay schedules to eliminate the 
need for stopgap measu res like providing stipends for the engineers.  
I appreciate the opportunity to provide my personal testimony on this important issue.  
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
Kerem Gungor  
Oakland  
