TESTIMONY 
or , 
KIRK F. MOHNEY, mnncron 
MAINE msromc PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
And the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Hearing Date: February 13, 2023 
LD 258, An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government, and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 
2025. 
Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, and Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Kirk Molmey and I am the 
Director of the Maine Historic Preservation Connnission. I am here today to present 
testimony in support of those Departmental items presented in the FY 24-25 Biennial 
Budget. 
The Maine Historic Preservation Commission Was established by the Legislature in 1971 
to implement State policy to “preserve the architectural, historic and enviromnental 
heritage of the people of the State, and promote the cultural, educational and economic 
beneﬁts of these resources. . . .” 
The Commission ’s primary focus is the administration of the program of the National 
Historic Preservation Act of 1966 in Maine. Its duties in carrying out this program 
include: 
¢ Maintaining an inventory of the state's historic and archaeological resources; 
0 Nominating buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts to the National 
Register of Historic Places; and 
0 Reviewing and commenting on federally funded, licensed and permitted 
undertakings in Maine, as Well as certain projects permitted by the Maine 
Department of Environmental Protection and the Land Use Planning Commission. 
0 We assist the owners of income producing historic buildings to obtain federal and 
state historic rehabilitation tax credits; 
¢ We develop and maintain a statewide historic preservation plan, and We provide 
historic and archaeological resource data to municipalities engaged in local 
comprehensive planning; and 
1 We provide technical assistance to the public, non-proﬁt organizations, and 
governmental agencies at the local, state and federal levels.
1
PARTA 
HISTORIC COMMERCIAL REHABILITATION FUND 
The Part A request for the Maine Historic Preservation Commission — Historic 
Commercial Rehabilitation Fund may be found on page A-426. 
Program Description 
The federal historic rehabilitation tax credit program has been in 
existence since 1976, whereas the state credit has existed in its present form since 2008. In 
the period from 2016-2022, 63 rehabilitation projects in Maine resulted in a total 
investment of over $329 million dollars. 
The account is established to receive fees for the certiﬁcation of proj ects that 
qualify for Maine state rehabilitation tax credits. However, the Commission has not 
instituted a fee schedule for the following reasons: 1) to date, most of the projects have 
used the federal credit; 2) the state pro gram’s rules do not require a separate application 
and review for projects that seek the federal credit; 3) federal funds support agency staff 
that administer the federal program; and 4) the level of activity for both the federal and 
state programs has not reached a volume that requires additional staff. 
FY 2024-2025 Budget 
The request for other special revenue allocation is $500 in both FY23-24 and 
FY24-25. 
Budget Initiative 
There is no budget initiative for this program. 
PARTA 
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMIVIISSION 
The Part A request for the Maine Historic Preservation Commission begins on 
page A-427. 
2024-25 Budget 
The baseline budget request continues operations at the current level. 
The request for General Fund appropriation is $413,472 in FY23 -24 and $416,982 
in F Y24-25. This amount includes $3,500 annually to support the activities of the State 
Historian. The State appropriation funds three full time positions and all other associated 
expenses. It provides approximately 68% of the matching funds for Maine’s annual 
federal historic preservation grant.
2
The request for Federal Expenditures Fund allocation is $866,670 in FY23 -24 and 
$876,530 in FY24-25. The account is authorized to have ﬁve full time employees. A 
minimum of 10% of the annual Historic Preservation Fund grant that the Commission 
receives from the National Park Service must be passed through to municipalities that 
participate in the Certiﬁed Local Governments Program. The balance supports personal 
services, all other associated expenses and a preservation grants program. 
The request for Other Special Revenue Funds allocation is $741,957 in FY23-24 
and $755,948 in FY24-25. The special revenue account is authorized to have 4 full time 
positions and 4.231 full time equivalents. 
Budget Initiative 
There are three initiatives for the Historic Preservation Commission. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding for the increased cost of statewide insurance 
coverage provided through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, 
Division of Risk Management based on claims experience, coverage increases, attorney 
fees on claims, and actuarially recommended reserves. The All Other General Fund 
request is $1,029 in FY23-24 and $1,029 in FY24-25 
The second initiative provides funding for the statewide technology services 
provided by the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Ofﬁce of 
Information Technology. In the first year of the biennium, the initiative provides funding 
to cover one-time costs to renovate the Commission ’s project review database, as Well as 
funding for the maintenance of that database and projected increases in OIT costs. In the 
second year of the biennium, the initiative provides funding to cover maintenance of the 
database and projected increases in OIT costs. The All Other General Fund request is 
$27,643 in FY23-24 and $8,871 in FY24-25. 
The third initiative provides ﬁinding for the increased cost of the Department ’s 
share of the cost for the fmancial and human resources service center within the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services. The All Other General Fund request 
is $5,664 in FY23-24 and $6,745 in FY24-25. 
PARTA 
HISTORIC PRESERVATION REVOLVING FUND 
The Part A request for the Maine Historic Preservation Commission — Historic 
Preservation Revolving Fund may be found on page A-428. 
Program Description 
The Historic Preservation Revolving Fund program provides funds to qualiﬁed 
nonproﬁt historic preservation organizations in the state for the purpose of acquiring 
endangered historic properties of local, state or national signiﬁcance. The properties are 
then marketed to new owners who agree to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the properties
3
subject to historic preservation easements or covenants held by the qualiﬁed non-proﬁt 
organization. 
2024-25 Budget 
The request for Other Special Revenue Funds allocation for this program is $500 in 
both F Y23-24 and FY24-25. 
Budget Initiative 
There is no budget initiative for this program. 
This concludes my testimony for the Maine Historic Preservation Commission. 
Thank you for your support of and interest in the Work that We do.
4
