Testimony of Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on 
_ ‘Appropriations and Financial Affairs _ 
“An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of 
State Government, General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
February 8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. I am Kirsten Figueroa, the 
Commissioner of the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am here 
today to present LD 258, the Governor ’s proposed ﬁscal year 2024-2025 biennial budget 
bill and to testify in support of certain language items. 
Introduction 
This budget advances the Governor ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more 
prosperous state where opportunity is available to all, We must invest in the infrastructure 
that supports our greatest asset: the people of Maine. 
That is why this budget proposal aims to strengthen the things that Maine people rely on 
every day to succeed, like education, housing, health care, child care, and transportation 
infrastructure. 
It maintains and builds on previous accomplishments. 
We’ve achieved 55 percent of the cost of education for the ﬁrst time in Maine history; 
fully restored municipal revenue sharing to 5 percent for the ﬁrst time since 2009; enacted 
free community college; overhauled our student loan debt relief program; provided 
signiﬁcant tax relief; invested more than $700 million in MaineCare and provider rate 
increases; provided free school meals; delivered the strongest inﬂation relief measure in 
the country — and most recently with the comprehensive Winter Energy Relief package — 
we made incredible bipartisan progress on issues critical to the people of Maine.
1
All of that work, all of those achievements, and the desire to ensure their continuation— 
became the foundation for this budget. 
This proposal" is balanced, it does not raise taxes and it leaves the Rainy Day Fund 
untouched at a record high of more than $900 million to protect us against the possibility, 
or as the various economists project, the inevitability, of an economic downturn. And, it 
fully funds initiatives of the Legislature that are law and that have cost more than 
expected. 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, 
making sure that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — we lived within our 
means. 
This budget proposal continues that practice. 
We have maintained positive credit ratings. 
We have grown Maine’s Rainy Day Fund. - 
We provide and improve the critical services Maine people and families depend upon. 
Progress made. Progress being made. More progress coming. 
Governor Mills considers all of these variables — the amazing work of previous budgets, 
the impact of the Maine Jobs Plan, the partnership with the Legislature, the pandemic 
recovery funding from our federal partners, the geopolitical landscape, inﬂation and 
interest rates, the possibility of a recession, the progress we’ve made and have promised 
to continue — in crafting this biemial proposal, putting all the pieces together to charta 
course forward. To continue to provide and improve the critical services to Maine people 
and families. To give people stability and dependability in State government. To havea 
plan to ensure we continue to do that and continue to fund those things that the Legislature 
and the Governor have worked together to enact. 
We look forward to the ongoing discussion over the next several months as we outline 
each initiative and impact of the proposed investments, and update on the progress being 
made throughout the state. 
Now to the speciﬁc initiatives on the agenda.
2
PartI 
Part I begins on page 13 of the language document. This Part updates statutes relevant 
to the General Fund appropriation limit to rebase the limit, simplify, and clarify the 
calculation. Additionally, updates clarify how transfers to the Budget Stabilization Fund 
are to be handled when revenues exceed the appropriation limit or when the Budget 
Stabilization Fund has reached its statutory maximum. 
Public Law 2005, chapter 2, “An Act to Increase the State Share of Education Costs, 
Reduce Property Taxes and Reduce Government Spending at All Levels” , was enacted to 
implement the Maine Municipal Association referendum for state government to pay 55 
percent of the total cost of education and to strengthen the State’s spending limitation and 
Budget Stabilization Fund (B SF). 
There were three components of the original law: 
Spending limits: 
0 The law limited the growth of the state’s General Fund appropriations to rates 
reﬂective of Maine’s income and population growth (the population growth 
component has since been removed). Any revenue over the limit is directed to the 
Budget Stabilization Fund. 
v County assessments and municipal assessments were limited by income and 
property growth factors. 
I School spending is tied to the level of student enrollment. 
0 Governing bodies may surpass the limits, but only through an explicit, public vote. 
Targeted tax relief: 
0 The law sought to target tax relief directly to Maine residents through speciﬁc 
programs. At initial passage, it increased the amount of property tax relief available 
through the Maine Residents Property Tax and Rent Relief Program (the “Circuit 
Breaker”) and increased the Homestead Exemption. The Circuit Breaker program 
has since been replaced by a refundable Property Tax Fairness Credit that can be 
claimed on the Maine Individual Income Tax Form. 
Increased school funding: A ' 
' The law set the course for increasing state spending on K-12 education to an 
amount that is 55% of the costs covered under Essential Programs and Services 
(EPS). This goal had never been met until the passage of PL 2019 Ch. 616 
(FY20-21 supplemental).
3
Since its passage, there have been several amendments/re ﬁnements to the spending 
limitation and BSF statutes, but the basic structure remains. 
Appropriations growth has historically been below the limit partly because of how the 
limit was structured. Now that school funding has reached 55%, the limit is meant to be 
calculated differently, but statute doesn’t make clear how to adjust the base for the new 
calculation. Also, it was unclear in statute what happens when revenues exceed the 
appropriation limit and when the BSF has reached its statutory maximum of 18%. The 
BSF is now at 16.6% based on the actual revenue collected for FY22; and, given the 
current forecast, it is expected to be over the maximum at the end of this ﬁscal year. 
Speciﬁcally, the changes proposed in Part I do the following: 
0 Simpliﬁes the deﬁnition of Baseline General Fund revenue to mean the 
recommended General Fund revenue forecast reported by the Revenue Forecasting 
Committee in its December lst report of even-numbered years in accordance with 
Title 5, Chapter l51—B, Section l7l0—F, eliminating reference to changes affecting 
state and local tax burden. 
0 Rebases the appropriation limit to recognize various achievements, including fully 
funding at 55 percent the cost of education, Medicaid expansion, Medicaid and 
provider payment rate reform, and fully funding revenue sharing at 5 percent. For 
the 2024-2025 biennium, the base for the appropriation limit calculation is reset at 
98 percent of the Baseline General Fund revenue for FY24 projected by the 
Revenue Forecasting Committee as of December l, 2022. The Growth Factor is 
then applied to that base to derive the limit for FY25. Please note, in number 4, 
letter A at the bottom of page l3 it currently reads 99 percent, but it should read 98 
percent. We will include this correction in the change package. 
0 Redirects where monthly interest earnings on BSF are deposited once BSF reaches 
its statutory maximum of 18% from the Retirement Allowance Fund to the 
Irrevocable Trust Funds for Other Post-Employment Beneﬁts for the State 
Employee Plan (OPEB-SEP) established in Title 5 MRSA section 286-B. This 
change will help make some progress on the OPEB-SEP that currently has 
unfunded actuarial liability of $746.6 million, and which must be amortized by the 
year 2037 per that same statute. 
o Removes the qualiﬁer of not funding education at 55 percent now that we are 
funding education at 55 percent. 
o Upholds that any Baseline General Fund revenue exceeding the General Fund 
appropriation limit will be deposited into the Budget Stabilization Fund and 
clariﬁes the process and timing for such a deposit.
4
Adds that if the BSF is at its statutory maximum of 18 percent then these revenues 
above the limit will be transferred as follows:p 
o Eighty percent to the Highway and Bridge Capital program, Other Special 
Revenue Funds account; 
- 
o Ten percent to the Maine Municipal Bond Bank, School Revolving 
Renovation Fund established in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, 
section 6006-F; and, 
o Ten percent to the Irrevocable Trust Funds for Other Post-Employment 
Beneﬁts for the State Employee Plan established in Title 5 MRSA section 
286-B. 
This situation of forecasted revenues being above the limit has historically not 
been common. It is only in these past couple years that we have experienced 
this and we project that we will be back to revenue under the rebased limit by 
ﬁscal year 2026. 
0 Adds to the Final Priority Transfers, otherwise known as the “cascade” , the School 
Revolving Renovation Fund by adjusting the BSF deposit from 80 percent to 70 
percent: 
o Seventy percent (this is currently eighty) to the budget stabilization fund; 
o Twenty percent to the Highway and Bridge Capital program, Other Special 
Revenue Funds account; and 
0 Ten percent to the Maine Municipal Bond Bank, School Revolving 
Renovation Fund established in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30-A, 
section 6006-F. 
As a reminder, the cascade is pertinent to actual General Fund revenues 
collected (and lapsed balances etc.) that are below the limit but above what was 
budgeted. 
0 And, lastly, suspends transfers of revenues above the limit to the BSF for fiscal 
years 2024 and 2025. Instead, this budget proposes: 
0- $200 million of these revenues be transferred to Maine DOT: » 
' $130 million to the Highway and Bridge Capital program, Other 
Special Revenue Funds to support highway and bridge projects; 
- $40,000,000 to the Multimodal Transportation Fund, Other Special 
Revenue Funds account to support multimodal projects; and 
' $30,000,000 to the Highway Light Capital, Other Special Revenue 
Funds account for the purpose of supporting light capital paving 
projects.
5
0 $30 million of these revenues be transferred to Maine State Housing 
Authority, State Housing Authority program, Other Special Revenue Funds 
account to expand rental housing options that are affordable to workers and 
their families through equal funding to the Rural Affordable Rental Housing 
. 
Program and the Low-income Housing Tax credit program; and, . 
o $7,500,000 of these funds be transferred to the Maine Community College 
System Free Community College - 2 Enrollment Years program, Other 
Special Revenue Funds account within the Maine Community College 
System to provide two years of free community college for all high school 
graduates from classes of 2024 and 2025 who enroll in a Maine community 
college full-time. 
PartK 
Part K begins on page 18 of the language document. 
The projected FY24 and FY25 revenues as projected by the Revenue Forecasting 
Committee in its December 2022 report for the Highway Fund are insufﬁcient to cover 
even the baseline expenses let alone new anticipated biennial needs of the Fund. PartK 
redirects proﬁts received from Title 28-A, section 90, the State’s spirits operation, to 
address this imbalance without raising taxes or fees. Since ﬁscal year 2015, these proﬁts 
have been sent to the Maine Municipal Bond Bank to be used for payment of the liquor 
operation revenue bond, which was the mechanism to pay outstanding hospital debt. The 
State intends to retire the liquor operation revenue bond by June 30, 2023. Part K also 
ensures the continuation of existing state match for certain water programs in the 
Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Enviromnental 
Protection. 
Speciﬁcally, the changes proposed in Part K do the following: 
0 Repeals the Healthcare Liability Retirement Fund, which was the Fund established 
to receive bond proceeds and make payment to hospitals and is no longer needed. 
v Ends the requirement that proﬁts received from Title 28-A, section 90, the State’s 
spirits operation, are sent to the Maine Municipal Bond Bank. 
0 Redirects the proﬁts received from Title 28-A, section 90, the State’s spirits 
operation as follows: . 
o The ﬁrst $7 million be deposited as undedicated revenue in the General 
Fund, for purposes of continuing to support state match toward certain water 
programs in the Department of Health and Human Services and the 
Department of Environmental Protection. The corresponding appropriations 
to the departments may be found on pages A-331 and A-281.
6
0 All amounts in excess of $7 million (which are currently estimated at $53 
million) be deposited as undedicated revenue in the Highway Fund. 
0 At the close of ﬁscal year 2023, transfers any accumulated balance remaining after 
the retirement of the liquor operation revenue bond: 
0 ﬁrst to the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund; and, 
o then to the TransCap Trust Fund to be used to pay towards the balance of 
remaining debt service of 2015A and 2021A bonds, which will create 
capacity for additional funds needed to match historic federal investments in 
roads, bridges and multimodal infrastructure. 
PartS 
Part S begins on page 23 of the language document. This language adjusts the attrition 
rate for the 2024-2025 biennium from 1.6% to 5% for judicial branch and executive 
branch departments and agencies. 
The appropriation reductions noted for the Executive Branch Departments and 
Independent Agencies — Statewide program (0017) reﬂect the projected savings from 
this change. The same proposal has been made in the budget bill for the Highway Fund. 
The baseline budgets submitted for each Program include a reduction of 1.6%, the 
standard rate authorized in law, of salaries for each position. The reductions of 
$15,838,357 for Executive and $1,737,645 for Judicial in Fiscal Year 2024 and 
$16,059,526 and $1,772,515 in Fiscal Year 2025 reﬂect the change from the budgeted 
1.6% to the 5.0% that is proposed in Part S. The savings will be distributed to the 
Executive and Judicial accounts by Financial Order in each ﬁscal year. 
Part VVV 
Part VVV, on page 56 of the language document, clariﬁes that COVID Disaster Relief 
Payment checks will be treated as unclaimed property that is not subject to the notice and 
receipt provisions established in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 33, section 2101. The 
volume and timing of retumed/uncashed relief checks unduly burdens staff in the Ofﬁce 
of the State Treasurer and ﬁnancial service centers, and delays the State’s ability to reissue 
unclaimed relief payments. Authorizing unclaimed relief payments to escheat 
immediately allows the state(and the recipient) to leverage the unclaimed property system 
to reissue unclaimed payments much faster.
7
The notice and receipt provisions in Title 33 require the Treasurer to compile a list of 
outstanding checks annually, after which agency personnel must mail due diligence letters 
to identiﬁed recipients — a process which typically takes several months. Oncea 
recipient ’s current address is identiﬁed, the state must follow a process to cancel the 
original payment and reissue a replacement — a process that requires multiple transactions 
to complete. Waiving these provisions allows the uncashed checks to be escheated 
immediately and allows identified recipients to request a replacement directly through the 
unclaimed property portal in a single transaction. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have.
8
