Testimony of Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Health and Human Services 
“An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures 
of State Government, General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and 
June 30, 2025” 
February 21, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Baldacci, 
Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services. My name is Kirsten Figueroa, and I am the Commissioner of the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am here today to testify in 
support of the ﬁscal year 2024-2025 biennial budget bill, LD 258, speciﬁcally those 
items on today’s agenda relating to DAFS. 
This budget advances the Governor ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more 
prosperous state where opportunity is available to all, we must invest in the 
infrastructure that supports the people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely 
on every day to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted 
budget and the last legislative session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. A 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, 
making sure that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic - we live Within 
our means. This budget proposal continues that practice. 
We look forward to the discussions over the next several months as we outline each 
initiative and the impact of the proposed investments.
1
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
The ﬁrst program on today’s agenda is the Developmental Services Oversight and 
Advisory Board on page A-24. MDSOAB monitors and comments on Maine state 
services for adults with Intellectual Disabilities and Autism (ID/ASD). Public Law 
2021, chapter 686 An Act To Enhance and Improve the Maine Developmental 
Services Oversight and Advisory Board moved the funding for this program from 
the Department of Health and Human Services to DAFS. DAF S provides this 
funding to the Board through a contract. This budget includes a General Fund 
appropriation of $137,682 in each ﬁscal year. 
There are no new initiatives in this program. 
The Maine Developmental Disabilities Council (MDDC), which can be found on 
page A-34 of the budget document, contains a General Fund appropriation of 
$160,155 each year and a Federal Expenditures Fund allocation of $480,465 each 
year. The council is a public instrumentality of the State and, under the federal 
Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000, MDDC is 
required to ensure that individuals with developmental disabilities and their families 
participate in the design oﬁ and have access to, needed community services, 
individualized supports, and other forms of assistance that promote self- 
determination, independence, productivity, integration, and inclusion in all facets of 
family and community life. 
There are no new initiatives in this program. 
Executive Department 
The Ombudsman Program can be found on page A-291 of the budget 
document. The program is an independent program within the Executive 
Department to assist people with resolving concerns and complaints regarding child 
welfare services provided by the Department of Health and Human Services. There 
is a $341,539 appropriation in each ﬁscal year and a Federal Expenditures allocation 
of $57,150 in each year. 
There are no new initiatives in this program. 
This concludes my testimony. I would be happy to address any questions you may 
have.
2
