Testimony of Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
“An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures 
of State Government, General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and 
June 30, 2025” 
March 1, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Bailey, 
Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. I am Kirsten Figueroa, the 
Commissioner of the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. Iam 
here today to testify in support of the ﬁscal year 2024-2025 biennial budget bill, 
LD 258, speciﬁcally those items on today’s agenda relating to DAFS. 
This budget advances the Govern0r ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more 
prosperous state where opportunity is available to all, we must invest in the 
infrastructure that supports the people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely 
on every day to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted 
budget and the last legislative session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. 
We have govemed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, 
making sure that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — we live within 
our means. This budget proposal continues that practice. 
We look forward to the discussions over the next several months as We outline each 
initiative and the impact of the proposed investments.
1
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
The Department of Administrative and Financial Services (DAFS) consists of ten 
bureaus, a handful of boards and commissions, and more than 1,200 employees 
serving the public and all three branches of state govemment. 
The Department has a broad range of responsibilities. We serve as the principal ﬁscal 
advisor to Governor Mills, prepare the state budget, coordinate the ﬁnancial 
planning and programing activities of state agencies, prepare the ﬁnancial records 
of the state, and advise the Maine Legislature on the economic status of the state 
and ﬁnancial statutes of state government. 
Additionally, DAFS oversees all aspects of: human resources, including employee 
beneﬁts, contract negotiations, recruiting, retaining, training and performance; 
information teclmology services, including cyber security, data management, 
application development, project management, technology infrastructure, 
accessibility, and network services; maintenance, repairs and capital improvements 
of state~owned buildings and grounds; leased space; procurement, contracting and 
vendor management; state postal services; surplus property; tax collection, tax law 
and tax policy; and ﬂeet management. 
Various internal services for state agencies are provided by the Department, 
including review of accounting transactions and procedures and the implementation 
of account controls. We oversee three state-owned landﬁlls. We also administer the 
state's lottery operations, medical and adult use cannabis programs, and the sale of 
distilled spirits within Maine's borders. 
DAF S employees are respected as conscientious stewards of the State's assets: ﬁscal, 
human, physical and technical. We are valued for the professional expertise We 
provide that ensures State departments and agencies efﬁciently, effectively, and 
economically fulﬁll their important missions for the people of Maine. We lead and 
collaborate with open doors, open minds, and open hearts. 
DAF S has ﬁve committees of jurisdiction — plus signiﬁcant interaction with the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs.
2
Today’s testimony is about HCIFS-related initiatives proposed in the biennial 
budget. 
Accident -.— Sickness — Health Insurance 
I’ll begin on page A-3, the Accident-Sickness-Health Insurance program. This 
program funds: management and administration of a series of beneﬁts and services 
available to employees and eligible ancillary groups and retirees, including the State 
employee health plan, dental plan, direct reimbursement accounts, deferred 
compensation, vision care, and life insurance; management of contracted services 
for employee assistance programs, including Living Resources; and the development 
of health and safety policies and programs to reduce the incidence of illnesses and 
injuries to employees. 
I will begin with the baseline in this account. The General Fund baseline budget 
is just over $770,000 in each year. The program also includes allocation for three 
separate Internal Service Funds: the Retiree Health Insurance Fund; the Accident- 
Sickness-Health Insurance Internal Service Fund; and, the Fireﬁghters and Law 
Enforcement Health Insurance Program Fund. The baseline for Accident-Sickness- 
Health Insurance Internal Service Fund includes Personal Services supporting 15 
positions and All Other allocation totaling approximately $3.1 million each 
year. The baseline allocation for the Retiree Health Insurance Fund is $117 million 
each year. The baseline allocation for the Fireﬁghters and Law Enforcement Health 
Insurance Program Fund supports one position and All Other totaling nearly 
$150,000 each year. 
There are six initiatives in this program. 
This ﬁrst initiative continues one Public Service Manager II position until June 6, 
2025, to assist with the design of the beneﬁts portion of the Human.Resource 
Management System (HRMS) project. This position works to identify and mitigate 
existing business risks associated with beneﬁts solution architecture. This position 
is critical to the successful transition of highly manual and paper-driven beneﬁts 
processes to the modern HRMS, working as the beneﬁts lead With the necessary 
knowledge of state and federal insurance requirements as well as current and 
historical knowledge of state government beneﬁts data elements.
3
This initiative increases the allocation in the Accident, Sickness & Health Insurance 
Internal Services Fund by $122,487 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $129,126 in ﬁscal year 
2025. 
The second initiative establishes one Public Service Coordinator I position serving 
as a Health and Wellness Beneﬁts Contract Analyst responsible for the management, 
review, negotiation, tracking, and compliance for the high volume of contracts 
necessary to implement and carry out the programs of Employee Health and 
Wellness. The ofﬁce manages 22 vendor contracts and up to ﬁve additional Business 
Associate Agreements, which outline parties’ obligations to safeguard and maintain 
the privacy of protected health information, during each ﬁscal year. This position 
will be responsible for tracking, ensuring compliance, and managing the 
correspondence and negotiations-related communication between the Ofﬁce of 
Employee Health and Wellness, the Ofﬁce of the Attorney General, and the vendor 
and ensuring ﬁnal contract documents are appropriate and signed. The volume and 
complexity of this work necessitates an additional position. While the types of 
contracts vary, other state ofﬁces deploy teams of employees to manage contracts, 
with one ofﬁce reporting a model of 6 contracts per full time equivalent. This new 
position is critical to achieving a more focused, efﬁcient, and effective management 
of these contracts. This initiative increases the allocation in the Accident, Sickness 
& Health Insurance Internal Services Fund by $102,076 in ﬁscal year 2024 and 
$107,833 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The last initiative on page A-3 establishes 2 Public Service Coordinator I positions 
to support state employees with all beneﬁts and retirees with health insurance, 
including educational sessions on retirement for state employees. Employee Health 
and Wellness currently has three funded Beneﬁts Specialist positions to provide all 
aspects of beneﬁts support for 25,700 members on the State of Maine Health Plan 
and 9,048 members on the State of Maine Medicare Advantage plan. In addition to 
providing member support, education, and communication through 550+ emails per 
month per specialist, 200+ calls per month per specialist, and walk-in customers, 
duties also include processing for new hires, leaves of absence, cobra beneﬁts, and 
new retirees; refund requests; and monthly payroll reconciliation exception reports 
for medical, dental and vision insurances. These new positions are critical to 
ensuring a manageable workload for each specialist while providing an improved 
customer experience for employees and retirees.
4
This initiative increases the allocation in the Accident, Sickness & Health Insurance 
Internal Services Fund by $182,060 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $192,674 in ﬁscal year 
2025. 
Turning to page A-4, the next initiative establishes one Ofﬁce Specialist II position 
to provide advanced ofﬁce and administrative support to the Ofﬁce of Employee 
Health and Wellness. Currently all members of the team—including the executive 
director and lead managers ——attempt to patch together the administrative support 
required to effectively run the office and meet the needs of vendors, employees, 
retirees, and other customers. This position will perform these tasks and more to ﬁll 
this critical need thereby allowing for timely and thorough completion of priority 
and strategic initiatives and activities by other staff. This initiative increases the 
allocation in the Accident, Sickness & Health Insurance Internal Services Fund by 
$89,088 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $94,240 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The second initiative on page A-4 provides funding for the proposed reclassi ﬁcation 
of one Public Service Coordinator I position to better align work responsibilities 
with classiﬁcation. This initiative increases the allocation in the Accident, Sickness 
& Health Insurance Internal Services Fund by $7,259 in ﬁscal year 2024 and 
$10,817 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program increases the allocation in the Fireﬁghters and 
Law Enforcement Health Insurance Program Fund by $10,000 in each ﬁscal year to 
align allocations with projected expenditures and available resources. This Fund 
provides health insurance coverage to retired county and municipal law enforcement 
ofﬁcers and retired municipal ﬁreﬁghters, as authorized under Title 5, section 286- 
M. Increasing allocation will reduce the need for mid-year ﬁnancial orders. 
State Beneﬁt Mandate Defrayal (Z373) 
There is one initiative on page A-50 for the new State Beneﬁt Mandate Defrayal 
program. This initiative provides $3.8 million in each ﬁscal year for the cost of the 
beneﬁt mandate providing coverage of infertility treatment as enacted by Public Law 
2021, chapter 692, An Act To Provide Access to Fertility Care. The federal 
Affordable Care Act requires states to defray the costs of any state beneﬁt mandates 
enacted after December 31, 2011. Qualiﬁed health plan issuers must quantify the 
cost attributable to each additional required benefit based on an actuarial analysis
5
and the state must make payments for those costs either directly to the enrollees 
whose plans include this beneﬁt or to the carrier that has paid the beneﬁt. The 
defrayal only applies to individual and small group markets. What this means, ata 
high level, is that if a state mandates coverage beyond the ten essential health 
beneﬁts provided for under the Affordable Care Act beneﬁt plan, the state must 
cover the cost by either reimbursing the health plan or the enrollees. The $3.8 
million was estimated by an actuary based on estimated costs of fertility services. 
This amount could vary based on a number of factors including actual cost sharing 
that carriers may implement or speciﬁcs related to the coverage that may be deﬁned 
through rulemaking by the Bureau of Insurance. 
Trade Adjustment Assistance Health Insurance 
The Trade Adjustment Assistance Health Insurance program is on page A-54. This 
program provides a group health insurance product for individuals certiﬁed to 
receive federal assistance for health coverage under the terms of the tax credit 
program within the federal Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 
2002. Individuals certiﬁed under the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act are 
Workers who have been displaced because of foreign competition. Although there 
have not been any expenses in this program since 2010 this is still an active program 
that could have participants. The program includes a baseline Federal Expenditures 
Fund allocation of $8,385 in each ﬁscal year and $75,000 each year as a baseline in 
the Other Special Revenue Funds account. 
There are no proposed changes to this Program. 
PartH 
Part H begins on language page 10. This Part adjusts the annual rates of pay used 
to determine the State’s contribution towards an employee ’s health insurance 
premium. As an employer, the State of Maine pays 85% to 100% of employee-only 
health insurance premiums for full time employees (prorated for part-time). The 
contribution is based on the employee ’s annual salary. Currently, for those 
employees with an armual salary of $30,000 or less, the state contributes 95% of the 
cost of the employee-only plan. For those earning between $30,000 and $80,000, 
the contribution is 90%. For those earning over $80,000, the State’s contribution is
6
85%. These salary tiers have been in effect since the program was established in 
ﬁscal year 2010. 
Part H adjusts the tiers to $50,000, $50,000 to $100,000, and over $100,000, 
respectively. In the State’s last round of collective bargaining, the minimum hourly 
rate of pay was increased to $15 per hour. At that rate there are no full-time 
employees in the below $30,000 range. 
The State also has a Health Credit Premium Program where the State may pay an 
additional 5% toward the cost of health insurance. Annually, the State Employee 
Health Commission designs the health credit premium program whereby employees 
are provided incentives to engage in healthy behaviors in an effort to improve the 
health status of the state employee population and to help reduce costs to the state 
employee health insurance program. Upon completion and documentation by the 
employee, they are eligible for a higher level of contribution from the State. This 
Part also aligns the tiers to $50,000, $50,000 to $100,000, and over $100,000 with 
contributions from the State of 100%, 95%, and 90%, respectively. 
This Part authorizes the transfer of funds between programs and departments and if 
necessary, from the Salary Plan and between Department ’s Personal Services 
appropriations, to support this Part. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you. I am happy to address any questions 
you may have.
7
