Helping communities thrive and prosper in the Greater Portland and Lakes Region
970 Baxter Blvd., Suite 201      Portland, Maine, 04103      Tel. (207) 774-9891       www.gpcog.org 
Testimony of the Greater Portland Council of Governments in Support of
 DECD’s Housing Opportunity Program 
a part of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 
30, 2024, and June 30, 2025.
February 9, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
Committee, and Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, I am Kristina Egan, Executive Director of the Greater Portland Council of Governments 
(GPCOG). I am here today to speak in strong support of full funding for DECD’s Housing Opportunity 
Program, contained in the Governor’s biennial budget.
GPCOG serves twenty-five municipal members, from Sebago Lake to Casco Bay, and the County of 
Cumberland. We staff the region’s Metropolitan Planning Organization which allocates over $30 
million dollars annually in federal transportation funds to regional priority highway and public 
transportation projects, extending our service territory into York County, including Saco and 
Biddeford. 
GPCOG also serves as the Portland region’s Economic Development District, as designated by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, and we support numerous programs like Maine Clean Communities and 
the Maine Broadband Coalition, along with the ever-changing needs of our member communities, 
which today include a housing crisis of major proportions.
In the Fall of 2021 GPCOG urged the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by 
Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions to include a recommendation for funding regional 
planning organizations so they could effectively and efficiently help municipalities implement 
strategies to expand housing volume, access, and affordability. 
We were pleased and grateful that the Commission made that recommendation, and we were 
encouraged that last year’s LD 2003 incorporated funding to regional planning organizations for 
regional technical assistance on housing. We were also grateful that last Fall, the Commission to 
Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Land Use Regulations and Short-term Rentals 
made another recommendation for expanded regional technical assistance funding in the wake of LD 
2003’s passage.
Helping communities thrive and prosper in the Greater Portland and Lakes Region
970 Baxter Blvd., Suite 201      Portland, Maine, 04103      Tel. (207) 774-9891       www.gpcog.org 
Today I am here to say again how important regional implementation is for the success of state 
housing policies. 
Land use policy changes are complex undertakings that many of our communities cannot successfully 
complete without adequate support. Regional planning agencies have expertise, local knowledge, 
existing trusted relationships, and the ability to help their municipalities make the best housing 
policies choices possible.
The funding contained in the Governor’s budget will enable DECD to implement its Housing 
Opportunity Program through the work of regional planning agencies like GPCOG, together with 
many other qualified regional planning organizations around the state. 
With full funding we are confident that our municipal members with have the support they need to 
implement housing policies that make meaningful progress toward solving our regional, and state, 
housing crisis. Without this funding, every regional planning agency will be severely limited in their 
capacity to be effective, efficient implementing partners with the state.
For all these reasons we urge you to vote to support full funding for DECD’s Housing Opportunity 
Program as proposed in the Governor’s budget.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and please let me know if GPCOG can help you with 
your important work on the Governor’s budget, and the implementation of state housing policies.
