Testimony of Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and State & Local Government 
“An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of 
State Government, General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government 
for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
February 17, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Nangle, 
Representative Stover and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and 
Local Govemment. I am Kirsten Figueroa, the Commissioner of the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services. I am here today to testify in support of the ﬁscal 
year 2024-2025 biennial budget bill, LD 258, speciﬁcally those items on today’s 
agenda relating to DAFS. _ 
This budget advances the Governor ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more 
prosperous state where opportunity is available to all, we must invest in the 
infrastructure that supports the people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on 
every day to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted budget 
and the last legislative session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. 
We have govemed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent Way over the past four years, 
making sure that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — we live within 
our means. This budget proposal continues that practice. 
We look forward to the discussions over the next several months as We outline each 
initiative and the impact of the proposed investments.
1
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
The Department of Administrative and Financial Services (DAF S) consists of ten 
bureaus, a handful of boards and commissions, and more than 1,200 employees serving 
the public and all three branches of state government. 
The Department has a broad range of responsibilities. We serve as the principal ﬁscal 
advisor to Governor Mills, prepare the state budget, coordinate the ﬁnancial planning 
and programing activities of state agencies, prepare the ﬁnancial records of the 
state, and advise the Maine Legislature on the economic status of the state and ﬁnancial 
statutes of state government. 
Additionally, DAFS oversees all aspects of: human resources, including employee 
beneﬁts, contract negotiations, recruiting, retaining, training and performance; 
information technology services, including cyber security, data management, 
application development, project management, technology infrastructure, accessibility, 
and network services; maintenance, repairs and capital improvements of state-owned 
buildings and grounds; leased space; procurement, contracting and vendor 
management; state postal services; surplus property; tax collection, tax law and tax 
policy; and ﬂeet management. 
Various internal services for state agencies are provided by the Department, including 
review of accounting transactions and procedures and the implementation of account 
controls. We oversee three state-owned landﬁlls. We also administer the state's lotteiy 
operations, medical and adult use cannabis programs, and the sale of distilled spirits 
within Maine's borders. 
DAF S employees are respected as conscientious stewards of the State's assets: ﬁscal, 
human, physical and technical. We are valued for the professional expeitise we provide 
that ensures State departments and agencies efﬁciently, effectively, and economically 
fulﬁll their important missions for the people of Maine. We lead and collaborate with 
open doors, open minds, and open hearts. 
Before we get into the speciﬁcs, I’d also like to discuss a few components that you will 
hear throughout all department budgets that involve DAFS. 
The ﬁrst is internal service funds.
2
The Department of Administrative and Financial Services develops, delivers, and 
maintains centralized govermnent systems that support the ﬁnancial, human resource, 
physical and technological infrastructure of state government. 
This allows the other departments to focus their expertise on their Department and 
statutory priorities — the state’s natural resources, education, health and human 
services, etc. - while we guide, support and innovate within our areas of expertise. 
Centralized Services Internal Service Funds include: 
Service Centers within DAFS provide centralized accounting, payroll, budgeting and 
human resources services to departments and agencies. 
MaineIT is responsible for the delivery of safe, secure, and high-performing networks 
and systems to State Agencies for daily performance of their missions for the citizens 
of Maine. IT enterprise functions beneﬁtting all state agencies are managed through 
this office to ensure consistency, volume discount efficiencies, and optimum 
performance and throughput. 
Central Fleet Management (CFM) within DAFS centrally procures, distributes and 
disposes of passenger and light truck vehicles. CF M handles many aspects of vehicle 
service including writing vehicle speciﬁcations, ordering vehicles, providing drivers 
with maintenance schedules, service assistance, fueling resources, insurance 
protection, and accident information processing. 
The Division of Risk Management within DAF S provides high quality insurance, loss 
control and claims services to all state agencies, the State's higher education institutions 
and some quasi-state agencies at the lowest possible cost. 
Central Services within DAFS provides a wide range of mail services, including 
interofﬁce mail, as well as disposition of state surplus materials and equipment no 
longer needed by the state agency that purchased them. This group also manages 
federal surplus property. 
All components of an internal service fund, including staff, All Other and capital, are 
included in our Intemal Service Fund budgeting. Personal Services increases the result 
of collective bargaining, or any other Personal Services action, as well as increases to
3
All Other costs for various reasons, including vendor increases or supply chain costs, 
etc — just like with any agency — impact these budgets. Internal Service Funds are meant 
to recover the costs of providing the service. We bill agencies for these services and 
they pay us with All Other funds. 
In this biermial budget, DAFS has adjusted these rates as they hadn’t been in a number 
of years. Agency All Other funds are not increased in the baseline to reﬂect the 
increased costs of the ISFs, so statewide we will all include initiatives for additional 
All Other to cover these services. 
Next is reclasses. 
As We discussed in the supplemental, Civil Service Rules require the Director of the 
Bureau of Human Resources to maintain the classiﬁcation plan and establish the 
processes and procedures with which to do so. There is a long-standing process in 
place to evaluate proper classiﬁcation of positions and determine through a functional 
job analysis whether a position meets the requirements for reclassi ﬁcation, including 
any pay adjustment. The State’s collective bargaining unit agreements include 
negotiated language related to this process. Reclasses may be employee or management 
initiated. Approved employee-initiated actions include a retroactive pay component 
back to the date the request was signed. In the biemiial, the initiative might be already 
approved by BHR or pending — the initiative will indicate the status. Reclass initiatives 
in Part A of the budget are necessary to fund these approved actions, which is required 
before the reclassi ﬁcations can be processed and paid. Reclass initiatives in Part B are 
self-funded. 
DAF S has ﬁve committees of jurisdiction — plus signiﬁcant interaction with the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs. 
The following seven divisions (really 6.5), of our ten, fall under the jurisdiction of the 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government and will be covered in this 
testimony: 
- State Economist, part of the Ofﬁce of the Commissioner 
' Ofﬁce of the State Controller
4
p ~ Bureau of the Budget 
- Bureau of Human Resources, excluding the Ofﬁce of Employee Health and 
G Beneﬁts, and the Ofﬁce of Workers‘ Compensation G 
' Division of Financial and Personnel Services (Financial/Human Resource 
Service Center) 
' MaineIT (former Ofﬁce of Information Technology) 
- Bureau of General Services 
We’ve also distributed to Appropriations members our Orientation document presented 
earlier in the month to the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government, 
which has more details about the various inner workings of these divisions of DAFS.I 
am incredibly passionate about DAFS and our DAFS team. I do have a lot of Words to 
say as we describe and advocate for our budget, but still there’s so much more in the 
report. 
I will discuss budget initiatives by division, in the above order — the order in which 
they appear in the Orientation document, except that we moved Financial and 
Personnel Services — rather than in page number order, as I believe it is less complicated 
and provides a clearer picture of our operations and responsibilities. 
One more thing before the details. I’d like to take a moment to thank the amazing 
people who oversee key elements and these SLG components of the Department — 
in the spirit of efﬁciency, they aren’t in the room today, but will be available for work 
session — and all of the DAFS employees who are performing the work I’m about to 
detail day in and day out. They are dedicated and incredible. 
Ofﬁce of the Commissioner — Administrative & Financial Services (0718) 
Starting with the Office of the Commissioner on page A-37. Generally, the Ofﬁce of 
the Commissioner provides strategic direction for the various bureaus and divisions of 
DAF S — primarily as it relates to policy and communication with the various segments 
of State government and the outside world, including the Governor, Legislature, the 
media, etc. Each bureau within DAFS reports to the Commissioner ’s Ofﬁce.
5
The Ofﬁce also includes the State Economist and her staff. The Ofﬁce of the State 
Economist is responsible for tracking and analyzing economic and demographic trends 
in support of policy development. The Ofﬁce maintains — and presents on — various 
modeling and analytical tools with the capability to do economic impact analysis, 
demographic projections, long-term and short-term economic forecasting, and 
statistical analysis. As designated by statute, the State Economist is a member of the 
Revenue Forecasting Committee, and the ofﬁce provides staff support for both that 
committee and the Consensus Economic Forecasting Commission. The Ofﬁce also 
serves as a liaison between the state and the U.S. Census Bureau, including designation 
as the State Data Center lead agency for Maine. 
The General Fund annual appropriation of approximately $2 million funds 4 positions 
in the Ofﬁce of the State Economist and 8 positions who oversee the various efforts of 
the Department of Administrative and Financial Services and who seek to continually 
improve the quality of services provided by the Department. 
There are two initiatives in this program. 
The ﬁrst initiative increases All Other appropriations by $3,550 in each ﬁscal year to 
cover the increased cost of the econometric models used by the State Economist and 
the Ofﬁce of Tax Policy. This is a shared cost between the Ofﬁce of the Commissioner 
and the Bureau of Revenue Services. The Bureau of Revenue Services request may be 
found on the bottom of page A-44. 
The second initiative provides funding for the Ofﬁce’s share of the ﬁnancial and human 
resources service center. Service Centers within DAFS provide centralized accounting, 
payroll, budgeting and human resources services to departments and agencies. Service 
Centers are established as an internal service fund intended to recoup their costs 
through billings to departments and agencies for services provided. 
State Controller — Ofﬁce of (0056) 
The budget for the Ofﬁce of the State Controller is on page A-51. The Ofﬁce is 
responsible for maintaining and reporting all state ﬁnancial transactions. Staff 
analyzes ﬁscal transactions and payrolls to ensure legality and correctness. The Ofﬁce 
is responsible for appropriation, allocation and allotment control including the review
6
and approval of all accounting transactions within AdvantageME, the automated 
production system for accounting and payroll services. In addition, the Ofﬁce of the 
State Controller provides internal audit support for the agencies that comprise state 
government. Official ﬁnancial records for all state agencies are administered by this 
Ofﬁce. The Ofﬁce’s Financial Reporting Unit prepares and publishes the State’s 
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report based on Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP). Additionally, OSC provides insurance advice and services for all 
forms of insurance for State Govermnent. Other areas of responsibility include: travel 
and expense policy, central payroll processing, ﬁxed asset inventory, and Federal 
single audit resolution. 
There are 27 positions within the Office of the State Controller; the annual budget is 
approximately $3.5 million. There are 8 initiatives in this program. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides $8,000 in each ﬁscal year for technology services provided 
by the Maine IT. 
The second initiative provides $25,000 in each ﬁscal year for training and tuition 
reimbursement for the Ofﬁce’s professional staff. Currently, there are nine positions 
in the bureau that require professional certiﬁcations and eleven employees who 
maintain professional certiﬁcations, including Certiﬁed Public Accountants (CPA), 
Certiﬁed Internal Auditors (CIA) and Certiﬁed Information Systems Auditors (CISA). 
These certiﬁcations require at least 40 hours of continuing education each year to 
maintain proﬁciency in their areas of responsibility. These certiﬁcations and training 
are necessary to allow staff to stay current with their expertise. 
The third initiative provides $25,000 each year for contractual services to provide 
training to agency partners for enterprise-wide systems such as the AdvantageME 
accounting system and DocuWare electronic content management system. The Bureau 
provides these systems with ongoing enhancements for thousands of agency users and 
this funding will help us to provide current training materials and resources. As systems 
are upgraded, new staff are hired, and processes are adjusted for new rules and/or 
efﬁciencies, it’s important to ensure users have current information, training and 
understanding. 
The fourth initiative provides $14,494 in ﬁscal year 24 and $15,286 in ﬁscal year 25 in 
Personal Services to increase the hours of one Accounting Technician position from 64
7
hours to 80 hours biweekly to support statewide vendor master ﬁle updates and vendor 
inquiries due to increased transaction volume, to mitigate increased cyber fraud 
attempts and to provide appropriate segregation of duties in the Accounting Division. 
Turning to page A-52, the ﬁrst initiative on this page provides $81,001 in ﬁscal year 
24 and $85,172 in ﬁscal year 25 in Personal Services and $5,375 in related All Other 
costs in each year to establish one Staff Accountant position to support accounting 
transaction review and approval due to increased transaction volume and to provide 
appropriate segregation of duties in the Accounting Division. There continues to bea 
signiﬁcant increase in the volume of transactions each year. In recent years, some 
transaction types have more than doubled because of increases in funding at both the 
state and federal level. Disbursements and accounting joumals make up the bulk of the 
volume increase as additional accounting and reporting requirements accompany most 
of the federal reporting. Even for temporary ARPA programs (like the Jobs Plan), the 
accounting and reporting requirements will continue for several years. In ﬁscal year 
2022, we processed more than 2.1 million disbursements and more than 4.6 million 
ﬁnancial transactions Additionally, there has been an increase in external fraud 
attempts (e.g., vendor EFT modiﬁcations, social engineering, etc.). OSC has instituted 
a multifaceted approach to address these issues, including greater use of electronic 
document processing, automated validation and veriﬁcation, and risk-based auditing. 
Even with these changes, staff must devote additional time to review transactions and 
to perform appropriate due diligence during the approval processes. 
The next initiative provides $20,014 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $20,009 in ﬁscal year 2025 
in Personal Services to reclassify two Public Service Manager II positions to better 
align their compensation with the levels of responsibility and accountability for the 
work activities associated with managing statewide accounting for more than $12 
billion of general, federal and other special revenue funds, and statewide payroll 
activities for more than 12,000 state employees. 
The ﬁnal two initiatives provide funding for increases in insurance coverage through 
the Division of Risk Management and the ﬁnancial and human resources service center. 
Risk Management (0008) 
Risk Management, on page A-47, managed by the Ofﬁce of the State Controller, is 
the internal service fund for insurance. There are 5 positions in the Risk Management
8
Division who are committed to providing high quality insurance, loss control and 
claims services at the lowest possible cost to all state agencies, the State's higher 
educational institutions and some quasi-state agencies. The Division annually reviews 
the entire subject of insurance as it applies to all State property and activities (except 
for workers’ compensation and health beneﬁts); develops and maintains accurate 
records of all insured buildings and contents, State-owned vehicles, aircraft, and ocean 
marine equipment; and gathers and evaluates other pertinent information to properly 
apply insurance coverage. The Division insures 4,300 buildings; 18,500+ employees; 
4,300 vehicles; 6,000 watercraft; 19 aircraft; and 20 drones. 
There are three initiatives within the Risk Management-Claims program. 
These changes combined will allow the Risk Management Division to address 
increases in claim costs, changes in the cost and availability of insurance in the 
marketplace, and increases in demand for underwriting activities. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides $7,241 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $12,732 in ﬁscal year 2025 
in Personal Services to reclassify one Public Service Manager II position to a Public 
Service Manager III position to better align with the work activities associated with 
risk management claims. 
The second initiative provides $122,487 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $129,126 in ﬁscal year 
2025 in Personal Services to establish one Public Service Manager II position to assist 
with managing the Division of Risk Management and to oversee the division's staff and 
statutory responsibilities. Loss prevention, subrogation and claims management 
activities have increased as we better manage the State’s risk of loss. Risk Management 
performed an additional 251 property inspections and 24 property audits in 2022, 
resulting in an additional $60,000 in cost recoveries over the prior two-year average. 
The number of policies processed has increased an average of 24% per year over the 
past three years. This additional position will assist with the implementation of a new 
claims management system; expand loss prevention and cost recovery activities to 
reduce the State’s risk of loss; and better manage insurance lines to minimize future 
costs for insurance. 
The ﬁnal initiative increases the All Other allocation in the Risk Management Fund by 
$2,000,000 in each year to cover increased claim activity. Adjusting this allocation 
will reduce the need for mid-year ﬁnancial orders.
9
Budget -— Bureau of (0055) _ 
Moving to page A-12, the Bureau of the Budget manages all aspects of the state 
budget on behalf of the Governor. The Bureau is responsible for carrying out the 
program initiatives of the Executive Branch within the limits of legislative oversight to 
achieve the most effective program outcomes and results within available budget 
resources. The State Budget Ofﬁcer and her staff are responsible for: supporting the 
Govemor in the submission of budget documents to the Legislature; managing the 
annual Work Program; and budget and position analysis and control. Since 2019, the 
Bureau has submitted 8 budgets and 6 change packages. In addition to the Maine Jobs 
Plan and the recent Winter Energy Relief Package. 
The Bureau of the Budget also compiles and issues the Maine State Government 
Annual Report; is responsible for preparing and submitting the four-year revenue and 
expenditure forecast for the General Fund and Highway Fund; and the State Budget 
Ofﬁcer serves as a member of the Revenue Forecasting Committee and as a member 
of the State Procurement Review Committee. 
There are 13 positions within the Bureau of the Budget: 12 are funded by the General 
Fund and 1 by the Highway Fund. The combined annual budget for the Bureau is 
just over $1.8 million. 
There are four new initiatives in this Program. The ﬁrst three initiatives provide 
funding for increases related to centralized services provided by the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services, Maine IT, Division of Risk Management, and 
the ﬁnancial and human resources Service Centers. The total impact of these three 
initiatives is a General Fund increase of $16,900 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $17,400 in 
ﬁscal year 2025 and a Highway Fund increase of $180 in each ﬁscal year. 
The ﬁnal initiative in the Bureau of the Budget provides funding for the proposed 
reorganization of a Public Service Coordinator I position to better align with the 
position ’s responsibilities. This initiative increases General Fund appropriations by 
$6,357 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $9,661 in ﬁscal year 2025.
10
Administration —- Human Resources (0038) 
We start on page A-5 with the Bureau of Human Resources. The Bureau is 
responsible for statewide human resources policy and procedure, including the 
administration of the State government ’s civil service system, employee relations 
activities, collective bargaining, recruitment and retention of State employees, 
statewide human resources programs, classiﬁcation and compensation, performance 
evaluation, training, the State employee beneﬁts package, deferred compensation plan, 
the State’s workers’ compensation plan, and equal employment opportunity policies 
and practices. 
BHR includes the Division of Talent Management, Compliance Division, Ofﬁce of 
Employee Relations, Field Services — responsible for delivering direct human resources 
services to most of the executive branch — as well as Ofﬁce of Employee Health and 
Wellness and Ofﬁce of Workers’ Compensation and is supported with a General Fund 
appropriation of approximately $3.2 million, most of which funds the 22 positions 
within the Bureau. 
There is also an Other Special Revenue account, which had been used when BHR billed 
agencies for training. Training is now coordinated and provided on an as needed basis 
and funded directly by the bureau itself and/or agencies. 
The ﬁrst initiative in this program transfers one Public Service Coordinator I position 
from the Human Resources program General Fund account to the Financial and 
Personal Services Fund program, Internal Service Fund account. This position 
supports all human resources functions for the agencies covered by the General 
Government Service Center. This initiative will align work effort with appropriate 
funding and allow the costs associated with this position to be rebilled to the several 
agencies that this position supports. The initiative results in a General Fund decrease 
of $98,037 in ﬁscal. year 2024 and $103,271 in ﬁscal year 2025. The corresponding 
initiative transferring the position into the Service Center can be found on page A-26. 
The second initiative establishes one Public Service Coordinator II position to provide 
expertise to the bureau in the legislative and rulemaking processes and provides 
funding for related All Other costs. This position, serving as a Policy Analyst, will 
provide expertise to the bureau in the legislative and rulemaking processes, working 
closely with the department's legislative liaison, BHR Human Resources Officer,
11
Executive Director of Employee Health and Wellness, and Director of Workers’ 
Compensation. This position meets the critical need to provide the bureau with 
expertise in review and analysis of legislation, preparation of summaries, drafting of 
testimony, and calculation of ﬁscal impact, as well as the critical need to initiate the 
rulemaking process to update Civil Service and other rules. This is consistent with other 
divisions within DAFS with a high volume of legislative and rulemaking activity such 
as Maine Revenue Services and the Ofﬁce of Camiabis Policy. This initiative increases 
General Fund appropriations by $127,862 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $134,501 in ﬁscal 
year 2025. 
The ﬁnal initiative on page A-5, establishes one Public Service Coordinator I, asa 
Human Resources Analyst position, to provide expertise on classiﬁcation and 
compensation and provides funding for related All Other costs. The classiﬁcation and 
compensation group is responsible for: the evaluation of functional job analysis for 
position reclassi ﬁcations, whether management or employee initiated; any and all 
efforts to reorganize and realign workforces for efﬁciencies and to ensure statutory 
obligations are met; establishment of new positions established through budget or 
ﬁnancial order; minimal qualiﬁcations development for job postings; and, ensuring 
consistent statewide compensation commensurate with assigned duties. This is the unit 
responsible for the ongoing efforts of the Classiﬁcation and Compensation Study meant 
to review the State’s 40+ year old system for classifying, compensating, and rewarding 
State employees to attract and retain qualiﬁed employees. This effort, in addition to the 
day-to-day efforts of this small but mighty unit, involves in-depth discussion with every 
department in state government; market pay analysis and evaluation; classiﬁcation 
systems’ evaluation; and outreach to other states. 
Speciﬁcally, this position will focus on functional job analysis evaluations (FJAs), 
including efforts to reduce the time for processing employee-initiated ﬁlings to limit 
future State liability. The number of FJAs has nearly doubled in the past two years, 
from 437 to 749, representing nearly 1,200 positions. There are currently onlyytwo 
permanent full-time positions doing this work. We have supplemented with a limited 
period position created with Maine Jobs funds, but that position a) is currently vacant 
and b) ends this October. This position would result in a permanent team of three, 
which is still fewer than needed. The backlog of FJAs, which has historically been 
fewer than 100, has grown to more than 190. Departments need these reviews timelier 
as job postings, ﬁlling vacant positions, starting new legislatively or federally awarded 
work, and reorganizing and realigning workforces for efﬁciencies and to ensure
12
statutory obligations are met, rely on these evaluations. This initiative increases 
General Fund appropriations by $111,544 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $117,273 in ﬁscal 
year 2025. 
Turning to page A-6, the last initiative in BHR establishes one Public Service 
Coordinator II position to perfonn professional services work in the highly specialized 
area of diversity, equity, and inclusion and provides funding for related All Other costs. 
DAFS-BI—IR leads this effort for all state govermnent by coordinating: strategic 
planning; agency DEI staff; training; and hiring practices. This position is critical to 
ensure the necessary expertise for continuing the important Work already underway 
through a limited period position to educate and develop human resources 
professionals, State leadership, and employees on diversity, equity, and inclusion. The 
research is clear: providing a welcoming environment for all employees is critical to 
ensuring our Workforce feels safe, recognized, and valued. This is a key component to 
elevating Maine state govermnent as an employer of choice. Being an employer of 
choice places the State in the best possible position for ongoing recruitment and 
retention efforts. This initiative increases General Fund appropriations by $127,862 in 
ﬁscal year 2024 and $134,501 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
Workers’ Compensation Management Fund (0802) 
The Workers’ Compensation Management Fund is on page A-58. This division of 
13 provides direction, management, and technical assistance in the administration of 
life-impacting workers’ compensation cases for all state employees within the3 
branches of government at all locations throughout the state. The Workers’ 
Compensation Management Fund is established to provide for the expenses related to 
the resolution of workers’ compensation claims including: records and information 
management; investigation; medical review; representation; rehabilitation; payment of 
compensation; appropriate medical expenses and other payments required by the 
Workers’ Compensation Board; the settlement of cases; and other related and necessary 
expenses. 
There are four new initiatives in this program. 
The ﬁrst initiative continues and makes permanent one Public Service Coordinator I 
position previously established by Financial Order 001935 F2. This position is 
necessary to ensure timely and comprehensive management of Workers’
13
Compensation cases. Speciﬁcally, this position: audits workers‘ compensation claims, 
which ensures compliance and prevents costly penalties and fees; handles a small 
caseload to ensure effective coverage of claims, along with career development; 
maintains legal spreadsheets for all claims to ensure our legal partners have updated 
ﬁle and claim information; tracks all medical-only claims that have work restrictions 
for proper reporting to the Workers‘ Compensation Board; schedules and prepares 
medical packages, and creates medical indices for case manager review, and for our 
legal and medical partners. Most importantly, this position allows Case Managers to 
perform the higher-level tasks necessary to manage claims appropriately and 
effectively. The initiative increases the Workers’ Compensation Management Intemal 
Service Fund Personal Services allocation by $98,343 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $103,712 
in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The second initiative establishes one Public Service Coordinator I position to provide 
oversight and training for the Human Resources Assistants (HRAs) in Workers’ 
Compensation and to assist with the processing of Worker compensation claims. The 
HRA position has high attrition, so this new oversight position will enable two things: 
1) a pathway for career development in the ofﬁce and 2) consistent oversight and 
training of current and future HRAs. 
HRAs are an integral part of our time sensitive claims processing system as they 
process all ﬁrst reports of injuries ﬁled with our ofﬁce, which must be ﬁled with the 
Workers‘ Compensation Board within 7 days in most cases. They perform the initial 
investigation by contacting all parties involved, including obtaining medical 
documentation necessary for case management review. HRAs also process medical 
bill payments as well as other reimbursements to injured workers. These payments 
must be made Within 30 days of receipt, adding on to other time sensitive matters they 
handle. There are currently three HRAs, so this position will maintain responsibility 
for some claims processing, but at a lower percentage. HRAs are typically assigned 
departments, and each is responsible for about 315 or more claims — up to 550 at the 
height of the pandemic. 
The initiative increases the Workers’ Compensation Management Intemal Service 
Fund Personal Services allocation by $91,030 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $96,337 in ﬁscal 
year 2025.
14
The ﬁnal two initiatives in this program fund proposed employee-initiated 
reclassi ﬁcations. These initiatives would increase the Fund’s Personal Services 
allocation by a total of $16,290 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $25,203 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
Financial and Personnel Services — Division of (0713) 
On page A-26 is the Division of Financial and Personnel Services internal services 
fund program, which is organized into ﬁve service centers that provide consolidated 
and centralized administrative, ﬁnancial and persormel management services to most 
Executive Branch departments and agencies. There are 275 positions and an annual 
budget of approximately $29 million. 
There are ten initiatives in this program. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding to increase the hours of one part—time Public 
Service Coordinator I position from 20 hours to 40 hours biweekly to support the 
operations of all Service Centers, including development of metrics, improved 
ﬁnancial reporting, and creating and tracking performance measures. Additionally, 
this position will assist with reviewing, analyzing, and supporting the division's Service 
Center in creating value added reports for agency partners to better manage budgets 
and simplify ﬁnancial tracking. This is an increased allocation of $27,688 in ﬁscal 
year 2024 and $27,677 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The second initiative is the transfer of one Public Service Coordinator I position from 
the Human Resources program, General Fund, that I discussed in the Bureau of Human 
Resources on page A-5, to the Financial and Personnel Services Fund program, 
Internal Service Fund. This initiative will align human resources work effort with 
appropriate funding and allow the costs associated with this position to be rebilled to 
the several agencies that this position supports. The initiative results in a General Fund 
decrease of $98,03.7 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $103,271 in ﬁscal year 2025, anda 
corresponding increased allocation in the Financial and Persomiel Services Fund for 
the same amounts. 
The third initiative establishes one Accounting Technician position, one Staff 
Accountant position, one Senior Staff Accountant position, and provides funding for 
related All Other costs within the General Government Service Center. Over the years, 
the GGSC’s workload has increased as new programs and agencies have been added;
15
however, the position count in this division has been reduced. These positions are 
needed to process transactions, process payment approvals, and complete daily 
transactional work and data entry. Currently this work is being performed by our 
Managing Staff Accountants. This initiative is necessary so the Managing Staff 
Accountants can focus on strategic work including analysis; ﬁnancial and budgetary 
reviews, reconciliations and reports; training; and more interaction with and guidance 
to our agency partners. This is a total allocation of $258,795 in ﬁscal year 2024 and 
$271,794 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The last initiative on page A-26 establishes one Ofﬁce Assistant II position and one 
Accounting Analyst Supervisor position within the Security and Employment Service 
Center. The SESC has taken on additional workload due to reduced staff and high 
turnover at one of our agency partner’s business ofﬁce. Work includes developing a 
consistent and reasonable cost allocation method; increased involvement in grant 
management, reporting and compliance with federal cash management requirements; 
and specialized tracking of “disaster ” and “pre-disaster ” costs for identiﬁcation and 
federal cost recovery. Additionally, there is an increased volume of work due to the 
addition of two new small agencies as well as for the Departments of Labor and Public 
Safety due to additional grant funding. This is a total allocation of $186,143 in ﬁscal 
year 2024 and $196,198 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
Moving to the top of page A-27, this initiative increases All Other allocation by 
$240,148 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $232,963 in ﬁscal year 2025 to fund statewide 
technology services provided by Maine IT. 
The next initiative increases the hours of one Staff Accountant position from 54 hours 
biweekly to 80 hours to support the additional accounts and agency partners assigned 
to the General Government Service Center. This is $26,335 in ﬁscal year 2024 and 
$27,711 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The third initiative on this page ﬁmds the proposed reclassi ﬁcation of one vacant Ofﬁce 
Associate II position to an Accounting Analyst position to support federal grant 
management within the Natural Resources Service Center. Increased review at the 
federal level and more rigorous reporting requirements have led to the need for 
additional resources to fully support this workload. Failure to approve this action may 
lead to audit ﬁndings and the potential loss of federal funding. This is increased 
allocation of $16,238 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $16,470 in ﬁscal year 2025.
16
The next initiative establishes one Public Service Coordinator I position to support 
human resources activities for the Department of Health and Human Services and 
provides funding for related All Other costs. This position will support human 
resources activities and the more than 3,000 positions in DHHS, the state's largest 
department, including processing of family medical leave, Americans with Disabilities 
Act claims, and hybrid work support. This is increased allocation of $1 l 1,544 in ﬁscal 
year 2024 and $117,273 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The next initiative provides funding to increase the hours of one Public Service 
Manager I position from 64 hours biweekly to 80 hours to support human resources 
activities within the Security and Employment Service Center. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program provides funding to increase the hours of one 
Accounting Associate I position from 32 hours biweekly to 80 hours to support 
accounts payables including intake, review of documentation, and transaction 
processing for agency partners for the Security and Employment Service Center. 
Central Administrative Applications (Z234) 
On page A-18 is the Central Administrative Applications program. This program 
was established to segregate costs related to the State’s centralized computer 
applications such as those used for accounting, budgeting, payroll, online document 
storage, hybrid work management, data warehouse and other statewide applications. 
There are three initiatives in this program. 
There are two initiatives that fund internal service funds. The ﬁrst and third initiatives 
increase funding for the program’s share of the cost for the ﬁnancial and human 
resources service center and statewide technology services provided by Maine IT. 
The other initiative provides $1,371,117 in each year to support statewide software 
systems used to process, control and report on the State’s ﬁnancial information. Costs 
are related to upgrades necessary to the state’s ﬁnancial and online content 
management systems; systems to manage and track hybrid work environment, 
including ofﬁce space reservations; and to add capacity to our online processing system 
to convert more paper-based processes to electronic.
17
Information Services (0155) 
Next, on page A-29, is Information Services also known as Maine IT. Maine 
IT provides centralized direction, coordination and oversight to information 
technology policy making, planning, architecture and standardization, with the focus 
on delivery of effective information technology services. This includes responsibilities 
over information technology leadership, communications, planning, ﬁnancial 
performance management, procurement and contract management, and resource 
management. 
The goal of MaineIT is to manage technology from the perspective of the entire 
enterprise, utilizing common architecture and infrastructure, ensuring a uniﬁed vision 
and strategic plan through effective project management, accountability and 
establishment of statewide priorities. The General Fund component funds areas 
within the Ofﬁce of the Chief Information Ofﬁcer and statewide initiatives such as 
security, business continuity, and disaster recovery planning. The Internal Service 
Fund includes 419 positions and, as an internal service fund, is funded by the Executive 
Branch agencies that utilize any number of MaineIT’s dozens of services, including 
radio services, telecommunications, desktop support, help desk, and applications 
development. Additionally, the Chief Data Ofﬁcer provides data stewardship and 
communication to ensure valid and reliable data are protected and available for legal 
and ethical use/reuse for data driven decision making throughout state govermnent. 
MaineIT supplements its state workforce with contractors who assist with project 
work and specialized technology needs. 
There are six initiatives in this program. 
We will start with the second initiative on the page requesting General Fund 
appropriations of $3,595,000 in fiscal year 2024 and $4,095,000 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
This represents the ongoing strategic investments in our State’s cyber resiliency to 
improve our capability of safeguarding State networks and infrastructure against cyber- 
attacks as part of MaineIT’s Security Plan. The Govemor proposed and the Legislature 
agreed that enterprise security should be funded with General Funds. In the F Y22/23 
biennial the Legislature split the roughly $8.2 million request between General Fund 
and Maine Jobs during the pandemic response. At the time, it was noted that ongoing 
General Fund funding is key to maintaining these protections. The investments span 
prevention, response, and the critical training of State employees.
18
Over recent years, the cyber threat landscape has become increasingly volatile and 
more complex, emphasizing the need for targeted funding to remediate the most critical 
gaps in our information security preparedness. Cyber-attacks against public sector IT 
assets and entitiescontinue to proliferate, posing one of the most signiﬁcant risks to 
our state’s ability to deliver secure and reliable services to our citizens while 
safeguarding the sensitive data entrusted to our care. The threat landscape has only 
continued to increase in frequency, sophistication, and complexity since the onset of 
the pandemic, creating unprecedented challenges for the State in its mission to 
safeguard the conﬁdentiality, availability, and integrity of citizen data. 
In any organization, employees are the main source of breaches with 85 percent of 
breaches involving a human element. Through appropriate training and awareness 
initiatives, we aim to substantially reduce the risk to essential services due to user error, 
insider threats, or exploitation of users. For our cyber security tools to work, Maine 
needs to be successful 100 percent of the time. 
The State has begun to make signiﬁcant strides in shoring up our enterprise security in 
an enviromnent fraught with risk. Nationally, cyber-attacks against state and local 
govermnents continue to increase and We are on the frontlines of defense. As cyber- 
attacks, especially ransomware, continue to increase in volume, variety and 
sophistication, a growing number of victims are state and local governments and school 
districts. To lead on cybersecurity, We must continue to prioritize cybersecurity funding 
for initiatives that strengthen, improve, and promote our State’s Information Security 
Program, build the capacity of our state’s cybersecurity workforce pipeline, promote 
adoption of best practices and enhance security awareness at all tiers of govermnent. 
The State’s general fund investments in information technology have enabled 
signiﬁcant strides towards greater protection of the enterprise. Speciﬁcally, these funds 
have allowed MaineIT to prioritize three levels of effort: 
1. Improving the breadth and depth of our information security professional staff. 
While we continue to have shortfalls in cybersecurity personnel, we have had success 
in onboarding six out of 8 of the positions requested in the Governor's Recommended 
Supplemental Budget for FY 2022 and 2023. These knowledgeable and skilled 
information security professionals are working to implement and operationalize OIT 
security initiatives, identifying a broad array of security risks on our network, and 
ensuring that security measures are up-to-date and effective. These professionals play
19
a key role in protecting the State's sensitive information assets and ensuring compliance 
with various federal and state information security regulations and standards. 
2. Improvements to Automated Information Security Tools and Infrastructure. 
Information security tools play a critical role in protecting the State’s network from 
cyber threats and potential data breaches. These tools help to secure sensitive 
information and prevent unauthorized access to sensitive data, such as personal 
information, ﬁnancial information, and conﬁdential government documents. These 
tools work together to provide a multi-layered defense against cyber-attacks and data 
breaches, helping to ensure the integrity and conﬁdentiality of the state's sensitive 
information. 
3. Matching funds for the IIJ A State and Local Cybersecurity Grant Program. State 
matching funds from Public Law 2021, chapter 635 leveraged federal cybersecurity 
funding from the 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act’s (IIJA) State and Local 
Cybersecurity Grant Program. This Grant Program provides an opportunity to fund 
initiatives that will move all levels of government towards baseline cybersecurity 
readiness and will incentivize collaborative partnerships at the federal, state and local 
levels. This initiative recognizes the high degree of interconnectedness of our state and 
local entities and will raise our collective cyber readiness to help our communities 
statewide become more secure. Maine continues to encourage the federal govermnent 
to expand its funding for cybersecurity issues as fraud, scams, and breaches are a state, 
national, and global threat. 
Additionally, progress would not have been possible without the ﬁlnds provided 
through the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan (MJRP). These included the State 
Cybersecurity Program for $8,173,402 and Business Continuity Plan for Information 
Technology for $6,000,000. These funds were part of the planned $40 million “to 
invest in targeted upgrades to make State systems more user friendly, as well as 
cybersecurity needed to ensure safe State operations. ” To cite speciﬁc improvements, 
MaineIT has: 
1. Implemented new security practices and resources to continuously review, 
evaluate, and remediate security vulnerabilities as part of the continuous monitoring 
strategy;
20
2. Established audit and compliance capabilities with security and privacy laws, 
rules, and regulations to protect federal and state sensitive data; 
3. Partnered with security vendors to provide 24/7 security monitoring of the State 
of Maine enviromnent, making the enterprise less vulnerable to cyber-attacks and data 
breaches; 
4. Enhanced and implemented capabilities that enable Endpoint Detection and 
Response functions to support a hybrid workforce; 
5. Enhanced email security capabilities to tighten protections and mitigate threats; 
and 
6. Increased capacity to address security gaps and to address threats to the State of 
Maine. 
MaineIT had a third-party security vendor conduct a security and privacy control 
assessment in 2019 against standards set by the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST). MaineIT ascribes to security and privacy controls set by NIST as 
these are the same standards used in all federal compliance requirements and by the 
State of Maine in audits conducted by the Ofﬁcer of the State Auditor. Another, 
recently concluded assessment conducted by the same third-party security vendor 
showed a nine percent increase in our security and privacy control implementation. 
While this is a modest gain, this is a good news story when you consider NIST 
substantially increased the number of security and privacy controls required of an 
entity. NIST controls are generally used to enhance the cybersecurity framework, risk 
posture, information protection, and security standards of organizations. Speciﬁcally, 
NIST added 66 additional security and privacy controls and 149 control enhancements. 
These general funds will be needed to offset What is currently being funded by MJRP. 
While we are constantly assessing what will be required to “appropriately fund” 
cybersecurity, this is a complex undertaking due to the ever-evolving nature of the 
cyber landscape and technology improvements and enhancements. What we know now 
is, our assessment shows areas we need to improve and certain areas where we need to 
catch up to minimal standards. We continue to have a lot of work ahead of us to reduce 
the risk to our IT infrastructure in our current cyber threat enviromnent. We greatly 
appreciate your support as we continue working to understand the complex and
21
emerging cybersecurity risks that we face as a State. We are committed partnering with 
you to safeguard the State’s IT infrastructure and the information entrusted to us by 
Maine residents. 
The next initiative is on the top of page A-30 and increases General Fund support by 
$772,150 in each ﬁscal year. The technology industry is one of the fastest-growing 
industries in the United States. Computing professions are growing more than twice 
as fast as the average for all occupations, and signiﬁcantly faster than most other 
science, technology, engineering, and math career ﬁelds. For the public sector, 
changing the approach to searching for new talent is essential to begin closing the 
workforce gap. 
The public sector needs to use its strengths to encourage young people, veterans, and 
near-retirement workers to join the public sector — to both give back and use their 
talents to move public organizations forward. We believe our Intem/Mentorship 
Program addresses not only those entering the workplace but infuses the existing 
workforce as they train and mentor interns. This dual approach allows talent to grow 
from within to gain supervisory skills to enhance their own development and posturing 
them to become tomorrow ’s leaders. 
The cost to hire interns, who complete the same level and quality of work as entry-level 
state employees, is signiﬁcantly less than hiring a full-time employee to serve in the 
same role. This, coupled with the beneﬁts of developing our current workforce and 
attracting new talent makes the value of this program to the State, IT, and citizens, 
immeasurable. 
Currently no funding model exists to support a robust internship program within 
MaineIT. Agencies wishing to support an IT intern must identify the funding for that 
intern from within their agency. Many agencies have come to greatly appreciate their 
intern workers, many of whom transition to state employees when positions for full- 
time hire are available. 
MaineIT is requesting $722,150 in each year to support the internship program. 
Skipping the fourth initiative, the next initiative establishes four positions in the Project 
Management Ofﬁce to be billed to agencies as the services are used. The Project 
Management Ofﬁce provides oversight and accountability for successful project
22
implementation by applying nationally recognized best practices to ensure projects are 
completed on time, within budget, and meet original goals while avoiding scope creep. 
The PMO provides a full array of project management services through the entire 
lifecycle of Projects and Initiatives critical to ensure the State’s interests are met and 
intended outcomes are achieved. 
The PMO continues its effort to replace costly staff augmentation contractors with state 
employees. Using State employee staff allows the PMO to gain the efﬁciency of 
assigning project managers to multiple projects, the beneﬁts of ongoing training and 
familiarity with state projects and processes. By using state employees, quality is 
increased, and dollars are saved. A contracted project manager can only work on one 
project at a time while state employees have consistently and effectively managed 2-5 
projects at a time. High quality project management has been proven to reduce 
unexpected expenditures, delays, and even project failures and deliver high quality 
results. This results in increased intemal service fund allocations of $564,620 in ﬁscal 
year 2024 and $593,068 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
This next initiative for MaineIT establishes two positions to support the Department of 
Defense, Veterans, and Emergency Management. These positions are required to 
acquire and maintain US Secret Service security clearance to work on DVEM’s 
systems. They will be funded through DVEM (see corresponding request on page A- 
179) with $232,715 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $244,602 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
Now to talk about various geospatial requests. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-29 establishes one Public Service Coordinator I position 
and one System Analyst position in the General Fund to service Geospatial mapping 
needs within the Maine GeoLibrary and provides funding for related All Other. The 
Maine Library of Geographic Information (GeoLibrary Board) was established in 2002 
through State statute to. expand and promote the value of geographic spatial data 
through widespread distribution and innovative use for the beneﬁt of Maine's citizens. 
The GeoLibrary Board is comprised of public and private stakeholders who, among 
other tasks:
23
' Collect, maintain, and determine how to use geospatial information system data. 
- Support and maintain a state~of-the-art, comprehensive, and ever-expanding 
L portal to public geospatial information and services.A 
~ Reduce redundancies in the creation, veriﬁcation, and maintenance of public 
geographic information to enhance its utility for complex analyses. 
' Develop services to facilitate generalized access for and use of data by 
governmental agencies and the public. 
MaineIT has historically augmented support for the GeoLibrary Board using two 
partially dedicated resources, totaling about 30 hours each week collectively. These 
staff hold roles that are intended to be dedicated full time to supporting Maine State 
agency needs. Our attempt to leverage existing resources in a part-time capacity to 
support the GeoLibrary Board has caused both this, and their primary focus area, to 
suffer. Attempting to divide time between two separate areas of focus hinders our 
ability to maintain a balance of ensuring both State of Maine agencies and the 
GeoLibrary Board are fully and adequately served in all Geospatial Information System 
initiatives. 
The practice of leveraging our resources in this manner to support both GeoLibrary 
Board and Maine Geospatial Information Systems initiatives is not enough and doesa 
disservice to both areas needing full-time support resources. There is far more work 
that is required which simply cannot be accomplished through the current support 
model. Maine is lacking in our ability to secure and leverage Federal matching grants. 
Additional funding avenues and our ability to robustly support citizens and 
governmental agencies using the data is also signiﬁcantly constrained. 
To deliver on the strategic direction and to be an effective partner in supporting the 
Maine GeoLibrary Board with its statutorily mandated tasks, we are asking to establish 
two new full-time positions to serve and focus on GeoLibrary Board initiatives, 
modernizations, strategic enhancements, and citizen support. The $246,228 and 
$270,993 being requested for Fiscal Year 2024 and 2025 respectively, will allow 
MaineIT to ﬁll these positions to robustly support the GeoLibrary Board, generate more 
value, increase cost savings to the State of Maine, and ensure the citizens of Maine are 
able to beneﬁt from the service.
24
Next and related is the fourth initiative in this program, or the second initiative at the 
top of page A-30. In addition to the increased headcount to serve the essential mission 
of the GeoLibrary Board, MaineIT is also requesting General Fund support for State 
Aerial Image Collection Projects. The General Fund support for this initiative will be 
used to collect, refresh, and store high resolution aerial images for the State, and 
ﬁnancially support speciﬁc projects for Geographic Information System Mapping 
(GIS) and Orthoimagery and Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR). 
Part of the GeoLibrary Board mission is the maintenance of the GeoLibrary, where 
aerial data, spanning back over a decade, is stored for statewide support and use. As 
GeoLibrary programs, imagery, technology, and data collection practices mature, new 
imagery data must routinely be collected to ensure the data is both viable and valuable 
long term to Maine communities. In Fiscal Year 2022 alone, the GeoLibrary acquired 
aerial imagery for over 16,000 square miles. 
The data collected through the GeoLibrary has a transformative effect on land 
development costs for private and public sectors in Maine’s economy. These detailed 
aerial images collected are used to map land, boundaries, climate change, erosion, and 
other land anomalies. In addition, elevation data provides a rich resource for analyzing 
natural and manmade environments. The GeoLibrary provides a coordination avenue 
for State agencies to support their efforts and combine aerial imagery needs to reduce 
overall costs. On-going funding will provide continuity for a program that has 
substantially beneﬁted the state, counties, and municipalities. 
As part of the cost-sharing funding model, the State has an obligation to provide 
matching funds necessary to supplement the ﬁscal support received from private 
sources, local governments, municipalities, and other statewide grant opportunities. 
The GeoLibrary needs an ongoing funding source to stabilize the Orthoimagery 
program, as well as GIS and data infrastructure for the future. The $553,772 being 
requested in both Fiscal Year 2024 and 2025 will provide the ﬁnancial support 
necessary to match funds to counties and attract. additional funding from local 
communities. 
Centralized Imaging Services (Z372) 
Turning back to page A-22, there is one initiative in this program providing an 
appropriation of $500,000 in each ﬁscal year to conduct aerial imaging acquisition and 
processing and Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) on state agency directed
25
projects. While the GeoLibrary Board provides services and tools that align with the 
needs of the public, the Board does not currently have a mission to fund data and 
imagery collection and facilities that are statutory requirements of individual State 
agencies. Combining the resources of technology tools and platforms creates 
efﬁciencies and reuse but underlying those tools is still the need for ongoing collection 
of imagery and data. This initiative proposes to create a standing fund, dedicated to 
serve State agency data collection needs, to be prioritized and managed by a governing 
board internal led by MaineIT. This provides better opportunity to align data collection 
with the GeoLibrary Board and ensure Maine is getting the best value when acquiring 
aerial services. 
The entirety of the ﬁrst year of this funding will be dedicated to meet the Department 
of Agriculture, Conservation and Forest1y ’s Public Lands division and their 
requirement to update forestry inventories that was established in Public Law 2017, 
Chapter 289. In subsequent years, these funds will be prioritized across all agencies ’ 
needs. 
Statewide Radio Network System (0112) 
The Statewide Radio Network System, found on page A—53, is the debt service for 
the statewide radio network. Radio Operations is a division within MaineIT that 
procures, installs, commissions and maintains a consolidated radio communications 
network to provide service to all State of Maine public safety and public service users. 
The baseline General Fund appropriation to cover debt service for the infrastructure 
and the rolling replacement of radios is approximately $4.2 million each year. 
There are no new initiatives in this program. But, it makes sense to discuss language 
Part R at this time as it relates to this debt service account. 
Part R may be found on language page 23. This Part authorizes the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services to enter into ﬁnancing arrangements in ﬁscal 
years 2024 and 2025 for the acquisition of portable radios, upgrades of tower hardware, 
and the purchase of equipment to support tower maintenance for the Statewide Radio 
Network within Maine IT. This mechanism ensures the State can continually upgrade 
and provide maintenance of the State’s radio network serving ﬁrst responders and 
numerous other State agencies. The radios are on a rolling replacement schedule.
26
The last Division is the Bureau of General Services (BGS). BGS provides consolidated 
management and coordinated oversight for a range of property, procurement, and 
central services to meet the operational needs of State programs and services. BGS 
pursues cost-effective operations in its own activities and in the operations of other 
departments and agencies. BGS is comprised of eight functional divisions: 
Division of Property Management; Division of Leased Space; Division of Planning, 
Design & Construction; Division of Safety and Environmental Services; Division of 
Central Fleet Management; Division of Central Services Division of Procurement 
Services; and, Ofﬁce of State-Owned Landﬁll Management (under the jurisdiction of 
the Joint Standing Committee of Enviromnent and Natural Resources). 
Buildings & Grounds Operations (0080) 
The Buildings and Grounds Operations program is on page A-14. This program 
ensures that facilities are safe, sanitary and healthy for those who work and visit 
them. This program covers both the Division of Property Management and the 
Division of Leased Space. 
The General Fund appropriation and Highway Fund allocation support approximately 
100 positions responsible for general maintenance and repairs, groundskeeping, and 
housekeeping as well as heating and cooling for state-owned facilities in the Augusta 
area representing nearly 2 million square feet. Funds in this program pay for utilities, 
fuel and security efforts of the buildings. 
The Internal Service Fund supports 3 positions and contains the activity of the Division 
of Leased Space that administers over 250 active leases for ofﬁce, warehouse, garage, 
storage, tower, classroom, mixed use, and training purposes in the service of 37 State 
agencies, across 68 different municipalities and 5 unorganized territories. The 
Division ’s leasing portfolio includes 1,882,244 square feet of space with an 
approximate value of $27 million. This total includes rent, utilities, custodial services, 
and all associated costs of the leased space. The Other Special Revenue Fund contains 
activity associated with the leasing of state property to external agencies. 
There are four initiatives in this program.
27
The two initiatives on page A-14 provide funding for increased utility and fuel costs 
and for contracted services and repair costs. The ﬁrst initiative increases funding in 
the General Fund and the Highway Fund by $1,155,159 in each ﬁscal year to support 
cost increases related to the Augusta area. The second initiative increases the Other 
Special Revenue Funds allocation by $285,000 in each year to support similar expenses 
on the Bangor campus. 
At the top of page A-15, the third initiative establishes 2 Plant Maintenance Engineer 
positions for the Bureau of General Services to assist with the maintenance and repair 
of water, heating and electric systems in state owned facilities. 
The work of these positions ensures the operation of the boilers and other heating and 
cooling equipment in our state-owned facilities. Regulations require that qualiﬁed 
technicians be on site 24 hours, 7 days a week, 365 days a year to ensure appropriate 
monitoring (some systems require at least every 4 hours). 
Based on the size, number, and age and state of our equipment, this staff operates ata 
deﬁcit that requires frequent double shifts and no room for unanticipated or scheduled 
absences. The current staff are dedicated to their mission but are struggling with the 
overload of work. We did add one position in the last budget; however, we need more. 
The stafﬁng shortage is a safety issue for our staff and those who work or visit our 
buildings, and puts our regulatory compliance at risk. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program increases the allocation in the Real Property Lease 
Internal Service Fund account. This increase is necessary to support the current 
level of activity in the account and will minimize the need for ﬁnancial orders 
processed during the year. 
Leased Space Reserve Fund Program (Z145) 
The next program, on page A-31, is the Leased Space Reserve Fund Program. This 
fund is used to collect savings that accrue from relocation of a state agency from leased 
space to a state-owned facility or a relocation of a state agency from leased space toa 
lower-priced leased space. Funds are used to defray moving costs. 
Next is the Division of Planning, Design & Construction. This Division is responsible 
for capital improvement planning for facilities, architectural and engineering design
28
procurement, and approval of design agreements, bidding of public improvement 
projects, and construction administration and monitoring of all the State's public 
improvements and public-school projects. Currently, the Division is engaged in 
approximately 300 active projects. _ _ y 
First, some background on the need for funding investments to attend to state-owned 
facilities and infrastructure. 
Background Study and Market Factors 
BGS hired a consultant, Gordian, formerly Sightlines, to conduct an extensive 
evaluation of the state’s building portfolio in 2020. Their report concluded that the 
state-owned buildings managed by BGS were older than comparable state government 
facilities in Maine (peer institutions were the community colleges and university 
campuses). Thirty-three percent (594,000 square feet) of the State of Maine’s owned 
space was built before 1885. Another 45% (8l0,000 square feet) was built between 
1851 and 1975. Seventy-eight percent (78%) of the State’s buildings (comprising 
1,404,000 square feet) are more than 48 years old. 
Due to chronic underfunding of maintenance, repairs, and capital improvements 
generally, Gordian identiﬁed a cumulative backlog in 2020 of $87 million in immediate 
“catch up” costs. These funds were intended to address systems and facilities that had 
met their useful life and required full replacement. To maintain a “steady state” of all 
systems, $8 million in “keep up” costs was needed annually. 
In 2022, the “catch up” number increased to $124 million and the cost to “keep up” 
building conditions costs increased to $9 million annually. Inﬂation, scarcity due to 
supply chain issues, and the cost of labor are responsible for the increase, which 
generally reﬂects the inﬂation factor used in the construction industry of 10% per year. 
However, in today’s market, a 10% annual increase is optimistic. F or. example, bids 
for the Cultural Building renovation were double the architect ’s renovation cost 
estimate. 
It's important to note that the $124 million is not all inclusive. Gordian’s 2022 numbers 
do not and could not reﬂect two major factors that will increase the total costs. First, 
renovation costs are substantially underestimated if asbestos or other hazardous 
materials, and/or dangerous conditions prevent full access to the buildings. This can
29
conceal degradation and obsolescence of electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and 
structural systems. This was the case at the Cultural Building and the Stone Buildings. 
Second, the cost of hazardous materials remediation. Gordian was not tasked with 
assessment of hazardous materials, so the cost to remediate is not included in the report 
and would be in addition to the $124 million. These costs can be extensive. In the 
Cultural Building, for instance, asbestos abatement costs are approaching $4 million, 
adding 15% to the total construction budget. Additionally, the cost estimates did not 
include Mackworth Island or the Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center, both of which 
require substantial facility work measured in the tens of millions of dollars. Nor do the 
estimates include civil projects such as retaining wall repairs, tunnel efforts, or the 
remediation of Dolby Landﬁll contaminated leachate. 
There are several programs that support these efforts, in addition to the Maine 
Governmental Facilities Authority. 
Capital Construction/Repairs/Improvement — Admin (0059) 
On page A-17 is the baseline for the Capital C0nstruction/Repairs/ 
Improvement — Admin program. This program supports the preliminary work of 
planning and design of the large improvement projects managed by the Division of 
Planning, Design & Construction. The General Fund baseline budget is $301,836. 
This Program also has an Other Special Revenue allocation in the rare case of private 
contributions made in support of state facilities. 
There are no new initiatives in this program. 
Public Improvements — Planning/Construction — Admin (0057) 
The next program, Public Improvements — Planning/Construction — Admin, is on 
page A-39. This program covers the 11 staff in the Division of Planning, Design& 
Construction and the Division of Safety and Environmental Services. As previously 
highlighted, the Division of Planning, Design & Construction staff are responsible for 
the planning, design and construction administration of all the state’s public school 
projects and the state’s facility improvements. They manage the procurement process 
for architectural and engineering contracts, conduct the bidding for construction, and 
monitor construction projects. The Division of Safety and Environmental Services 
provides hazardous material (asbestos, lead, mold, mercury, PCBs) and indoor air
30
quality assessment and mitigation oversight services for public schools and state 
facilities and serves as the lead agency of the State for these matters. The annual budget 
is approximately $2.0 million. 
The Department of Administrative and Financial Services has direct responsibility to 
ensure the safety and wellness of our state govermnent employees. Our Bureau of 
Human Resources ’ statutory mission is “to establish within state govermnent a high 
concern for state employees as people” . Our Bureau of General Services (BGS) is 
tasked speciﬁcally with ensuring “facilities are safe, sanitary and healthy for those who 
work in and visit them” . DAFS advocated for and two positions were restored in PL 
2021, Chapter 398 to staff the statutorily required Division of Safety and 
Enviromnental Services. 
In direct response to the serious health threat posed by COVID-19, BGS worked with 
each department and agency to identify and complete retroﬁts to our State buildings 
that enhance worker safety and health. Improvements aimed at air quality include: 
installing bipolar ionization systems in State-owned and leased buildings; mechanical 
equipment replacements and upgrades to improve air circulation within nine State 
buildings; upgrading to higher density (MERV 13) air ﬁlters; and installing air puriﬁers 
throughout buildings without central air systems. As is their routine practice, the BGS 
team has been diligent about ensuring that all facilities meet U.S. CDC designated 
criteria for ventilation system design and indoor air quality. We replaced or upgraded 
the ventilation equipment in 1.2 of the 1.8 million square feet of state-owned space in 
Augusta. 
The Division of Safety and Environmental Services has made a concerted effort to 
collect and catalog in a comprehensive ﬁle known data related to harmful contaminants 
contained in and around State workspaces (both owned and leased), including asbestos, 
lead, PCB and mold. This database includes all testing associated with the discovery 
and remediation, such as air and water testing, and including post clearance results. We 
also document the steps taken to remediate these items. Additionally, the Labor- 
Management Committee on Building Safety has met bi-weekly over the last year and 
provided an effective venue for MSEA to raise concerns brought to them by their 
members. At these meetings, BGS provides detailed actions, updates and remediations 
of any known air quality and hazardous materials issues. People know this Division 
exists and is diligent and responsive. This is an ongoing, dynamic effort and we use
31
and track this information to help ensure that facilities are safe, sanitary, and healthy 
for those who repair, maintain, Work in, and visit them. 
During recruitment efforts, it was determined that the supervisor position neededto be 
a higher classiﬁcation due to the knowledge and special licenses. The ﬁrst initiative 
provides funding to increase the hours of one Occupational Health and Safety 
Compliance Assistance Specialist position from 52 hours to 80 hours biweekly to 
ensure timely and adequate coverage of the responsibilities of this division. In addition, 
this full-time position will allow the Division to proactively engage on the design and 
installation of all ventilation improvements. 
The second initiative provides funding for the Department's share of the cost for the 
ﬁnancial and human resources service center within the Department of Administrative 
and Financial Services. 
Bureau of General Services — Capital Construction & Improvement Reserve Fund 
(0883) 
The next program, on page A-16, is the baseline budget for the Capital Construction 
& Improvement Reserve Fund. This fund is used for the receipt and expenditure of 
funds earmarked for major capital improvements, repairs, and renovation of state 
government owned facilities. The funding is necessary for repair, replacement, and 
renovation including: parking garage repairs; plumbing and electrical issues; roof 
replacements and repairs; mold, lead, asbestos and water testing; walkway repairs; 
septic system maintenance; building envelope repairs; drainage upgrades; site work; 
above- and below- ground infrastructure; paving improvements and striping; master 
plan updates; masonry repointing; window replacements; space planning; mechanical 
system upgrades; painting, ﬂooring, carpeting, lighting repairs and updates; retaining 
wall maintenance; remediation efforts; and capital asset management plamiing. 
These funds are more ﬂexible than other capital improvement funds, such as Maine 
Governmental Facilities Authority (MGFA), allowing us to more nimbly respond to 
emergencies or unplanned events, such as a failed system or building envelope issue. 
These funds can also be used for project assessment, which helps us more strategically 
assign our MGFA funds; design facility upgrades and improvements in advance of the 
issuance of MGFA funds, allowing the MGFA projects to go to bid as soon as funds 
are available; and demolition, which MGFA does not cover.
32
The funding for this account is a bit sporadic. Public Law 2015, chapter 267, Part L-8 
amended the statute that prioritized year end transfers, otherwise known as “the 
cascade” , by eliminating the transfer to this program. Prior to this elimination, at the 
close of _each ﬁscal year following certain other transfers, 10% of the remaining excess 
revenues were transferred to this fund to support necessary projects and improvements 
related to state owned properties. Also, there is an Other Special Revenue account for 
proceeds from the sale of state buildings and property, which has spent down to nearly 
zero, meant to be used to support maintenance. However, deposits are not consistent as 
sales of state property are infrequent and even when available cover only a small 
fraction of the need. 
Happily, Public Law 2021, chapter 398, Part SSS transferred $50,000,000 from the 
unappropriated surplus of the General Fund to the Other Special Revenue Funds 
account in this program for the purpose of funding umnet capital construction and 
repair needs for state-owned buildings. 
The one initiative in this program provides a $2 million allocation in Capital 
Expenditures in both ﬁscal year 2024 and 2025. Renovation and repair work is now in 
process, and the entire $50 million has been assigned to nearly 30 capital improvement 
projects. Twenty-four percent (24%) has been expended and an additional twelve 
percent (12%) has been encumbered. Design work is in process for the remainder. This 
allocation increase will enable the use of these funds for those projects in the next 
biennium. 
Next is more information on the Maine Governmental Facilities Authority (MGFA). 
The Maine Governmental Facilities Authority (MGFA) was created in 1997 to assist 
with ﬁnancing the acquisition, construction, improvement, reconstruction, and 
equipping of additions to governmental facilities. The authority is govemed by ﬁve 
members including the State Treasurer, the Commissioner of Administrative and 
Financial Services, and three members appointed by the Governor. The MGFA issues 
securities on behalf of the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial Branches to ﬁlnd large 
projects essential to governmental operations. 
Under the MGFA process, the Commissioner of Administrative and Financial Services 
identiﬁes projects essential to Executive Branch operations, obtains legislative
33
approval for borrowing, and designates those projects to the MGF A Board for issuance 
of securities. 
MGFA funding is a critical tool that allows DAF S to address the deteriorated condition 
of the State’s old and chronically underfunded facilities, often allowing for an adaptive 
reuse to address current agency needs. Funds are used to address hazardous material 
abatement, building envelope repairs and restoration, improvements at state-owned 
landﬁlls to reduce contaminated leachate, and to plan for and construct replacement 
structures in the rare case where a specialized use has outgrown the existing building ’s 
capacity. 
It makes sense to discuss language Parts E, F and G at this time as they all relate to 
MGFA requests. 
Debt Service — Government Facilities Authority (0893) 
The baseline budget for the next program, Debt Service — Government Facilities 
Authority, may be found at the top of page A-24. This program provides funding for 
annual principal and interest payments in support of capital construction and renovation 
of state facilities. These funds provide the means to assist Maine State Government in 
ﬁnancing the construction and equipping of facilities by providing access to the tax- 
exempt bond market. The annual appropriation in this account is nearly $22 million. 
MGFA Funds 2019-2022 
Since 2019, three legislatively authorized MGFA borrowings have, are or will fund full 
renovations of long-neglected buildings (the Ray Building, 221 State Street, and the 
Greenlaw Building); abatement, repair and replacement of some major systems in the 
Cultural Building to restore it to functionality; and the ﬁrst phase of work on the Stone 
Building. Important work included extensive building envelope work at the Maine 
Criminal Justice Academy; replacement of several badly deteriorated roofs (Tyson 
Building and 6 Elkins Lane, to which some Maine State Archives collections were 
relocated); and masonry work to secure Cross Building granite panels, many of which 
are held on with metal bands. Funds were also used on Phase II of the project to 
remediate contaminated leachate at Dolby Landﬁll, acquired in 2011, and to funda 
new Ofﬁce of Chief Medical Examiner facility as the current building is obsolete, does
34
not have an isolation area for communicable diseases, and is no longer able to support 
the number of autopsies required.D 
MGFA Requests FY 24-25 Biennial Budget _ 
All this to say. . .We have made signiﬁcant improvements to state-owned facilities. But 
there is still much to do and it is imperative to continue these critical infrastructure 
investment efforts. Therefore, in the biennial budget, DAFS is requesting authority for 
three MGFA tranches. 
The ﬁrst amount of $34.05 million (Part F, page 9), will fund: continued efforts to 
address extensive building envelope and mechanical needs at the Maine Criminal 
Justice Academy; the ﬁnal phase of the Dolby landﬁll capping project; the next phase 
of the Stone Building renovation (abatement and mechanical Work); the next phase of 
roof edge and ﬂashing work on the Center Building; some interior work to restore an 
old auditorium that will serve as conference space on the East Campus; remediation 
and closure of East Campus tunnels; renovation of several long-neglected small historic 
buildings occupied by the Maine Arts Commission, Maine Historic Preservation 
Commission, and the Secretary of State; and structural work at a storage barn within 
the Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center campus, turned over to BGS in poor condition 
when no longer used by the hospital. Due to reﬁnancing and retirement of older 
borrowings, DAFS has funds to absorb the debt service in the baseline appropriation. 
The second amount of $37 million (Part G, page 10) will be used for window repairs 
and replacements at the Bureau of Motor Vehicle Building; a security screening facility 
at the Cross Building; security fencing at the Blaine House; insulation and window 
repairs at the Cross Building; the next phase of work at Stone Building (windows and 
interior renovations); renovation work to the former Inland Fisheries & Wildlife 
Building on the Bangor Campus; and a replacement of mechanical equipment at the 
Crime Lab. _ . . 
It is important to note that these project lists are based on what we know today. BGS 
will shift as needed to accommodate bids in this unpredictable market, supply chain 
issues, contractor availability, and emergency needs. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-24 provides $3 million each year for amiual principal and 
interest payments on funds borrowed through the Maine Governmental Facilities
35
Authority in support of Part G, on language page 10, which authorizes the issuance 
of $37,000,000 for capital repairs and improvements to state-owned facilities and 
hazardous waste cleanup on state-owned properties. 
The third amount of $39.5 million (Part E, page 8) renovates the historic “CETA” 
Building (former AMHI nurses’ residence) at the East Campus and adds space for 
ofﬁces, labs, and equipment storage. 
This plan will consolidate several Inland Fisheries & Wildlife locations into one central 
facility. The new facility will accommodate ofﬁces, conference rooms, education 
space, a necropsy lab, equipment and vehicle storage, and the ﬁsh health lab. It will 
create needed adjacencies among department units; provide centralized space for 
vehicles, storage, and supplies; and enhance opportunities for public education and 
interaction. 
More than 7,000 people per year visit IF&W’s main ofﬁce. This number will increase 
with additional outreach and educational programming; helping the Department reach 
its goal to recruit new outdoor enthusiasts. The proposed facility will be designed to 
meet Maine’s Climate Action goals through energy efﬁciency, use of Maine wood 
products, and incorporation of technologies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
The proposed location, the East Campus, is consistent with the Augusta State Facilities 
Master Plan. The CETA Building, former nurses’ quarters for the Augusta Mental 
Health Institute, will be renovated and expanded for this project. An adjacent 
bam/building will provide storage for boats, ATVs, snow machines, and other 
equipment (all unheated space), and house the necropsy lab (heated space). 
There are a number of beneﬁts to renovating this state-owned building on land already 
owned and managed by the state. The East Campus plan carries the beneﬁt of Property 
Management Division services and avoids the rent increases endemic to private 
leases. It avoids “additional rent” for things that PMD and the state would provide at 
a lower cost such as heating and cooling, water and sewer charges, maintenance fees, 
pest control, insurance, janitorial services, trash removal, snow removal and grounds 
work, and general property management. Leases also contain escalation provisions 
requiring the state to absorb increased costs including increases in property taxes. For 
instance, the lease for 109 Capitol Street, executed in 2017, experienced an increase in 
year two “additional rent” from $611,854 to $780,725. Of the increase, $12,180 per
36
month is attributable to an increase in property taxes. In contrast, this state-owned 
project renovates an existing historic building, not only advancing the master plan goals 
for the East Campus, but also reusing existing building infrastructure. 
As such, the second initiative on page A-24 provides $3.2 million in each year for 
annual principal and interest payments on funds borrowed through the Maine 
Governmental Facilities Authority in support of Part E, on language pages 8 and 9, 
which authorizes the issuance of up to $39.5 million for this project. 
One more note before We leave this Division, the funding we are requesting to do all 
of what was just outlined is less than what it would have cost to demolish and replace 
the Cultural Building (which we wouldn’t do given the now iconic nature of the 
building!) which would have cost at the very minimum $1 10 million. Oh, we also have 
two attachments: one is a drone view of the East Campus — we’ve touched or will touch 
just about every one of these buildings; the other is a rendering of the proposed IF &W 
headquarters. 
Central Fleet Management (0703) 
The next Division is Central Fleet Management on page A-19. The Central Fleet 
intemal service fund coordinates the purchase, use and disposal of the state’s 
vehicles. Funds in this program are used to purchase vehicles and equipment, pay for 
maintenance, fl16l and insurance and maintain adequate stafﬁng to provide ﬂeet support 
services and analytical reporting of ﬂeet costs. This service and the vehicles 
themselves are supported through the fees paid by user agencies. 
There are 16 positions within the Central Fleet Management Central Motor Pool 
Internal Service Fund account; the annual budget is just over $9.3 million. 
There are ﬁve initiatives in this program. . 
The ﬁrst initiative establishes one Fleet Support Specialist position to manage the asset 
management software and telematics program to ensure efﬁcient tracking and care of 
the cars and light trucks procured, maintained and provided by the Division of Central 
Fleet Management.
37
The second initiative increases the allocation by $46,766 in ﬁscal year 2024 and 
$51,655 in ﬁscal year 2025 to fund the proposed reorganization of eight positions 
within the Division to better align their classiﬁcations to their work responsibilities. 
The total increased allocation related to these reclasses is $46,766 in ﬁscal year 2024 
and $51,655 in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The next two initiatives relate to a vehicle ﬂeet telematics system. This includes a one- 
time $10,000 allocation in ﬁscal year 2024 and an ongoing allocation of $365,000 for 
the annual maintenance costs associated with a vehicle ﬂeet telematics system. 
Central Fleet Management maintains vehicle records in an intemally developed, 
customized, and antiquated R-Base system that is no longer supported. In addition, we 
use several different MS Excel spreadsheets to track various processes, tasks, and 
items. And then there’s the hard copies of invoices and other documents that must be 
retained and physically ﬁled. Billing and reporting tasks are completed by merging all 
this together manually. The systems need to be replaced with a modern ﬂeet 
management application that can consolidate all the processes and data into one 
comprehensive database. Upgrading will also provide telematics functions to collect 
administrative data currently submitted by hand (maintenance diagnostics, mileage, 
EV/hybrid data for proper placement with agencies, and vehicle charging data.) The 
introduction of telematics will allow mileage to be tracked and uploaded automatically, 
and with the planned increase in electric vehicles, will allow tracking of battery power 
consumption and charging details. 
It will provide the following beneﬁts: 
~ Consolidate data currently recorded on spreadsheets and other documents 
~ Improve accounting and billing processes 
~ Improve analytics and reporting capability 
' Introduce required telematics for mileage tracking and vehicle diagnostics for 
most state vehicles. Telematics offer future needs such as fuel and battery power 
consumption and charging details in EVs. 
~ Maintain digital copies of invoices and other documents to minimize paper 
records 
- Integrated fuel program 
' Integrated EZ-Pass program 
- Integrated purchasing program
38
~ Integrated stock program 
~ Integrated garage work orders for the state-run facility and for local garages near 
the vehicle’s location 
- Integrated rental vehicle program , 
The ﬁnal initiative provides one-time funding of $3 0,000 each year to cover the 
ongoing maintenance costs of an asset management software system that will be shared 
between the Division of Central Fleet Management and the Central Services program. 
A corresponding initiative will be found in the Central Services — Purchases program 
on page A-21 and the Purchases — Division of program on page A-40. 
Central Services — Purchases (0004) 
Next is the Division of Central Services. 
The Central Services - Purchases Program, on page A-21, is an Internal Service 
Fund funded by fees charged to its customer agencies. The 31 staff are responsible for 
managing central services in the areas of Postal Services and Surplus Property. 
State Postal Center provides a wide range of mail services for State agencies, including 
interofﬁce mail. The Postal Center presorts and bar codes mail 
thereby receiving discounted rates from the United States Postal Service. 
Surplus Property provides various mechanisms for the disposition of state surplus 
materials and equipment no longer needed by the state department that purchased 
them. In addition, federal surplus property is obtained for donation to qualifying state, 
public or non-proﬁt organizations throughout Maine. 
As just noted in the Central Fleet Management section, the ﬁrst initiative provides 
funding for ongoing maintenance, to be shared with Central Fleet, of the asset 
management system. Surplus Property is operating under original processes and tasks 
without the beneﬁt of any modern technology. These rely on paper forms, one 
spreadsheet and limited tracking of vehicles in a Microsoft Access database. 
Information is stored in ﬁle cabinets. The ability to generate reports on intake and sales 
of surplus items is manual, incomplete and time consuming.
39
The Surplus Property organization needs to establish and integrate a modern asset 
management system to process, track, and liquidate surplus property efﬁciently and 
effectively. This will improve the agency experience, streamline the customer sales 
process, and increase intake and sales volume, with the ultimate beneﬁt of creating a 
proﬁtable and self-funded unit. An asset management system will consolidate all 
processes into one comprehensive system and provide the following additional 
beneﬁts: 
~ Elimination of all paper documents and manual ﬁling 
- Online submission of surplus items by agencies 
' Improved intake processes and tracking of items 
~ Implementation of barcodes and scanners to track all surplus items 
- Implementation of Point-of-Sale equipment 
' Improved public, donee, and employee sales 
~ Implementation of an online “virtual” warehouse for the public, donees, and 
employees 
- Improved federal surplus sales, tracking and compliance, allowing for expanded 
acquisition of federal property for state and local government agencies and 
qualifying non-proﬁts 
~ Improved accounting and billing processes 
- Improved analytics and reporting capability 
The second initiative in this program establishes one Postal Services Worker position. 
Postal workers pick up and deliver all types of mail, sort incoming mail for delivery 
and presort outgoing mail for discounting, apply appropriate postage to letter and 
package mail, and drive postal vehicles in the performance of their duties. 
DAF S recently completed a study of Postal processes and the hours required to 
complete tasks by function. The report concluded that to meet standard delivery service 
and to perform all the functions required, Postalneeds to staff 78.18 hours per day. To 
staff to this minimum, Postal needs one additional Postal Services Worker. 
The third initiative on page A-21 funds the proposed reclassi ﬁcation of two positions. 
The ﬁrst changes one Ofﬁce Associate II position to an Accounting Technician. Both 
Postal Services and Surplus Property have business functions that would be improved 
and streamlined with business processing, expense review and processing, billing and 
accounting skills.
40
The second reclassi ﬁcation is from a Central Services Supervisor to a Business 
Manager I position. This reclassi ﬁcation adjusts the imbalance between management 
of Postal and Surplus and offers a cost-effective way to recruit a person with the skillset 
and management experience needed to address production and operational concerns. 
It would allow for a greater focus on Surplus operations, particularly Federal Surplus, 
and allow Surplus to be the proﬁtable operation it should be. These two reclasses 
increase allocation in the internal service fund of $9,232 in ﬁscal year 2024 and $9,904 
in ﬁscal year 2025. 
The ﬁnal initiative in Central Services provides one-time General Fund support of 
$1,734,808 for replacement equipment for the Postal Division and ongoing funding of 
$98,262 for postage meters, maintenance, and supplies. 
By now, you are sensing the trend that we have with a number of our Divisions. We 
need to modernize. Similarly, the equipment and technology used in the Postal Service 
is outdated and several systems are no longer able to be updated and are not supported 
by Maine IT on the state’s IT network. Four major areas of Postal operations are 
impeded by old equipment and lack of reliable technology: 
1. Data is entered manually, and old technology (various Access databases and R-Base 
for billing and processing) are no longer supported. 
2. Mail scanning is part electronic and part manual, making the need for cellular 
technology critical. Also, certiﬁed mail cards are processed on a system running on 
Windows 98 software, the equipment frequently breaks down requiring hand-stamping, 
and equipment parts are difﬁcult to obtain. 
3. Folding, Inserting and Meter-printed material runs on Windows 7 software, which 
is not upgradeable or supported, causing service issues. Equipment failure is a risk due 
to lack of availability of parts for the 10-year-old equipment. There is no battery 
backup, and it’s hard to ﬁnd people who can service our outdated machinery. 
4. The PCs and equipment that sort our Read and Sort system are operating on 
Windows 7, are obsolete and not upgradeable. The sorting system is 8 years old and 
other key equipment components are 15 years old. Again, parts availability, 
breakdowns, and delayed service are an issue.
41
The State Postal Center provides a wide range of mail services for more than 147 
separate State locations, including interofﬁce mail. Last year, they handled more than 
9 million pieces of outgoing mail, handled more than 4.5 million pieces of incoming 
mail, and processed more than 60,000 parcels/signature-required items. And still they 
are looking to do more! 
Currently, Postal Operations are a mix of state provided and direct services as we 
cannot support all of the mail services with too little staff and outdated or non-existent 
systems. Modemizing will allow us to pull the direct services back to this Division 
creating cost savings to the state, efficiencies and tracking not currently available. The 
following equipment upgrades would be funded with the budget request and allow 
Postal Services to scale the business and improve effectiveness. 
l. Handheld Scanners - Upgrade or replace the scanners to work on the cellular 
network in addition to Wi-Fi so it can support cellular voice and location tracking. 
2. Analytics Software — Acquire this cloud—based software that can track all tasks 
done on all the connected machines and processes. This will provide standardized 
reporting and billing capability. 
3. Blue Crest Business Manager — Upgrade the server to a Maine IT supported 
platform and upgrade the software to the latest Blue Crest software, also installed on 
the staff laptops so staff can control processes from their desks and track billing data. 
4. Certiﬁed Mail Equipment — Replace the desktop PC with a Maine IT supported 
PC or use staff laptops with appropriate software. Replace the printer. 
5. Metering Systems — Renew the lease on the six SendPro machines. Replace the 
package metering system with a new system that is comiected to the Business Manager. 
6. Folding and Insertion Machines — Replace or upgrade both machines with the 
latest technology. We need machines that have the same capabilities so that all tasks 
can be performed on either machine in case of an outage. 
7. OCR Sorting Machine — Upgrade the machine to the latest technology so that it 
can be integrated with the Analytics software. 
Purchases - Division of (0007) 
The next program is on page A-40. The Division of Purchases procures materials, 
supplies, equipment and services that represent the best value to the State of Maine. 
The Division has responsibility under law to make purchases on behalf of all 
departments and agencies of State Government, with consideration to life cycle,
42
delivery, quality and price. The Division of Purchases provides for open and 
competitive bidding in the procurement of goods and services to the greatest extent 
possible. The budget for this program is approximately $2.1 million each year and 
supports 13.5 positions. There are four initiatives in this program. _ 
The ﬁrst initiative provides $7,500 in each ﬁscal year for the costs associated with the 
statewide technology services provided by Maine Information Technology. 
The second initiative provides one-time funding of $300,000 to fully implement the 
Microsoft Dynamics portal to allow RFP proposals to be submitted, evaluated and 
awarded within the portal and provides on-going funding of $20,000 each year to cover 
licensing costs to streamline the procurement workﬂow and contract review process. 
The third initiative provides a one-time appropriation of $700,000 to support the asset 
management system that we discussed in the Central Fleet Management program, on 
page A-19, and Central Services Purchases program, on page A-21. The $30,000 
requests in Central Fleet and Central Services are the ongoing requests that will support 
the maintenance of the asset management system. 
The ﬁnal initiative in this program provides $54,000 in each ﬁscal year for contractual 
expenditures related to temporary stafﬁng and multimedia services. 
I will now turn to language parts related to the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. 
PartD 
PartD begins on language page 7. This Part updates the title of the Director of 
Human Resources to the State Human Resources Ofﬁcer within the major policy 
inﬂuencing position of the Department of Administrative and Financial Services and. 
in the list of positions with salaries set by the Governor. Sections 3 and 4 direct the 
Revisor of Statutes and Department of Administrative and Financial Services to update 
this title when updating, publishing or republishing the statutes or when adopting or 
amending rules and developing or publishing forms, policies and publications.
43
Parts E, F,G 
Parts E, F, and G all relate to the Maine Governmental Facilities Authority. I’ve left 
the information here that we spoke about earlier as reference, but won’t read it again. 
Part E, on language pages 8 and 9 of the language document, authorizes the Maine 
Governmental Facilities Authority to issue additional securities up to an amount of 
$39.5 million for the purposes of paying the costs associated with the plamiing, design, 
renovation, abatement, construction, ﬁnancing, furnishing, and equipping, of new and 
existing facilities to serve as a headquarters for the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife. There is a corresponding initiative on page A-24 to provide the funding for 
the annual principal and interest payments in the amount of $3.2 million each year. 
Part F on language page 9 authorizes the Maine Governmental Facilities Authority to 
issue additional securities up to an amount of $34,050,000 to pay for the costs of capital 
repairs and improvements to, and construction of, state-owned facilities and hazardous 
waste cleanup on state-owned properties. The debt service associated with this 
part can be covered within the baseline appropriation of the Debt Service- 
Govemmental Facilities Authority program found on page A-24. 
Part G on language page 10 authorizes the Maine Governmental Facilities Authority 
to issue additional securities up to an amount of $37,000,000 to pay for the costs of 
capital repairs and improvements to, and construction of, state-owned facilities and 
hazardous waste cleanup on state-owned properties. There is a corresponding initiative 
on page A-24 to provide the funding for the annual principal and interest payments in 
the amount of $3 million each year. 
PartN 
Part N may be found on language page 21. This Part authorizes the State Controller 
to carry any remaining balances in the Debt Service — Govermnental Facilities 
Authority program in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services in each 
year of the 2024-2025 biennium into the following ﬁscal year.
44
PartO 
Part O may be found on language page 22. This Part authorizes the State Controller 
to carry any remaining balances in the Central Administrative Applications program in 
the Department of Administrative and Financial Services in each year of the 2024-2025 
biennium into the following ﬁscal year. 
PartP 
Part P may be found on language page 22. This Part authorizes the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services to enter into ﬁnancing arrangements in ﬁscal 
years 2024 and 2025 for the acquisition of motor vehicles for the Central Fleet 
Management Division. 
PartQ 
Part Q begins on language page 22. This Part authorizes the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services to enter into ﬁnancing arrangements in ﬁscal 
years 2024 and 2025 for improvements to the State's teclmology infrastructure and data 
centers; purchase of enterprise software; modernization of databases, storage and other 
components; and improved security of personally identiﬁable information and other 
conﬁdential data. The debt service for this Part is included in the baseline of the Central 
Fleet Management program on page A-19. 
PartR 
Part R may be found on language page 23. This Part authorizes the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services to enter into ﬁnancing arrangements in ﬁscal 
years 2024 and 2025 for the acquisition of portable radios, upgrades of tower hardware, 
and the purchase of equipment to support tower maintenance for the Statewide Radio 
Network within Maine Information Technology. This mechanism ensures the State can 
continually upgrade and provide maintenance of the State’s radio network serving ﬁrst 
responders and numerous other State agencies. The radios are on a rolling refresh 
schedule. The debt service for this Part is included in the baseline of the Statewide 
Radio Network System program on page A-53.
45
This concludes my testimony. Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions 
you may have.
46
                                   
                                                                    
$/ O $1Y~P~T1V£ 
e‘ ‘W 
w '%/O ~27 
Q‘ EST. 193* 3%                   
Department of Administrative & Financial Services 
Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Department Orientation Prepared for the 
Joint Standing Committee on State & Local Government 
February 2, 2023 
Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative Affairs and Strategic Operations 
(207)522-4068 I anva.trundv@maine.gov
Table of Contents 
Orientation on the Department of Administrative & Financial Services 
prepared for the Joint Standing Committee on State & Local Government 
Department Overview 
DAFS Mission, Vision, Values 
Organizational Chart 
Office of the Commissioner 
DAFS Bureaus under the jurisdiction of SLG: 
Office of the State Economist 
Office of the State Controller 
Bureau of the Budget 
Bureau of Human Resources 
MainelT 
Bureau of General Services 
Division of Financial and Personnel Services 
Conclusion 
P8- 2 .\ 
Z 2‘ 
ﬁﬂ ' 
$3» 
L»/» 1*“ /q "\~ 1 RAT l \-'5 
6“: 44,’)
1 
m H-.-w" 
PE- 
P8- 
Pg- 
P8- 
P8 
P8 
P8 
PB 
P8 
P8 
P8 
PH-3
5
6
7
8 
10 
12 
15 
23 
30 
42
44
5‘ Wm v; 
\‘,\ 4,1,0 
31116- 
.1 .~ 
.0                                               
In nu 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Overview V ' 
The Department of Administrative & Financial Services (DAFS) is a broad-reaching innovative 
service organization serving the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of State government, 
all State agencies, and the public. Acting as the central nervous system of state government, DAFS 
is focused on the development, delivery, and maintenance of centralized government systems 
that sustainably support the financial, technological, human resource, environmental and 
infrastructure health of state government for the benefit of the public and our fellow state 
agencies and employees. 
DAFS is a large and wide-reaching department: we consist of 10 divisions; 7 of which report to 
the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government; are comprised of approximately 
1,200 positions; and our work intersects with every department, agency and branch of state 
government. 
DAFS has five committees of jurisdiction — plus significant interaction with the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs. 
DAFS serves as the principal fiscal advisor to the Governor; provides statewide economic 
forecasting, revenue projections, and demographic analyses; prepares the Governor's budgets, 
informs the Legislature's appropriation deliberations, and implements the enacted budget. For 
all Executive Branch departments and agencies, we provide financial management and 
accounting services, including payroll, processing transactions, grant management and 
reporting, financial reporting and analysis, review of internal controls and internal audit 
services, establishing uniform processes and adherence to best practices across state 
government, thereby eliminating the need for each department and agency to maintain their 
own internal accounting expertise. 
We are responsible for oversight of all aspects of the civil service system; workforce 
recruitment, development, and retention; adherence to personnel policies and administration 
of the classification and compensation system; negotiation of collective bargaining agreements 
and employee relations policy; and employee health and wellness. 
We maintain all State-owned buildings and grounds; manage new construction, renovations 
and repairs, and procurement of leased space; provide centralized purchasing of services, 
supplies, materials, and equipment for departments and agencies; oversee the State's fleet of 
passenger and light truck vehicles; attend to the disposition of surplus property; and ensure 
mail delivery to all of state government. 
pg.3
\$‘ “"T' "F 4,, 
9+ it 
o -='-vi‘ 
$1 i- 11131118 -                                
, .\ .9 tn uh‘ 
We furnish over 12,000 State employees and contractors with the computers, software, email 
and lT support services that enable them to do their jobs; protect the State's networks, 
services, application systems, and end-user computers from cybersecurity threats; develop 
custom applications to meet agencies unique needs; and provide local and cloud hosted data 
storage and management that protects the confidential information citizens have entrusted to 
their government. 
The following seven divisions fall under the jurisdiction of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Government and their operations are detailed in this report: 
~ State Economist, part of the Office of the Commissioner 
¢ Bureau of the Budget 
- Office of the State Controller 
- Division of Financial and Personnel Services (Financial/Human Resource Service Centers) 
- Bureau of Human Resources, excluding the Office of Employee Health and Benefits, and 
the Office of Workers‘ Compensation 
~ Bureau of General Services 
~ MainelT (former Office of information Technology) 
The remaining three divisions, as well as the Offices of Employee Health and Benefits and 
Workers‘ Compensation within the Bureau of Human Resources fall under the jurisdictions of 
other joint standing committees and are therefore not included in this report. 
~ Maine Revenue Service (TAX) 
~ Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations (VLA) 
~ Office of Cannabis Policy (VLA)) 
~ Office of Employee Health and Benefits (HCIFS) 
~ Office of Workers‘ Compensation (LBHS) 
DAFS employees are respected as conscientious stewards of the State's assets: financial, 
technological, human, physical, and natural. We are valued for the professional expertise 
and cooperative support we bring in assisting State departments and agencies to efficiently, 
effectively, and economically fulfill their important missions. 
pg.4
$9 ;..».1|v,= 
U; 
S /J 
5 V
3 
2 H»1,a1_-n € ‘;‘ 
'1/I ,. 1 . 5"
5 . 
,1’ \v. 
~/,0 ,3 
DAFS Mission, Vision, Values 
The Department's mission is to serve the public and deliver quality essential services to state 
government by providing leadership and accountability and performing with the highest level of 
collaboration and confidence. in alignment with Governor Mills, in our daily interactions people 
will find an open door, an open mind, and an open heart. 
Our mission: To serve the public and deliver essential services to state government. 
Our vision: Provide quality services, leadership, and accountability, and perform in a manner 
warranting the highest level of public confidence. 
Our values: Excellence, teamwork, and innovation; open and continuous communications; 
diversity, integrity, and humor; a helpful, courteous, and positive attitude; personal and 
professional growth; pride in our work; leading by example toward environmental sustainability; 
respect for our fellow State employees and the citizens we serve. 
How we get there: 
Provide quality services by: 
o Partnering with State agencies to meet mutual objectives. 
o Delivering products and services on time and in a professional" 
manner. 
o Enhancing knowledge of and access to services. 
Provide leadership and accountability by: 
o Promoting state~of-the-art systems. 
o Assisting the Legislature and State agencies in meeting their fiscal, human resources, 
technology, and operational responsibilities. 
o Managing revenues, resources, and costs to ensure accountability in the State of Maine's 
financial performance. 
Perform in a manner warranting the highest level of public confidence by: 
o Promoting excellence, innovation, communication, and teamwork. 
o Recognizing the abilities and achievements of State employees. 
o Inspiring others to be environmentally friendly by promoting sustainability at work and at 
home. . . .. 
Lead by Example: 
DAFS is uniquely poised, given our core functions, to play a principal role fulfilling Governor 
Mills’ charge to State Government to lead by example. 
o Promoting sustainability, renewable energy, and environmentally conscious practices 
0 Embracing and promoting Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Belonging practices 
pg.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Ofﬁce of information 
TcCl1t1 _Qlo_gl{ Office of State Econom_Lt_ 
Chief information Officer Department of Administrative and Financial Services __ 
Kirsten LC Figueroa Key 
Commissioner Under Jurisdiction of Joint Standing 
I Committee on State and Local Government
4
i 
Sharon Huntley Jenny Boyden Michael Allen 
Director, Communications Associate Commissioner Associate Commissioner _
_ 
of Tax Policy Maine Jobs 8: Recovery Lf M Under Jurisdiction of other enn' er errow . . . 
gxecuﬁve Assistant Cl Joint Standing Committees 
Crystal Vaughn 
Director, Special Projects 
Heather Perreault Anya Trundy Elaine Clark 
Deputy Commissioner Chief of Legislative and Deputy Commissioner 
of Finance Strategic Operations of Operations 
Fred Brittain Amanda Rector 
State Economist 9Q@SF’ _‘2§§E*E§..§ ""°“@1'P 
Doug Cotnoir 
State Controller fgllljgvég of ‘the Budgt‘ 
Beth Ashcroft 
State Budget Oﬂicer 
""| Nicholas Marquis 
.._,..| 
--—l Nathan Willigar 
@-liiiﬂ/“' 
Account Management '"“ 
J Ken Boykin Client & iniiastriicttire 
_,.-_§.ev_i<;<i7 
Exec. Dir, C&I Services 
Enterprise Shared 
Sharon Horne 
Exec. Dir., ES Services 
Information Security 
Chief Info Security Officer 
Project 
Management Oiﬁce 
Douglas Birgfeld 
Director, Pro!‘ Mgt Oﬁlce 
Derek Mullens 
Director, Account Mgrnt. 
_. 
Chief Data Ofﬁcer Office of State Economist 
Vacant 
Senior Economic Analyst 
Oflice of State Economist 
Denise St. Peter 
Economic Analyst 
Oftioe of State Economist 
Vac ant 
Data Comm. Specialist Ollice m'SlZil. € Controller 
Shirley Browne 
Deputy State Controller 
.9sr,1:e: ‘_*¥¢°\*"*i1*g 
— Tammy Chase 
Dir" Gen. Accounting 
_§BP_§1vs_r<1 ﬁl Kim Hall 
Dii:, ERP Operations ~._. 
Financial Repo' 
_| _m_ iavsiilﬂllg 
Sandra Royce 
Director, FR&A 
..-.1.etsr.11@.1 _.»‘\w=1@ 
Frank Wiltuck 
Director, intemal Audit <- 
State Payroll 
__| _____ _._ .... 
Soumia Tber 
Director, State Payroll 
.B!§!<.L¥a2aeem¢l1t J 
" Suzanne Murphy 
Director, Risk Mgmt. Bureau of the Budget 
Darryl Stewart 
Deputy State Bridget Otlicer Bureau ofl'lU.l1'18I1 Resources Division of Financial 
Breena Bissell 
State Human Resources Oﬂicer 
Field Services 
Lisa McGrotty 
Director, Field Services 
General Govt. 
Service Ctr (HR) 
"' Aimee Norko 
HR Director, GGSC 
Division of Talent 
_______ "Management Health8rHuInanServ 
Service Ctr. (HR) 
Jessica Crosby 
Director, Talent Mgmt. .i
1 
HR Director, HHSSC 
Compliance Division 
Kelsie Lee 
Director of Compliance Natural Resources 
NS__ervice Ctr. (I-lR) __ 
AmandaBeckwith 
l-IR Director, NRSC 
-_-J“ Oﬂice of Employee 
5_¢.1aPi_Q2§ Legal 
Vacant 
Chief Counsel Corrections 
Service Ctr. (HR) 
Darlene Sage 
HR Director, CSC 
Oﬂice of Employee 
Health Br Wellness 
-.,..'§“'_\__"__ 
M G rid 
‘Exec. Director,§EH8iVV S cur-rty ' 
8zEml- 
.\'Ile 6l1‘lZS€l'V.Cl1'.l(Jl%) 
_‘___ ...., 
Debra Phillips 
HR Director. SESC 
Office of Worltefs 
Compensation 
Beatrice Turner 
Program Mgr, WC 
Other Direct Reports 
Taxpayer Advocate £8-rd 0f'1iair_Appeal _§ State Claims Comm; 
Leslie F101-es I
F
_ rPhilF St.j/O_n' ge V‘ 
Richard Estabrook 
Acting 'laxpayerAdvocate ChiefAPP@\l5O ﬂl‘7€Y, 
_ ‘ Dlf°qql3P1_"RH I/) :l"eCmF' SCC and Personnel Seiyices 
Service Center (FIN) ii Financial Service 
_ ..... F\4 Cg Jennifer Libby 
FSC Coordinator 
General Government 
Service Center (FIN) 
Vacant 
FIN Director, GGSC 
Health 81 Human 
Sew 5ev9¢ _<?t&L1ill§Ii, 
Sarah Gove 
FIN Director, HHSSC 
Natural Resources 
Gilbert Bilodeau 
FIN Director, N RSC 
Corrections 
Service Center (FIN_ 
Mitch Boynton 
FIN Director CSC 
Secunty&Employment 
€l'VlC€ Center S ' 
{FIN 
Marilyn Leimbach Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages 
___§E?_€PPE?iiiOP “1““°1“ Oﬁice of Cannabis Policy 
Gregg Mirieo 
Director, Bureau of Alcoholic 
Beverages 8! Lottery Operations John Hudak . 
Director, Otﬁce of 
Cannabis Policy Bureau of General Services 
William Longfellow 
Director, 
Bureau of General Services Maine Reven1ie_Sei_'vice§_ 
Jerome Gerard 
State Tax Assessor 
FIN Director, SESC Liquor/Operations 
Tracy Willett 
Acting Deputy Dir, Liquor 
Lottery Operations 
Michael Boarclman 
Deputy Director, Lottery OCP Operations 
Vernon Malloch 
Deputy Dir. of Operations Division of 
Procurement Services 
--Ii;.;;;;;M"f 
Acting, Chief Procure OH. 
Licensing Division 
Elisa Ellis 
Director ofljcensing Division of Property 
__1‘!4_=1H __essi11;=I3* _ Jan Lareau 
Director, Property Mgnit .
I
A 
can.“ 
Michael Field 
Director, Compliance Divisionof Planning 
&Constmdion 
Joe Ostwald 
Director, PD&C 
Strategic Initiatives 
Lisa Roberts 
DeputyDir., Strategiclnit , 
Division of
, 
i Leased Space 
Mathewhonganedter 
Director, Leased Space 
1 Data Analytics _l_~i_i_ —__ 
John Gagnon 
Diied'or,DataAnalytics Division of 
Central Services 
i Andy Giroux 
Director, Central Services 
, 
Policy’ 
J Gabi PierceA 
Director of Policy Div. of Central 
Fleet Management 
Mark Bailey 
Diiecioi;Oa1nal!=leetMgmt
J 
Media8cStakeholder 
Relations 
~'7i;;;;;,;,, 
Director, M&SR 
_5i>_~1<zieI _.§’.¥2i*25t2_ 
‘J Tracy Jacques Div. of Satay 81 
Envirorunen Serv. 
Occupational HmlIli&Safe1y 
Q cc 
Olﬁce of State-Owned 
Landﬁll Management 
Wallace Giakis 
Landﬁll Manager Peter Lacy 
Director, Property Tax 
F“-._—'—"'i1 
Ofﬁce of General 
__. 
Alexander Weber 
General Counsel i""'1' 
Sara Lewis 
Deputy Executive Director Vicki Roy 
Deputy Executive Director 
Income/Estate_"i ’ait___ 
Heather Popadak 
Director, I&E Tax 
Sales, Fuel 8: 
S ecial Tax 
JudyMethot 
Director, S,F 8! S Tax _C3“_1E’L“E......._. 
__| Michael Fortin 
Director, Compliance 
Ope:aﬁonsP1oqssirig 
andSecr1r1i1 
_ Susanﬁmith 
Quality Assurance 
;- Rhonda Ainslie 
RevenueServ. Diiector 
Accoinithig __ 
._l 
Dir.i  
, -ii 
l
I
i
i
i
r 
Ell 
J.
S    
~\>“x'“"/5 4. 
_\\= 4,) 
_ 7 
3 1 
;- Q1 .E 
’:- :~ 
“>0 \{_‘\ 
m \ut~ 
Office of the Commissioner 
Kirsten LC Figueroa, Commissioner 
Generally, the Office of the Commissioner provides strategic direction for the various bureaus 
and divisions of DAFS including policy direction, legislative relations, gubernatorial relations, 
federal relations, coalition building, external affairs, media relations, transparency and 
accountability efforts, Freedom of Access Act requests within various divisions, and other policy 
and communications efforts. Each bureau within DAFS reports to the Commissioner's Office. 
This work is performed by: 
o Deputy Commissioner of Finance, Heather Perreault 
o Deputy Commissioner of Operations Elaine Clark 
Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations, Anya Trundy 
Associate Commissioner, Jenny Boyden 
Associate Commissioner of Tax Policy, Michael Allen 
Communications Director, Sharon Huntley 
Jennifer Merrow, Executive Assistant       
The team is led by Kirsten LC Figueroa, who was appointed by Governor Janet Mills as the 
Commissioner of the Department of Administrative & Financial Services. ln this role, Figueroa is 
responsible for the development of the State of Maine's budgets, coordinating the financial 
planning and programming activities of State agencies, overseeing the administration of tax laws, 
directing technology services and infrastructure, advising the Maine Legislature on the financial 
statutes of State government, and the recruitment and retention of one of Maine's largest and 
most diverse workforces. 
Named a ”State Female Administrator to Watch" upon her appointment, Figueroa has a long 
career of public service and fiscal leadership, having previously served as the Chief of the 
Administrative Services Division at the Office of the Attorney General, as Director of 
Administrative Services for DAFS’ Division of Financial and Personnel Services, and as Finance 
Director for DAFS’ Office of Information Technology. 
ln addition, Figueroa served as Chief Financial Officer at Dirigo Health Agency and Deputy 
Commissioner of Finance for the Maine Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). At 
DHHS, Figueroa oversaw that department's budget, accounting, and audit functions, and was 
responsible for developing and managing the department's $3.3 billion budget. 
Figueroa also served as the Chief Financial Officer of Avesta Housing and as the Energy and 
Housing Services Program Director for the Maine State Housing Authority. She is a graduate of 
Southern New Hampshire University, where she earned a B.S. in business administration and 
accounting. 
pa7
. 
aw; \*“" 4., 
_~\“ ‘e, 5‘ <1»
7 
‘Ina-lnﬁ ._ 
1~ . 3 -' - > '3 . . l-__- -’~h 
i .;::.1—; ‘,.;,E§> _ 
‘( \ 41- ‘F 
"'0 s9‘ 1;, .1,-'     
State Economist Ofﬁce of the 
tor State Economist 
d analyzing economic and Amanda Rec, 
The Office of the State Economist is responsible for tracking an 
demographic trends in support of policy development. The Office maintains various modeling 
and analytical tools with the capability to do economic impact analysis, demographic projections, 
long-term and short-term economic forecasting, and statistical analysis. 
As designated by statute, the State Economist is a member of the Revenue Forecasting 
Committee and the office provides staff support for both that committee and the Consensus 
Economic Forecasting Commission. The Office also serves as a liaison between the state and the 
U.S. Census Bureau, including designation as the State Data Center lead agency for Maine. 
The Office provides technical assistance with and responds to requests for economic and 
demographic data along with maintaining an interactive web-based tool containing key data from 
various sources. 
I borates with economists in other parts of State government, such as the 
S rvices. The Office also cola 
t of Labor and Maine Revenue e Maine Departmen 
Highlights include: 
0 State Economist Amanda Rector is a highly respected and sought-after spokesperson for 
the Maine State economy. Her speaking engagements, both in-person and remote, have 
increased over the past several years: 19 in 2019, 25 in 2021, and 31 in 2022 for events 
such as Maine Community College System Board, Mainebiz Five on the Future Economic 
Maine Revenue Services State Tax Symposium, and Maine State Outlook Forum, 
Chamber of Commerce Board. 
0 Amid fluctuating State revenues, influx of Federal Covid-19 pandemic assistance, and 
changing economic conditions, this Office has been quite busy. Below is an overview of 
some of the high-level themes this Office has been tracking: 
0 inflation was very high in calendar year 2022, with the all-items consumer price 
index increasing 8.0% over calendar year 2021. Increases in energy and food costs 
were particularly significant in 2022, with energy increasing by 25.2% and food 
increasing by 9.9%. Although there have been some recent declines in gasoline and 
fuel oil prices, fuel oil remained up 41.5% in December 2022 compared to December 
2021. 
pa8
\\}vs.rr|\'; _‘ 1’ _ .
0 9. 
.» . i
1 
Q . ¢ 'é 
5 mame; 
' 
’e,. ts‘ 
'0 , 97” 
0 Maine gained 3,000 nonfarm jobs in November 2022, with the largest increases in 
accommodation and food services and healthcare and social assistance. This is an 
increase of 21,300 jobs since November 2021 and about 5,000 more jobs than 
before the pandemic. Maine's unemployment rate was 3.7% as of November 2022, 
equivalent to the U.S. unemployment rate, but slightly higher than the New England 
average of 3.4%. 
0 The median sales price of Maine homes increased by 8.3% over the last year, with 
very significant variation between counties. Overall, prices were increasing more 
slowly during the end of 2022 than during the prior two years. 
What's ahead for 2023: 
The Office of the State Economist team is expanding allowing the office to focus more on 
demographic data from the census; devising and publishing charts, tables and other visual 
representations that will bring value for the public. 
0 Senior Economic Analyst will dig into available micro data to provide more in-depth 
analysis from Census Bureau individual level records and customize a multitude of tables 
including median income by race and head of household. 
0 Economic Analyst will act as the state data center leader, deal with data requests, and 
help to liaison between the Census Bureau and the general public. They will also produce 
monthly economic indicators report and news release summaries. 
0 Data Communication Specialist will focus on data visualizations, telling the story of the 
data using visualizations and other communications. 
pg.9
‘gt ‘RAT! YE 4:‘, 
.\" 0, c‘ /                               
Office of the State Controller 
Douglas E. Cotnoir, State Controller 
The Office of the State Controller (OSC) maintains accounting policy and records 
according to Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) rules. OSC is responsible for 
financial administration and general accounting control of the State Government, keeping of 
general accounts, auditing before payment of bills or vouchers and authorizing all claims against 
the State for which appropriations have been made. OSC provides internal audit support for State 
government. Additionally, OSC provides insurance advice and services for all forms of insurance 
for State Government. The powers and duties of the OSC are detailed in MRS Title 5 §1541 and 
§1728-A. 
The Office of the State Controller provides fiscal oversight, control, monitoring and 
accountability for all funds that flow through Maine state government. This is accomplished 
through seven divisions, including: Administration, Accounting, ERP System Operations, 
Financial Reporting & Analysis, Internal Audit, Payroll, and Risk Management. 
Below are some updated stats for fiscal year 2022 (July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022): 
v We processed more than 2.1 million disbursements (significant volume increase due to 
pandemic relief payments) 
¢ We processed more than 4.6 million financial transactions (significant volume increase 
due to additional federal COVID relief funding) 
0 We issued more than 316,000 payroll payments to 14,165 unique employees (average 
12,164 per pay period) 
0 The Annual Comprehensive Financial Report for fiscal year 2022 received the 
Government Finance Officers Association Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in 
Financial Reporting award, marking our fifteenth consecutive year receiving this award. 
Highlights include: 
0 Distributed more than $119 million of ARPA Local Fiscal Recovery Funds to 477 Non- 
Entitlement Units (NEUs) of government 
0 Implemented Oracle analytics Cloud Services OACS data analytics tool, also known as 
DAFS Analytics, to provide comprehensive data querying, reporting and analytics of the 
state's financial, human resources, payroll and budget data enabling the state to 
decommission a non-secure legacy application. 
pg.10
en‘ MT‘ "F +1..
'
2 
2% 
implemented or enhanced technologies and provided tools to improve efficiencies, 
reduce paper and automate routine, repetitive activities providing better opportunities 
for collaboration, including: MainePays, DocuWare and UiPath. 
Completed closeout of Maine's allotment of $1.25 billion in federal Coronavirus Relief 
Funds (CRF) under the CARES Act. 
Performed accounting due diligence, coordinated with the Governor's Office, with DAFS 
Bureau of the Budget, and with various agencies throughout State government to 
provide allowability guidance and manage approval of business cases to administer 
more than $1 billion in federal State Fiscal Recovery Funds under ARPA through the 
Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan. 
What's ahead for 2023: 
s O 
pg. ll Continued progress toward implementation of the new Human Resources Management 
and Payroll system, a software as a service SAAS solution reducing risk through more 
secure, reliable payroll data and improved internal controls. 
Major upgrade to Advantage, the state's financial system.I
.‘- R1\T“’f \;\> 4.3.0
, 
i-. F1... 7 
o 1'. 1; 
*2 ~17§‘?l?’.‘e5 
Z . 
-._ 
¢ >7 
1,. 1‘? 
Ir’ 4" Mn ‘SX 
Bureau of the Budget 
Beth Ashcroft, State Budget Officer 
The vision for the Bureau of the Budget is to be an innovative organization that achieves the most 
effective and efficient program operations that facilitate the administrative and financial policies 
of the Legislature and the Governor. 
The Bureau of the Budget provides central budget and position planning and control in support 
of gubernatorial objectives and legislative intent. This represents a balanced approach for 
carrying out the initiatives of the executive branch of State government within the limits of 
legislative oversight to achieve the most effective outcomes within available budget resources. 
The powers and duties of the Bureau of the Budget are detailed in Title 5, § 1662 et seq. 
The Bureau ensures compliance with all requirements reflected in 5 MRSA chapters 145 and 149 
as well as numerous other sections of statute that require the State Budget Officer to make 
recommendations or take other actions. lt prepares and submits biennially to the Governor (or 
the Governor-elect) a State budget document in accordance with 5 MRSA §1664 and §1666. 
The Bureau examines and recommends for approval the work program and quarterly allotments 
of each department and agency of state government before the appropriations or other funds of 
such departments and agencies become available for expenditure. Additionally, the Bureau 
examines, and recommends for approval, any changes to allotments during the fiscal year in 
accordance with 5 MRSA §1662 sub-§2 and 3 and §1667. 
ln carrying out its budgetary responsibilities, the Bureau constantly reviews administrative 
activities of the departments and agencies of the State, studies organization and administration 
and reports periodically to the Governor and on request to the Legislature in accordance with5 
MRSA §1662 sub-§4. 
The State Budget Officer serves as a member of the Revenue Forecasting Committee and asa 
member of the State Procurement Review Committee. 
Highlights include: 
0 Since 2019, DAFS has prepared 8 budgets — 3 biennial budgets and 5 supplemental 
budgets. Each budget is submitted to the Legislature in two budget documents, one for 
the Highway Fund and one for the General Fund and All Other Funds. The Department 
also prepared 6 Change Packages to these budgets which were also each submitted in 
two budget documents. DAFS also prepared the Maine Jobs Recovery Plan and the 
Winter Energy Relief Package. 
pa 1?-
pg. 13 wmiv; .\"\\ 4*’/1 
, 2, 
5 ' 
17:; '5 
>5 mama; 
¢ . '-P l~ .5 __q 
21. -/V _ -s 
J” Hz rm *3 
During the pandemic, the Bureau of the Budget adapted processes to keep State 
government financial transactions running smoothly while employees work from home 
including changing Financial Orders and other transactions that were mostly done via 
paper to electronic workflows. The team also adapted to remote versus in-person 
meetings. Such processes continued to be refined over the course of the pandemic and 
have become standard practice as most of the Bureau's staff, and staff in the agencies the 
Bureau interacts with, continue to work in a hybrid environment. 
The Bureau of the Budget played a key role in the efficient, seamless, and transparent 
effort to disburse and report on the $1.25 billion in Federal Coronavirus Relief Funding to 
entities across Maine. 
The Bureau is also responsible for preparing and submitting the four-year revenue and 
expenditure forecast for the General Fund and Highway Fund. The most recent forecast 
report for the 2022-2023 and 2024-2025 biennia was submitted on October 5, 2022. This 
point-in-time forecast can offer a starting point for work sessions and conversations 
throughout the State's biennial budget process as State leaders, including the Legislature, 
carefully identify the appropriate mix of policies and strategies to be utilized in pursuit of 
a balanced budget. 
The Bureau of the Budget also compiles and issues the Maine State Government Annual 
Report, an inter-agency, statewide effort. The Bureau will soon be issuing the 2021-2022 
Annual Report, which has been somewhat delayed this year due the biennial budget 
effort. 
This team has led the most recent supplemental budget process and biennial budget 
process, both large efforts. The budget process requires working across State government 
with various other departments and agencies. The Bureau of the Budget often facilitates 
1:1 budget meetings with each area of State government to understand their needs, and 
those of the constituencies they serve, to find funding solutions and ensure all across 
State government are informed and current on the latest projects. 
The Bureau of the Budget has 12 full time and one part-time positions. There has been 
some turnover in_the past two years but all 12 full time positions have now been fill_ed 
since December 2022 with individuals that bring relevant knowledge, skills and 
experience to the work of the Bureau. 
Routine work in the Bureau includes reviewing and processing Budget Orders and 
Financial Orders associated with agencies ’ adjustments to their annual work programs, 
including obtaining the Governor's approval on Financial Orders as recommended by 
the State Budget Officer. The volume of Financial Orders has increased in the years 
during and following the pandemic to allow for the expending of federal COVID-related
pg. 14 . 
$1,-\T| Y am‘5 -4,’. 
S ’JA 
s‘ ‘I                               
»/ >\‘ 
. 3» m ==~\ 
grant funds. in fiscal year 2021-22, approximately 695 Financial Orders were processed 
through the Bureau and about 24% (168) of those were considered COVID-related. 
What's ahead for 2023: 
~ The Bureau and the Office of Information Technology are currently engaged in a project 
to replace the Budget and Financial Management System. It is expected to provide an 
updated and streamlined user experience, better reporting capabilities and more 
efficient integration between the budget and financial systems with favorable pricing 
and payment terms. The project is in a technical discovery and initial design phase anda 
date for implementation has not yet been chosen.
;__k3\~¢.,<11\';4 ‘\_ 
;~- /J 
we 
- ‘ =- 
¢+#.//’ Qws)’                         
Bureau of Human Resources 
Breena Bissell, State Human Resources Officer 
In 1985, the Legislature enacted Title 5 § 7033 et. seq (Civil Service Law), which 
established a State Civil Service System to ensure that State employees are hired and 
retained based upon only their merit, skills and qualifications. The Bureau of Human 
Resources (BHR) was established as the personnel administrative organization necessary 
to ensure these ”merit system" principles in hiring and retention practices. BHR was also 
charged with recognizing and developing talents, contributions, and potential of State 
employees and applicants for employment. 
In 1991, the State Employee Health Insurance, Workers’ Compensation, and State 
Employee Health and Wellness Programs were placed under BHR. 
In 2007, the Civil Service Law broadened BHR's role to include the statutory duties 
formerly assigned to a separate bureau. The Bureau of Employee Relations was 
abolished, and its functions and employees were consolidated with those of BHR. 
Today, BHR is responsible for the administration of the State government's civil service system, 
employee relations activities, collective bargaining, recruitment of State employees, statewide 
human resources programs, classification and compensation, training, the State employee 
benefits package, deferred compensation plan, the State's workers’ compensation plan, and 
equal employment opportunity policies and practices. 
The Bureau of Human Resources consists of the following functional divisions and 
offices: 
o DIVISION OF TALENT MANAGEMENT This Division is responsible for developing programs to 
recognize talents and contributions of state employees, recruitment and retention protocols, 
management training, and presenting educational briefings for HR professionals. 
o COMPLIANCE DIVISION The Division includes the Classification and Compensation Unit, the 
Civil Service System Unit, the Office of Employee Relations, and the Investigation and Equal 
Employment Opportunity Group. Major functions and responsibilities include: development 
of statewide personnel policies; statewide classification system; statewide compensation 
system; interpretation of Civil Service Law and Rules and issuance of guidelines, bulletins and 
memoranda to HR professionals; assisting department managers in efforts to reorganize and 
realign workforces for efficiencies; providing outsourcing services to state employees who 
are laid-off; and maintenance of personnel records. This Office is also responsible for all 
matters concerning the collective bargaining process and administration, development and 
implementation of employee relations policies, and representation of all departments and 
agencies within the Executive Branch in grievance arbitration and other labor proceedings. 
pg. 15 
‘\z_\r1\.;= 
€_\> -4 .1,» 
_~\ '1. 
Q‘ . . '1 
Q 7Q _5 
; meme 
.,+ 
"9 \’ 
70 H H ﬁx? 
Additionally, this Division is responsible for statewide policy implementation for employment 
laws (e.g., EEO, ADA, FML), training and counsel, investigating the more serious allegations of 
misconduct, and conducting management reviews in situations that warrant such reviews. 
o DIVISION OF EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND WELLNESS This Division provides centralized 
administration of the State's health, dental, direct reimbursement, voluntary long-term care 
insurance, vision care, and deferred compensation programs. (As listed previously, one 
subset of this division does not report to SLG.) 
o FIELD SERVICES The HR portions of the five Service Centers report to BHR and are responsible 
for delivering direct human resources services to the majority of the executive branch. These 
Human Resources Service Centers partner with their respective departments on strategic 
initiatives and human resource-related business decisions; provide guidance to supervisors 
and managers; assist employees in employment matters; and ensure employees are paid 
accurately. 
Since DAFS last update to SLG, there have been a number of improvements for State workers in 
terms of compensation, telework opportunities, health and safety, more opportunities for 
training and development, and efforts to improve retention and embrace Diversity, Equity, 
inclusion and Belonging (DEIB). 
Highlights include: 
Classification & Compensation 
0 The classification and compensation study is ongoing, with the BHR team meeting with 
90% of state agencies to review the classification recommendations of the consultant, 
Segal Group. Patterns for career ladders are being noted and considered as the bureau's 
class and comp team establish and reclassify positions through the FJA process. 
0 The Compensation and Classification team worked to meet the changing needs of State 
government and continued to create new classifications, while taking into consideration 
those recommendations made by the Segal Group. In 2022 alone, the group completed 
a total of 694 reclasslfications, range changes, classification specification updates, new 
position creations, new classification creations and job title changes. 
0 ln 2022, the team worked with Human Resources and Department heads to review and 
change minimum qualifications to meet the needs of the Departments and to reflect 
changes in the current job economy. In many cases, this involved changing minimum 
qualifications that required many years of experience to competency-based 
qualifications, allowing us to attract a larger applicant pool. 
pg.16
. at I v; N“ -'r _. 
9+ \,J 
S‘ . ’*¢
* B »
2 
rrgame 5 ,' 
,__
A t 
, J "L \v' 
"/,1 9;:        
my \1=.k' 
Bargaining
O 
pg. 17 The Bureau of Human Resources will continue to bargain on behalf of the Governor with 
now five different unions representing eight bargaining units. in 2021, a new Maine State 
Law Enforcement Supervisors bargaining unit was created and is represented by the 
Fraternal Order of Police (FOP). The Maine State Service Employees Association (MSEA) 
represents the Administrative Services; Operations, Maintenance, and Support Services; 
Professional and Technical; and Supervisory Services bargaining units. The American 
Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) represents the 
Institutional Services unit. The Maine State Troopers Association (MSTA) represents the 
State Police unit. And the Maine State Law Enforcement Association (MSLEA) represents 
the Law Enforcement unit. 
Negotiations for successor agreements typically happen every two years on the odd year. 
Since 2019, the Bureau has negotiated, on behalf of the Administration, several across- 
the-board salary increases and additional pay benefits to substantially elevate the pay of 
State employees, including: 
o Longevity pay of 20 cents per hour for employees with 10+ years of service (15+ 
years remains 30 cents/hr; 20+ years remains 40 cents/hr) 
0 Increased longevity pay to 60 cents per hour for employees with 25+ years of 
service 
0 3% raise October 2019 
o 4% (average) raise December 31, 2020 
o 2% raise December 1, 2021 (March 2022 for law enforcement units that finalized 
negotiations in 2022) 
o $2,000 lump sum payment December 1, 2021 (March 2022 for law enforcement 
units) 
o $15 minimum hourly rate effective December 15, 2021 
o 4% raise .luly 1, 2022 
The Bureau has implemented the State's first paid parental leave for employees, initially 
negotiated in 2019 as 14 paid days to be paid immediately after the birth or adoption of 
a child; and then increased through negotiations in 2021 to 28 paid days with the 
flexibility to be taken continuously anytime during the eight weeks directly following the 
birth or adoption of a child.
_\\>“"AT""4 
av ‘V6
’ 
; 1;n,a1ne ; -A '' 
3 Y. '~ 
1, z?" ' -- Y 
,;-. 
at e '1; _ @\ 
0 19 m NH- 
Pandemic Response .
. 
pg. 18 Though the Bureau has moved beyond the heaviest lift of pandemic-related activities 
(contact tracing; COVlD work rules; administration of Federal acts related to leave, health 
insurance, open enrollments, and flexible spending benefits; other leave options; pulse of 
the workforce surveys; telework considerations; transition back to the workplace; and 
more), there are still ongoing reporting, case management, and posting requirements, 
increased workers’ comp activity, and efforts to ensure the safety of all employees. The 
two plus years spent working under such stressful circumstances have had a significant 
and ongoing impact. Longtime HR professionals who could retire, did; those becoming 
eligible, have indicated they will. The HR professionals remaining feel the extra burden of 
filling in the gaps and training new employees as they strive to best guide, advise, and 
serve the departments, agencies, and employees and meet our mission of elevating 
Maine State Government as an employer of choice. 
In response to safety concerns raised during the pandemic, the State and the unions 
revived the Labor Management Committee on Building Safety, co-chaired by the State 
Human Resources Officer and the President of MSEA, and made up of employees from 
each of the bargaining units, managers from several departments, and a member of the 
Governor's Office. Initially, meetings were held biweekly and in 2023 have transitioned to 
every other month. 
The Bureau conducted two surveys during the pandemic in November 2020 and June 
2021, with approximately 7,000 workers responding to each survey. Results provided 
insight into employee needs and concerns to be addressed (for example: feeling isolated) 
and helped guide management decisions for work rules and potential transition out of 
emergency telework. 
In order for the State of Maine as an employer to be prepared to meet anticipated 
OSHA/BOSH requirements, BHR developed and deployed a vaccination portal in which 
over 8,700 State workers uploaded their proof of vaccination cards. Each upload was 
validated by the bureau. 
In 2022, BHR’s Office of Employee Health and Wellness collaborated with Shaw's/OSCO 
and WellStar to provide 79 employee/family member vaccination clinics. At these clinics, 
1,227 individuals received a COVlD-19 Bivalent vaccine, and 2,055 received a flu vaccine, 
for a total of 3,392 vaccines administered. In 2021, there were 64 vaccine clinics provided 
through this collaboration.
.~.\5‘ R“ I W 44» 
0'9’ /J
? r' 
E ." 1- 
; mame 
nu \=~' 
7’ "1 Q0 H1\~'|\" 
Transition to Non-Emergency Hybrid Telework - 
While some employees and agencies reported onsite throughout the pandemic or prior 
to the announced period of transition due to operational needs—for which we thank 
them very much! — for the most part, those who were teleworking during the pandemic 
began transitioning to non-emergency telework during the announced transition period 
of June 6 through October 3, 2022. 
The Bureau was key in the development and deployment of Works For ME for the 
transition to non-emergency telework. This program provides guidance and training for 
managers through three online modules on considerations for telework, how to establish 
appropriate telework arrangements, and the telework authorization form and approval 
process; as well as a help guide, sample telework authorization form; safety, security and 
compliance checklist, and online training for employees. Also available on the Worksfor 
ME site is a hotel space booking application. 
Over 4,800 of our employees, about 43%, either are or have submitted plans to engage 
in telework. On an annual basis, this will save more than 22 million driving miles. 
Workforce Engagement Survey 
pg. 19 The Bureau's Talent Management Division developed and deployed the first annual 
workforce engagement survey on October 27, 2022, with responses due November 7, 
2022. We were pleased to receive 6,089 responses, which are currently being analyzed 
by an experienced vendor. This data will become the baseline, as we work toward 
identified areas for improvement and assess progress on a regular, annual basis. 
Initial learning from the survey includes: 
o Top 5 reasons came to work for Maine State Government 
I Benefit options 
I Job Security 
I Make a difference for the people of Maine 
I The work seemed interesting 
I Public service is important to me 
o 87% Feel their supervisor treats them with dignity and respect 
o 87% see their work as adding value for the people of Maine 
0 74% see a clear link between their work and the mission, vision, and values of the 
agency
1Y~ATl Vs, 
\\E\\> Lg»/J 
“G 
+- lII'1'3'11'1 €                                                       
, \ 
I17 nu' 
Recruitment and Retention . 
The Bureau continues to take a holistic approach to recruitment and retention. 
Representatives from BHR’s Talent Management, Employee Health and Wellness, HR 
Service Centers, Classification & Compensation, and the Office of Employee Relations 
meet with agencies to discuss job duties and postings, minimum qualifications, 
application process improvements, functional job analysis (FJA), hiring pay strategies, 
wellness programs, exit surveys/stay surveys, culture, considerations for negotiations, 
and the potential for stipends through the statutory process. Most recently, the Bureau 
has put strategies in place to address recruitment and retention concerns at the 
Department of Corrections, the Maine State Ferry Service, and the Department of Public 
Safety’s Emergency Communications Services. Conversations are currently underway 
with the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, DAFS' Division of 
Procurement, and Public Safety’s Capitol Police. 
A Recruitment and Retention Community of Practice for recruiters throughout state 
government is meeting regularly to share tips and tools, receive guidance, suggest 
improvements to applications and processes, evaluate data, and learn from their 
combined knowledge and expertise. For example: BHR’s DEIB Specialist met with the 
group in December, providing methods to ensure recruitment and retention practices are 
inclusive, including setting ourselves apart in job postings, using competency-based 
qualifications, communicating clearly and timely, and creating a welcoming environment. 
Through the efforts of BHR’s Talent Management Division, the State of Maine has been 
recognized as a Certified Age Friendly Employer through the (CAFE) Program which 
recognizes Maine state government as an employer valuing diverse employees based on 
proficiency, qualifications and contributions —free of ageism. The program began with an 
evaluation providing recommendations for improvement to become and remain an age 
friendly employer. Along with certification, the State will receive increased publicity and 
marketing. 
Training and Development
O 
pg. 20 The Bureau of Human Resources continues to provide statutorily required Managing in 
State Government training to new managers and supervisors. As a result of the pandemic, 
the program was revamped to be completely virtual. Feedback has been incorporated to 
enhance the program, which has increased from 3 full days to 4 days in 2023. Attendee 
feedback is excellent! As word got out about the quality of this program, large
‘wt earn ; in 
departments who once provided their own version are now sending their new 
managers/supervisors to BHR's program. In January 2023 alone, 150 participants were 
registered to attend. 
ln December 2022, the Bureau's Talent Management Division piloted a new workshop 
Employee Counseling: The Fork in the Road with great success and excellent feedback. 
The workshop will be available to larger audiences in February 2023. 
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging (DEIB) 
Recognizing the opportunity for Maine state government to lead by example in diversity, 
equity, and inclusion, the Bureau created a limited period position and hired a Diversity, 
Equity, inclusion, and Belonging (DEIB) Specialist in May 2022. A Diversity, Equity, and 
Inclusion Community of Practice (COP) has been established with DEI practitioners in 
state government identifying goals to develop a strategic plan and strengthen 
connections both across Maine state government and throughout the east coast. The 
Bureau's DEIB specialist has participated in networking opportunities through DEI focused 
workshops and entities such as The Better Maine Conference: Building inclusive 
Workplaces, the first annual DEI conference for the National Association of State Chief 
Administrators, and the Government Alliance on Race and Equity (GARE). 
The Talent Management Division launched a SharePoint resource page, which has 
information, articles, videos, and other resources to support recruitment, retention, 
development, and diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging efforts in state government. 
The site has helpful information for state government hiring managers, leadership, and 
employees. The SharePoint Site will be regularly updated with new content and training 
opportunities. 
Leaders within the Bureau of Human Resources have been participating in DEIB education 
throughout 2022 and into 2023, to enhance their knowledge through readings, 
conversations, special guests, and online tools. DEIB reading groups have also been 
extended to other departments within Maine state government, and a DEIB strategic plan 
is being developed. 
What's ahead for 2023:
O 
pa 21 Human Resources Management System implementation 
o We are very excited to be moving forward with the critical implementation ofa 
modern Human Resources Management System to replace our disparate, 
outdated legacy electronic and paper-based systems.
pg. 22 A5‘ so-\‘l'!\'5-
4 N‘ ‘lb 
':» 
5 1;». 3; 
5 £1" 
eg 
2 24;.E 
/4, Q ‘. F "0 .69 ii: .».» 
Last fall we began working with our new implementation partner, Accenture. 
Accenture was carefully selected through a rigorous RFP process that started the 
previous year. 
Accenture has spent several weeks reviewing our previous implementation 
efforts and documentation, and they have been meeting with State employees 
to gain additional insight into our processes, needs and goals for a new HR 
system. 
Between now and the end of February, Accenture will be reviewing their 
recommendations with State project staff and executive leadership. This may 
require us to make some decisions that will change the way we perform HR 
functions and support our employees, in order to take full advantage of the 
improved functionality and efficiencies offered by a modern system. 
Once we have completed the current review and recommendations phase of the 
project, we will go into the planning phase, and we hope to have a much clearer 
view of the project timeline and development needs by the end of March. 
We have taken some additional steps to keep the project on track and ensure 
that we go-live with the best product possible. We have contracted witha 
vendor that specializes in the Workday system to provide critical testing services 
throughout the project, and we have engaged an experienced provider of 
independent Validation and Verification services, who will be continuously 
reviewing the work of the project teams from both Accenture and the State. 
Ongoing progress of Classification and Compensation 
o This will include engaging external resources to help connect the market salary 
information to the information gathered through classification discussions with 
department leaders, other states, and our consultant, Segal Group. 
Ongoing efforts in DEIB initiatives
. _$1\1A1|v; 
__\+‘ M-,_, 
Q‘ ‘L 
If 
o .. 
F; 11131113; , , . ._ 
'5 (ti: 
v IQ ll: ,.~\ so     
MainelT 
Fred Brittain, Chief Information Officer 
MainelT, formerly known as the Office of Information Technology (OIT), provides reliable, cost 
effective, and secure information technology (IT) services. 
MainelT roles and responsibilities are legislatively authorized by statute: 5 MRS Chapter 163: 
Office of Information Technology. The roles and responsibilities of MainelT and the Chief 
Information Officer include the complete spectrum of IT oversight and management for Executive 
Branch agencies and selected parts of the spectrum throughout State government. 
MainelT provides: 
' Best business practices and project management (§1973); 
~ IT communications and coordination across State government (§1973); 
~ IT leadership and vision (§1973); 
' Policies and standards (§1973); 
- Strategic planning (§1974); 
~ Training and development programs for State employees (§1974); 
' Approval of acquisition and use of equipment (§1974); and 
' High-quality, responsive, cost-effective information technology services (§1981). 
From a strategy perspective, MainelT directs, coordinates, and oversees all information 
technology operations, cyber security, policymaking, planning, architecture, and standardization. 
The Chief Information Officer, as head of MainelT, provides central leadership and vision in the 
use of information and telecommunications technology on a statewide basis — and sets policies 
and standards for the implementation and secure use of information and telecommunications 
technologies. 
Specifically, to cybersecurity efforts, MainelT leads efforts to safeguard the State's valuable 
information assets, strengthen our incident response capabilities and adopt comprehensive 
information security measures for protecting the enterprise. Cyber-attacks against public sector 
entities continue to proliferate, and under-resourced state and local governments are attractive 
targets for malicious actors. Funds were included in the last budget and Jobs Plan. The Jobs 
Plan funds are one-time; however, and we must sustain and increase the effort, as there is 
more work to be done. This is a biennial budget request.' 
internally, on a day-to-day basis, this means that MainelT supports the more than 11,500 
executive branch employees, 15 Cabinet-level departments, and all the smaller agencies in the 
executive branch of State government. MainelT also provides certain services to the Judicial 
branch, Office of the Attorney General, and Secretary of State. 
pg.23
‘vi ;.nn~, 4V _-‘ O. 
5‘ .‘ Q, 
5 Z 1- ';II1a_1116 - 
1. I 2 
3 g L T .,_ ,\ 
IQ €:~ nu ‘saw 
Externally, MainelT supports Maine citizens directly through its administration of the contract for 
the Maine.gov web portal on behalf of the independent lnforME board. It is also responsible for: 
0 Operation and maintenance of the State's radio network serving first responders and 
numerous other State agencies; 
¢ Application development and support for all executive branch agencies; 
0 Project management for successful coordination and implementation for technology 
projects as well as other important agency efforts; 
0 Management and support of the State's network and communication services; 
0 Management of two State data centers and cloud-based server infrastructure; and 
0 Provision and support of all desktop computing. 
Highlights include: 
0 Maine received an overall grade of an A- for the 2022 Digital States Survey. This survey 
is the most comprehensive and respected benchmarking for state government IT 
organizations, and this is the highest grade ever achieved for the State of Maine since 
beginning the survey in 2010! An A- indicates that we have demonstrated "very strong 
innovation, high performing solutions, and have applied excellent practices in all aspects 
of operations, governance, and administration." 
0 Maine Revenue Services and MainelT collaborated to support the programming and 
operations needed to send out the $850 COVlD relief checks to nearly 876,000 Maine 
tax filers. This process will be modified and repeated to produce the Winter Emergency 
Energy Relief checks in early January 2023. 
0 Maine Revenue Services and MainelT collaborated on the State Tax and Revenue 
System (STARS) project, a four-year phased operation to replace the legacy tax systems. 
The second successful rollout has been completed which included Sales Tax and 
Withholding Taxes. Efforts are now focused on the 1040 individual Income tax 
implementation, which is scheduled for rollout in 2023. 
0 The on-premises mainframe was formally decommissioned and transferred to the cloud 
bringing the nearly 50-year mainframe era at the State of Maine to an end. This wasa 
coordinated effort between many different teams to carefully plan out the cloud 
transition of the MFASIS system that processes all state employees ’ payroll. MFASIS is 
continuing to run smoothly on the new Mainframe as a Service platform and will remain 
operational until the new HRMS system is implemented. 
v MainelT, in partnership with the Department of Health and Human Services, replaced 
the Federally Facilitated Marketplace for federally mandated consumer insurance 
pg.24
pg. 25 .\>‘?"‘T""»i‘ -' -
> 
cgJ 
’, 
; g _' 1. 
5 1331119 2 
1 1 . '_ 
""0 
W W, $9‘ 
coverage and MaineCare eligibility with the State-Based Marketplace. The first release 
to replace the interface between critical business applications and the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services went live on schedule. The second release also went live 
to provide further enhancements to functionality and usability for the citizens of Maine. 
MainelT is using Jobs Plan funds to upgrade the State Cybersecurity Program and 
advance business continuity and disaster recovery planning for state government by 
developing an actionable contingency plan for disaster recovery which "recovers" an 
organization's hardware, applications, and data after a technology disruption. These 
plans are vital to the State's ability to prepare for and respond to a broad range of 
threats, from mild outages to serious disasters and cyber-attacks. 
The information Security Office was able to grow its workforce. This increased capacity 
will continue to strengthen and support enterprise security, statewide information 
security, and modernization efforts that are essential building blocks for advancing the 
State's information security program. 
Through the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) of 2021, Congress established 
the State and Local Cybersecurity Improvement Act, which established the State and 
Local Cybersecurity Grant Program (SLCGP), appropriating funding to be awarded to 
states over four years. A planning committee was formed, submitted the application, 
and was awarded $2,666,577 for the first year of this program pending a complete State 
Cybersecurity Plan due in September 2023. The intent of this grant is to establish the 
”State role as leader and service provider." Working with municipalities, state 
departments and school districts, the funds will be used statewide to elevate our 
collective understanding of cybersecurity threats and our posture. Maine continues to 
encourage the federal government to expand its funding for cybersecurity issues as 
fraud, scams, and breaches are a state, national, and global threat. 
Maine|T has various MJRP efforts in progress including Modernizing Digital Physical 
Technology, Improving Delivery of Digital Service to Citizens, State Cybersecurity 
Program, Effective Remote Work Capabilities, and Business Continuity Plan for IT. With 
these federal funds, along with the continued support of the Legislature, MainelT will 
continue to align our fiscal model to support lT services in partnership with the agencies 
serving citizens of the State of Maine. 
The Laptop Refresh is a proactive laptop refresh life cycle. Client Technologies uses 
cloud-based services, windows Autopilot, to setup and pre-configure laptops direct from 
the manufacturer to the end users’ desk. This modern approach to laptop provisioning
O
O 
pg. 26 .\s1\~“"'r 
\Y‘ 4,. 
~.~ "1, C‘ I 
w g 5 1 
:2 ;m,ame § 
-,5 1:..:.:-> __5 "3 
"1. 5‘ '1.w /,-, 
My ‘wgsxv 
will enable Client Technologies to refresh end user computers every four years. 
MainelT adopted a Digital Accessibility Awareness and Education Plan to develop and 
sustain awareness of the importance of ensuring digital accessibility for all. 
Implemented the Human Resources Supervisor Audit process to provide supervisors the 
ability to validate the individuals assigned to them monthly, via an automatic email 
notification. Supervisors can add or remove staff as needed to correct their employee 
assignments. This information is then used to update assignment data in MFASIS. 
MainelT launched a new call center for the Maine Department of Labor to support 
hurricane relief for the Florida Department of Labor unemployment call flow. Support 
was routed to Maine to assist Florida. This effort was completed immediately to support 
hurricane relief efforts. 
MainelT in collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services Office of 
Child and Family Services completed a modernization effort to streamline business 
processes and improve automation and integration of various workflows. The Katahdin 
application is a Salesforce based application and its implementation was aided by the 
”Maine Service Bus," which is a network that moves data easily among different 
systems, to support rapid development and reusable components. 
Following the Federal government ban on the use of TikTok and the TikTok application, 
services, and equipment from all Federal communication devices, MainelT launched and 
completed a thorough assessment of the product. As a result of this assessment, 
MainelT is now prohibiting the use of TikTok accounts and the TikTok application from 
all Executive Branch State-owned devices or BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) mobile 
devices that connect to the State's network. 
MainelT completed several network upgrades including refreshing our load balancers, 
completing firewall upgrades, upgrading the uninterruptible power supply in 
datacenters,-completing infrastructure improvements, and upgrading firmware to 
ensure consistent, stable, and reliable State of Maine network performance for all State 
of Maine users. 
The Central Applications account is where we manage the technology that supports 
administrative functions throughout State government. This includes financial 
processing and reporting, budgeting, human resources, payroll, and data warehouse 
and analytics tools. Some recent accomplishments include:
      
.;_1P-ﬂaw; 
__\e‘ 1\»,) 
_<\‘ ’» 
a‘ A T 
Z malne5 
.\ 
*/;,_ qr‘ 
1,, _;'\-7 
l1xH\\ 
o Transitioning to a modern data analytics platform, which provides dramatically 
increased functionality. ' i' 
o With the abrupt move to remote work, we expanded the number of agencies 
utilizing MainePays, our electronic workflow tool for financial transactions, 
increasing usage 435% and going from 64,000 to 340,000 documents processed 
annually. We also expanded the functionality of this tool to include additional 
types of financial transactions, and we continue looking for new ways to improve 
efficiency and effectiveness with it. 
0 In order to support our new hybrid workforce, we developed several tools, 
including an electronic Telework Authorization Application portal, and 
implemented hoteling software, which allows staff without permanently 
assigned space to reserve a desk on the days they plan to be on-site. 
What's ahead for 2023:
O 
pg. 27 Business Continuity focuses on sustaining mission/business processes during and aftera 
disruption to restore operability of the target systems, applications, or infrastructure 
after an event. The State of Maine must develop, train and be prepared to execute plans 
to ensure essential government services are available for citizens. 
Ongoing modernization of the State's digital and physical technology will ensure: 
o State Government continues to respond to demands from the pandemic. 
o Maine citizens have access to reliable digital government services. 
o Aging assets with accumulating technical debt and risk are replaced timely. 
o Public health systems are adequately improved and supported. 
o Infrastructure systems are appropriately sized to support demand growth. 
o Citizen applications are stable, available, secure, and well-performing. 
o All State facilities have the bandwidth necessary to support hybrid work. 
o Infrastructure is highly available, redundant, and low risk. 
Creating a Remote Technology Portfolio will improve the opportunities for a highly 
available hybrid remote workforce by adding systems, support, processes, and 
enhancements to existing tools to increase the effectiveness of remote work 
capabilities. The program will focus on ensuring State employees and the public can 
access what they need no matter where they are.
1\11\Tl\"r \\ 4. 
.~\“ “'1. 
S‘ . '41. 
3 Z P ,1.‘1’l_3j1D€ -' 
7; v; . .3 
i °’ ffii"5 ., _\. 
a7/» -hf 
IQ rs: uu '$%V 
0 The state's financial system, Advantage, is scheduled for a major upgrade; the Budget 
Financial Management System (BFMS) is past due for replacement; and our HR and’ 
payroll systems are in the process of being implemented. These are transitioning from 
on-site, mainframe systems to cloud-based Software as a Service (SaaS) technologies. 
While this does increase annual maintenance costs, it has significant long-term benefits: 
SaaS systems receive regular updates, more robust disaster recovery abilities and avoid 
the perils of outdated and difficult to maintain systems along with the significant one- 
time costs to replace them. 
Project Management Office 
The Project Management Office provides oversight and accountability for successful project 
implementation by applying nationally recognized best practices to ensure projects are 
completed on time, within budget, and meet original goals while avoiding scope creep. 
There are currently 25 projects in-flight with another 12 in initiation phase. The Maine Project 
Management office applies a standard and repeatable practice that has led to 95% "green" 
performance rating for in-flight projects. 
The PMO achieves these results by providing a full array of project management services 
through the entire lifecycle of Projects and Initiatives critical to ensure the State's interests are 
met and intended outcomes are achieved. These include: 
0 Project Initiation 
~ Strategic Planning 
0 Business Case Development 
0 Project Needs Analysis 
0 Project Delivery 
0 Organizational Change Management 
0 Independent Validation and Verification 
Highlights include: 
0 Created, organized and managed the process to distribute $997 million of Jobs Plan 
funds through 140 business cases, ensuring federal eligibility and fiscal and metric 
tracking. 
¢ Continue to balance state and contractor workforce to gain more efficient management 
of projects. The average number of mid-sized projects a contractor can effectively 
manage is one, while the average number of projects a State of Maine Project Manager 
pg.28
, '2. 
r
E 
1 0 All data governance efforts are built upona _\$1~;_:.1ii',m 
_. .,./1 
can effectively manage is three. in the last year, the PMO filled 4 positions approved ina 
previous budget and reduced our dependence on contractors by 9. More on this in the 
biennial budget. 
0 What's Ahead: Portfolio Management, which will provide agencies with new tools to 
' ' 
ble d‘ t and track their array of projects toward more unified goals and measura coor inae 
outcomes and allow for a state-wide dashboard of project performance and impacts. 
Chief Data Officer 
The state now has a Chief Data Officer. The Chief Data Officer provides data stewardship and 
communication to ensure valid and reliable data are protected and available for legal and 
ethical use/reuse for data driven decision making throughout state government. 
0 Responsible for both: data management — how to organize, consistently collect, and 
' ' ' ' 
l‘ and establishing merge data; and data governance — facilitating data privacy comp iance 
appropriate data sharing. 
common foundation, philosophy, and 
values, and are achieved through rigorous data stewardship and communication. 
0 Promote and enable the intersection of policies, standards, processes, technology, and 
people responsible for using/re-using and managing data as a secure and strategic asset.
' 
res onsibilities as outlined in PL 2021, Chapter 717, An Act To Promote Equity in Various p 
Policy Making by Enhancing the State's Ability To Collect, Analyze and Apply Data.O 
pg.29
~\5‘MTW‘4 s, S’ ‘ 
/J
5 7» 
3 {%1jr)~;tine _                             
~/-‘ _ _\‘ 
m Hi\' 
Bureau of General Services 
Elaine Clark, Deputy Commissioner of Operations 
Bill Longfellow, Director of the Bureau of General Services 
David Morris, Acting Director of Procurement Services 
The Bureau of General Services (BGS) provides consolidated management and coordinated 
oversight for a range of property, procurement, and central services to meet the operational 
needs of State programs and services. BGS pursues cost-effective operations in its own activities 
and in the operations of other departments and agencies. BGS's enabling or authorizing laws can 
be found in 5 MRSA, Chapters 152 through 156, and Title 41, Code of Federal Regulations. 
BGS is comprised of eight functional divisions. The Director's office coordinates research, policy 
and reporting, inter~divisional and inter-agency initiatives, various statutory stakeholder groups, 
public improvement projects, and expenditures as authorized by the Legislature, energy 
procurement and market monitoring, Legislative and constituent matters, and a variety of other 
special projects 
The Bureau of General Services consists of: 
o DIVISION OF PLANNING, DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION DIVISION (DPDC) The Division of 
Planning, Design & Construction is responsible for capital improvement planning for 
facilities, architectural and engineering design procurement, and approval of design 
agreements, bidding of public improvement projects, and construction 
administration of all the State's public improvements and public-school projects. 
DPDC manages the procurement process for architect and engineer agreements, 
conducts the bidding for construction services, and monitors construction projects. 
The division also develops overall long-range public improvement programs for all 
agencies of State government. As of 2023, DPDC is engaged in approximately 300 
active projects. 
o DIVISION OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES (DSESI The Division of Safety 
and Environmental Services provides hazardous material (asbestos, lead, mold, 
mercury, PCBs) and indoor air quality assessment and mitigation oversight services 
for public schools and state facilitiesl and serves as the leadagency of the State for 
these matters. 
o PROPERTY MANAGEMENT DIVISION (PMDI This division provides operation, 
maintenance, and building control services to five (5) memorials, forty-five (45) 
occupied buildings, and twelve (12) unoccupied/ storage structures located on three 
campuses totaling nearly 2 million square feet of employee-occupied space for all 
pg.30
     
\\5‘7J\Tl\';_1 
5 4;.) 
Q‘ ’/
5 ‘P- 
1 2 
Z -_ 
a, F 1 J‘ 
State agencies. PMD also maintains approximately 150 acres of grounds and several 
monuments in the Capitol area. On average, PMD responds to 20 work orders every 
workday providing responsive and professional maintenance and diagnostic services 
to state employees. 
DIVISION OF LEASED SPACE (LS) The Division of Leased Space administers over 250 
active leases for office, warehouse, garage, storage, tower, classroom, mixed use, 
and training purposes in the service of 37 State agencies, across 68 different 
municipalities and 5 unorganized territories. The Division's leasing portfolio includes 
1,882,244 square feet of space with an approximate value of $27 million. This total 
cost includes rent, utilities, custodial services, and all associated costs of the leased 
space. 
OFFICE OF STATE-OWNED LANDFILL MANAGEMENT (OLM) The Bureau of General 
Services, Office of State-owned Landfill Management, has authority under 5 M.R.S., 
§1742, to own, design, develop or operate, or contract with private parties to 
operate, solid waste disposal facilities as provided in 38 M.R.S, §4. Currently, the 
State of Maine owns three landfills, Carpenter Ridge, Juniper Ridge, and Dolby. 
DIVISION OF PROCUREMENT SERVICES (DPS) The Division of Procurement Services 
directs the procurement process by purchasing or reviewing and approving agency 
purchases of goods and services supporting the needs of State government. The 
Division of Procurement Services ensures that these procurements are made ona 
best value basis, ensuring both quality and cost effectiveness, and that the 
transactions are made in a fair, open, and competitive manner. The Division 
processed 37,123 procurement transactions in fiscal year 2022, an increase of 52% 
over the previous report. 
DIVISION OF CENTRAL FLEET MANAGEMENT (CFM) Central Fleet Management was 
established to procure, distribute, and dispose of passenger and light truck vehicles 
cost-effectively by consolidating State government vehicle management through a 
single agency. Today, CFM manages more than 2,300 vehicles for employees on 
official State business. 
DIVISION OF CENTRAL SERVICES (CS1 Central Services is comprised of Postal 
Operations and Surplus State and Federal Property Operations. 
o Postal Services: The State Postal Center provides a wide range of mail 
services for 147 separate State locations, including interoffice mail. The
s19.\Tl&'5>_h _\\ 
Q‘ '1 
cw c 
5 -:1 
1; 
0 Z: 
; smame 2 ..,._ ;' ~A , _", 
"#1 , .<.’3\ 
,. 
Postal Center handles more than 9 million pieces of outgoing mail, 4.5 million 
pieces of incoming mail, and some 60,000 parcels/signature-required items 
annually. in 2022, outgoing mail included nearly 876,000 in Relief Checks 
distributed to tax filers throughout the state. 
o Surplus Property: The Surplus Property Division disposes of state surplus 
property that is no longer needed by the department that purchased it. The 
Division conducts daily sales, property offered for bid, periodic public sales, 
and public auctions. Additionally, federal surplus property is obtained for 
donation to qualifying state, public or non-profit organizations throughout 
l\/laine. ln 2022, Surplus Property sold 282 vehicles/large equipment through 
electronic auction. Total sales exceeded $1.3 million. 
The entire Bureau of General Services team has been particularly active on behalf of all of State 
government as engaged stewards of all Maine State facilities, land, and property. Their 
commitment to ”catch up," ”keep up,” and ”build up" has resulted in comprehensive strategic 
planning, critical assessment, and ongoing timely maintenance to avoid more costly fixes in the 
future. 
Highlights include: 
Division of Planning, Design and Construction 
0 Pandemic 
o Much of the general fund work in 2022 was related to air quality improvements 
in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. Air handling equipment was replaced and 
air filtration improved in 1,200,000 of the 1,800,000 square feet of state-owned 
space in Augusta. Sixty-one air purifiers were provided to various departments, 
in response to requests. 
0 Relocations Necessitated by Major Renovation Work 
o Building renovations at the Cultural and Ray Buildings triggered a second major“ 
wave of work in 2021 and 2022. 
I Relocating the Cultural Building's staff, books (26,000 square feet of 
collections), archives (8,330 boxes), and museum objects required 
multiple leased spaces (some with specialty temperature and humidity 
controls) and improvements to the state-owned buildings to which the 
agencies were relocated (10 Water Street, 242 State Street, the Center 
Building, 6 Elkins Lane, Cross Building, Smith-Merrill House, and the 
Williams Pavilion). 
pg.32
_ 3‘ $_AT|\'[ 
Q; 4,,/J 
5 it ‘a -_ , Y
1 
: . E I ., 2 
; mame9 
3.' 
' 
.5 ’:~ ¢' 
"'0 5*’ 7 S 4' 
\ ‘v ‘‘ 
I For the Ray renovation, Maine DEP was relocated to the Marquardt 
Building, one floor of which had recently been vacated, with the file room' 
transferred to the only building that could support the weight, the DEP 
training room at Chimney Loop. 
0 Greenlaw Building Renovation 
o Renovation work began in 2019 and continued through 2022 to convert the 
vacant Greenlaw Building into a sophisticated and complex lab building for the 
Health and Environmental Testing Lab. 
Planning 
o Completed Augusta Area Facilities Master Plan 
0 Completed Master Plan for MECDHH/GBSD and Mackworth Island 
o Completed Facility assessment for BGS-managed buildings at Dorothea Dix 
Psychiatric Center 
o Strategic Planning for $50 million in state general funds for keep-up and catch-up 
projects, all funds committed to projects 
0 "Keep up" Stewardship 
/ O BGS directed resources to building envelope upgrades (masonry, windows, roofs) 
to protect against water infiltration 
o Long-neglected civil projects were addressed, leading to designs for the 
Chamberlain Street wall replacement, and a project to realign the front steps of 
the Blaine House to correct settlement that had happened over the years 
0 "Catch up" Renovations in Progress/Historic Preservation/Adaptive Reuse
O 
pg. 33 o Phase I of the Stone Building renovation took place, which consisted of pest 
removal and a thorough building envelope upgrade/repair study 
o Studies of Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center buildings managed by BGS anda 
Master Plan for MECDHH/GBSD/Mackworth Island created a blueprint for future 
renovation and demolition work 
o When friable asbestos was removed, many unforeseen conditions were found at 
the Cultural Building, leading to a supplemental budget funding request in the 
amount of $5 million V_ 
Internal Reviews, Strategic Planning for Modernization and Efficiency 
o RFP for an automated maintenance recording and scheduling database for all 
Maine State properties was advertised and proposals submitted
Division of Safety and Environmental S
O 
pg. 34 sg\1I\TlV5 
so 44.0 
,;=t 
- V;-2 ..7 
2-                               
, . ,\ 
/r -Q HI \n\ ‘s 
0 Energy and Environment 
o Ray Building renovation, new OCME Building and Cult l ura Building renovation all 
were designed with electrified me h' 
c amcal systemsto minimize or eliminate use 
of fossil fuel and carbon emissions 
0 Security 
o Selection process was conducted for design of a secure screening entrance at the 
Cross Building 
o Concept designs develo df pe or a secure fence at the Blaine House 
0 Real Property 
0 Staffing was restored in the positions were hired 
0 SES responded to 37 separate incident ' 
l' o Acquired former "fire station" property at 40 Hospital Street, Augusta, for 
replacement OCME building 
o Design for new OCME building completed 
ervices (SES) 
FY 23 budget, and the first of two 
s |nvo vmg air quality, mold, mercury asbesto 
other hazardous m ' ' ' 
0 Inspections - 39 
o Technical reports - 21 technical , s, or 
aterials issues, as detailed below: 
on-site inspections were conducted 
reports were produced 
o Materials involved
O
O     
21 projects involved mold 
13 projects involved asbestos 
4 projects involved lead-based paint 
5 projects involved odor complaints/issues 
1 project involved mercury contamination 
o Abatements overseen
O
O    
SES maintains a detailed oversaw 15 mold abatements 
oversaw 4 asbestos abatements 
oversaw 1 lead-based paint abatement 
oversaw 1 mercury-contamination abatement 
database of incidents and responses
_~_\$') ‘q‘n“"‘ 1-. 
.~\" ‘-1 
5‘ .- 
_/ 
<1; 
5 ' 
2; Z 
I-7: m _a1_n 8 ;" 
3 '
I 
2 =? 
1:,’ 
'7 , $5‘ 
Property Management Division 
Energy projects: 
o Completed LED upgrades with motion sensors in ten (10) PMD maintained 
facilities, to include hallways, stairwells, exit signs, emergency lighting and 
exterior building lighting 
o Completed several HVAC integrations allowing for more energy efficient 
operation 
o Replaced window AC units and old mini-split cooling units with energy efficient 
heat pumps at 19 Elkins Lane 
Security projects: 
o Enhanced security at twenty-two (22) facilities, state-wide, to include security 
panels, card readers, and cameras 
Renovations: 
o installed doors (overhead doors and building access doors) in several locations 
with associated electrical work 
o Completed renovations/upgrades in seven (7) locations, to include walls, 
painting, plumbing fixtures, and flooring 
Division of Leased Space 
Eighty-three (83) leases were processed in 2022, escalator clauses to be removed from 
leases as they are renewed or entered into 
Process to request leased space and to report environmental issues was formalized, 
greatly streamlining and standardizing workflow 
The standard lease form was updated and is being used on all new or renewed leases 
A fee increase was approved which will allow the Division to be fully staffed 
Office of State-Owned Landfill Management 
pg. 35 Successfully completed second phase of capping at Dolby 
Negotiated preliminary agreement with East Millinocket to reduce charges for 
wastewater treatment 1l 
Worked with consultants to respond to P.L. 2022, Ch. 172, addressing methods to treat 
PFAS in landfill leachate 
Responded to 38 MRSA §1303-C, sub-§4O-A, concerning possible amendments to the 
Operating Services Agreement for out of state waste at Juniper Ridge Landfill
=.\'>"”‘n"‘4... 
er ‘I; 
Q? /‘ 
% ‘L _ ;—=~.= .7 c ;_'1 -‘ 
V 
ang
E . ea‘ . 65 
'2‘: ‘' 
\‘ 
lo £1: -.-A59 
Division of Procurement Services 
v Pandemic 
o The Central Warehouse was closed having completed its mission providing PPE 
for schools throughout the State and State agencies 
o A total of 15,845,026 PPE items were processed through the Central Warehouse 
in response to the pandemic 
~ Internal and Administrative improvements 
0 Technology changes streamlined contract submission and review processes 
o The Divisions of Procurement, lT Procurement, Central Fleet, Surplus, and Postal 
were assessed for process, efficiency, and functionality to develop individualized 
action plans for process improvement, modernization and automation 
o An RFP for the State Purchase Program (P-card) was issued and awarded to JP 
Morgan. Transition is expected in early FY2024 
Central Fleet Management (CFM) 
0 The vehicle fleet consists of 2300 vehicles, 20% of which have 125,000 or more miles, 
leading to increased maintenance requirements. CFM has met the challenge and kept 
the fleet in operation, despite higher than usual mileage due to the unavailability of 
replacement vehicles 
0 in 2022, State of Maine fleet vehicles traveled 26,387,351 miles 
0 Eleven electric vehicles (EVs) were added during calendar year 2022. Electric vehicle 
purchases included 1-Kia Niro PHEV SUV, 2-Ford E~Transit BEV cargo vans, 3-Ford F150 
Lightning Pro BEV pickup trucks, and 5~Chevy Bolt BEV compact cars. The Chevy Bolts 
will soon be placed in service at the agency level. CFM continues to work with agencies 
to provide PHEV and BEV vehicles based on vehicle availability and agency needs 
Division of Central Services - Postal 
0 The State Postal Center provides a wide range of mail services for more than 147 
separate State locations, including interoffice mail 
0 Handled more than 9 million pieces of outgoing mail, including nearly 876,000 $850 
Pandemic Relief Checks distributed to tax filers throughout the State 
0 Handled more than 4.5 million pieces of incoming mail 
0 Processed more than 60,000 parcels/signature-required items 
pg.36
                         
\‘>‘M1W'-4, . 
9+ ta
’ 0‘ 1 v — 
'1‘ 
"' 
j 1; 2 
mameg 
) . 0‘ O m l'A\\Q 
Division of Central Services - Surplus Property
I
Q
O 
O Surplus Property located a buyer for the MDOT ferry ”Governor Curtis.” Details are still 
in process, but the vessel is expected to go to a buyer in the south in early 2023V 
Sold 282 vehicles and pieces of large equipment via auction 
Conducted 12 public sales 
Conducted 4 sales specifically for state employees to purchase equipment and other 
materials supporting telework from home 
What's ahead for 2023 (and beyond): 
Division of Planning, Design and Construction 
0 "Keep up" Stewardship
O 
pg. 37 o Continue to work with Gordian/Sightlines to update biennially the level of annual 
stewardship needed to properly support the state's 1,800,000 square feet of 
building space in Greater Augusta 
o Full facility assessment studies will be done on state-owned buildings to allow for 
accurate calculation of ”keep up" costs 
o Buildings constructed or renovated within the past 20 years will be maintained in 
like-new condition (Harlow, Williams, Deering, Greenlaw, Marquardt) through 
consistent, scheduled preventative maintenance 
o BGS will continue to direct resources to building envelope upgrades (masonry, 
windows, roofs) to protect against water infiltration and replace obsolete 
heating/ventilation/air conditioning equipment such as at the State Crime Lab 
o Continue annual repairs on the parking garage, pending results of structural 
study to be done in 2023 
“Catch up" Renovations in Progress/ Historic Preservation/Adaptive Reuse 
o With available funding, the state has an opportunity to continue to ”catch up" on 
long-neglected facilities and will prioritize those where full facility assessments 
and the complete scope of work have been developed 
o in accordance with the Master Plan, and to minimize environmental impacts, 
BGS will continueto prioritize renovation of existing facilities, particularly 
buildings that contribute to historic districts such as at the Stone and Center 
Buildings 
o BGS will continue to pursue ”adaptive reuse" of existing, but obsolete facilities to 
minimize the environmental impacts of new construction 
o Facilities to be renovated include BGS-managed sections of the DDPC Campus (as 
funds are available), the Blaine House, Maine Criminal Justice Academy, the East
pg. 38 O __K\§ ?.ATl\'5
M \‘ '/ 
?\J 
c ..Q Ii ';‘ 
2 "‘,T§"'5 
‘at 9‘ "#1 vi II! §~_L" 
Campus (Chimney Loop buildings, Stone Building, Center Building), and the Nash 
School, Daschlager and McLean buildings. 
Continue efforts to seek funding for, abate, and demolish obsolete structures 
that are too degraded to save (for example, several buildings at MECDHH/GBSD 
at Mackworth Island, the Pooler Pavilion at DDPC, East Campus tunnels, 242 
State Street) 
Planning
O
O   
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O 
O Master Plan for DDPC 
Master Plan for Public Safety Campus 
Master Plan for EV Chargers in Augusta 
Solar installation guidance 
Internal Administrative Tools 
Develop a database via a competitive process that creates a central repository of 
information for facility condition, repairs and improvements, energy 
consumption, and that alerts to upcoming maintenance ("keep up”) issues 
Standardize reporting for general fund expenditures on capital projects 
Revise Rules for Capitol Planning Commission and address leases of excess state 
property 
Energy and Environment 
BGS Energy Manager to develop a database/baseline of energy use and carbon 
emissions in state-owned buildings and leased spaces 
Complete EV Charger Master Plan for Augusta 
Develop design standards for solar installations 
Develop sustainable design standards for clean energy sources such as VRF/heat 
pump technology for new construction or major renovations 
Incorporate mass timber into new construction 
Continue electrification of buildings formerly served by central steam plants 
(originally fueled by coal, then oil, now natural gas) 
Continue capping at Dolby Landfill in East Millinocket 
Assimilate results of PFAS study for landfills and develop next steps 
Security 
Design a secure screening facility for the Cross Office Building and have ready to 
issue for bid in January 2024 
Design a more secure fence for the Blaine House and have ready to issue for bid 
in January 2024 
Finalize details of a mass notification system for emergencies
» V~»\T|V( \>‘ -4,, 
.:~\‘\ J                                     
I A In 1'~I\' 
Real Property 
o Property acquisition and development to be in accordance with the relevant 
campus master plan (Augusta, MCJA, DDPC, Mackworth)' 
o Address state acreage adjacent to the Dolby landfill in East Millinocket, transfer 
major acreage to DACF/Parks and Lands and sell some land to the Town of East 
Millinocket 
o Sell excess state land at Downeast Correctional Facility 
o Continue to inventory state-owned land databases to develop an accurate list 
o Award contracts for infrastructure projects (Chamberlain Street retaining wall 
rebuild, shifting granite steps at Blaine House) 
Division of Safety and Environmental Services (SES) 
Continue to respond to air quality or hazardous materials issues within 24 hours or 
sooner for emergencies 
Continue to provide weekly reports of active situations when BGS SES is involved ina 
response 
Maintain database of incidents and responses 
Division of Property Management 
pg. 39 Q Work with Energy Manager to develop accurate fuel consumption data by building 
as part of the state's ongoing efforts to track and reduce carbon emissions. 
¢ Expand recycling opportunities beyond paper and cardboard 
0 Develop expertise with VRF/electrified technologies and changing building usages 
and occupancies 
0 Develop a capital replacement plan for grounds equipment 
0 Continue to refine PMD project specifications such as standard types of hardware, 
windows, energy specifications, etc. 
0 Complete equipment entry with PM schedules in Shift Connector 
0 Procurement of services for annual evaluations of roofs in all state-owned buildings 
0 Review and update PMD job descriptions to address technology updates and other 
changes 
0 Update PMD work rules and policies 
0 Continue to work with Planning, Design and Construction Division to migrate 
buildings off theCentral Steam Plant on the East Campus as they are electrified 
0 Begin to analyze how the Steam Plant and Chillers in the Cross Building that supply 
heat and cooling to the CSOB, State House, and Cultural Building, and fueled by 
natural gas, can within the next 5 years be fueled via clean energy 
0 Formalize division of responsibilities for the State House between the State House 
and PMD, codify in an MOU
          
‘ $“LATl\"[ 
$9 44.0 
0‘ ’¢ 
3' 31,. 
- ;<,» . 
c 3- - 
: as 
+— 'I1’la1I'18 - z .- 
2 ;,=,J ¢ 5 "e, ,5‘ ., __ 
U In nu Ax 
Division of Leased Space 
Reduce the number of leases with escalator clauses by 25%.' 
Fill two vacant positions, an Office Specialist ll and a Public Service Manager ll 
Reduce the number of Tenant at Will leases by 25% in 2023 and 25% in 2024 
Monitor Lessor improvements to 286 Water Street in Augusta to eliminate water 
infiltration 
Begin collecting energy usage information on leased space buildings 
Office of State-Owned Landfill Management 
Complete capping at Dolby Landfill 
Complete easements and license agreements to formalize transfer of leachate from 
Dolby Landfill to the East Millinocket treatment plant 
Complete agreement establishing charges for wastewater treatment at the Dolby 
Landfill 
Continue to address PFAS issues in leachate at both Dolby and Juniper Ridge 
Address Juniper Ridge capacity issues 
Division of Procurement Services 
Revise statutory and rule requirements to administer grant awards, be more precise 
with procedural requirements and update to meet automation strategies 
Continue modernization and automation of procurement processes through staged 
augmentations of our Dynamics-based applications 
Progressively integrate assessment plans into individual units 
Formalize and integrate Green Purchasing Program 
Gather data and implement the Procurement DEI Program 
Division of Central Fleet Management 
Upgrade fleet management database system 
implement telematics solution for all or portion of fleet to gain insight on fuel 
efficiency, cost savings, and reduced emissions 
Continue to source and integrate electric vehicles into the fleet 
Adopt newer technologies 
Cycle out older, high-mileage vehicles 
Division of Central Services - Postal 
pg. 40 Implement assessment recommendation to modify staff organization 
Replace outdated and maintenance-heavy equipment with modern technology 
Transition aged vehicles to EV as business use allows 
Enhance security protocols by establishing a safe and separate area within the postal 
facility to screen for toxins and other possible contaminants
Division of
O
O
O
O 
pg. 41 >\\ T, 
\$\§\,¢. 15.544,’ 
. 1 
.- 
1: 
,1 
.17 .                                
Central Services - Surplus Property 
' ' 
‘h di itized system Replace the existing paper process wit ag 
Implement a green surplus program 
Establish a stronger and deliberate Federal Surplus program 
Seek aiternative methods of sales to ensure maximum ROI
. 
\Lr\T|' 
QPV‘ “we 
malne-
. 
J __.                              
~( 
1 Q: '/}( _w 
‘HI »1.=\- 
Division of Financial and Personnel Services 
Heather L'Hommedieu Perreault, Deputy Commissioner of Finance 
The Division of Financial and Personnel Services provides finance and human resources expertise 
to departments and agencies across State government. There are five centers focused on 
common customers, and each has a finance division and a human resources division that provide 
highly experienced and technically trained professionals with specialized knowledge in their 
fields. These service centers are: 
o General Government 
0 Natural Resources 
Security and Employment 
Corrections 
Health and Human Services     
These teams work with 13 State departments, including some of the largest, and dozens of 
boards, commissions and agencies. They provide professional expertise across all levels of HR 
and financial management, including processing, analysis, and reporting. Staff is well-versed in 
state and federal laws and regulations within which the State must operate. This expertise is used 
to assist agencies toward achieving their desired outcomes. Accountability, efficiency and 
effective use of State resources are the Division's goals. 
The centralized nature of these operations provides a critical system of checks and balances, 
allowing for independent review of transactions and consistent application and interpretation 
across departments and agencies of statutory requirements, budgetary policy, generally 
accepted accounting practices, human resources policy, and collective bargaining agreements. 
All staff within the Division contribute towards this objective, whether they are advising 
senior leadership on strategic objectives, or processing day-to—day transactions. 
Responsibilities include paying the State's bills, managing cash flow, on-boarding new 
employees, and training managers in human resource management. In addition, finance 
office staff assists with the agency budget analysis, development and management; 
financial reporting, forecasts and analysis; and advises on a variety of financial matters 
throughout the year. Human Resources staff assists both employees and managers with 
resolution of workplace issues; guides managers in performance evaluation and 
discipline; and provides workforce training and development. 
Title 5, Section 284 established the Division of Financial and Personnel Services on June 
30, 1992. 
These statewide services were brought together within the Division as a result of 
Public Law 2005 c. 12 Pts. K-4, G-2 and G-3. These laws expanded the agencies served 
within the Division, and also directed the Department to review the structure of payroll, 
pg. 42 
/ 
112- 43 _\,u=.nn-5 4' 
Q? "V 
_; 
5 Q. ; 1. 
personnel and accounti 
and cost-ef ' ng statewide in an effort to improve organizational efficiency 
fectiveness. 
Highlights include: 
0 During the pandemic, the Service Centers were pivotal drivers of change, rapidly 
adapting and designing new business processes for the suddenly remote work 
environment. The Service Centers successfully continued to process transactions, 
prepare and manage budgets, pay employees and manage personnel changes without 
interruption so that partner agencies could provide critical services to the citizens of 
Maine throughout this challenging time. 
0 Human resources professionals within the service centers ensured employees across the 
state were familiar with the most up-to-date COVID-19 work rules and policies 
(including leave options); and served as the point of contact for employees testing 
positive for COVID-19, advising them on current isolation and quarantine requirements 
and conducting contact tracing for State employee cases until the shift to case 
management in early 2022. 
0 Massive increases in Federal funding over the past few years significantly increased the 
workload for finance service centers, with thousands of additional transactions, complex 
new compliance requirements, and hundreds of new grants and reporting 
requirements. In FY 2019, they managed approximately 800 accounts with $7.6 billion in 
spending; in FY 2022 they managed over 900 accounts with $10.6 billion in spending, an 
increase of 40%. Positions created through ARPA funds generated additional work for 
the human resources side of the service centers, as they assisted agencies with 
completing and reviewing functional job analysis (FJAs) and then submitti 
processing. ng them for
51 v..\'r| v;_ 
xéx 14,0 
_~ 
Q' "» 
mam- 
4. _ .»)\‘                                               
1,, \1\\' 
Conclusion 
DAFS has broad responsibility for the structures, systems and functions that play such a pivotal 
role in the State's ability to provide the programs and services so crucial to a functioning society 
and so very important to Maine families, schools, and communities. 
The last few years have been a time of significant accomplishment within DAFS but there is still 
much to do to build on those successes and ensure continued momentum. 
At DAFS we are committed stewards of state government's critical infrastructure: fiscal, human, 
physical, and technical. 
DAFS Stewardship: FISCAL 
- Upgrading Budget Management System 
- Updated and streamlined user experience, better reporting capabilities and more 
efficient integration between the budget and financial systems 
o New Human Resources Management System Implementation 
- More secure, reliable payroll data, improved internal controls and comprehensive 
human resources functions 
- Upgrade Advantage System 
~ Expanding State Economist Staff 
o More demographic data from the census; devising and publishing charts, tables and 
other visual representations that will bring value for the public. 
~ The Annual Comprehensive Financial Report for fiscal year 2022 received the Government 
Finance Officers Association Certificate of Achievement for Excellence in Financial Reporting 
award, marking our fifteenth consecutive year receiving this award. 
~ Since 2019: 3 biennial budgets, 5 supplemental budgets, Jobs Plan, Winter Energy Relief 
- Discretionary Pandemic Relief Funds tracking and management: $1.258 CRF; $1B Jobs Plan 
o increased Project Management oversight and accountability for successful project 
implementation 
- Fair, open and competitive procurement 
DAFS Stewardship: HUMAN 
. Become an "Employer of Choice" 
. Continuation of Classification and Compensation work 
. Focused recruitment and retention efforts 
. Diversity, Equity, lnclusion, and Belonging Strategic Plan and Center of Excellence 
- Age Friendly Employer Certification 
o Data management and data governance 
Pa44
. Kl’!’ 
_-_\>"“ "44, S /1 
S‘ Z’ s‘ 7 -Q Z 
i- Q 1 2 
.& __s 
H \* 
/'0 
M ,\.<."" 
Talent Development and Coaching, both supervisor and employee focused 
"Works for Me" portal for coordinating hybrid work 
"Hoteling" application ~ easy booking space for on-site work' 
ln 2022, completed 694 reclassifications, range changes, classification specification updates, 
new positions, new classifications, and job title changes 
~ Workforce engagement surveys 
- Digital accessibility awareness and education 
Over 4,800 of our employees, about 43%, either are or have submitted plans to engage in 
telework. On an annual basis, this will save more than 22 million driving miles. 
DAFS Stewardship: PHYSICAL 
. New BGS maintenance and tracking Database 
. Ongoing "Catch Up" "Keep Up" of State-owned buildings and properties 
Consistent, scheduled maintenance across all state-owned properties — more 
than 2 million square feet 
Focus on energy efficient upgrades and solar projects 
Transition from oil and gas to electric heating 
. "Lead by Example" - Caring for our natural resources and the environment/ 
I Sustainable, green procurement practices 
11 Electric vehicles added to fleet in 2022 
Master Plan for EV Chargers in Augusta 
Ongoing PFAs Mitigation Efforts in Landfills 
. Safety and Security Upgrades 
Hazardous material and indoor air quality assessment and mitigation 
Screening entrance at Burton Cross 
Blaine House fencing 
Safe and separate postal inspection area 
Emergency Notification System 
DAFS Stewardship: TECHNICAL 
~ Cybersecurity 
pa 45 Cybersecurity Plan due in September 2023 
Actionable contingency plan for disaster recovery to hardware, applications, and data 
after a technology disruption 
Plans are vital to the State's ability to prepare for and respond to a broad range of 
threats, from mild outages to serious disasters and cyber-attacks 
Firewall, Firmware and Power Supply Continuity
PAT! V5 . s‘. 
:“\ 4"’/1 
0* ”, 4 
5 If .>- Zfnﬂlne L ___ 
2,} I
5 ,5 4. 1,’ Q 
- Human Resources Management System implementation 
o Modernization and automation of procurement processes 
- Upgrade Fleet Management System' 
~ State Tax and Revenue System project - to replace legacy tax systems 
- Upgrade and modernize Postal Division 
- New Budget and Financial Management System 
- Ongoing Remote/Hybrid work upgrades 
~ The last on-premises mainframe was decommissioned after nearly 50 years 
- Modernizing digital physical technology 
o improving delivery of digital services to citizens 
~ Laptop refresh on four-year cycle 
- Our electronic financial transactions workflow tool now processes more than 340,000 
documents annually, with more coming online         
As we continue to push these critical efforts forward, we will ensure that our state processes, 
facilities, and infrastructure are maintained, continue to function safely and smoothly, and keep 
critical pace with the changing technology around us. We will also continue to be engaged and 
supportive champions of our greatest resource — our employees, who continue to deliver 
essential programs and services to the people of Maine. 
pa46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
