TESTIMONY  
OF 
LANA EWING , INTERIM EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
MAINE CHARTER SCHOOL COMMISSION  
 
For the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
And the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
Hearing Date: February 13, 202 3 
 
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of St ate Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025"  
 
Senator  Rotundo, Representative  Sachs, Members of the  Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Senator Rafferty, Rep resentative  Brennan, and the 
Mem bers of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural  Affairs, my name is Lana 
Ewing,  and I am the Interim Executive Director  of the Maine Charter School  Commission  (the 
Commission) . I am pleased  to present testimony on behalf of the Commission’s Biennial Budget  
request.  I regret that due to pressing health considerations of Chair Wilson Hess and my family, 
neither of us are able to join today’s proceedings.  
The Commission was established by Public Law 2011, Chapter 414 . It is comprise d of 
seven members – four appointed by the Governor and three appointed by the state board from 
its membership . The Commission is empowered under this chapter to authorize charter 
schools , enter into contracts wit h public charter  schools , oversee and mo nitor charter schools , 
and decide whether to renew, not renew or revoke their charter contracts . 
The Maine Charter School Commission authorizes and monitors ten public charter  
schools across the state. In doing so, the Commission seeks to increase student achievement by  
supporting high -performing schools, promoting innovative educational opportunities in diverse  
public -school settings, creating new professional opportunities for educators, and novel  
approaches for community engagement in th e design, execution, and delivery of education to 
the state’s children.  
State law allows the Charter School Commission to draw up to 3% of the annual per -
pupil allocation received by each public charter school under its authorization. In fiscal year 
2021 and 20 22, the Commission ’s allocation was 2.35% . 
The revenue projections for this Biennium Budget are based on a continued 2.35% 
allocation. T he baseline  budget for the Commission can be found on page A -133 in the 
Recommended General Fund  Biennial Budg et document – Part A. The Other Special Revenue 
Funds request is $694,809 in  each year of the biennium. There are no new initiatives for the 
Commission.  
Thank you for considering this written  testimony on behalf of the Maine Charter School 
Commission . I would be pleased to respond to  any questions you may have.  
