Maine Medical :{- 3:-‘a, 21 .,, Fl 
Lt 1% s ,_ E ,. . 53 , . 
"e~§,‘<egs’§' is;/3‘ :?;_:?" .7 ‘E '»1>;&1 ,‘ 
. ' 
it '; 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President l Paul R. Cain, MD, President —Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO l Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
ISUPPORT Maine Physicians OADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine OPROMOTE the health of all Maine People 
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
Room 228, State House 
FROM: Maine Medical Association 
DATE: Wednesday, February 22, 2023, 1:00 p.m. 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE MEDICAL ASSOCIATION NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
L.D. 258, THE GOVERNOR ’S SFY 2024-2025 BIENNIAL BUDGET PROPOSAL 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations 
Committee, and also Good Afternoon to Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and 
Members of the Health & Human Sen/ices Committee. My name is Lani Graham, M.D., M.P.H 
l am a resident of Freeport and a member of the Public Health Committee (PHC) of the Maine 
Medical Association (MMA). I am a former Chief Public health Officer for Maine. 
The MMA is a professional organization representing more than 4300 physicians, residents, 
and medical students in Maine whose mission is to support Maine physicians, advance the 
quality of medicine in Maine, and promote the health of all Maine people. 
I am here on behalf of my colleagues in the medical community to ask you to consider 
increasing your support for our public health system during your deliberations of this biennial 
budget. l am not speaking to any specific line in the proposed budget and the MMA supports 
the Governor ’s biennial budget proposal as a whole. We simply could not pass up the 
opportunity to tell you that we believe more investment in public health in Maine is vitally 
important to the health of our population if you can identify the resources to do so. 
Support for public health in Maine is one of the top three priorities of the MMA in the 131$‘ 
Maine Legislature and with good reason. We have just been through the terrible COVID-19 
pandemic when every citizen of this state hung on the updates provided daily by Dr. Shah. 
Physicians and patients alike found out how important public health could be to survival. We 
were so lucky to be led by a well-trained and capable physician who could meet the challenge 
Frank O. Stred Building i 30 Association Drive l PO Box 190 i Manchester, Maine 04351 
TEL: 207-622-3374 i FAX; 207-622-3332 i www.mainemed.com
despite the disadvantages of a public health department that had been seriously weakened in 
the preceding years. 
After several years of cuts, the Maine CDC was left with about 100 fewer employees in 2019 
than in 2011 - a 25% reduction in staff. Maine is not alone. Nationwide, less than 3% of the 
health care budget is spent on public health and prevention. This would be typical of the 
approach to public health in Maine and in the nation. When looking for money to spend on 
immediate needs, public health and prevention are often targets. But this is short sighted. 
Insufficient support for public health not only left us vulnerable to an infectious disease 
pandemic but has also resulted in the neglect of all public health services, including a failure to 
control other epidemics such as opioid addiction, vaping, traffic fatalities, obesity, and suicide. 
And now, having survived the pandemic, we seem to be ready to go back to “business as 
usua|" forgetting the vital role that public health plays in keeping Maine people healthy. 
ln 2022, a report was published of the relative health of states around the country. Maine 
ranked 26"‘ in overall health of the population and last among the New England states.1 
Hospitals are becoming oven/vhelmed by illnesses that might reasonably be reduced bya 
strong public health system - late-stage cancer, hypertension induced strokes, out-of-control 
Diabetes, chronic obstructive lung disease, and of course the opioid epidemic. We all know 
that the old saw is true: “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” 
I am here to make a plea for adequate funding of public health. We all cheered to hear that 
there were some public health federal dollars expected, but the people of Maine deserve more 
Currently Maine stands below the median among states for public health funding? 
As long as I have worked in public health, strong, unwavering support has been lacking. lf we 
do not support public health now, after a clear demonstration of the need, when will we? Our 
public health system is chronically underfunded, understaffed, and in some sectors being 
stripped of its legal powers? 
Maine, unlike many states, does not have a strong county public health system. Our regional 
public health infrastructure consisting of eight districts and a tribal district were defunded 
1 
hfcps://wwwamericashealthrankings.org 
2 https:[Lpublichealthmaps.orq/motw-2021/2021/4/5/5-april-2021-per-person-state-public-health- 
funding-united-states 
3 https:1/truthoutorg/aiticles/underfunding;public-health-is-a-decision-t0-let-peopie-die-in-the-next 
pandemic/?gclid=CjwKCAiA 6yfBhBNEiwAkmXy53ADwz9P9UhmlK5BGJBltZSOG —pOhrO9vox8sn9- 
QvUidelsYiBx5RoChEUO_AvD BWE 
Frank O. Stred Building l 30 Association Drive PO Box 190 i Manchester, Maine 04351 
TEL: 207-622-3374 % FAX; 207~622~3332 www.n1ainc1ncd.co1n
before the current Administration of Governor Mills. It seems unlikely that that this system is 
back to full strength. Sustained funding for the new Maine Prevention Network could 
accomplish much. 
We recognize that there are many competing needs for state dollars. But we want to draw to 
your attention one strategy that could support public health while at the same time reducing a 
deadly threat to Maine youth - tobacco. A sheet is attached to this testimony outlining the 
advantages to using this strategy. 
Thank you for considering the Maine Medical Association ’s concern about Maine's long-term 
investment in its public health infrastructure — a critical investment in the health of future 
generations of Mainers. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. 
Frank O. Stred Building i 30 Association Drive l PO Box 190 l Manchester, Maine 04351 
TEL: 207-622-3374 i FAX: 207-622-3332 l www.mainemed.co1n
Maine Medical .1.= 
_-;1.~_=:~.-; »z 
z '2 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President l Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect l R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO l Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
OSUPPORT Maine Physicians OADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine OPROMOTE the health of all Maine People 
Support Public Health with Tobacco Tax 
BACKGROUND 
As we consider this legislative session as well as actions needed in the next Congress, it 
appears that there is an overwhelming array of issues to be addressed. But, thanks to the 
tragedy of Covid-19, there is one issue that must surely be considered at the top of the list. 
That would be on-going, solid, financial support for public health. 
After several years of cuts to Maine CDC, the agency was left with about 100 fewer employees 
in 2019 than in 2011 - a 25% reduction in staff. Insufficient support for public health here in 
Maine and the nation has not only left us vulnerable to an infectious disease pandemic but has 
also resulted in the neglect of all public health sen/ices, including a failure to control other 
epidemics such as opioid addiction, vaping, traffic fatalities, obesity, and suicide. Furthermore, 
hospitals are becoming overwhelmed by illnesses that might reasonably be reduced bya 
strong public health system—late stage cancer, hypertension induced strokes, out of control 
Diabetes, chronic obstructive lung disease and cardiac failure. 
Even in these difﬁcult ﬁnancial times, a source of funding is needed. While there would 
potentially be many choices, the most obvious one for Maine in 2023 is an increase in the 
tobacco tax which will not only support Maine's public health system but also reduce tobacco 
use, particularly among vulnerable youth. 
KEY POINTS 
- Tobacco remains our #1 underlying cause of premature death. 
o On average, smokers die 10 years earlier than non-smokers. 
On average, about half of all tobacco users will die from tobacco. 
Smoking costs the U.S. $300 billion per year, including about $170 billion in direct medical care 
for adults. 
o Nationally, estimated smoking-caused health costs and lost productivity totals $19.16 per pack, 
far lower than the ~$3 in federal and state excise taxes on each pack. 
o 17% of Maine's high school students vape (use e-cigarettes), higher than the national rate of 
14%. 
- There are 4,200 Maine high school students who smoke cigarettes, higher than the national 
rate. 
o 29% of the cancer deaths in Maine are attributable to smoking 
- $811 million dollars of annual health care costs are directly caused by smoking 
Frank O. Stred Building l 30 Association Drive l PO Box 190 I Manchester, Maine 04351 
TEL: 207-622-3374 I FAX: 207-622-3332 l www.mainemed.com
Smoking costs Medicaid in Maine (MaineCare) about $262 million per year. 
$647 million dollars of productivity in Maine is lost to smoking each year 
There are 27,000 kids under 18 alive today who will ultimately die prematurely from smoking 
Maine's tax on a pack of cigarettes has not changed since 2005. 
Maine's current tax of $2.00 on a pack of cigarettes is the second lowest in New England 
Maine's tobacco tax used to be one of the highest, it is now #19, while Maine's smoking rate of 
17.3% is the highest in New England and higher than the national rate 
o Raising state cigarette taxes always increases state revenues and always reduces smoking. 
LEGISLATIVE REQUEST 
We respectfully propose consideration of a $2 per pack increase in the state excise tax as well as 
proportionate increases in other nicotine products, including e-cigarettes, cigars, and chew tobacco. 
The resulting $4 per pack excise tax would result in Maine's having the third highest rate in New 
England (now 5"‘). It would result in millions of dollars in state revenues for public health. The last time 
Maine raised the tobacco tax was in 2005. 
Most important is preserving a fair share of the generated funding for public health work in Maine. We 
ask that drafted legislation support assuring that at least ﬁfty percent (50%) of the funds generated 
from this tax be directed to public health support for the Maine Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 
Increasing the tobacco tax is a win-win-win solution for states: a public health win that reduces 
smoking and saves lives, a ﬁnancial win that reduces smoking-caused health care costs and raises 
much-needed revenue, and a political win because tobacco taxes have the strong support of the public. 
Even the tobacco industry acknowledges that raising tobacco taxes reduce smoking, which is why they 
ﬁght so hard to oppose them. 
Resources: 
httos://www.cdc.gov/tobaccoldata statistics/fact sheets/fast facts/indexhtm 
https:1’ ,/www.tobaccofreekids.orgifact~sheets 
https://www.cclagovistatesystem/factsheets/ECigarette/ECigTa><.htmi 
https:Z/wwwxobaccofreekids.org[problem/toil-us/maine 
https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/assets/factsheets/0097.pdf 
State excise taxes as of June, 2020 
CT: $4.35 
RI: $4.25 
MA: $3.51 
VT: $3.08 
ME$ : 2.00 
N H: $1.78 
https://WWW.tobaccofreekids.org; ’assets/factsheets/0097.pdf 
Frank O. Stred Building l 30 Association Drive i PO Box 190 l Manchester, Maine 04351 
TEL: 207-622-3374 FAX: 207~622—3332 wwW.n1ainen1ed.oom
