Maine State Library 
Testimony — Lori Fisher, State Librarian 
1315‘ Maine Legislature 
oint Standin Committee on A ro riations and Financial Affairs 8 PPP 
]oint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
LD 258 — ‘L412 An‘ Ma/éing Unzﬁed/1ppr0prz'atz' 0n.r and/1//0vaz ‘z' 0n.rﬁ"0m* the General Fund and 
Oz‘/yer Fundtﬁn" z‘/1e E>¢endz‘zfure: 0fSz‘az‘e Government and C/2an<gz' n,g Certain Proz/z' .rz' on.r of the 
Law Neaersag to the Proper Operaz‘z' 0n: of S tale Govemmentfor 2‘/9e Fiscal Years Endingfune 30, 
Z023, fune 30, 2024, arzdjzme 30 2025.” 
February 13, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the]oint Standing Committee on Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs; Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, members of the ]oint Standing 
Comniittee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Lori Fisher, and I am the Maine State 
Librarian. I am speaking in support of the Maine State Library’s items in the Biennial Budget, which 
appears on pages 514 to 519 of Part A of the budget proposal. 
In troduction 
Established in 1837, the Maine State Library (MSL) is one of the first cultural agencies created by state 
government, and throughout our long history, we have had the privilege and honor of “Helping 
People; Making Maine Libraries Stronger; and Trans forming Information into Knowledge ” (our 
mission). In 2022 the library experienced a signiﬁcant change in leadership with the departure ofjames 
Ritter (former State Librarian) andjanet McKenney (former Director of Library Development). These 
roles have recently been filled — most recently I became your State Librarian on December 2?, 2022. 
The MSL staff and I look forward to continuing to serve the people of Maine, and the allocations 
represented in the proposed FY 24-25 budget will allow us to do so. 
MSL is made up of three departments: Collection Development and Digital Initiatives; Public and 
Outreach Services — Research and Innovation; and Library Development. 
The budget submitted will enable these core departments to carry out their essential work. The 
testimony that follows underscores the irnportance of our work and highlights challenges that are 
before us.
1
Administration: Page A-514 ( Original PartA Budget Submission) 
This fund (General Fund) is created to support the role of the Maine State Librarian and associated 
administrative costs such as technology, central service center, and other administrative 
responsibilities. The State Librarian is statutorily responsible for overseeing the operation of the 
Maine State Library, which includes the three departments previously referenced. Additionally, the 
Maine State Library is one of four key agencies that partner to support the Maine School and Library 
Network (MSLN), which delivers high-speed ﬁber broadband to nearly 900 libraries and schools 
across Maine. Over 90% of Maine’s public libraries receive services through MSLN. All of these 
libraries have a 1 gigabit ﬁber connection except for 4 island libraries or libraries in very remote areas. 
Blind and Visually Impaired News Access Fund: Page A-515 (Original Part A Budget 
Submission) 
This fund (Special Revenue Fund) receives its revenue from the Maine Public Utilities Comrnission ’s 
portion of the Universal Service Fund. The Maine State Library then adininisters content 
subscriptions, most notably Newsline provided by the National Federation for the Blind, to ensure 
that those Maine citizens who are blind or have visual impairments, can access news services 24/ 7. 
Imagination Library of Maine Program: Page A-515 ( Original Part A Budget Submission) 
This fund (Special Revenue Fund), established in 2021 through legislation related to Title 27, Libraries, 
History, Culture and Art, Chapter 1: State Librarian, has the speciﬁc purpose of“ ...promoting and 
encouraging reading by children of this State and to develop a statewide initiative to provide age- 
appropriate books to children from birth to 5 years of age at their homes on a monthly basis.” We 
have received $200,000 for FY22/23 and anticipate adding private funds to this revenue account to 
exceed a match of those funds over the course of FY23 / 24 and FY 24/ 25, as outlined in the legislation.
2
Maine Public Library Fund: Page A-516 (Orlginzl Part./1 Budget Submission) 
This fund (Special Revenue Fund), established in 2014, allows Maine state tax filers to voluntarily 
contribute to the Maine Public Library Fund when they file their annual state taxes. In 2022 over 
$50,000 was collected through these incredible voluntary contributions. The funds are used to directly 
support Maine’s public libraries through grants that allow libraries to develop impactful community 
programs, build collections, pilot innovative initiatives, support professional development for 
librarians, and much more. Since 2014, approximately $300,000 has been granted to Maine’s public 
libraries. 
Maine Public Library Fund (MPLF) in actioni 
“One of the BHPs (behavioral health professional) who brings the young man she works with into 
the library for the Robotics Club, said that he has matured so much in just the few months of coming 
to the group. She said that he is enjoying the club so much that he is working very hard at concentrating 
and completing the task at hand and has become so much more social with the other children in the 
group. She can see (in fact we all do) this positive change and credits the work he is doing with building 
the robots and the concentration needed to get the job done. His behavior and social skills have 
improved for the positive and he is thoroughly enjoying the club!” (As reported by the Berwick Public 
Library Director in their required ﬁnal grant report.) 
Maine State Library Funcl: Page A-517 ( O1-Jjginal Part A Budget Submission) 
This is the Maine State Library’s primary operating fund (General Fund and Federal Fund) account 
that supports the bulk of services delivered by MSL. 
The State Library’s three core departments are represented through this program. 
Collections and Digital Initiatives is responsible for the acquisition, cataloging and care of the 
library’s holdings. This includes over seven linear miles of shelved books, government documents
3
and periodicals. The vast majority of our permanent collection pertains to Maine - books on Maine 
people, places, and public policy, books by Maine authors, and a local history and genealogy 
collection that is the largest of its kind north of Boston. The library also holds a signiﬁcant 
collection of historical maps and unique special collections pertaining to the history of our state. 
Newspapers are also an important part of our collection. \\’/e maintain subscriptions to every 
current daily and local newspaper published in the state (currently 78 titles) and maintain an archive 
of millions of pages of historical newspapers in bound volumes and over a thousand reels of 
microﬁlmed papers — many of which may not exist anywhere else in any other format. 
This department is also primarily responsible for building digital collections and helping to maintain 
access to the state library's digital platforms. I’ll talk more about those services in a moment. 
The State Library’s Public and Outreach Services department serves Maine citizens through a 
public / circulating library. The primary purpose of our public operation is to provide services to 
Maine citizens seeking access to our collections, research and reference services and public 
computing support. The public also attends special programs hosted by MSL. 
When we resided in the Cultural Building, we were typically open 50 hours per week, and ina 
traditional year served approximately 75,000 visitors. W/e remained open to the public throughout 
the pandemic (aside from the time needed to move), providing virtual, curbside, and eventually 
onsite services and direct lending. At this time we are open 40 hours per week and staff two 
facilities: one for public services at 242 State Street, and one for collections storage, van delivery, and 
inter-library loan services in leased space in Winthrop. MSL continues to be a destination for people 
all over the state and the nation. 
A very important component to our public services is under the auspice of “Outreach Services. ” 
This includes two very unique programs — Talking Books Plus and Books by Mail programs. The 
former (Talking Books), lends audio books provided by the National Library Service via the Library 
of Congress to thousands of eligible Maine Citizens. The Books by Mail program literally mails 
books to citizens that are homebound and/ or in communities that are not served by a public library.
4
Our Library Development department receives its primary funding directly from the Institute of 
Museum and Library Services through the Library Services and Technology Act’s Grantr to States 
program, which is the g1_ly federal program exclusive to state library agencies across the nation (for 
Federal Fiscal Year 2023, MSL will receive $1.5 million). The department is made up of a team of 
Specialists in key areas (e.g., Technology, STEM, Workforce Development, Small/ Rural Libraries, 
etc.) who are responsible for working with Maine libraries to ensure they have the tools they need, as 
well as needed consultation to make them stronger organizations. Additionally, this department 
supports the growth of online professional development and learning resources through 
subscriptions available in the Digital Maine Library. 
A cornerstone of the work Library Development Specialists do is to support the continuing 
education needs of Maine’s library workforce - the majority of whom do not hold a degree in 
Library Science. This work is accomplished through a combination of in~person workshops, virtual 
and hybrid sessions, asynchronous online courses, site visits, and one—on-one consultations. 
Consultations average 216 per month (about 2,600 over the last two years). Virtual programming 
begun in response to the pandemic proved successful in connecting with Maine’s more rural and 
remote libraries that had not often participated in in-person training programs (primarily because of 
travel time and costs). Library Development is broadening its virtual and hybrid offerings to 
continue to reach these libraries. For example, MSL offers a 3-tiered Voluntary Public Librarian 
Certiﬁcation (VPLC) program which includes over 500 asynchronous courses. Through this and 
other self—directed learning, 169 librarians have completed 688 courses. A total of 23 VPLC 
certiﬁcates were issued in the last year. 
Turnover among library directors has been over 50% in the last four years which impacts the 
services these libraries are able to offer their communities. To mitigate this trend and ensure a strong 
library workforce, Library Development instituted an intensive intervention approach for directors 
in the position 3 years or less. After a hiatus during the Pandemic, this past fall 47 new directors 
attended a by-invitation in-person orientation and 36 are currently participating in monthly peer 
learning circles. Library Development will continue this approach throughout FY 24/ 25.
5
Suffice it to say, all three core departments of the Maine State Library have thrived over the past 
year, and we look forward to doing so in the years to come —— this fund in the budget has and will 
continue to support all these important services. 
Speciﬁc initiatives where we are asking for increased funding in this biennium budget: 
0 Page A-517: $250,000 each year for Bendable Maine & Digital Maine 
According to Title 27 § 39, MSL purchases digital learning content for use free of charge by all 
residents of the state. Resident access content virtually through Maine’s 255 public libraries as Well as 
all K-12 libraries and academic libraries including University of Maine System, and Bates, Bowdoin, 
and Colby Colleges. Demand for digital materials increased in response to the pandemic and 
anticipated to continue to grow. In particular, the launch of Bendable Maine in August 2022 has 
highlighted two main areas of need: workforce development and community engagement. MSL 
partnered with the Maine Department of Labor to acquire and provide content in Career Centers 
across the state, some of which are now in libraries. For more statistics on Bendable (August 2022- 
January 2023) please see the last page of this testimony. 
0 Page A-517: $45,000 each year for increased rate charged for van delivery service across the 
state. In accordance with Title 27 § 39, MSL manages a van delivery service so that residents of the 
State have access to over 1.5 million physical materials through the State’s library network. The last 
biennium saw a signiﬁcant rate increase for this service due to labor shortages, supply chain 
challenges, and increased diesel costs. In FY 22 MSL covered this $44,000 in extra cost with existing 
funds from its operating budget. Since that approach is not sustainable, we are asking for the increase 
in cost to be covered by additional funds. MSL will explore what other options are available to 
provide this type of statewide service, and anticipates going out for another RFP before the next 
biennium. 
I Page A-517: $50,000 in FY23/24 and $15,000 in FY 24/ 25 to adjust for increased costs of 
collections purchases. MSL is required to submit a ﬁve-year plan to the Institute of Museum and 
Library Services to receive annual federal funding. The 2023-2027 plan focuses on increasing access 
to materials for Maine residents who are visually impaired, have a disability, and/ or reside in an 
underserved community. These materials are provided both digitally and through mail delivery 
services to address challenges for residents living in remote areas of the state. The collections 
impacted by this include the library’s Large Print program and Talking Books Plus program, which
6
are both available statewide. This funding will speciﬁcally target our Large Print collection, bringing it 
up to date with increased titles / genres available to Maine residents who depend on library services 
for reading and informational materials. 
Page A-518: $3,587 in each year for statewide insurance coverage. This increase was provided to 
us by the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of Risk Management. 
Page A-518: $26,009 in FY23 / 24 and $29,058 in FY 24/25 for the department ’s share of the 
Financial and Human Resources Service Center. These ﬁgure were provided to us by the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services, and are due to negotiated and beneﬁt changes 
to Personal Services, as well as increases in operational costs. 
Page A-518: $55,000 in FY23 / 24 to replace 6 obsolete microﬁlm machines (one time 
funding). The Ofﬁce of Information Technology determined in 2022 that they can no longer 
support the library’s existing equipment due to compatibility issues with Wmdows 10. The six 
machines to be replaced are 10 years old and are used by the public to access newspapers and 
government documents. 
Page A-518: $300,000 in FY23/24 to replace the integrated library system for the URSUS 
libraries. Title 27 § 39 requires the State Library to promote resource sharing among Maine’s 
libraries. URSUS is an integrated library system (ILS) which brings together seven University of 
Maine System libraries and combines them with the collections of MSL, Maine State Law and 
Legislative Reference Library, Bangor Public Library, and Portland Public Library. This provides 
Maine residents access to over 3 million unique titles. The current system software is 25 years old, 
and is critical to library infrastructure and resource sharing, supporting all collective library functions 
such as circulation, processing overdue materials, cataloging, serials management, acquisitions, and 
statistical reporting. The URSUS directors actively engaged in an RFP process over the past year to 
identify potential vendor replacement systems and respective costs. The request for $300,000 in this 
initiative reﬂects a one-time cost for system implementation, migration from the current ILS, and 
training for staff. The cost can be roughly divided between the University of Maine Libraries 
($184,000) and Maine public libraries ($116,000).
7
Statewide Librazy Information System Fund: Page A-519 (O11:g1' n21Pa1'tA Budget 
Submission) 
This fund (General Fund) provides support to both the Maine State Library’s Digital Repository and 
the Digital Maine Library. All three of the Maine State Library’s departments have a role in managing 
the platforms and content that the funds in this program support. Examples include digital newspapers 
such as the Wall Street Journal; car repair information from Chiltons, genealogical information and 
documents from Ancestry, job-ready classes through Learning Express, and foreign language learning 
modules through Pronunciator. 
\Ve have brought all of these resources together through the DigitalMaine Library 
(*a"amI.digitainzaineorg) online portal where any Mainer can access this licensed content through 
geoauthentication (verifying by IP address that they are located in Maine) or by logging—in using their 
library card number. 
Some of our most important and sought-after digital content pertains to the rich history of our 
state. Through our DigitalMaine Repository (‘>3FW‘W.@ri“?iZZrliE"l ﬁi2"}»€,iC-(JIKE the Maine State Library has ), 
collaborated with the Maine State Archives and the Maine Law and Legislative Reference Library to 
build online collections that provide transparency in government and offer insight into how public 
policy has evolved over time. 
We have also partnered with over 6O libraries, museums, and historical societies around Maine and 
over two-dozen other organizations ranging from churches, trade groups, fraternal organizations, 
municipal governments, public policy groups and arts organizations to provide access to 
community-specific collections ranging from local history books, town reports, historical 
newspapers, and a variety of other source materials for people with an interest in learning more 
about the past. 
To facilitate this work, we’ve invested in scanning technology that we allow collecting institutions to 
use as no charge to facilitate digidzation of their Maine-related holdings. During the renovation, our 
two large book scanning units were moved to a small scan lab we set-up on the first ﬂoor of the 
Cross Office Building in the space that was once occupied by OPEGA (Ofﬁce of Program 
Evaluation and Government Accountability). \/Ve would welcome the opportunity to give youa 
tour if that would be of interest.
8
Last month, as we marked the 10-year anniversary of the launch of this service, the 230,000" ‘ digital 
item was added to the system and the content download count surpassed 4.25 million. 
Challenges 
Wlnle the Maine State Library recognizes the importance of ﬁscal prudence given the uncertainty of 
economic conditions ahead of us, the major challenge we face in the new biennium is completion of 
the Cultural Building renovation and moving all of our collections and staff back into that space in 
2024/2025. We are very aware of how this project, which started with HVAC replacement and 
expanded to asbestos removal and an entire gutting of the facility, has grown into a major capital 
renovation that was not budgeted for. Completing the renovation, including ADA accessibility to the 
bathrooms throughout the building, is critical over the next 12 months. MSL staff appreciates the 
support of the Committees regarding our requests in the supplemental budget for high density 
shelving and space planning/ furniture for the newly renovated building. We have over 20 years of 
assessments and studies on our space in the Cultural Building that highlight the space constraints we 
face given our mission and statutory mandates. Given the high cost of moving all of our collections 
and staff out of and back into the space for this unplanned renovation, now is the time to make 
efficient and effective adjustments to the MSL floorplan within the building while it is empty in order 
to maximize collections space and address the public’s information needs for the 21“ century. Moving 
back into the Cultural Building in 2024/2025 will be a top priority for us that will be balanced with all 
of the other statewide and collaborative services outlined previously in my testimony. 
Thank you for your time today. I’d be happy to answer any questions the Cornmittee members may 
have. 
Respectfully, 
Lori Fisher,
9
   
endable Stats & facts of maine.bendab|e.com 
,\ Number of Accounts 
by Zip Code: 
2 
it 9> 
Aroosiooircouruy Qi 
--r~-~—1 A 
w >14-25 . 
v _... 
ai 
.,._; e; V -. I                        
Plscalaquls Ooilgfyl 
somerset carévly it >4-9 
“'1 
- 
c r 
1 Q‘ 
_ l) 
col omuy \— 
;,.,‘ ;U,i 
t . 
X A ( 14                    
. Franklin '- as ~ ,, 
3 »~ <8 is: Wnehinglon 
Conn .4~
X 
" 
Percent of zip codes 
i "Z: ‘ reached to date:
4 
. E‘ 
Airiazarwnca nnq 
/M / iziqoolncuumy w’ 
1 ,' e“»!=§aud _.._»1:_,? . 1/ 
Q1,‘ 
W .1 i‘                 
§Yo!Oou ~>"’r
. 
Total Unique Visitors: 12,289 ’ 1' 
(Mid-August 2022 through Mid-January 2023) 
Top Five Community Collections 
Healthy life through farming 
books to be your chllclis ﬁrst teacher 
career within your passionX W Y-, aw» . 'A" 
Learning prograrnrnl gngend creating together in makerspaces 
§“1'i8rP"" , 
Resources Engagement and 
Paths to Learning 
o Board 
e Explore 
Q Home 
My Stuff 
Q Untrackable Top Five Career Collections 
Tech Support Specialist 
Medical Administration 
Aquaculture 
Production Technician 
Public Sector 
Bendable 1:o1s: Instructional 
Video Series for Beginners 
iocillnhtlrt 
Bendable 101: Where 
Should You Begin? ,. 
%?4f;             
Lmalrmm 
Bendable 101: Discovering 
Content 
Follow along widn this one-minute in this one-mirule video. see how 
video to see how to siqn up for to natiqate Bendable Maine's 
Bendaaie Mane. ahng with how ‘Di ‘ t F d I‘ 
to leap track oiyour iavcrita 
learning comem and iind new scorer page o ii’ aarrung 
c ontent that's psi right for you. 
!"/I/W cm ‘A 
Hare den-.15 
W E av"- ﬁv-:-= gE§;#"~ Local Resource Providers 
Statewide: 
DOL CareerCenters 
MaineCat 
National Digital Equity Center 
6 Branches across 8 counties 
Maine Adult Education 
32 Branches across 12 counties 
Androscoggin 
The Root Cellar 
Maine Adult Education (5 branches) 
Aroostoolt 
National Digital Equity Center (1 branch) 
Maine Adult Education (2 branches) 
liancock 
Artwaves 
Haystack Mountain School of Craft 
National Digital Equity Center (5 branches) 
Maine Adult Education (2 branches) 
The Abbe Museum 
Knox 
The Farmer’s Lyceum 
Maine Adult Education (2 branches) 
Penolrscot 
Ebenezer Farm Fitness 
Bangor Makerspace 
National Digital Equity Center (1 branch) 
Maine Adult Education (1 branch) 
University of Maine Cooperative Extension 
Piscataquis 
Community Fitness 
Maine Adult Education (1 branch) 
Sagadahoc 
Healthy Living For ME 
National Digital Equity Center (1 branch) 
Now You're Cooking 
Maine Adult Education (3 branches) 
Healthy Living For ME 
Maine Adult Education (1 branch) 
Waldo 
National Digital Equity Center (2 branches) 
Maine Adult Education (1 branch) 
Washington 
Maine Outdoor School 
National Digital Equity Center (1 branch) 
York 
National Digital Equity Center (3 branches) 
Maine Adult Education (8 branches) 
Cumberland 
Common Threads 
Factory 3 Makerspace 
Healthy Living For ME 
Maine Adult Education (2 branches) 
Maine Audubon 
Maine Humanities Council 
National Digital Equity Center (2 branches) 
Portland Conservatory of Music 
Portland Museum of Art 
University of Southern Maine 
Kennebec 
Healthy Living For ME 
Learn with MOOSE! 
Maine Department of Inland Fisheries 81 Wildlife 
Maine State Museum 
MDF - Maine Downtown Center 
Maine Adult Education (4 branches)    
National Resource 
Providers 
Studycom" 
@ PENN FOSTER 
Q1] 
LRNG 
Khan Academy 
igigii Common Threads ﬂaﬂ 1./O€3K$r%Z—rOR LIFE ..» 
we 
CELL-ED 
wslobal‘ _ pi .,r(‘.4iml;O uuuuuuuu he ,,,, . . . 
‘~._'/ 
brairgfjdsme 
SKFLLSI-lCll"9s 
Get$etUp ’ 
LEARNiNqExpm:ss 
An EBSCO Company 
sokanu 
SCQEQ/. 
pronunciotorzj About Bendable Maine 
Who is behind Bendable? 
Bendable was developed by the Drucker Institute, a nonprofit social 
enterprise. Bendable first launched in June 2020 in South Bend, 
Indiana, in partnership with the St. Joseph County Public Library 
and with philanthropic funding from Google’s and Walmart’s 
corporate foundations. The system was designed by IDEO. In late 
2022, the Institute team that created Bendable was given the 
opportunity to spin it out on their own and operate it independently. 
Their company, Bendable Labs, now runs the platform. 
I-low was Bendable Maine developed? 
Bendable partnered with the Maine State Library in 2021 to bring 
Bendable to Mainers. Bendable Maine launched in August 2022. 
I-low do you choose what is included on Bendable? 
The team that developed Bendable worked with the Maine State 
Library, its network of local libraries across the state and other key 
stakeholders to curate a learning catalog tailored for the desires 
and needs of Mainers. We balanced topics, skill level, age and 
modality so that you are always one click away from the learning 
you need. We’ve included high-quality national providers and 
trusted local providers so that community-based, in-person 
choices are highlighted alongside online offerings. 
Who exactly is Bendable for? 
Much of the content on Bendable is geared for working adults, but it 
is truly a “lifelong ” learning system. Anyone from elementary school 
through retirement age should be able to find interesting things to 
learn. 
Does Bendable cost money? 
Because Bendable is being offered through the public library, the 
vast majority of learning resources featured on the system are free 
to local residents. When there is a cost, it’s clearly indicated. 
What is Bendable ’s Privacy Policy? 
Bendable is compliant with the California Privacy Rights Act (CPRA) 
and the European Union’s GDPR. 
.-1?-3'T EI' 
15--‘ El 
maine.bendable.co|n - 
. Bendable 1:o1s Video Series 
IE! 3 +-.- = "55?-'-“             
