Testimon y of Laur a Cor des, Ex ecutiv e Dir ector
Neither f or nor Ag ainstLD 258:An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Alloc ationsfrom the General F und and Other
Funds f or the Expenditures of St ate Go vernmen t and Changing Cert ain Pro visions
…
.for the Fisc alYears E nding June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025
Joint Standing Commit tee on Appr opria tions and Financial Aff airsFebruar y 13, 2023
Good a fternoon, Sena tor Rotundo , Sena tor Ra fferty, Represen tative Sachs, R epresen tative Brennan andesteemed member s of both the Appr opria tions and Financial Af fairs and E ducation and Cultur al Af fairsCommit tees.Thank y ou for the opportunity t o comebefore you today.
My name is Laur a Cor des.  I am the Ex ecutiv e Dir ector for Maine Associa tion f or Community Ser viceProvider s (MA CSP). MA CSP is the s tatewide associa tion of 85 ag encies pr oviding  per son cen tered andindividualiz ed educ ational, v ocational, r esiden tial and c ommunity supports, as w ell as specializ edservices and c are to a div erse popula tion of childr en and adults who ha ve either in tellectual disabilities,autism spectrum disor der, or br ain injuries, so tha t the y ma y live full and meaningful liv es in thecommunity .
We are neither f or nor ag ainst the pr oposed budg et as pr esen ted but wish t o draw your a ttention t othe need f or additional funding f or Child De velopmen t Ser vices t o equit ably support our y oung estchildr en with special needs within the e xisting ne twork of c ommunity based Special PurposePreschools.
Supporting our childr en with both the medic ally necessar y and educ ational supports t o be success ful inthe leas t restrictiv e educ ational en vironmen t is the f ocus of our Special Purpose Schools.
The ther apeutic ser vices needed f or each child in both the Special Purpose Pr eschools and SpecialPurpose K -12 schools ar e paid f or thr ough MaineCar e. While educ ational ser vices f or childr en in SpecialPurposeK-12programs r eceiv e tuition r eimbur semen t,Preschool pr ograms do not r eceiv e tuitionreimbur semen t by the St ate, which is in e ffect the sending school, when the child is appr oved forMaineCar e.
The Of fice of MaineCar e Ser vices has been clear tha t medic aid pa ymen ts for educ ational ser vicesprovided t o childr en is pr ohibit ed under f eder al medic aid la w.(continued)

CDS ho wever will only pa y for the educ ational supports of childr en in Special Purpose Pr eschools whenthe child isnotcovered b y MaineCar e, cr eating adiscrimina tory inequity f or our Pr e-K s tuden ts withdisabilities.
We ha ve been gr appling with this inequit able and inadequa te funding be tween the Special PurposePreschools and Special Purpose K -12 pr ograms f or years. W e are no w in crisis and e xperiencing acollap se of pr ograms and r educed census among Special Purpose Pr eschools.
At a time when C OVID has placed an e xtraordinar y bur den on f amilies with childr en who ha ve specialneeds, access t o early in tervention and special educ ation in early childhood is critic al to de velopmen tand learning f or childr en with disabilities. Maine childr en ar e falling behind.
A MA CSP sur vey from las t summer of mor e than 20 special purpose pr eschools f ound tha t while 100%of pr ograms ar e carrying w aitlis ts (350 childr en), an alarming 73% of pr ograms had r ecen tlyreduc edtheir census and 64% ha ve further r educed their c apacity in the curr ent 2022-2023 ac ademic y ear.Multiple ag encies ha ve either closed pr eschool pr ograms or ar e considering closing their pr ograms ne xtfall.
Waitlis ts ar e growing. The r educed c apacity in these pr ograms r epresen ts a de vastating loss of accessto feder ally r equir ed ser vices f or hundr eds of Maine’ s childr en and their f amilies, and a signific ant stepbackw ard from our shar ed g oal of ensuring tha t every child has Fr ee and Appr opria te Public E ducationas de fined in the Individuals with Disabilities E ducation Act.
Over the las t few mon ths our member s have had c onstructiv e but inc onclusiv e discussions with theDepartmen t and CDS r egarding the need f or tuition r eimbur semen t for the educ ational supportsprovided t o childr en for Special Purpose Pr eschools.
We look f orward to further discussions with the Departmen t and c ommit tee member s regarding theforthc oming bill, LR 1003An Act T o Clarif y Requiremen tsFor Paymen t Of T uition F or Children WithDisabilities B y The Departmen t Of E ducation's Child De velopmen t Ser vices System F unding,sponsor edby Represen tative Drew Ga ttine,and ask tha t you w orkto iden tify and include the equit able fundingneeded t o mee t the educ ational needs of all of Maine’ s childr en in the budg et.
Thank y ou for your time and c onsider ation. Please c ontact me with an y ques tions y ou ma y have.
Respectfully Submit ted,Laur a Cor des
MACSP | P .O. Box 149, Hallo well, ME 04336 | (207) 623-5005 |Laur a.Cordes@meacsp.or g
