  
LD 258,  An Act Making Unified Appropriations and 
Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for 
the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper 
Operations of State Government for the Fiscal  Years 
Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
February 22, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs , and members of the  Joint Standing Co mmittee  on 
Appropriations and Financial Services ; Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Joint Stan ding Committee on Health and Human Services:  
 
My name is Laurie Belden and I serve as the executive director of the Home Care &  Hospice Alliance 
of Maine -- a membership organization representing home care, home health care and hospice 
providers across the State. Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on the proposed 
biennial budget .  
 
The Alliance is a network of home care , home health care  and hospice providers across our State 
delivering home -based care to older adults and disabled individuals of all ages - allowing them to stay 
in their home and community. Annual ly, our  provider members deliver care to more than 45,0 00 
clients in their residence s across Maine, traveli ng more than 20 million miles. Collectively, home care, 
home health care and hospice members employ more than 7,000  staff  – making this sector on e of 
Maine ’s largest employers.  
 
Hospitals, nursing homes, and home care providers are like a 3-legged stool in the state’s healthcare 
landscape. While the state’s hospitals and nursing homes continue to struggle to care for the number 
of patients that arrive at their facilities, it’s important to recognize that home care and hospice 
providers h elp to relieve the stress on these two other systems by keeping patients out of acute and 
long -term care settings. If we do not support and bolster our system of in-home services , we will not 
be successful at relieving the pressure on hospitals and nursing  homes.   
 
The Administration and the Legislature have made some progress in recent years in supporting the 
home care sector. We are happy to see continued COLA payments in this budget proposal. In 
addition, we support the proposed ongoing funding for state -funded home care services (OADS 
Policy Manual Section 63). However, despite this progress, there is more work to be done to ensure  
Mainers are able to access high quality care in the home.  
 
The economic hardships our providers continue to face even as the  pandemic subsides mirror the 
acute -care sector , for example,  increased pay for staff (including the reliance of temporary staffing 
agencies) and increased costs for perso nal protective equipment (PPE).  

The Legislature has approved COVID -19 supplemental funding in recognition of the challenges 
experienced b y hospitals and nursing homes. Home care and hospice providers are also 
challenged, and we are here today to urge you  to add CO VID-19 supplemental payment funding 
for home care providers into to the biennial budget.   
Our members are challenged every day to meet the needs of children and older adults in hospitals 
throughout the state awaiting  services at home for successful discharge. Patients across Maine who 
are approved for home care services are going without care  due to staffing shortages and low 
MaineCare reimbursement rates.  Our m embers  are reporting operational losses of 15 -20% on 
payments received from governmental payers , yet no dollars in the Governor’s budget have been 
earmarked to support the operational recovery of the home care industry . 
 
As our secto r has not been included in the D epartment’s past effo rts to disburse COVID -19 
supplemental  payments, we are not aware of their methodology for payments;  therefore we do not 
have an exact dol lar amount we would recommend. We wo uld instead recommend that the 
Department work with our providers to apply their methodology to our sector to determine an 
appropriate amount for relief funding.  
 
Regarding rates , we were heartened to learn recently that  the D epartment plans to conduct a rate 
determination process during this calendar year for clinical services prov ided by home care 
providers. This is critical for our members, as they cannot even begin to compete for nursing talent 
given the extremely low  reimbursement rates for home care nurses. While the Legislature has taken 
important steps in recent years to address rates for direct care workers, no progress has be en made 
on nursing rates. Our Alli ance has been working with the D epartment on the need for this 
redetermination for years and we are thankful that these rates will be prioritized this year; however 
we were disappointed to see that funding has not been set aside in this biennial bu dget to 
implement rate increases for these nursing services.   
 
Given that rate relief is  still at least a year away, and in order to shore up the healthcare system and 
stabilize in-home services , we respectfully ask that the home care, home health care a nd hospice 
industry receive a COVID -19 supplemental payment to offset the historic cost trends that we 
experienced  during the pandemic and continue as we transition out of the pandemic .   
 
We need your help to acknowledge the important role this industry plays in the continuum of care 
and allocating relief funds will help sustain it as a viable option for Mainers needing care.   
 
Providing critical funding now to help offset losses in Maine's home care and hospice industry is 
critical for : 
 Ensuring access to care: Without adequate funding, home care and hospice providers may be 
forced to cut back on the services they offer, or even  close their doors entirely. This could result 
in a shortage of providers, making it more difficult for patients to access the care they need.  
 Supporting the workforce: The home care and hospice industry relies on a dedicated workforce of 
caregivers who provide vital support to patients in their homes. By providing additional funding, 
you can help ensure that these caregivers receive the compensa tion and support they need to 
continue providing high -quality care.  
 Reducing hospitalizations: Home care and hospice services can help reduce the need for 
hospitalizations, which can be costly and disruptive for patients. By investing in these services, 
you can help prevent unnecessary hospitalizations and promote better health outcomes for 
patients.  
 Saving money in the long run: Investing in home care and hospice services can actually save 
money in the long run by reducing the need for more expensive for ms of care, such as 
hospitalizations and nursing home stays. By providing funds to support these services, you can 
help promote cost -effective care for patients.  
By investing in these services, you can help ensure that vulnerable patients receive the care and 
support they need to live healthy and fulfilling lives.  
 
Laurie Belden  
Executive Director  
Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Maine  
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
www.HomeCareAlliance.org  
