Lee  Glynn
Skowhegan
LD 258
Good afternoon, my name is Lee Glynn. I survived a hemorrhagic stroke 5 years ago that left 
me with a significant brain injury. I would like to speak in support of the Biennial Budget with 
regard to Brain Injuries. It is my understanding that "core supports", a discretionary item 
within the OADS budget, includes services that I view as crucial to the brain injury community 
in Maine. You see, 5 years ago I went to bed as a heathy, active 63 year old farmer in 
Mercer, Maine. A tiny blood vessel began to leak within my brain the next morning. And my 
life changed gears. When I came to, I was flat on my back, in an acute rehab hospital. I had 
no feeling on the right side of my body as if a line had been drawn down the middle. I was 
unable to dress, walk or use the bathroom alone. I showered one handed in a chair with a 
nurse in attendance. And I couldn't see my life going forward. Everything I planned, every 
dream, was over. My family removed my firearms before I was discharged, in a wheelchair 
and dependent on others for nearly everything. 
It was against this backdrop that i discovered one of those "core supports" in the form of a 
brain injury support group in Brewer, which was the closest to me at the time. In that group I 
was surrounded by people who needed no explanation, they understood. That 1 hour meeting
helped me begin to turn the corner, to believe that life could go on after a terrible and 
pervasive injury. Today, there are 19 support groups serving Maine, with more planned. On 
that same day, I was introduced to Sarah Gaffney from BIAA and in the ensuing years, I 
attended Maine's Brain Injury Resource Fair and the annual Brain Injury conference in 
Portland both also part of the "core supports". Maine now also offers a helpline and 
neuro-resource navigation, again, under that core supports heading. I would be remiss if I 
failed to thank this standing committee for supporting the brain injury community in the past, 
you may not realize it, but you are lifesavers!
Finally, I would urge that these core supports be added as a line item going forward. Maine 
has made wonderful gains in supporting those with brain injuries, in my opinion, now it is time 
to protect those gains. Please help ensure that these critical services will continue by taking 
these core supports from discretionary to a line item.
Thank you.

