 
February 17, 2023
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs
Representative Melanie Sachs – Chair
Senator Margaret Rotundo – Chair
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
Representative Holly Stover
Senator Tim Nangle  
 
Good morning, Chair Rotundo and Sachs, and members of the 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee. And, Good Morning 
Chair Nangle and Stover and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. 
My name is Lee Umphrey the President and CEO of Eastern Maine 
Development Corporation, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization based 
in Bangor that promotes economic and workforce development, small 
business lending, community planning for municipalities and overall 
business support to people, businesses and communities helping them 
find and leverage resources to make a difference.  
Our organization, as a leading regional coordinator within the State’s 
Community Resilience Partnership, is here today to relay firsthand our 
strong belief that an increase in funding would further ensure the 
important progress Maine is making continues.  
Maine’s bold efforts to combat Climate change is gallant but needs to be 
stronger.  The bipartisan legislation to establish the Maine Climate 
Council was just the beginning.  Governor Mills deserves lots of credit 
for prioritizing this fight against climate change while promoting 
renewable energy opportunities. We need to continue this momentum by 
increasing funding for the Community Resilience Partnership’s grants in 
the Governor’s proposed budget. To date, the Partnership has helped 
multiple communities throughout Maine to asses and take steps to get 
ready for these climate related risks.   
The partnership’s framework aims to bring communities together to find 
and share solutions. This consensus building effort is a partnership 
between the state, towns and organizations. EMDC started this 
discussion with our 2021-2025 Comprehensive Economic Development 
Strategy (CEDS) exercise and report that identified Climate Resiliency 
as a major goal. Our CEDS plan builds upon DECD’s Maine Economic 
Development Strategy and the Maine Won’t Wait report. 
 EMDC’s Climate Resiliency project Goals:
Establish new climate and energy technical assistance 
capacity to support communities in Region 4
Recruit and enroll communities in Region 4 to participate in 
the Community Resiliency Program through a robust 
outreach project
Enrolled communities are eligible to apply for funds to 
support clean energy and climate resiliency projects
EMDC will recruit and provide technical assistance to a 
minimum of 15 communities during the 2-year project
Training and Peer Learning events will be hosted during the 
2-year period to inform more about the benefits of addressing 
climate resiliency as part of their strategic planning process.  
Lessons learned and best practices will be shared.
EMDC is committed to working with a high Social 
Vulnerability Index and low capacity for developing resiliency 
plans at the local level without additional assistance
EMDC is a results-oriented Economic Development District.  
Reporting metrics are being tracked to document the results of 
our work and modify program components to meet the goals of 
this project
We are an organization that works equally with the Maine’s Department 
of Labor and Department of Economic and Community Development. 
While a big part of the Community Resilience Partnership is to mobilize 
and prepare communities, the significant underpinning of this program 
ensures the workforce development system is fully aligned with 
economic development. To help meet the wind, solar, biofuel, and 
broadband sectors as part of the evolving energy industry’s workforce 
demands, we are building community awareness of new training 
opportunities to  prepare people at the local level to connect with jobs.
As the workforce development administrator in nine counties in 
partnership with the Department of Labor, we work with industries, 
businesses, community colleges and others to prepare workers for jobs 
in this green economy. These efforts go hand and hand with the Climate 
Resiliency work of the Partnership and your support for increased 
funding should take stock at how this cohesive, collaborative endeavor is 
an investment in Maine’s future. Doing so is both practical and forward 
thinking in meeting the challenges of the climate crisis we all face. 
 
