1LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle
  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)
www.mainelse.org
February 22, 2023
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 258"An Act Making Unified Appropriations and 
Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of 
State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary 
to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" before the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs.
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Senator Baldacci, 
Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services.
Legal Services for the Elderly is a non-profit legal services organization 
established in Maine following passage of the federal Older American’s Act 
in 1974. Since then, our mission has been to provide free legal assistance to 
our disadvantaged older adults when their basic human needs are at stake. 
Our clients are all aged sixty or older and most have very low incomes. 
Some are the most physically and financially compromised people in our 
communities.
Today we would like to offer comments in support of the following lines 
some of which contain new initiatives and some that do not. Each of our 
comments are preceded by the page number and the budget description of 
the line. 
1.  A-356 MAINE RX PLUS PROGRAM 0927 
“This program makes prescription drugs more affordable for qualified 
Maine residents, thereby increasing the overall health of Maine residents, 
promoting healthy communities and protecting the public health and 
welfare of Maine residents.”
2Program Summary - OTHER SPECIAL REVENUE FUNDS
All Other                   135,786   135,786              135,786   135,786
We hope that you will support this long-standing program. It includes one 
of the few personal health benefits available even to Maine residents whose 
incomes are too high to qualify them for any other public program. It allows 
residents whose monthly family income is up to 350% of the Federal 
Poverty Level ($4,253 for 1 person or $5725 for two) or who spend more 
than 5% of their family income on drugs or 15% on medical expenses to 
buy prescription drugs at the same price as those purchased by the State of 
Maine for the MaineCare program. In some cases, that may represent as 
much as a 60% discount. Since eligible individuals pay privately and 
receive no subsidy from the State of Maine, the budget costs are 
administrative in nature.  
2. A-344 Health and Human Services, Department of
LOW-COST DRUGS TO MAINE'S ELDERLY 0202
“This program assists low-income elderly in obtaining prescription drugs.”
GENERAL FUND          
All Other        4,445,545  4,971,353      4,971,353  4,971,353
FUND FOR A HEALTHY MAINE
All Other                       6,082,095  6,082,095      6,082,095  6,082,095
Once upon a time this program just paid for prescription drugs. But over 
many years, the State of Maine has been able to leverage the same funds to 
provide better benefits for our older adults by investing in the Medicare 
Saving Program (MSP) and the Drugs for the Elderly and Disabled Program 
(DEL). These programs help approximately 87,000 adults who are age 65 
and older, or younger disabled adults, pay for their prescription drugs.
They also help pay some or all the premiums, deductibles, co-payments and 
co-insurance related to their Medicare health insurance benefits. This 
combination of assistance has allowed a significant number of Maine’s 
older residents to receive the medical care and treatment necessary to 
maintain their best level of physical and mental health. 
These programs make a significant positive difference in the quality of life 
experienced by older adults. We are truly grateful that this budget again 
includes this proposal.  
33. The next two sections are initiatives that focus on the problem of elder 
abuse. These initiatives reflect the recommendations contained in the Elder 
Justice Roadmap. 
The Roadmap is a product of a group created by the Governor’s Executive 
Order in 2019. The members have organizational missions that include 
providing services to older adults who have suffered abuse, neglect or 
exploitation. Because they work in either the public or private sector and 
had common purpose they were named the Elder Justice Coordinating 
Partnership. The Membership List is extraordinary and we add it here 
because they deserve more than casual mention. 
Jaye Martin, Private Sector Co-chair, Executive Director, Legal Services for the Elderly
Judith Shaw, Public Sector Co-chair, Securities Administrator, Office of Securities
Katlyn Blackstone, Chief Program Officer, Southern Maine Agency on Aging, 
representing the Area Agencies on Aging
Morgan Connolly, Deputy Director, Office of Behavioral Health
Colonel John E. Cote, Chief, Maine State Police
Brenda Gallant, Executive Director, Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program
Bobbi Johnson, Associate Director, Child Welfare Services, Office of Child and Family 
Services
Patricia Kimball, Executive Director, Elder Abuse Institute of Maine
Jeanne Lambrew, Commissioner, Department of Health and Human Services
Karen Mason, Associate Director, Aging and Long- Term Services and Supports, Office 
of Aging and Disability Services
Andrew McCormack, Assistant United States Attorney and Elder Justice Coordinator, 
United States Attorney’s Office
Sheriff Joel Merry, Sagadahoc County Sheriff, representing Maine Sheriffs’ Association
William Montejo, Director, Division of Licensing and Certification
Emily Moores, Senior Health Program Manager, Maine Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention
Leanne Robbin, Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General
Erin Salvo, Associate Director, Adult Protective Services, Office of Aging and 
Disability Services
Michael Sauschuck, Commissioner, Department of Public Safety
Elizabeth Ward Saxl, Executive Director, Maine Coalition Against Sexual Assault
Officer Candice L. Simeoni, Kennebunk Police Department, representing the Maine 
Chiefs of Police Association
Kathryn M. Slattery, District Attorney, Maine Prosecutors’ Association
Francine Garland Stark, Executive Director, Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence
4The entire Elder Justice Roadmap may be viewed here:
https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline-
files/EJCP_Roadmap.pdf
The scope of its recommendations is stated on Page 12 as follows:
“The Roadmap provides recommendations regarding actions that the public 
and private sectors can take today in the areas of direct victim services, 
public and professional education, public policy, and data collection and 
evaluation to: Decrease the incidence of elder abuse in Maine; Increase the 
number of elder abuse victims who seek and receive help in stopping abuse; 
and Improve the multi-disciplinary response to elder abuse.”
Two of the Roadmap “top priority” recommendation are contained in this 
Budget. Top priority means there was broad agreement among members 
that they have a “high probability of successful implementation and high 
impact on elder abuse”.
The first top priority recommendation of the Elder Justice Roadmap is 
“Develop and expand wraparound support services, including case 
management services, for victims of elder abuse based upon Adult 
Protective Services pilot.” This is found on page 15 of the Roadmap and is 
reflected in the Budget as follows:
Page A-389: Department of Health and Human Services, Office Of Aging 
& Disability Services, Adult Protective Services 
“Initiative: Provides funding to continue the elder services connection 
project per the recommendation of the Elder Justice Roadmap.
GENERAL FUND All Other    600,000      800,000
Initiative: Provides funding to continue the purchased goods and services 
pilot program per the recommendation of the Elder Justice Roadmap.
GENERAL FUND All Other       75,000     100,000
The elder services connection project is the continuation of a previously 
federally funded pilot that has proven to be enormously helpful. Adult 
Protective Services (APS) is charged with the responsibility to investigate 
allegations of adult abuse, neglect, or exploitation. They will take 
appropriate action to stop it, if a victim with the capacity to do so gives their 
5consent. If the victim lacks capacity and no other alternative exists, APS 
will petition the Probate Court to appoint a public guardian or public 
conservator. When an individual with capacity has suffered abuse, neglect 
or exploitation but is unwilling to accept APS’s recommendations, which 
may include a criminal referral to law enforcement, APS normally does not 
have the resources to offer additional long-term help. However, if the client 
is willing to receive help that is focused on changing the dynamics that have 
caused the abuse, the elder services connection is designed to provide APS 
and the abused adult with an option that offers more than an emergency 
solution.
With client consent, APS will make a “warm handoff” referral to an 
organization with advocates experienced in delivering wrap around services 
to abused older adults and researchers that will evaluate the program’s 
impact. In the pilot, that organization was the Elder Abuse Institute of 
Maine.  Once a referral is received, advocates help clients identify their 
most immediate needs (e.g., housing, personal assistance with activities of 
daily living (ADLs), medications, doctor appointments, transportation, legal 
needs, financial management and access to public benefits like SNAP or 
MaineCare).Then they help advocate for and coordinate these services. 
They also help people reestablish relationships with family members and 
may help explore long-term care living choices if necessary. This may also 
involve helping with applications and moving into an appropriate level of a 
long-term care residential setting.  
The elder services connection has proven to be a successful model and we 
strongly support its continuance.
The second top priority recommendation of the Elder Justice Roadmap is 
“Increase the staffing capacity at Legal Services for the Elderly”. This 
recommendation is found on page 15 of the Roadmap and is reflected in the 
Budget as follows: 
Page A-391 Department of Health and Human Services, Office Of Aging & 
Disability Services, Central Office 
Initiative: Provides funding to reimburse Maine Legal Services for the 
Elderly for a full-time staff attorney and a part-time helpline attorney per 
the recommendation of the Elder Justice Roadmap. 
GENERAL FUND All Other 184,500 184,500
6The Elder Justice Roadmap provided the following reason for its 
recommendation:
“When the Maine Elder Justice Roadmap recommendations are 
implemented, more victims of elder abuse will be identified and seek help. 
With additional funding, Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) would add 
attorneys to represent these victims and would conduct more outreach to 
referral sources regarding available legal remedies and resources.” 
“If LSE had more resources dedicated to addressing elder abuse, it would 
decrease the incidence of abuse, increase the number of victims that seek 
and receive help, and improve the multidisciplinary response.”
Elder Justice Roadmap, p44  
The initiative provides funding for a full-time staff attorney and a part-time 
Helpline attorney. The Helpline is a toll-free telephone line staffed by 
attorneys (1-800-750-5353). It’s first point of contact with LSE for calls for 
legal assistance from all over the state. About 75% of the legal problems 
commonly experienced by older adults can be handled in the Helpline. 
Often legal advice, a letter, a call to a third party or a referral to another 
source of human services help will resolve the issue. The rest of the 
problems require a much more intensive level of service and are assigned to 
a Staff Attorney. Elder abuse cases involving financial exploitation are 
some of the most difficult and time consuming cases that we handle and 
have the greatest consequence for the victim. Especially in cases in which  
the older victim has some level of cognitive impairment the degree of 
difficulty increases. We do not expect that reality to change nor do we 
expect that the need for our services will decrease. 
The unfortunate truth is that the low-income older adults that we represent 
face more frequent legal problems than the general low-income population 
and are at higher risk of harm when facing a legal problem.  A one year 
legal needs study conducted by the University of Maine Center on Aging in 
2011 concluded that 56% of Maine’s older adults with low incomes had 
experienced a legal problem. That figure went up to 67% for those 70 years 
of age or older. This is consistent with a very recent national study showing 
that 56% of older adults with low-incomes experienced a civil legal 
problem in the past year, and 10% experienced six or more legal problems 
per year. Before the pandemic LSE was meeting, at best, about 15% of the 
7need for services.  Lack of legal assistance with problems like abuse, 
foreclosure, eviction, loss of income, loss of public benefits, or 
unmanageable debt quickly leads to a downward spiral in what had 
previously been a productive and independent person’s life. We appreciate 
the support offered to us by this initiative and believe that it will make a 
measurable positive difference in the lives of many older adults.     
  
4. Before you leave Page A-391 of the Budget we ask that you also support 
the initiative for the five Area Agencies on Aging who are a critical 
component to the network of service providers authorized by the federal 
Older American’s Act. 
A-391  Initiative: Provides funding to the Area Agencies on Aging to 
enhance Maine's aging and disability resource centers and no wrong door 
system programs.
GENERAL FUND All Other    500,000    500,000
Maine’s five AAAs are designated as Aging and Disability Resource 
Centers (ADRCs) and provide the entry point for Long Term Services and 
Support programs offered under State or Federal laws. In that capacity they 
have expert knowledge of many types of available programs such as: Home 
and community based or facility based nursing programs, personal care and 
assisted housing programs, prescription drug programs, nutrition programs, 
heating programs, tax related exemption or credit programs and many more 
sources of assistance. Their staff members routinely explain the intricacies 
of eligibility for all these programs and help people access those that best 
help them meet their needs. They are truly system navigators. The “Triple 
As”  also make referrals to other organizations like Legal Services for the 
Elderly or the Maine Long Term Care Ombudsman Program for specialized 
help for individual cases. They are on a short list of some of the most 
experienced elder advocacy organizations in our State and we have 
considered them essential partners from the time we began offering our 
services to Maine’s older adults. We hope that you will support them.
That concludes our remarks. Thank you for giving us the opportunity to 
present them to you today. 
