Tuesday, February 21,2023  
 
Testimony of Spectrum Generations, Central Maine Area Agency on Aging  
In Support of Aging and Disability Resource Centers and Home Delivered Meals a part of LD 258 (HP 163) - An Act 
Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State 
Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025  
 
Honorable Members of the Appropriations Committee,  
My name is Gerard Queally, President and CEO of Spectrum Generations, Area Agency on Aging and Disability 
Resource Center serving six counties in Central/Midcoast Maine, Brunswick and Harpswell. I am writing to express my 
support for the Governor's Budget requesting a state General Fund of $2,286,048 in FY 24 and $3,189,351 in FY 25 
and beyond, for home delivered meals, as well as $500,000 each year for Aging and Disability Resource Center 
activity. This would be a significant investment in promoting and advancing the well -being and independence of older 
and disabled adults, with the support of their care partners, to live in their community of choice.  
Spectrum Generations is committed to actively engaging the people of Maine, across the entire generational 
spectrum, in a continuous dialogue to assist older and disabled adults to live healthy, socially enjoyable and 
independent lives. Our programs and services are innovative and entrepreneurial, positioning us as the primary 
source for solutions to the challenges aging and disabilities present that touch all families - our neighbors and our 
communities.  
We are most pleased that Governor Mills budget is well -aligned with our organizations core purpose and mission 
through this foundational budget recommendation. This funding is critical to ensure that our states ’ older adult 
population and individuals with disabilities have access to nutritious meals and necessary resources to achieve health, 
well-being and independence. Home delivered meals prevent malnutrition, reduce hospitalizations, improve the 
overall health of vulnerable populations and fight the issue of food insecurity head -on. Aging and Disability Resource 
Center activities provide essential supports and resources so that individuals can make informed decisions about their 
care and gain access the services they need. Spectrum Generations supported 10,418 people in FY 22 through 
programs and services that make an immediate needed impact and have long -term positive effects.  
Through Spectrum Generation ’s home delivered meals - Meals on Wheels (MOW) - 313,577 meals were prepared, 
packaged and delivered to 2,170 homebound older adults and adults with disabilities during FY 22. These nutritious 
meals, expertly created by the chefs at our community centers, are delivered by an incredible cadre of generous, 
committed volunteers. In addition to delivering these greatly needed meals, the volunteer visit also serves as a check -
in with each Meals on Wheels recipient. Through our surveys, it has been reported that 70% of the people we serve 
feel less lonely and isolated by having a volunteer deliver meals and knowing that a volunteer will be coming to see 
them, makes 80% of people we serve feel safer in their home.     
Alarming, however is that 20% of our Meals on Wheels consumers have stated that they rarely or never have human 
contact aside from the MOW delivery volunteer, this is roughly 1 in 6 older and/or disabled people in your community. 
In one such case a MOW recipient didn ’t answer the door for their meal delivery, which was very unusual, and a safety 
check was performed. Upon entering the home, the individual was found on the floor where they had been for an 
unknown amount of time. The family and medical professionals were alerted immediately and the individual 
unfortunately had suffered a heart attack. This person survived the health event and is now okay with thanks to their 
volunteer MOW driver! There are many stories like this one, here is another example.  
Amy from Waldo County has the following statement to share about MOW as a support for her parents:  
“This program has been life and health changing for my parents and they absolutely love the meals they receive. My 
father can barely use his hands and is in extreme pain from the arthritis but continues to care for my mother on a daily 
basis at their home. It had become very hard for my father to cook meals at home due to his health issues. What a 
godsend Meals on Wheels is for my parents and we will continue to support this program long into the future so others 
in the same situation as my parents can receive the amazing benefits from Meals on Wheels. ”     
In FY 22 5,337 people utilized our access services which include case management, information and assistance, 
outreach, and public education. Recently a member of our ADRC team supported a consumer from a coastal 
community in our service area who had never heard of Medicare Savings Plan. After they experienced a divorce, this 
person had become very low income to the point of selling their personal belongings on Facebook marketplace to 
make ends meet. The ADRC gave them a list of food pantries, the number for LiHEAP/WaldoCAP and helped them 
apply for MSP & SNAP. An application was put forward and they were approved for SNAP and QMB in addition to 
HEAP. They were so relieved and appreciative when they called to share with the ADRC that supported them, they had 
been approved for all of these benefits. This person can now afford to pay rent, be warm at their home, eat three 
meals a day, and take necessary medications. This is exactly how ADRC programs are supposed to work. It ’s a 
wonderful feeling to be a part of helping people find their safety net, and get the help they need to live independently 
in the home of their choice.  
Given current inflation rates coupled with the ongoing aftershocks of COVID -19, the number of people requiring MOW 
and other services related to ADRC continues to grow at a heightened rate. At an average cost of $9.00 per meal for 
home delivered meals in the state - $2,286,048 will provide an additional 254, 005 meals to those in -need in FY 24 and 
an additional 354,372 can be served to those in -need in FY 25. I urge you to prioritize this funding and invest in the 
health and well -being of Maine's most vulnerable populations for the betterment of our state ’s homebound older 
adults, people with disabilities and their families.  Thank you for considering, we appreciate it.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Gerard Queally, President and CEO  
Spectrum Generations  

