Testimony of Linda Sanborn, MD 
On behalf of Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
Neither for nor against 
LD 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, 
June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" 
March 1, 2023 
Senators Rotundo and Bailey, Representative Sachs and Perry, and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Services. I am Linda Sanborn and lam here today as a member of the Board of Directors for 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care. 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC), is a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates 
for Maine people to be heard, respected, and well-served in a health system that provides coverage, 
access and quality, affordable care to all. 
As you deliberate on budget matters related to the Department of Professional and Financial 
Regulation, I would encourage you to consider including continued funding for Maine's Health 
Insurance Consumer Assistance Program. 
Currently CAHC is designated by Maine's Attorney General to serve as Maine's Consumer Assistance 
Program (CAP). Funding for the CAP comes from other special revenue at the Bureau of Insurance that 
flows to the Attorney General’s office, which then contracts with an independent nonprofit organization 
for CAP services. 
As Maine's Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program, the CAP operates a statewide, toll-free 
confidential HelpLine staffed by trained experts in eligibility and enrollment in private and public health 
insurance coverage. 
CAP staff answer questions about coverage options and eligibility, help people apply for and enroll in 
health coverage, including private Marketplace health plans, and assist with other issues regarding 
insurance and accessing care, including helping people file complaints with the Bureau of Insurance and 
appeal coverage denials by insurance companies. 
Last year, Maine's Consumer Assistance Program fielded nearly 6,000 calls and emails with Mainers who 
needed help understanding their health coverage options, applying for and enrolling in health coverage, 
or assistance in understanding and appealing a denied claim for coverage. 
Health insurance is complicated, especially for people who do not have access to health 
insurance through employment. Eligibility and enrollment in individual health insurance can bea 
confusing undertaking — finding a plan that covers the health care services, treatment, and 
medicine one needs isn't easy. Some of the people the CAP assisted this past year include:
1
~ Robert, whose bills for emergency services were denied as out of network. CAP staff fileda 
complaint on his behalf with the Maine Bureau of Insurance, ensuring his insurance company 
covered the cost of his medically necessary health care. 
- Roger, who is self-employed and is being treated for melanoma. As you can imagine, health 
insurance is important to Roger. He needed ongoing assistance from HelpLine staff to understand 
his options and enroll in a plan he can afford that works for him and covers his treatments. 
~ Pam, who lives in Western Maine, needs regular treatment and prescription medicine for a chronic 
illness. She is not offered health coverage through her work and the coverage she was able to 
enroll in with help from staff at the CAP enables her to continue working. 
My testimony provides more information about the services the CAP provides. l believe continued 
funding is important for many reasons, as the examples above show. l am particularly concerned about 
the effect the end of the public health emergency will have on Mainers, tens of thousand of whom, will 
need to transition to private Marketplace coverage as continuous coverage under MaineCare will end. 
Beginning in May 2023, Maine DHHS will be redetermining eligibility for an estimated 17,000 
households, representing approximately 31,000 members, each month through June, 2024. Some 
people will retain their MaineCare coverage, but DHHS estimates 65,000 to 90,000 members will lose 
their eligibility for MaineCare during this process? 
As many at 90% of those who lose their MaineCare coverage are estimated to be eligible for coverage 
through other sources, such as through the Marketplace or through an employer~sponsored plan, 
however many of these people will need help understanding their coverage options and applying for 
and transitioning to a private insurance plan. The CAP will be an incredible resource to Maine people 
who are at risk of becoming uninsured — which will not only benefit those who need health care, but 
also Maine's health care providers, hospitals, clinics, etc. which depend on the revenue they receive 
from health insurance to help keep their doors open. 
Again, my written testimony provides more information about the establishment of Consumer 
Assistance Programs across the country, and how federal funding for those programs ended in 2016. 
Maine's legislature was wise to provide state funding to Maine's CAP to ensure these valuable resources 
continue to be available to Maine people. l hope you will consider doing so again with this budget. 
Thank you. 
Section 1002 of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) established Consumer Assistance Programs 
(CAPs) to help people enroll in and use their health insurance effectively. The Maine Attorney 
General and the Maine Superintendent designated Consumers for Affordable Health Care as the 
Maine Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program with the support of a federal grant from 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in 2010. Maine's CAP offers both toll-free and 
face-to-face assistance to Mainers who need help enrolling in coverage or assistance with other 
insurance issues, such as appealing a denial of coverage. Explanation of Benefit notices sent by 
carriers to enrollees in Maine include the contact information for the Consumer Assistance Program, so 
that enrollees may seek assistance with appealing a denied claim. However, federal funding has not 
been available to support this work since 2016. 
1 
httpsﬁwww.maine.gow ’dhhs,/sites; ’maine.gov.dh hs./illes/ ’iniine-flies ﬁresentatéon tlpdf
2
Consumers for Affordable Health Care continued to provide CAP services to individuals, such as helping 
people enroll in coverage and resolve issues with their health insurance, even after the federal funding 
ended. However, without funding, Maine's CAP operated with reduced staffing that limited capacity to 
provide assistance to individuals seeking help with private insurance issues, such as appeals. 
CAPs continue to operate without federal funding in more than 30 states, many of which are supported 
by state funding? 
In 2019, Maine's Legislature passed LD 1274, An Act To Enact the Health Insurance Consumer Assistance 
Program, which required the Attorney General to contract with a nonprofit, independent health 
insurance consumer assistance entity, that is not an insurer, to operate the Health Insurance Consumer 
Assistance Program. The legislation included funding for the CAP for the 19-20 and 20-21 fiscal years 
through a transfer of available Other Special Revenue Funds balances from the Department of 
Professional and Financial Regulation to the Department of the Attorney General. Two years later, 
another bill, LD 631, was passed by the legislature to continue this funding for the 21-22 and 22-23 fiscal 
years and help ensure that Maine people have access to the assistance they need to enroll in coverage 
and get the most out of their health plans. 
Denials of coverage can be devastating — especially for people with serious health conditions and 
for those who are already struggling to pay high premiums and out-of-pocket costs. The appeals 
process can be daunting, especially when people are unaware of their rights or have limited 
knowledge of insurance regulations and requirements. Without timely and professional guidance 
or assistance, many people are faced with expensive bills they can't pay and are burdened with over 
time and in some cases, at risk of being unnecessarily sent to collections. 
As previously mentioned, the CAP also provides assistance with enrolling in private insurance 
coverage, including subsidized Marketplace plans. All CAP staff are trained eligibility experts 
and are certified to provide enrollment assistance through the Marketplace as Certified 
Maine Enrollment Assisters (MEAs). 
When the pandemic first hit, CAHC took immediate action to educate the public about 
emergency changes to insurance coverage, as well as health coverage options for individuals 
losing their employer-based insurance or experiencing changes in income. The CAP worked with 
the Maine Department of Labor to share information and CAP staffjoined several calls with laid 
off workers from large employers such as Pixelle Specialty Solutions in Jay, Tasman Leather 
Group in Hartland, Penn Gaming in Bangor, Vic Firth Co. in Newport, and Dragon Paper in 
Oxford. The CAP also hosted online webinars about available coverage options and utilized 
traditional and social media to share information with the public. 
In addition to outreach to individuals, CAP staff also provide trainings and support to navigators, 
brokers and agents, and other enrollment, social service, and health care professionals. 
The CAP HelpLine continues to be busy on a number of fronts helping people who have lost 
their jobs and employer-based coverage to sort through their options and enroll in public and 
2 https://www.cms.gov/CCllO/ Resources/Consu mer-Assistance-G rants
3
private coverage. 
Again, Health insurance is complicated, especially for people who do not have access to health 
insurance through employment. Eligibility and enrollment in individual health insurance can bea 
confusing unclertaking — ﬁnding a plan that covers the health care services, treatment, and 
medicine one needs isn't easy. At the same time, most people want to be sure that their doctor 
and other providers are in-network and the services they need will be covered under their plan. 
CAPs play a critical role in ensuring that people are able to obtain health insurance and access 
the benefits they are entitled to under their health plan. 
Please also do not hesitate to contact me with any questions you may have about Maine's Consumer 
Assistance Program.
Maine's Health insurance Consumer Assistance Program 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
Pursuant to 24-A l\/l.R.S. §4326 (PL 2019) 
Reporting period: O1/01/22 — 12/31/22 
Table of Contents 
Purpose: ........................................................................................................................................ ..1 
Overview: ...................................................................................................................................... ..2 
Enrollment Assistance in Response to COVID—l9: ......................................................................... ..3 
Consumer Assistance Program Services in 2022 ........................................................................... ..4 
A. Complaints and Appeals ........................................................................................................ ..4 
B. Collecting, tracking, and quantifying inquiries about health insurance. ............................... ..4 
C. Educating consumers about their rights and responsibilities. .............................................. ..9 
D. Assisting consumers in obtaining coverage. ......................................................................... ..9 
E. Assisting with obtaining federal health insurance premium tax credits ............................. .. 11 
F. Outreach and education related to toll-free assistance. ..................................................... .. 11 
Conclusion: .................................................................................................................................. .. 13 
Purpose: l\/laine's Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP) was authorized by 
statute to provide the following services: 
A. Assisting consumers with filing complaints and appeals with a group health plan, health 
insurance carrier, or independent review organization and providing information about the 
internal and external appeal and grievance processes of a group health plan, health 
insurance carrier, or independent review organization. 
B. Collecting, tracking, and quantifying inquiries regarding health insurance and problems 
encountered by consumers. 
C. Educating consumers on their rights and responsibilities with respect to health insurance 
coverage. 
D. Assisting consumers with obtaining health insurance coverage by providing information, 
referrals, or other assistance. 
E. Assisting with obtaining federal health insurance premium tax credits under Section 36B 
of the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (i.e.: assisting l\/iainers with 
exploring health coverage options and enrolling in coverage), and 
F. Providing information to the public about the services of the consumer assistance 
program through a comprehensive outreach program and a toll~free telephone number.
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: O1/01/22- 12/31/22 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC) is designated as I\/Iaine's Health Insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program (CAP) by the I\/Iaine Attorney General and previously by Maine's 
Bureau of Insurance. CAHC delivered CAP services statewide through three components: a toll- 
free HelpLine (1-800-965-7476), staffed by experts in eligibility and enrollment in private and 
public health insurance (who provide in-person enrollment assistance when necessary), outreach 
and education, and private insurance appeals and grievances. 
Overview: In 2022, Maine's CAP fielded over 5,800 calls from Mainers to our toll-free Helpline. 
Callers to our HelpLine come from all walks of life, but each person needs help navigating 
complex health coverage issues. They include: 
0 Robert, whose bills for emergency services were denied as out of network. CAP staff filed 
a complaint on his behalf with the I\/Iaine Bureau of Insurance, ensuring his insurance 
company covered the cost of medically necessary health care. 
Q Roger, who is self-employed and who is being treated for melanoma. Health insurance is 
critically important to Roger. He needed ongoing assistance from HelpLine staff to 
understand his options and enroll in a plan that works for him. 
0 Troung, a small business owner in central l\/Iaine, has been coming to CAHC for 
enrollment help since 2020. Troung needed assistance to ensure he received the correct 
Advance Premium Tax Credit, which lowered his monthly payments. 
Q And Nancy, who needed help understanding how to upload documents as part of the 
enrollment process. She shared her gratitude with us: "Thanks so muchfor your he/p 
today! You are the best! You are so knowledgeable, patient, and he/pful." 
These are only a snapshot of the thousands of I\/Iainers the CAP helped in 2022. This report 
provides detailed information about the various services the CAP provided and the people we 
assisted. 
Although Iow—or no cost private health insurance has been available since 2014 through the 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) and MaineCare expansion in 2019, Mainers often find the world of 
public and private health insurance overwhelming to navigate. Insurance plans and programs 
have different application and enrollment processes, complicated eligibility criteria, burdensome 
documentation requirements, waiting periods, and, in the case of private insurance, limited 
opportunities to enroll. Keeping track of when, where, and how to enroll in health insurance can 
be confusing. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for members of a single family to be eligible for 
different programs: one parent might have an employer plan, another parent might be eligible 
for a Marketplace plan, and the children eligible for the Children's Health Insurance Program. 
CAHC, through its Consumer Assistance Program, helps consumers find, maintain, and fully 
maximize their health coverage. Activities included: answering calls and helping Mainers sort 
through their health coverage options, supporting enrollments, assisting with appealing denials 
of coverage, developing and facilitating trainings for enrollment professionals statewide, 
engaging in outreach and education through print and social media, and providing presentations 
and enrollment assistance using video conferencing technology and web—based phone services. 
Page 2 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/01/22- 12/31/22 
CAHC continued to operate its toll-free HelpLine remotely through 2022 but provided in-person 
enrollment assistance to people who required it. Under those circumstances, safety protocols 
were in place to protect both staff and consumers. 
The Consumer Assistance Program (CAP) provided services continuously in 2022. ACA Open 
Enrollment for 2022 plans ran from 01/01/22 - 01/15/22. After that, calls consisted of people 
seeking coverage through a Special Enrollment Period, who lost employer-sponsored coverage 
due to a layoff or change in jobs, who needed help appealing a denial from their insurer, or who 
needed help navigating other safety net programs, including sliding scale community health 
clinics or prescription drug assistance programs. Open Enrollment (OE) for ACA 2023 
Marketplace plans began on 11/01/22 and ran through 1/15/23.1 
This year was the second year the state's exchange at Cox/erl\/iE.gov has been in operation 
(where i\/lainers who purchase ACA plans enroll in coverage). For 2022 plans (last year), more 
than 66,000 l\/lainers selected plans, a 14% increase in enrollments over the previous year. Final 
data for 2023 plans is not available as of this writing, but as of 1/11/23, the Center for Medicare 
and Medicaid reports that enrollments in Maine are on track, with 62,468 Mainers enrolled ina 
plan as of 01/07/23. 
CAHC Consumer Assistance Program Staff are certified as Maine Enrollment Assisters (MEAs) 
having completed Maine's Office of Health Insurance l\/larketplace's (OHIM) annual MEA 
training. l\/lEAs are qualified to help consumers evaluate their private (and public) health 
coverage options can help consumers enroll in coverage. 
CAHC worked collaboratively and productively with the OHl|Vl to benefit Maine consumers. This 
partnership included planning meetings prior to OE and, once OE started, biweekly meetings 
with OHIM personnel. In addition, CAHC met with a consortium of statewide navigators/M EAs 
weekly to keep abreast of enrollment news and information, changes in health policy that would 
affect consumers, and troubleshoot barriers some l\/lainers may face in enrolling in coverage. 
Enrollment Assistance in Response to COVID-19: Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, enrollment 
assistance was often provided in-person at CAHC's office. Since the onset of the pandemic, the 
majority of enrollment assistance has been provided remotely, through a hybrid of both phone 
and Internet technology. However, despite a growing familiarity with video conferencing 
technology, some consumers continue to face barriers accessing such technology and prefer in- 
person enrollment assistance. CAHC accommodated these requests as often as possible through 
2022. Phone enrollments were least common. 
Each enrollment option had its challenges. For a consumer to choose the best plan for 
themselves and/or their family, they need to compare many plans, their provider networks, 
premiums, deductibles, out of pocket limits, and co-insurances. This research is best done online 
through the Plan Compare Tool developed by OHllVl and available at CoverlVlE.gov. When 
1 
This report does not include CAHC Open Enrollment data after December 31, 2022. 
Page 3 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/O1/22- 12/31/22 
consumers had access to a computer or mobile device, CAHC’s i\/lEAs used video~conferencing 
technology to share screens, thereby facilitating enrollments. When CAHC MEA’s assisted with 
an in-person enrollment at CAHC’s office, safety protocols, including COVID screening, masking, 
and physical distancing, ensured a safe enrollment experience for both the MEA and the 
consumer. if travel to Augusta posed a barrier, CAHC referred the consumer to a iocal assister. 
Phone enrollments were the most challenging because MEAs need to describe the multiple plans 
available to the consumer. Consequently, CAHC i\/lEAs provided enrollment assistance by phone 
only when there was no other option available. 
Consumer Assistance Program Services in 2022 
A. Complaints and Appeals. 
CAHC offers several types of assistance for consumers seeking to challenge denied medical 
claims or eligibility determinations. In some cases, CAHC staff handled the appeals process 
directly as an authorized representative of the consumer. Because each denied claim is different, 
these cases involve considerable staff time devoted to medical policy analysis, research into 
accepted medical or best practices literature, and writing the appeal(s). in other cases, CAHC 
staff provided consumers with assistance in understanding the appeals process and suggestions 
for self-advocacy. ln still other cases, when consumers have greater health coverage literacy, 
resources, and understanding, CAHC provides them a copy of its consumer guide, Do it Yourseif 
Health insurance Agoeal: A step by step guide to exercising your rights with an offer of additional 
assistance if needed. CAHC mailed several copies of the guide to Mainers and directed other 
consumers to the online version. 
During the reporting period, CAHC staff acted as the consumer's authorized representative ina 
number of cases, challenging a denied medical claim, either through the private insurance 
appeals process or through filing a complaint with the Bureau of Insurance. While one case is 
still pending, our assistance that resolved in the consumer's favor has resulted in at least 
$24,800 in consumer medical benefit to date. 
B. Collecting, tracking, and quantifying inquiries about health insurance. 
The CAP collects data on the number of HelpLine calls from consumers, enrollment 
professionals, health professionals, elected officials, and many others. The HelpLine fielded 
5,818 calls (incoming and outgoing) in 2022. Call volume at the beginning of the year was 
consistent with years past, including a peak in March. We attribute this increase to callers who 
missed Open Enrollment for 2022 Marketplace plans and were inquiring whether they qualified 
for a Special Enrollment Period, as well as enrollment professionals calling about upcoming 
trainings. 
Page 4 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/O1/22- 12/31/22 
Helpline Calls by Month, 2022 
709 
574 
361 377 362 
zes 291 280 so                                          
<~°°¢\ ofﬁ as <<~ ($9 c <<~ 
\'b (<60 a’?/Q‘? Q +04%      
Between April through September, call volume remained fairly steady. In August, there was an 
increase, likely attributable to the new i\/iviviaineConnection.gov website (used to enroll in public 
coverage programs), which launched in late July. Call volume increased steeply in November for 
ACA 2023 Open Enrollment, which ran November 1, 2022, until January 15, 2023. HelpLine 
Advocates spent an average 16 minutes on the phone with callers outside of Open Enrollment 
and 20 minutes on calls during Open Enrollment. Monthly HelpLine call volume and average 
times do not include information related to in-person enrollment appointments. 
Consumers rely heavily on CAHC’s HelpLine for information about health insurance coverage, 
accounting for 86% the total calls. in addition, CAHC is a trusted resource for others who need 
information and other assistance with health insurance. For example, health or insurance 
enrollment professionalsz were the next largest group of callers, representing 5% of the total, 
followed by Navigator/l\/laine Enrollment Assistors at 3%. Calls from agents or brokers 
constituted 2% of the total. Elected officials represented 1% of the calls. 
2 Doctor's office, hospital staff. 
Page 5 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: O1/O1/22- 12/31/22 
Providing assistance, trainings, updates, and support 
to other entities (hospital billing staff, community 
health centers, social service agencies, etc.) and other Otherﬂealghor Agent! 
individuals who work with consumers, extends the f;§§:;"; ‘f o,h.,,'ns'P;?;i§»:'°na' '22:; 
CAP's reach. Often, agents and brokers rely on CAP °-3’%~~~‘....2'37% 
program staff to help low-income Medicare PartB 
eligible Mainers/consumers enroll in the Medicare Na‘,'J, g§§°'/ 
Savings Program and assist with MaineCare 318% 
applications when a consumer is not eligible for the 
Marketplace. Catagory of Caller - 2022 
CAHC tracks county data in order to inform our 
outreach and education efforts. County volume 
Andfuscoggin in 2022 was roughly equivalent to activity from 
o.,t-.,¢.§m.,unknown Argfézok prior years. As is typical, the largest percentage 
of calls (53%) came from Cumberland County, Calls by County - 2022 
Cumbe land 
-62% Kennebec, Penobscot, and York Counties (24%, York 
Washington 11%, 10% and 8% respectively). According to the 
Wi' |:% United States Census Bureau, 58% of Maine's 
3-02%-, population resides in one of those 4 counties. 
Somerset- =;anklin 
1.70% 1,79% 
Hancock 3.009’° 
3.55% 
1.429’ 0 
/Oxforu_/ : 
r Knox 11-32% 
iscot 232% Lincoln" 
3 359, 
9.88% 2.65% ' ° 
Page 6 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: O1/01/22- 12/31/22 
CAHC also tracks consumer calls by type. Callers who needed help getting coverage were the 
largest category of callers in 2022 (41%). Calls about coverage increased 7% over 2021, likely the 
result of changes in state and federal rules affecting coverage eligibility. 
Type of Consumer Call - 2022 
Uninsured 
isues 
0.24% 
Coverage concerns: 
e.g., network issues, 
denim Help Getting 
28.21% 
40.54% 
Other 
Only 
19'59% or Renewing 
Coverage 
10.86% 
CAHC also tracks consumer calls by the primary reason for the call. In 2022, 25% of all callers 
requested assistance with Marketplace application or navigation. lt is important to note, 
however, there can be significant overlap. In Maine, it is not uncommon for a family to have 
multiple sources of health insurance: employer-sponsored coverage for one parent, Marketplace 
for another parent, and public health insurance for the children. Thirteen percent of calls 
involved determination of coverage options. Eight percent pertained to general education about 
health insurance. Private insurance calls, Medicare, and other calls made up the balance. 
CAHC engages in significant consumer education during 
HelpLine calls. The chart below shows the variety of 
topics covered. Education about the ACA Marketplace Medlcale1:§li'l§pl°g'am 
M ki 
is the most prominent category both because it is :a.e7l:a:ce 
relatively new, in contrast to Medicaid, and‘ 
because a ""*‘"‘"° 
large category of people became eligible for subsidies 
as a result of changes at the federal level. CAHC also saM,,N,. 
educates a significant percentage of consumers about °"°" 
private insurance, i.e., off-Marketplace plans and Den ,I 
employer-sponsored insurance. 4.32; Consumer Education 
assistance 
4.21% 
Page 7 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/01/22- 12/31/22 
Many consumers call with questions unrelated to health insurance but which pertain to 
accessing health services. These include calls about dental care, prescription drug assistance, 
hospital free care and other safety-net programs. CAHC Helpline staff stay abreast of available 
programs and services to ensure Maine consumers have all the information they need about 
access to health care. 
CAHC collects reports of barriers to enrollment in health coverage. For both Marketplace and 
MaineCare, enrollment and/or application process barriers represent more than 70% of the 
barriers reported. Process barriers include: not understanding how to use the online application 
platform, questions that require assistance from an eligibility specialist at CoverMe.gov, long 
wait times to speak with an eligibility specialist, income or asset questions, and application 
documentation related issues. In addition, a change at the federal level that resolved the ACA 
”family glitch" issue (in which family members of people with employer —sponsored coverage 
could not receive subsidies through the Marketplace, even if the offer of coverage was 
unaffordable) generated a significant percentage of calls to our HelpLine. 
For consumers shopping the Marketplace, 
CoverME.gov, the state-based exchange in its 
second year of use, operated more smoothly 
than in its first year. Many of the technological other Aﬁ°,dabimv1 
issues were resolved after Open Enrollment for 8-99% Z-75% 
Sm“, 
2022 plans. Staff at DHHS and OHIM were F» 
_ - 
1,, *"°% 
responsive to issues CAP staff and assisters 1°-64% 
reported, such as incorrect APTCs, opening an 
SEP, or incorrect account information. Barriers to Coverage/Access 
Marketplace - 2022 
in 
OHIM call center staff referred consumers to 
CAHC for help with plan selection support or 
enrolling in a Marketplace Plan. The 
OHIM/CAHC partnership allowed each partner 
to make specific use of its expertise: call center 
representatives troubleshooted or escalated technical issues; CAHC staff used eligibility and 
healthcare system knowledge to help consumers navigate and enroll in the correct program 
and select a plan that was best for each member of their household. 
Determining and understanding how to count various types of income can create barriers for 
people who are not sure what kind of coverage or subsidy for which they may qualify. Self- 
employed and seasonal workers often have difficulties reporting and documenting changes in 
income over the course of a year. HelpLine staff spend a significant amount of time helping to 
educate consumers and enrollment professionals how income calculations work for each 
program. Time spent on income calculations increases when consumers receive supplemental 
payments, advanced child tax credits, new retirement benefits, and/or stimulus payments. 
Page 8 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/01/22- — 12/31/22 
C. Educating consumers about their rights and responsibilities. 
In addition to educating individuals through the HelpLine, CAHC maintains a library of more 
than 25 educational, inclusive, downloadable factsheets on its website under the Resources 
tab. These include factsheets about the Marketplace, MaineCare and Medicaid categories, 
specific programs designed to help underserved populations, health and dental clinics, 
prescription drug assistance programs, hospital free care, and other safety net programs. These 
factsheets are distributed by CAHC’s network of enrollment professionals, at hospitals, health 
centers, community action programs statewide. CAP staff mailed or emailed 1,281 factsheets to 
individual consumers as appropriate during the reporting period. 
CAP staff provide callers who are eligible for Marketplace plans, whether through SEP or during 
Open Enrollment, with in-depth education about private Marketplace coverage: how it is 
structured, what types of subsidies might be available to them, and how both Advanced 
Premium Tax Credits (APTC: subsidies to help decrease monthly premium costs) and Cost 
Sharing Reductions (CSR: help with deductibles and copayment for people with low income) 
work. The availability of these subsidies is an important component of making health insurance 
affordable for tens of thousands of Mainers. At the same time, consumers who take advantage 
of these subsidies incur significant responsibility. Callers need to fully comprehend that 
unexpected tax liability can result when an applicant's actual income, as compared to their 
projected income when they apply for coverage, increases over the calendar year. 
In explaining the APTC subsidy, CAHC staff emphasize two points: 1) applicants should report 
any changes in income during the calendar year, and 2) applicants will be required to reconcile 
the APTC against their actual income when filing federal taxes and may have to pay back the 
subsidy if their income increases. CAHC considers this a critical educational piece so consumers 
who take advantage of the availability of APTC are not caught unaware in the event of an 
income change. 
D. Assisting consumers in obtaining coverage. 
CAHC HelpLine Advocates assist consumers in obtaining health coverage by evaluating their 
options. This process begins with a thorough screening to determine whether they are or may be 
eligible for private or public health insurance. lt continues with CAP staff providing application 
and/or enrollment assistance as needed. During Open Enrollment for 2023 ACA plans} CAP staff 
assisted: 
0 approximately 1,670 consumers who appeared to be eligible for Marketplace plans. 
0 at least 453 consumers who qualified for Special Enrollment Period. 
Assistance provided involved an in-depth explanation about Marketplace coverage, including 
topics such as: metal levels (bronze, silver and gold plans), defining and explaining costs 
(premiums, deductibles, out of pocket limits, co-payments and co-insurance) and the features 
each include, such as the types of subsidies associated with each, who qualifies for which type, 
3 These data reflect Marketplace assistance through December 31, 2022. Open Enrollment for ACA plans extends 
through January 15, 2023. 
Page 9 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/01/22- 12/31/22 
what SEPS are and who qualifies for them, things to look out for when choosing a plan, and, the 
importance of reconciling tax credits. 
CAP staff enrolled 132 Mainers in ACA Marketplace plans, a nearly three—fold increase over 2021, 
through safe, in-person meetings at CAHC’s office or remotely by either telephone or 
videoconferencing. ACA enrollments typically take between 1.5 and 2 hours because staff work 
with the consumer to review a variety of plans in advance of selection. In addition, CAP staff 
enrolled 67 consumers who qualified for Special Enrollment Period. 
ln contrast to the Marketplace, enrollment in MaineCare is available year-round if an individual 
or families meet certain income and other eligibility guidelines. Families who lose employer- 
sponsored private coverage (due to job loss or layoff) qualify for a Special Enrollment Period and 
are often eligible for a low—cost Marketplace plan or MaineCare. During the reporting period, 
CAHC HelpLine staff assisted 1,837 people who appeared eligible for MaineCare. In addition, 
CAHC made a substantial number of referrals: 596 to DH HS; 327 to the state-based Marketplace; 
32 to sliding—scale clinics or other safety net programs; 75 to Area Agencies on Aging; 15 to the 
Bureau of Insurance; and 107 to other nonprofit social service agencies. 
An important means by which the CAP augments its impact is to ensure that enrollment 
professionals statewide have adequate training to assist Maine consumers in obtaining health 
insurance. Because of the pandemic, CAHC continued to hold trainings virtually. Virtual trainings 
have the advantage of reducing geographic barriers to participation. They also allow for targeted 
trainings for specialized organizations in a cost-effective, timely manner. 
Training other assisters or enrollment professionals: 
Six hundred nineteen professionals were trained by CAHC CAP staff through: 
0 Workshops: 
o 2 Marketplace Workshops (05/10/22 and 10/O4/22) 
o 2 Assister Round Tables (10/18/22 and 10/29/22) where detailed information and 
training is provided to assisters through—out the state prior to Open Enrollment. 
0 9 presentations: 
o 2 Filling the Coverage Gaps Presentations (05/19/22 and 9/27/22) 
0 1 Department of Labor presentation for new Rapid Response Team Members 
(5/19/22) 
o 1 Presentation on Safety Net Programs for MaineHeaIth resident physicians 
(9/14/22) 
o 1 Presentation for the DownEast Public Health Council on 09/16/22 
o 2 AAA (Area Agencies on Aging) Marketplace updates (9/20/22 and 9/29/22) 
o 1 ACA plans webinar (10/27/22). 
I Basic and advanced trainings related to Medicaid that overlap with Marketplace 
trainings. in some cases these trainings are designed for professionals who work directly 
with low-income families (e.g., Pine Tree Legal Assistance) or New Mainers. 
Page 10 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: 01/01/22 — 12/31/22 
In addition, CAHC oversees an enrollment professional ListServ, which currently has 280 
members representing social service and health care provider groups from across the state. The 
ListServ is an efficient means of crowdsourcing technical assistance to enrollment professionals, 
l\/laine Enrollment Assisters, and insurance brokers who have specific coverage and enrollment 
questions. There were 70 requests for information or announcement posts with 191 responses 
during the reporting period. 
E. Assisting with obtaining federal health insurance premium tax credits. 
In providing direct enrollment assistance, Helpline staff helped various consumers realize at least 
$57,262 in APTC during the reporting period. However, many consumers enroll in Marketplace 
coverage on their own after receiving CAP Helpline guidance. The subsidies they receive are not 
included in the total. Consequently, the true economic impact of Helpline guidance is not 
measured in its entirely in these data. 
F. Outreach and education related to toll-free assistance. 
CAHC publicized the availability of free, professional assistance in finding and understanding, 
health insurance in a variety of ways during the reporting period. These included staff 
appearances at virtual events, television advertisements, the distribution of printed material, 
and earned and social media. CAHC’s toll-free number (1-800-965-7476) is listed on all private 
insurance Explanation of Benefit statements, on the Department of Human Services ’ 
Coverl\/legov website, and on l\/laine Department of Labor (DOL) DOL notices to filers for 
unemployment insurance. in addition, the l\/laine Department of Health and Human Services 
refer people whose MaineCare is ending to CAHC for Special Enrollment Period assistance. 
CAHC continued to work closely with the l\/laine DOL to reach Mainers with employer —based 
health insurance who were laid off as a result of the COVID-19 epidemic and/or other economic 
factors. Information about CAHC's services and its toll-free number was included in 500 updated 
copies of DOL's "Transitions Resource Guide for Laid-off Workers." In addition, CAHC 
participated in two Rapid Response events for workers at the Machias Veterans Home (3/O8/22 
and O3/09/22). 
CAHC returned to participating in some in-person events in 2022, while remaining conscientious 
about COVID-19 precautions, including masking. These included: 
0 a regional job fair in Belfast on O4/12/22 
0 the 32"“ Youth Leadership Advisory Team conference on O6/22/22 
0 Pine Tree Hospice Health and Resource Fair on O6/29/22 
0 a back-to-school bash in Lincoln County with partners LincolnHealth, Healthy Lincoln 
County, and Central Lincoln County YMCA on O8/17/22 
v the Farmington Fair on 10/O4/22 
0 the Waterville Craft Fair on 12/11/22 with representatives from the Office of Health 
insurance Marketplace. 
Page 11 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: O1/01/22- 12/31/22 
The CAP engaged in other outreach and education activities regarding health coverage options 
and enrollment deadlines, including but not limited to: 
0 Frequent stories in Coffee CAHC, CAHC's blog, sent to 4,352+/subscribers. The blog 
always includes a message about health coverage, such as: 
Do you know someone \who\needs\\hea;l\th, insurancef? Learn about héailtggg ” 
coverage options, includinglvlal inetare a‘1nd\ \special enrollment periodsi efgir 
Marketplace icovlelrage \at»C1overiVlE,gov pri (jalll Maine's. Consumer 
As;=:istance\Progra mat 1~8Q.O}965-747 ,6. iJ 
0 Electronic and printed material distribution of health insurance options and deadlines 
through professional organizations such as Professional Logging Contractors, and l\/laine 
State Library Health Connect Program 
0 Brochures, magnets, and business cards to health care providers 
v Young Adults with Disabilities Transition to Adulthood event. 
CAHC participated in several press events. These include: 
0 A press conference to kick off Open Enrollment on 11/01/22, with DHHS Commissioner 
Jeanne Lambrew, a consumer who selected a 2023 ACA plan, and Patty Lovell, an i\/lEA 
from Western l\/laine Community Action, which serves as l\/laine's navigator consortium 
lead. 
0 A press conference at CAHC's office in Augusta with Governor Janet T. Mills and DHHS 
Commissioner Jeanne Lambrew on 12/14/22, which received coverage on WCS%~l and 
WGFVEE. 
in addition, CAHC appeared in or published stories in newspapers or television 52 times over the 
report period. During December, CAHC ran two Open Enrollment television ads in the Portland 
and Bangor catchment areas. One featured a srnail business owner. The other featured 
information about Open Enrollment in Spanish, Erench, Somali, and English. These ads reached 
an estimated 251,031 and 83,441 viewers, respectively. Radio ads in the Portland, Augusta, 
Bangor, and Presque Isle markets during the same time period reached at least 185,700 
listeners. Other paid media publications regarding l\/laine ’s CAP and coverage information 
included but were not limited to: 
0 A profile of CAHC in the Central l\/laine Nonprofit Guide, published by the Kennebec 
Journal and Morning Sentinel. The feature provided information about coverage options 
in l\/laine, featured the CAP's toll-free number, and also pointed readers to Coveri\/iE.gov. 
0 Stories published in Turner Publishing local weekly/monthly print and on-line news 
publications, including those directly mailed to nearly 200,000 households in December 
2022, mostly in Western and central Maine. 
The CAP also uses a number of social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, and 
lnstagram to reach Mainers. CAHC posted information about Open Enrollment and coverage 
options on Facebook 258 times during the reporting period, with a total reach of 25,636. There 
Page 12 of13
Consumers for Affordable Health Care CAP Report 
Reporting period: O1/O1/22- 12/31/22 
were three types of content: posts that promoted the CAP’s services; posts that educated the 
public about availability of coverage through the ACA Marketplace including during SEP and that 
provided information about the new state-based Marketplace, CoverME.gov. 
CAHC tweeted about health insurance 260, with a reach of 19,711. CAHC posted on lnstagram 
225 times, reaching 4,070 users. 
A social media example is provided below: 
.‘;§~" = Consumers for Affordable Health Care ___ 
Published by Catherine Saree 0- No.'embar18,2022'B 
More Maine people than ever qualify for ﬁnancial assistance this year through CoverM5.gov. This 
includes: 
- 
People who earn more than 400% of the federal poverty level (about 554,000 for an individual, 
or $111,000 for a family of four) who can now qualify for ﬁnancial help if coverage would 
otherwise be unaffordable to them. 
- 
People who previously were ineligible because a member of their family has an offer of 
affordable coverage through ajob. 
Enroll in a health plan through Coveri'~.iE.g::>v by Dec. 15 for coverage to begin Jan. 1. 
For free assistance applying and enrolling, call Maine's Consumer Assistance Program Helpline at 
1-B00-965-7476. (Free translation services are available.) 
FACA 
;op-:-nen:oiln*.ent 
-' 
=famélygi§tch 
Conclusion: CAHC effectively served as Maine's Health insurance Consumer Assistance Program, 
providing important outreach and education services to Maine people, including responding to 
over 5,800 calls to our toll-free, statewide Helpline. The Consumer Assistance Program helps 
Mainers understand their health insurance options, enroll in coverage, and appeal inappropriate 
denials of coverage. It also helps Mainers surmount barriers to accessing the health care and 
coverage they need. The CAP will continue to expand its reach in 2023 to address the health 
insurance needs of all Maine people, especially in light of the planned conclusion of the COVlD- 
19 Public Health Emergency and as Mainers continue to recover from the lingering health and 
economic effects of the pandemic. 
For more information visit Consumers for Affordable Health Care at: Consumer Assistance 
Program , email info@mainecahc.org, or call 1-800-965-7476. 
Page 13 of13
