northernlighthealth.orgThis institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer.Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 258 An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025
Testimony – Finance Authority of Maine 
February 15, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee, Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the 
Committee On Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business my 
name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN. I am here today providing testimony on behalf of 
Northern Light Health and our member organizations speaking in support of Finance 
Authority of Maine health professions funding as propose in the biennial budget bill. 
Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, 
central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, 
behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices 
and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s 
population lives in the Northern Light Health service area. Northern Light Health is also 
proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with over 12,000 employees statewide.
The Maine Health Care Provider Loan Repayment Pilot Program was resourced with $1 
million dollars in one time funding to provide loan repayment for high demand health 
care professionals. As one of Maine’s largest health care employers we encouraged 
qualified health professionals in our employ to complete loan support applications.  It is 
our understanding that the volume of applications was very high, thus demonstrating 
the need for financial loan support to offset educational debt.  Maine’s nursing 
workforce challenge is an excellent example of a heath profession in great demand with 
more positions than available workers. In the spring of 2022 the Maine Hospital 
Association and Maine’s Nursing Action Coalition issued an updated projection 
estimating the shortage of nurses in Maine totals 2,250 RN’s. Northern Light Health is 
recruiting for 500 nurses to care for patients in our hospitals, home care, hospice and 
other health services.  We are in full support of the Governor’s budget proposal to 
provide $4 million dollars in funding for the Health Care Provider Loan Repayment Pilot 
Program.
But, we must express our disappointment that the Governor’s budget does not 
include funding for the Nursing Education Loan Repayment Program. The core root of 
Maine’s nursing workforce shortage is the need for more faculty in all of our nursing 
education programs.  The legislature passed $1 million dollars in funding in 2021 for this 
loan program. The program was also modernized to require eligible faculty to teach full 
time for 3 years in a Maine based program and updated the loan caps for masters and 
doctoral prepared nursing faculty.  The program was a tremendous success with the first 
round of applications.  In the fall of 2022 FAME approved nurse educator loan 
repayment for 12 masters and 12 doctoral faculty exhausting nearly all of the $1 million 
dollars in available funding.  We ask that you include in the biennial budget $1 million 
dollars in funding for the nurse education loan repayment program to support the 
ongoing critical need for nurse educators in Maine.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on this critically important funding.
