Testimony of Lori Morrison, Director of Administrative Services 
Baxter State Park 
Before the Joint Standing Committees on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
and Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Hearing Date: February 28, 2023 
LD 258 “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
Good aﬁemoon Senators Rotundo and Ingwersen, Representatives Sachs and Pluecker, and 
Members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Lori Morrison, I am the Director of 
Administrative Services for Baxter State Park. I am here today to testify in support of LD 258, the 
Govemor’s Biemiial Budget proposal for State ﬁscal years 2024 and 2025. This testimony 
addresses each item and proceeds sequentially from pages A-129 through A-130. 
Baxter State Park is an independent quasi-state agency and a large charitable trust and not part of 
the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. Beginning in 1931, Governor Percival 
Baxter generously giﬁed this world-class wildemess and outdoor recreation destination to the State 
of Maine to hold in trust for the beneﬁt of the people of Maine. Park entrance is free to Maine 
residents. 
Each of 28 gifts of land from Govemor Baxter was accepted by acts of the legislature and included 
in the Private and Special Laws of the State of Maine to collectively form what is now Baxter State 
Park. Governor Baxter created a park where the protection of natural resources takes primacy over 
recreational opportunities, and the landscape is protected in a “Forever Wild” condition. He also 
described the governance structure he wanted to oversee the Park, called the Baxter State Park 
Authority. The Authority consists of the state’s principal ofﬁcers in the professions of the law, 
forestry, and ﬁsh and wildlife management, speciﬁcally the Maine Attorney General, the Director 
of the Maine Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry and the 
Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.i 
Govemor Baxter intended for the Park to remain ﬁnancially independent through a trust created 
in 1927 and upon his death, he donated a large portion of his estate, which grew into an endowment 
capable of funding one-half to two-thirds of our annual operating budget. The entire budget for 
Baxter State Park comes from Other Special Revenue Funds, using no General Fund dollars. 
The Park’s primary source of revenue is the trust Governor Baxter established. Other sources of 
revenue for the Park include visitor fees and revenue from sustainable forest management in the
l
Scientiﬁc Forest Management Area in the northwest corner of the Park. Thus, approving the Park’s 
proposed initiatives would have no ﬁscal impact on the General Fund. 
The initiatives proposed in this budget are intended to build our capacity to continue Welcoming 
visitors to Baxter State Park without compromising our ability to maintain this “Forever Wild” 
landscape according to Governor Baxter’s wishes, as the donor of this trust. 
The ﬁrst initiative on page A-129 continues and makes permanent one Public Service Manager II 
position, that enhances the leadership team at the Park and is currently a limited-period position 
established by ﬁnancial order. 
The second initiative on page A-129 provides increased allocation for general operating expenses 
to cover cost increases required to continue the same level of services for the protection of natural 
resources and recreational public access throughout Baxter State Park. 
The third initiative on page A-129 provides funding for Risk Management insurance rate 
increases. 
The fourth initiative on page A-129 provides a one-time allocation to replace roofs and aging 
rental lean-tos, and upgrade cabins to improve the visitor experience. 
The ﬁfth initiative can be found on page A-130. This provides a one-time allocation to replace 
aging ﬂeet vehicles owned and maintained by Baxter State Park. 
The sixth initiative on page A-130 provides a one-time allocation to maintain infrastructure and 
for capital improvement projects in Baxter State Park. Maintenance of the aging road infrastructure 
is necessary to comply with best management practices for safety and efﬁciency, and to provide 
habitat connectivity in stream systems. 
The seventh initiative on page A-130 provides a one-time allocation in FY24 to purchase safety 
equipment to support alpine zone trail rehabilitation projects on Katahdin. 
The ﬁnal initiative on page A-130 provides for increased allocation to replace minor power 
equipment. 
This concludes my testimony on our 2024-2025 biennial budget. I would be glad to respond to 
any questions you may have at this time.
2
