Testimony of Lorraine Klug, RDH for LD 258:An ActMaking Unified Appropriations and Allocations fromthe General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing CertainProvisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal YearsEnding June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025.
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee and the Health and Human ServicesCommitteePublic Hearing: February 22, 2022
Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative Meyer, and esteemedmembers of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services Committees, myname is Lorraine Klug and I am President of the Maine Dental Hygienists Association .  I’m testifyingtoday to encourage the Committees to add the necessary funding into the budget to ensureMaine CDC’sSchool Oral Health Program has the resources to expand to all schools by 2025, as enacted last legislativesession.
At least half of Maine kids are currently not accessing preventive care in traditional dental office settings,and there are very few dental offices taking new patients, especially with MaineCare, and most of thosethat do typically have at least a 6 month  to a year wait for appointments. The School Oral HealthProgram fills a critical gap in the system, by ensuring that all kids have the opportunity to receive at leasta screening and fluoride varnish, and assistance with follow up referrals as needed.  No child should gowithout preventative dental services and the school setting is the perfect place to allow access for all.Unlike the private practice, you don't have to worry about transportation and appointment failure issueswhich is a problem with many families.
About 1 in 4 children screened by the program this fall were identified with active decay, and thisproportion could be significantly higher in schools where the SOHP has not been available as the decayrates tend to improve once schools have had the services for a few years.  Sealants and fluoride for everychild in school would greatly reduce this statistic.
We need to take care of our most vulnerable citizens and provide preventative dental services to thosewho don't have a dental home. Our private practice offices are overwhelmed with patients and theschool system is the prefect setting to provide necessary services.
It is very important that we fund the expansion of this critical program. Thank you for your considerationof my testimony on this important issue.
