February 22nd 2023
LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025.
Senator Rotundo, Senator Baldacci, Representative Sachs, Representative Meyer, and 
esteemed members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human 
Services Committees, my name is Lyvia Gaewsky and I am the Program Manager for the 
statewide From the First Tooth program. I am testifying today to encourage the 
Committees to add the necessary funding into the budget to ensure Maine CDC’s School 
Oral Health Program has the resources to expand to all schools by 2025, as enacted last 
legislative session.
From the First Tooth is a statewide children’s oral health program funded by the 
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine. For the last 14 years, From the First Tooth has 
worked to increase access to preventive oral health care by integrating oral health 
evaluations and fluoride varnish application into the pediatric primary care settings for 
children in Maine. 
Early childhood caries is the most widespread, chronic disease among children in the 
United States. The consequences of untreated tooth decay includes pain, infection, 
impaired speech, delays in learning, toothaches and facial abscesses that can become so 
acute that care is sought in hospital emergency departments. Avoidable oral health related 
emergency room visits are not only wasteful and costly to the healthcare system, but also 
rarely addresses the true problem, as few emergency departments deliver comprehensive 
dental services. 
School-based oral health programs increase access and serve as an early intervention to 
prevent the need for expensive, last-minute triage care. Providing health services for 
children in schools, where they spend the vast majority of their waking hours, is a proven 
public health success story and is practical and fiscally responsible.
On a personal note, I have two close friends who are currently elementary teachers in 
Maine. One is a second grade teacher serving a school in Hancock County. My friend 
recalls a student coming up to her in the middle of the day’s lesson and saying they were 
unable to concentrate due to a toothache. Without other options, she sent the child to the 
nurse’s office for pain relief, which typically includes an ice pack applied to the face. The 
next week, again during the middle of a lesson, the same child approached my friend and 
said they are unable to concentrate due to dental pain.  
The second friend is an elementary school teacher who teaches students with severe 
intellectual and development disabilities in Cumberland County. Recently, she shared 
with me that many of her students struggle to find routine dental care resulting the need 
for sedation to treat escalated dental disease. Expanding school-based oral health 
programs to provide early, often and appropriate preventive care can break cycles and 
improve the overall health and wellness of children in Maine. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony on this important issue.
On behalf of From the First Tooth,
Lyvia Gaewsky
From the First Tooth, Program Manager
 
