A///once 
MAINE 
I " Officers "' 
Dave Mccluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1='Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2'" Vice- 
President 
laineGeneral Behavioral Healt 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Centc 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink
l 
"’ Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
idroscoggin Home & Healthca 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
I Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
‘ NFI North, Inc.
l 
Northern Light/Acadia 
>ortland Recovery Com munit\ 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
'iCounty Mental Health Servic- 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 258 
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30,2024 and June 30, 2025 
February 21, 2023‘ 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Baldacci, Representatives Sachs and Meyer, 
and members of both the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and 
Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy. I am a resident of 
Westbrook and the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental 
Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority 
of Maine's community based mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies and 
evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our 
behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak strongly in support of today's 
sections of the budget — the DHHS Children's Services. Especially those pertaining 
to the Homeless Youth Program, Foster Care and Therapeutic Foster Care, and the 
critically needed investments in upgrading MaineCare Rates for the provision of 
behavioral health services to our youth. 
Many of you have seen me before you for several years now, sharing our concerns 
that the system of care for children with behavioral health challenges is fraying and 
falling apart. We have pointed out the hundreds and hundreds of children awaiting 
services, the dozens of them sent out of state for their care (far from home and 
family). We have highlighted the children stuck in our hospital emergency rooms, 
and in youth corrections because there was nowhere else for them to go. 
We have continually sought rate increases and rule changes (without great success 
most times) to better allow for evidence-based programs that can work with youth 
at the shallow end of the pool, in home and community treatment. However, in the 
130*" Legislature, working with legislators and the administration, we were all able 
to create a new MaineCare Rate Reform process that begins to address the 
stagnation of rates that led to this decrease in access that we have seen for overa 
decade. 
There is proposed a $237 million investment in federal and state funds to continue 
MaineCare and related payment improvements as well as make investments in the 
children's behavioral health system and opioid response. The proposed biennial 
budget has $213 million in funds to continue these payment improvements, 
including related Office of Behavioral Health (OBH) and Office of Child and Family 
Services (OCFS) state-funded programs. It also includes $17 million to address the 
urgent need to expand the range of services for children's behavioral health and $7 
million to target toward direct response to the opioid crisis. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 '” Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 “' theAllianceMaine.org
We applaud the work the administration put into this budget proposal. It is a huge step forward. The 
Governor several times stated that this investment is ”historic" and it is. But please understand that 
it is not transformational. 
It is finally allowing history to better catch up to the current costs of providing these services ina 
system that had stagnant rates for 10 — 15 years. And as we all know; the pandemic has added to 
this burden and has intensified the demand and the wait times. These rate increases and new 
investments are CRITICAL to stabilizing our system of care for youth struggling with mental health 
and substance use challenges, and their families. 
If these investments in the increased rates were to be cut from the budget, having been 
implemented in January of this year through the supplemental FY 23 budget, and allowing providers 
to start hiring and expanding services — it would collapse the entire system. Please support these 
investments as proposed. 
In setting this new baseline from which to build, the department has come a long way to fixing many 
of the issues;that have broken our system of care for our most at-risk children. However, there will 
be other bills coming before the legislature, and especially the Health and Human Services 
Committee, this session that will add to this investment in our system of care, and work on many 
other parts that need attention. Please also look closely at these initiatives as they come before 
you. 
Our community-based system of behavioral health care for our children has been at risk for years, it 
has been hit with cuts and withered with lack of attention -- this investment stops the bleeding and 
stabilizes the patient, but there is still much work to be done before it is healed. 
Thank you for your time and attention to these issues. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “' Phone 207.621.8118 "‘ Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
D POLICY PRIORITIES FOR 2023 
1 . Invest in Behavioral Health Workforce. Maine has seen a critical workforce 
shortage for behavioral health services for many years. Without adequate 
1 community are resources for equitable pay, many agencies see turnover rates of 40-50% for 
Gfeg Bawers, 1..\,1ce.p,es,de,,, direct care staff. The Pandemic has only exacerbated this crisis. This 
Dav One adversely impacts those in need of these services by creating instability in 
5°” D°‘;°“‘;“"'t2""V'°e' the care provided and in the quality of that care. 
T85 en . . . . . . 
AaineGenera| Beha\,,o,a| Heam a. Investment in direct service and clinical staff wages and benefits. 
Kara Hay, segrefafy b. Streamline and reduce barriers to licensure for much needed direct 
Periquis ¢AP ln¢- care and clinical staff. 
5'9" Bemisi T'°a5""°" c. Provide incentives to enter the behavioral health field of work. 
iroostook Mental Health Cente
I 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 2' Dave McCluskey, President 
Enhance and Expand Mental Health (MH) Services. Many agencies have 
closed or reduced service offerings in recent years due to increasing 
"50""! M¢"1be"$ " administrative burdens, rules that hinder evidence-based care, and stagnant 
or unsustainable reimbursement rates. We have been left with inadequate 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital access to care and with some services that cannot adhere to the f|CI8IltY
_ 
Aitemative services, N5, |n¢_ standards of the models of care to truly meet the needs of those struggling 
ndroscoggin Home & Healthcai with menta| i||ne55e5_ 
CathcﬁiScS'é’ }:‘;':i‘;‘;’e:'“:3‘aine a. Restructure Home and Community Treatment for children to better meet 
mcwmng c°||abo,;tive Sen,“ best practices, and invest more in specialized services such as Multi- 
Maine Systemic Treatment, and other evidence-based practices. 
Ch'I$t°Phe' Aa'°" Came’ b. Restructure aspects of Medication Mana ement services for ersons with P 
Common Ties . . 
_i . . . Severe Mental Illness to provide timely access, and to accommodate the .ommunity Caring Collaborativi _ _ _ _ 
;,;,mmun;ty Heanh 8, Counseiini various levels of support needed to sustain independence in our 
COR Health communities. 
C"5'$ 8‘ C°“"5e""g ¢f""te‘5 c. Restructure billing practices for adult residential MH care to assure 
Crossroads Maine , _ _ _ _ 
moa Heanhcare & Telepsychiai continued access to these needed supportive living settings. 
Kennebec Behavioral Health d. Invest in and restructure mental health services to bring home youth 
Maine Bel"?/l°rf=\l Health being treated out of state and far from their family and community. 
O'ga“'Zat'°" 
e. Reduce administrative burdens with a national licensure ”deemed iMaine BehavioraIHealthcare H _ _ _ 
Milestone Recoven, status similarto hospitals.I 
NFI North, Inc.‘ 
Portgﬁlérgobfxta ﬁiiznity 3. Enhance and Expand Substance Use Disorder (SUD) Treatment Services. 
Center The need for SUD treatment continues to grow in Maine and COVID-19 has 
Pathways of Maine only exacerbated the problems, as access to housing, work, and basic 
Rumford Group Homes community supports have disappeared. With generational substance use 
gEIi“::u:Ii::; ‘: now being seen in families across Maine, there is also an increase in the 
Sweetser number of those ever-younger presenting with an increased complexity of 
riCounty Mental Health Service co-occurring substance use and mental illness. 
Wingsflil)/regmlgéIgiamilies a. Invest in and expand access to residential SUD treatment options. 
Woodfords Family Services b. Invest in more case management for those in treatment for SUD to 
l enhance and sustain their recovery. 
c. invest in recovery ready community supports, such as housing and 
community centers. Adcare Educational Institute 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 " Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org 
