295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony regarding  
The Governor’s Change Package for LD 258  
May 17, 2023  
 
Good afternoon Senator  Rotundo , Representative  Sachs , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on  Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs .  My name is Malory Shaughnessy . I am a resident of Westbrook  and 
the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental H ealth 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community -based providers of these important services , providing 
services annually to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The 
Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -
based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our 
behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in regards to the 
Governor’s Change Package to LD 258. 
 
The Alliance has both praise for several initiatives, and some  concerns to share 
about this budget proposal. We also have some suggestions for funding that is truly 
needed to address the increased mental health crisis that is growing daily in this 
state, especially for our youth.  
 
Members of the Alliance thank the Governor for fulfilling her pledge to provide 
funding for a Housing First Program in Section AAAA . Housing First programs 
recognize that stable housing is a prerequisite for effective psych iatric and 
substance use treatment and for improving quality of life. Once stably housed, 
individuals are better able to take advantage of wrap -around services – to help 
support housing stability, employment, and recovery. Without stable housing, 
attaining  these goals is far  more difficult.  
 
Another important initiative within this proposal is the $ 5.9 million in ongoing 
funding to establish a High -Fidelity Wrap -Around program  for Medicaid -eligible 
youth to provide coordinated community services, training, and other supports for 
children with behavioral health needs and their families .  
 
High Fidelity Wraparound uses an individualized, team -based, collaborative process to 
provide a coordinated set of services and supports. It is typically targeted toward 
children and youth with complex emotional, behavioral, or mental health needs, and 
their families. Throughout the process, youth and their families work with a care 
coordinator who convenes, facilitates, and coordinates efforts of the wraparound 
team. The care coordinator further helps the family navigate planned services and 
supports, including informal and community -based options; tracks progress and 
satisfaction to revise the plan of care as needed; and ensures program fidelity.  You 
can find out more at the Federal Title IV -E Prevention Services Clearinghouse at 
https://preventionservices.acf.hhs.gov/programs/330/show . 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Progress Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
The main concern that the members of the Alliance want to shar e with the Appropriations Committee 
pertain to the large sums being added to the MaineCare Stabilization Fund  in Section WWWW. We 
would advocate that these funds be invested in the current biennium rather than be set aside for a later 
date. This budget pro poses transferring over $50 million into the MaineCare Stabilization Fund, when 
the fund is already at an all time high.  
 
MaineCare is not only not “stabilized” yet post Pandemic , it is becoming increasingly unstable as the 
demand for mental health servic es rises in response to the Pandemic. This money should be expended 
now to address workforce shortages and meet the increasing service needs in our communities.  
 
The Alliance would request that this committee consider moving some of this funding slated fo r the 
MaineCare Stabilization Fund into direct care now by including into the Change Package some of the 
unanimously passed legislative initiatives that will soon be landing on the Appropriations table .  
 
These bills below have already passed unanimously (or nearly) through the Committee process  and carry 
a total price tag of somewhere between $10 – 15 Million (not all have a fiscal note attached yet) : 
 
• LD 472, An Act to Support Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinic Projects  
• LD 1178, Resolve, to Red uce Barriers to Recovery from Addiction by Expanding Eligibility for 
Targeted Case Management Services  
• LD 540, An Act to Establish Peer Respite Centers for Adults with Mental Health Challenges in 
Maine  
• LD 997, Resolve, to Reduce Workforce Barriers for Ment al Health Professionals in Maine  
• LD 1355, An Act to Establish a Behavioral Health Employment Income Tax Credit for Student 
Loan Payments  
• LD 1718, An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine's Essential Support Workforce Through 
Access to Higher Education  
One last request would be  in relation  to the change package proposal to repeal the Service Provider 
Tax on health providers  and remove all documented add -on amounts associated with the tax that are 
built into MaineCare reimbursement, effective January 1, 202 5.  The Alliance would like to  see in writing 
a list of all of the MaineCare Sections and services that the DHHS considers to be subject to the Service 
Provider Tax. We would like to assure that we are in alignment before the process of removing it begins.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of these requests for the health of our communities.  
 
 
 
 
