Testimony to the Joint Standing Committees on  
Appropriations and Financial Affairs & Innovation,  
Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
 
L.D. 258 - In Support of Maine Development Foundation Funding  
February 9, 2023  
Dear Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Econ omic  
Advancement & Business,  
 
My name is Mark Levasseur, Chair of the Steering Committee for Momentum Aroostook, a  program under the Realize 
Maine Network funded by the Maine Development Foundation. Momentum Aroostook is a young professional’s 
networking g roup in Aroostook County helping to shape Maine’s next generation of leadership, mentor, attract and 
retain young professionals in Northern Maine. I would like to extend my appreciation for allowing us to testify in 
support of MDF’s appropriation.  
 
Our ste ering committee consists of 13 members with a broad range of career paths  and our  reach spans from Fort 
Kent to Houlton with constant interaction between community members to accomplish our mission. Volunteer based, 
we all serve as part of this committee t o attribute a bond with our community to the strong foundation that 
Momentum  Aroostook helps foster.  
 
We have gathered support from long -standing organizations like MMG Insurance, Katahdin Trust Company, Northern 
Maine Development Commission, Farm Credit E ast and most importantly, the Aroostook Partnership – a collaborative 
group of businesses in the region. Through a partnership with AP, we aim to bring more  appointed potential youth 
leaders on -board with Momentum Aroostook to create targeted leadership  opportunities and build our core 
membership group. We are proud to build leadership skills and confidence for young professionals during this 
significant demographic shift in Maine’s aging workforce. Our organization is also partnering again with Young 
Prof essionals Institute, a University of Maine leadership development  program. This partnership is key to our mission 
and success in Aroostook County to retain young local leaders who want to make an impact in Northern Maine. We 
are excited to continue our wor k and ensure that our County can meet the growing need for leaders in the next 
decade.  
 
Without the continued funding from the Realize Maine Network through Maine Development Foundation, our goal 
and mission would be difficult to achieve. The funding allo ws Momentum to host quarterly networking socials, host 
outings and professional development opportunities and most importantly, our annual Aroostook Achievers Awards. 
We successfully held our third annual event, recognizing 15 individuals in five categorie s for their work and dedication 
to their work professions here in Aroostook County. An event that draws in a crowd of almost 200 people to show 
their support for these emerging leaders. In addition , funds from MDF will be used this August  as we host Magn etize 
Maine in Aroosto ok County. O ur goal will be to highlight  the work force development initiatives in Northern Maine 
along with  showcase what Aroostook County has to offer  through a panel d iscussion confere nce. Momentum will al so 
be hosting a social hour and welcome event for the young professionals to gather and network.  Momentum 
Aroostook would greatly appreciate your consideration for fun ding so we can keep the momentum going in Northern 
Maine and help our young professionals remain as an asset up here.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Mark Levasseur  
MMG Insurance  
Chair, Momentum Aroostook  

