A Brief History of the MDSOAB 
Duties and Responsibilities 
The Maine Developmental Sen/ices Oversight and Advisory Board (“MDSOAB,” "OAB,” 
“the Board”) was created by the 123rd Legislature in 2007 as part of what came to be 
called "the mechanisms of future compliance" legislation. 
The history of the Board can be traced back to the class action lawsuit seeking to 
address the care and treatment of residents of the Pineland Center that was filed in the 
Southern District Court of Maine in July, 1975. The lawsuit resulted in the settlement 
known as the Pineland Consent Decree in July, 1978 which was supervised for 
compliance by a federal master. In November of 1983, the court determined that the 
state had met the terms of the decree and discharged the special master. 
At this time, a citizen advisory board was created, the Consumer Advisory Board 
(“CAB”) to provide independent oversight of Maine's system of care for those with 
intellectual and developmental disabilities. When the CAB recognized that the State 
had not kept up with the terms of the decree, the CAB became the plaintiff in a new 
lawsuit in 1991. That litigation ended with another out of court settlement, the 
Community Consent Decree, in September, 1994, and another federal master was 
appointed to oversee the second consent decree. 
Part of that second settlement was a requirement that Maine must have a way to 
insure continued compliance with the Community Consent Decree before the court 
could release the state from the supervision of the federal master. The "mechanisms of 
future compliance legislation" - which included the creation of the OAB — allowed the 
state to satisfy the requirements of the Court, and the Community Consent Decree was 
discharged in March, 2010. 
Duties of the Board: 
The OAB was staffed in 2010 as the successor to the CAB. By statute the Board was 
created to 
A. Provide independent oversight over programs and services for adults with 
intellectual disabilities or autism that are provided, authorized, funded or 
supported by the department or any other agency or department of State 
Government. The board shall focus on systemic concerns affecting the rights 
of persons with intellectual disabilities or autism, including but not limited to 
issues surrounding health and safety, inclusion, identification of needs and 
desires of persons eligible for services by the department, the timely meeting 
of the identified needs and effective and efficient delivery of services and 
suppoﬂs
B. Provide advice and systemic recommendations to the Commissioner, the 
Governor and the Legislature regarding policies, priorities, budgets and 
legislation affecting the rights and interests of persons with intellectual disabilities 
or autism 
The Board also provides a representative to each of the three-person Regional Review 
teams who must approve and monitor restrictive Behavior Management Plans and 
Safety Plans. The other members of the review teams are a representative from 
Disability Rights Maine (non-voting) and an OADS Crisis Team leader. In addition, 
there is a similarly constituted Statewide Review Panel that makes recommendations to 
the Commissioner on the Level 5 (the most restrictive) Plans. 
Finally, the OAB administers the Volunteer Correspondent Program. 
New for 2023: 
ln April of 2022, the Governor signed into law LD716 “An Act To Enhance and Improve 
the Maine Developmental Services Oversight and Advisory Board" which — along with 
some administrative adjustments — created an Aging and Disability Mortality Review 
Panel to review deaths of and serious injuries to -- among others -- all adults with 
intellectual or developmental disabilities or Autism Spectrum Disorder who receive 
sen/ices under Section 18, 20, 21, and 29 waivers. A representative from the Board will 
sen/e on the Panel. 
For the hearing on the Budget: 
The funding for the OAB appears on page A-24 of the Budget. The Board has been 
funded at the same level ($137,682 per annum) for at least the five years that I have 
served as Executive Director. The budget covers salaries/expenses for the Executive 
Director and the Coordinator of the Volunteer Correspondent Program, bookkeeping 
sen/ices, stipends and travel reimbursement for meetings (for those receiving 
MaineCare sen/ices) and for representatives to the Behavioral Management Review 
Team meetings, plus office rent, supplies, etc. We've underspent the budget during the 
pandemic, and while we’ve been without a Volunteer Correspondent Coordinator, but 
we anticipate a new hire and more travel expense as activities return to normal. 
Mark Kemmerle 
Executive Director, MDSOAB 
295 Water St. Suite 203 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Email: kemmerle.mdsoab@gmail.com 
Telephone: (207) 449-8888
