Mary  Audia Mulholland 
Scarborough 
LD 258
My name is Mary Audia Mulholland, and my husband and I live in Scarborough. We 
desperately want to be parents, but to date, we have had 2 miscarriages, we have 
completed 3 cycles of IVF, and I've had one surgery for endometriosis over the past 2 
years. I am currently preparing for another frozen embryo transfer in March. 
My husband and I moved to Maine from New York 2.5 years ago. We had our New 
York-based jobs and insurance coverage for all 3 cycles of IVF, which was covered at
90% under the state law. We decided to move to Maine for many reasons, but the top 
ones being improved quality of life and because it's a great place to raise a family. We
have fallen in love with our life in Maine, and we just purchased our first home in 
2022. We also celebrated our COVID-delayed wedding in Portland last year, where 
over 150 guests traveled in from out-of-state to see the beautiful place we now call 
home. 
When we first moved to Maine, we originally kept our New York-based jobs, but it 
was very important for us both to work for Maine companies. We were distressed to 
find that Maine did not have insurance coverage for our medically necessary fertility 
treatments, and now I am so proud that the state has passed this bill to support family 
building. 
That said, because of the time-sensitive nature of fertility treatments, we could not 
wait until 2024 for the law to go into effect. When job hunting, I applied and 
interviewed for dozens of Maine companies, but I had to prioritize the ones that 
offered fertility benefits, as paying out of pocket for medically necessary health care 
is not an option for us. Both my husband and I now proudly work for Maine-based 
companies.
I am grateful that my job offers some fertility benefits, but it only offers 2 cycles of 
IVF. Unfortunately, this does not give us enough coverage to feel secure to build the 
family we hope to have in the long term. Studies show that a majority of couples need
between 2-4 cycles of IVF to achieve one live birth. 
We need this law to be implemented on January 1, 2024 as passed to ensure we can 
become parents in Maine. Please support this budget funding to help ensure families 
like mine stay here in Maine to grow their families. Thank you. 
