Testimony for L.D. 258 
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State Government, General 
Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of 
State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2021, June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2023 
 
Dear Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement & Business I write this testimony for L.D. 258 in support of continued funding for 
programs through the Maine Development Foundation; especially that of those young professional 
networks through the Realize Maine Network. Realize Maine Networking being a statewide initiative 
that brings together regional group representation united around the cause of attracting and retaining 
young people in Maine 
As chair of Uplift LA which is an active participant of the Realize Maine Network, a group of young 
professional groups from within the state brought together by the Maine Development Foundation, we 
personally have witnessed and benefited from the State of Maine funds allocated towards the cause. 
I’ve been actively involved with the Lewiston Auburn Metropolitan Area Chamber of Commerce, 
formerly known as the Androscoggin County Chamber of Commerce, for over a decade and for as long 
as I can remember its young professional network has been a benefactor of these state grants and 
funds. Once known as the Young Professionals of the Lewiston Auburn Area and now known as Uplift LA, 
we are a catalyst for our community through an active group of rising professionals in the Lewiston 
Auburn Area through collaboration with local nonprofits, businesses and the education sector by 
providing opportunities for collaborative engagement, networking, professional growth and forums for 
those who live, work or enjoy the area. 
Most recently, Uplift LA has been a benefactor of RMN grant funds that have provided substantial 
support for Uplift LA’s 40 Under 40 Program. The Program was started in 2016 from a team of rising 
professionals of the Lewiston Auburn Metropolitan Area that recognized many individuals within our 
communities are doing commendable and noteworthy things towards the betterment of our area and 
wanted to publicly recognize their work and accomplishments. Over the past year’s Uplift LA’s 40 Under 
40 Nominees, Honorees and Awardees were recognized amongst the community receiving much praise 
and many accolades. As of September 11, 2020, the program has received over 440 nominations. Each 
of those nominations highlighting the many great accomplishments and contributions our young + rising 
professionals are making towards the betterment of the Lewiston Auburn Metropolitan Area. Those 440 
nominations have resulted in over 6,800 community votes which in turn have resulted in recognizing 
130 unique individuals under the age of 40 as one of the program’s honorees. 
Uplift LA’s 40 Under 40 Program is only one of the many projects and initiatives that funding to the 
Realize Maine Network has stimulated and made an impact on our communities, economy and both our 
young professionals and businesses. This funding continues to both retain individuals in our State as well 
as attract individuals to come to our State. Being that Maine has one of the oldest median ages in the 
United States, funding initiatives like the Realize Maine Network continue to provide candidates for our 
aging workforce. 
On behalf of the members of Uplift LA and the young and rising professionals of the Lewiston Auburn 
Metropolitan Committee, I support L.D. 258 and the funding of State of Maine initiatives likes the 
Realize Maine Network. These initiatives are crucial to the survival of our businesses and providing a 
sustainable future for our State’s workforce. 
 
Sincerely, 
Matthew D. Shaw 
Committee Chair, Uplift LA of the LA Metro Chamber 
 
415 Lisbon Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240  

