 
 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs  
 
In Support of Funding in L.D. 258 "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the 
General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years 
Ending June 30. 2023. June 30. 2024 and June 30. 2025"  
 
February 15, 2023  
 
Greetings Chairs Senator Rotundo  and Representative  Sachs  and distinguished honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. I am Matthew Shaw, Chair of the Steering 
Committee for the Realize Maine Network, a program of the Maine Development Foundation. Thank you for the 
opportunity to testify in support of the budget proposal for the Maine Development Foundation.  
 
The Realize Maine Network is a partnership of regional networking groups and organizations that are focused on 
the future of our state and who work tog ether to retain and attract people to Maine, empower them to reach 
their greatest career and civic potentials, and create opportunities to keep them living, working, and thriving in 
our state.  I can personally attest to the work these groups do at a high l evel and how that work trickles down 
peppering our great State of Maine with opportunities of growth to our social, economic, and environmental 
equity. The Network operates with working agreements among seven  (7) member organizations to share best 
practice s, identify and collaborate on partnership opportunities and promote each other’s work and 
accomplishments in a statewide manner.  Together the organizations reach over 10,000 individuals using social 
media to influence professional development, togethernes s, but most importantly the benefits of living and 
working within the various regions of Maine.  
 
The $33, 444 of earmarked  funds designated for the Network  as part of the $58,444 for the Maine Development 
Foundation , support our mini -grants, such as  Statew ide, Collaboration, and Marketing  Grants, as well as staff 
and administrative support. Where the Realize Maine Network is vastly comprised of volunteer -led boards and 
members, this is invaluable for the  network. In addition, these funds go to scholarship(s ) for the Network  to help 
send affiliate group members to the Maine Development Foundation’s Leadership Maine  and Institute for Civic 
Leadership  programs, of which many distinguished community, business and government leaders have all 
participated and thro ugh that experience, have gained valuable skill  sets becoming  part of an exceptional , 
expansive  professional network.  
 
Through the help of the designated  funds, two (2) new groups were added to t he network over the last year . 
One being PROPEL focused on the Portland area and the other being Live + Work in Maine. Being  a rural State, 
with vastly different  geographic areas , we were able to utilize funding to help increase  the size of the Network’s 
Steering  Committee, significantly heighten ing the awareness of our group in the com munities , resulting in  the 
formation  and strengthening of existing and new partnerships with ar ea organizations and businesses.  
 
As one of the group ’s most notable accomplishments within the last decade, 2017 marked the be ginning of the 
Magnetize Maine Summit, a recurring collaborative effort across multiple areas of our State, designed to 
facilitate the identification and discussion of e fforts needed to transform Maine’s future work environment and 
inspire younger workers to move to and remain in our great state.  The Summit started in Bangor, then traveled 
to Auburn and then most recently featured the newly revitalized Downtown Waterville Area in 2022. This year 

the Summit will be hosted in  Aroostook county and then in Down town Lewiston in 2024. This Summit continues 
to bring presenters and attendees from across the State of Maine for a daylong event; foster personal and 
professional development, exploration of communities, and spending resulting in economic growth.  
 
Active engagement and participation with in the Realize Maine Network  regional groups have afforded 
numerous opportunities to members to become more involved in their communities in both civic and 
professio nal endeavors. For example,  Chairs of several groups went on to chair  or serve on  their local Chamber's 
board of directors, and many of our members are asked to join various boards and committees, allowing them 
to showcase the leadership skills and trust they have developed while directly engaging and involving t hem in 
the community.  
 
With Maine’s aging workforce continuing to be on the brink of retirement  and both younger and aged families 
resettling in Maine , we have the opportunity to negate the impact as much as possible with this focused, 
preemptive effort t o empower, engage and provide the opportunity for Maine’s future leaders to do what they 
need to do, lead.  
 
This investment pays in rich dividends to our regions across the state working together to build on the overall 
goal to make Maine the destination t o live, work, and play. Your support of Maine Development Foundation is 
vital to the continuation of the success of these efforts continuing over the next two years . Thank you for your 
time today and for the critical support you provide in our efforts.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Matthew D. Shaw  
Chair, Realize Maine Network Steering Committee  
Maine Development Foundation  
(207) 754 -1516  
