' Mailing: PO Box 437 
M a l n e C Q n F fof Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103 
- _ Augusta, ME 04332 
Economic Policy \.vww.mecep.org 
Testimony on LD 258 An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Endingjune 30, 
2023,June 30,2024 andjune 30, 2025 
February 8, 2023 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Grohoski, Representatives Sachs and Perry, and members of 
the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Taxation Committees. lvly name is l\/laura Pillsbuiy andI 
am a tax analyst at the l\/laine Center for Economic Policy. l\/laine has an opportunity with this year's 
budget to take huge steps forward to address child poverty and improve housing affordability; to 
position l\/laine well to meet its obligations to residents in the future; and to reform a tax break that is 
beneﬁtting some of the wealthiest residents of our state. 
Refundable Child Tax Credit 
One of the most signiﬁcant policy successes during the pandemic was the dramatic reduction of child 
poverty through expansions of the refundable federal child tax credit. Despite the clearly documented 
success of this program, Congress failed to extend the program. Families have lost these benefits 
while prices on their basic needs have increased. But l\/laine can reform its own child tax credit to 
better sen/e the needs of low- and middle-income households with children. 
First, by making the existing $300 credit refundable, l\/laine can ensure that the poorest families aren't 
locked out of beneﬁtting from this income boost. Making the credit refundable would impact about 
89,000 l\/laine children ‘ , giving their families greater financial stability to afford necessities and 
unexpected expenses. Currently these families are shut out from receiving the credit because they 
have no income tax liability. 
Second, increasing the refundable credit amount for all families will further boost the impact of the 
state program in reducing childhood poverty and improving families ’ abilities to make ends meet.A 
recent institute on Taxation and Economic Policy analysis showed that a $600 refundable state tax 
credit would reduce child poverty in l\/laine by 25 percent. “ Increasing the credit would benefit 229,000 
l\/laine children. This investment would impact the well-being and outcomes for l\/laine children. 
Positioning Maine for the Future 
We know that often when tax reform proposals are introduced, like eliminating the income tax, 
typically the wealthy disproportionately benefit. Unlike expanding the child tax credit, proposals to cut 
taxes across the board are poorly targeted to help those that need it most. 
Further, l\/laine does not really have a surplus if we aren't meeting the essential needs ofall Mainers. 
Rather than cutting taxes, we urge the committees to make much needed investments to make sure 
all people, families, and communities have what they need and that no Mainer falls through the
" 
Mailing: PO Box 437 
a I n e € n E F fQf' Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103 
_ I Augusta, l\/IE 04332 
Z Economic Polic W\/VV\/.IT| €Cep.O|'g 
cracks. Cutting taxes could compromise our capacity to uphold our commitments to Maine people 
and communities now and in the future, while failing to provide targeted supports to Mainers in need. 
Ifyou do end up taking this path, we urge you to make sure you focus on those who are currently 
undersen/ed by state programs, like CTC recipients 
Limit Property Tax Freeze for Older Malners - Budget Line Item Z368 
The governor's budget proposes fully funding the property tax freeze for older lviainers with $15 
million for the program in 2024 and $31 million in 2025. This will grow to at least $45 million and $60 
million in the next biennium, and continue to grow in future biennia, unless lawmakers intervene. 
There is no question that low-income seniors are struggling to afford the basics including housing and 
property taxes, but this tax freeze misses the mark at addressing this hardship and will draw heavily 
on state resources. This program will shower much of its benefits on economically secure seniors 
while having little beneﬁt for seniors who are struggling to afford their property tax bills today. The 
state already has policies in place to help struggling seniors with this issue that are much better 
alternatives, provide a better benefit to low-income seniors, and cost considerably less to provide, 
including the Property Tax Fairness Credit, the Homestead Exemption, and the Property Tax Deferral 
Program. 
We look fon/vard to the legislature taking up the many bills put forward this session to reform this 
program. We hope the legislature will eliminate this program or reduce its price tag in future years by 
adding income and asset limits to the eligibility criteria. in the meantime, we urge the committee to 
fulfill the State's financial obligation to municipalities under the law as it is currently written so 
municipalities are not left with additional financial pressure. We believe there are much better things 
we could be doing to support older Mainers and municipalities than this program and encourage a ﬁx 
as soon as possible. 
Transfer Estate Tax revenue to the HOME fund 
The estate tax is forecast to raise $23.7m in 2024 and $23.2m in 2025. We believe these revenues 
should be redirected from the general fund to the Housing Opportunities for l\/laine (HOME) fund to 
support investments in affordable housing. This would essentially double the amount of funding 
available to Maine Housing to help l\/iainers access safe, affordable housing. 
Part L - funding for MRS new hires 
We support the request for additional positions for the Bureau of Revenue Sen/ices. MRS needs 
additional resources to increase their capacity and ensure tax fairness. 
‘ITEP analysis 
“ https://itep.sfo2.digitaloceanspaces.com/ChiId-Tax-Credit-Options —Maine-2022.pdf
