Testimony from Maya Eichorn 
Student at York County Community College 
In Support of L.D. 258 
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State 
Government, General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
February 13, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Senator Raffeity, Representative Sachs, Representative Brennan, and Members of the 
Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Education and Cultural Affairs, 
my name is Maya Eichorn. I live in York, and I am a student at York County Community College. I am 
here to testify in support of L.D. 258. 
Almost three years ago, my high school transitioned all classes to an online format following the global 
outbreak of Covid-19. I struggled immensely with online school and took summer classes in an attempt 
to catch up. It did not go well. One year ago today, I was preparing to sign a piece of paper that would 
ﬁnalize my Withdrawal ﬁ'om high school. I was dropping out to take the HiSET exam because I was ill 
prepared to return to in-person schooling. Today, I am a full-time college student with a 4.0 GPA and 
am preparing to run for president of my student senate. Without the Maine Free College program, I 
would be aimlessly moving through life and, if I had chosen to go to college, would probably be unable 
to afford basic necessities. 
Throughout the state, but especially in York County, the cost-of-living is becoming prohibitively high 
for the younger generation. Rent is skyrocketing; food prices are rising; and the cost of raising children 
can be debilitating. For so many people, that has meant choosing between providing for themselves and 
their families and getting an education. Many college’s tuition costs mean that students have to choose 
what food they can or cannot afford and what bills are most important to pay. This is not a sustainable 
state of living, and luckily, it is not a state of living that me and my peers are forced to face. Instead, 
with the Maine Free College Initiative, we can go to school while affording to survive. 
In my time at York County Community College, I have met many incredible students. I have friends that 
work full time, take classes full time, and raise their children full time. I know students that provide for 
their families, students that live at home and are saving up for future schooling, students that are taking 
classes to discover what they want to do with their future, and students that are working full time as 
nurses, tax accountants, graphic designers, waitresses, and construction workers. All of these people are 
getting a free education so that they may join new professions, get higher-paying jobs, or learn important 
skills, and none of them would be able to afford it if it were not for the Maine Free College Initiative. It 
is a vital program that is positively impacting the lives of thousands of young Mainers.
