 
   
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774- 5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
  
  
TESTIMONY OF  MEAGAN SWAY   
  
LD 258—Ought to Pass  As Amende d  
  
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Endin g 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
  
Joint Standing Committe es on Appropriations and Financial Affairs    
and Criminal Justice and Public Safet y  
  
Februar y 14, 2022  
Senato r Rotundo, Representative Sachs  and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Appropriations and Financial Affair s, greetings. My name is  Meagan Sway, and I 
am Policy  Directo r for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization  
committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions.  On behalf of our members, I  submit this testimon y in support of amending the 
budget as it pertains to appropriations to the Departments of Public Safety and Corrections .  
The governor’s proposed budget has many virtues. Its proposed investments in mental 
health and substance use disorder services are historic, and would address  some of the state’s 
major challenges . However, the budget’s increased  allocat ions to the Dep artment of Public 
Safety (“DPS”) and the Department of Corrections (“DOC”) would be better spent in the community, creating a continuum of care, stable housing for more people, and access to quality 
health care for those who need it .   
 
The Department of Pu blic Safety Should Not Spend Any New Money   
 
PART A (p.  575- 614)  
The governor’ s budget proposes to substantially  increase the DPS’ s staffing an d funding, 
increasing the number of positions in public safety by 21.5 (from 643.5 positions to 664) and increas ing DPS ’s budget by more than 10 percent . For too long, we have relied on  the policing 
institutions in our country to solve challenges better suited to our healthcare, housing, and educational system s. Our constitutional values of freedom from unreasonable  state intrusions, of  
  
 
 2 liberty and dignity, are not advanced by a law enforcement response to  poverty or mental health 
challenges.  We must finally as a state begin to address problematic substance use as the health —
not criminogenic —issue that it is.  Instead , adding new positions to DPS would be a continuation 
of failed systems. Given the opportunities that we have to invest in housing and health care, 
choosing instead to fund additional law enforcement positions  is a missed opportunity. We urge 
legislators to scrutinize the proposed additions to the  budge t and ensure that we are not spending 
money on police, jails and prisons that would be better spent elsewhere .  
  
The Legislature Should Fund Alternatives to Youth Incarceration, and   
Should Not Increase the Budget for  Long Creek Youth Development  Center   
 
PART  A (p. 159- 160)  
 
Long Creek Youth Development Center represents an irresponsible use of state resources, 
especi ally when considering the harm that the facility causes to young people and staff.  There 
are currently  fewer than thirt y children incarcerated at the Long Creek priso n. Yet,  LD 25 8 
proposes to increase the DOC’s funding for this facility from  $16.3 millio n to $18.1 million, 
despite the fact that the number of kids incarcerated at Long Creek has dropped by over  two-
third s in the last five year s.   
Maine mus t turn away from expensive and ineffective institutional solutions and invest in 
a system that support s kids thriving in their homes and communities. Children with behavioral 
health disorders are legally entitled to receive necessary health services in their homes and communitie s, but too many are not receiving the services to which they are legally entitl ed. The 
state’ s failur e to meet its legal obligation s to provide care in the community forces children into 
institutional settings like Long Creek or psychiatric facilities . Indeed, i n July 2022, the United 
States Department of Justice (DOJ) issued a Findi ngs Letter concluding that Maine unnecessarily 
segregates children with mental health or developmental disabilities at Long Creek , in 
psychiatric hospitals, and in residential treatment facilities, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) .
1      
The DOJ found that Maine children are subjected to unnecessary institutionalization 
when they are “unable to access behavioral health services in their homes and communities —
services that are part of an existing array of programs that the State adve rtises to families through 
its Medicaid program ( MaineCar e), but does not make available in a meaningful or timely 
  
 
 3 manner.” The DOJ further found that “Maine’s community- based behavioral health system fails 
to provide sufficient services. As a result, hundreds of children are unnecessarily segregated in 
institutions each year, while other children are at serious risk of entering institutions.”    
Instead of promptly receiving the services they need, children in Maine are often forced 
to wait—for months and m onths —for healthcare. These waits are especially long in rural areas, 
where the State has failed to make sure there is a sufficient healthcare workforce. Even when children are able to get off the waitlists, often the services the State provides are far less than 
what the child actually needs.   When children with behavioral health needs are forced to wait for 
services, or get insufficient services, their conditions deteriorate. Maine must  therefore address 
the underlying problem –  the failure to provide acc ess to home and community- based services – 
instead of putting resources toward institutionalization. Instead of increasing Long Creek’s budge t, the legislature should invest these funds into community- based supports that allow 
families to stay together and the  state to meet its legal obligations . 
 
  
Conclusio n  
The legislature is charged with crafting a budget during a time of unprecedented 
opportunity and abundant resources. Where you invest those resources now will determine the health of our state in the coming decade . Divesting from the Departments of Corrections and 
Public Safety and investing in alternatives will keep local communities safe and help them thrive. We applaud the governor for her clear interest in funding our  educa tiona l, housing, and 
healthcare systems.  However, this must be paired with a dives tment from our policing system s. 
Indeed , such divestment  would not only improve the lives of our state’s most vulnerable peopl e; 
it would also improve the lives of those who are employed by policing systems. Prisons harm not just prisoners, but also prison guards; policing hurts not just the policed, but also the police. The 
deeds that the policing system sometimes pressures its workers into are almost certainly 
connected to l ow life expectancies and high rates of depression and suicide of police and 
corrections staff .
2 The sooner we devise and fund alternative livelihoods for our police and prison 
staff the likelier we are to improve the length and quality of their lives.    
 
