Southern Maine 
AGENCY KMAGING SERVING OUR COMMUNITIES FOR 50 YEARS 
Testimony on Behalf of Needs Expressed by Older Adults in Southern Maine 
In Support of Aging and Disability Resource Centers and Home Delivered Meals 
Testimony as part of LD 258 (HP 163) An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from 
the Genera! Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025 
Good morning, Esteemed Committee Members: 
I'm Megan Walton, the CEO of Southern Maine Agency on Aging. 
Thank you to those of you who have made a recent visit to our Sam L. Cohen Center in Biddeford 
to learn more about our programs and services. lt is because of your partnership that Maine isa 
place where individuals want to grow old. 
The five Agencies on Aging in Maine are here to serve individuals of the greatest social and 
economic need. 
Yes, the Meals on Wheels program is about ensuring that individuals who need a delicious and 
nutritious home-delivered meal are given one. 
And... Meals on Wheels is about so much more. This program is how we identify, understand 
and assist older individuals who need help in our own backyards. 
Take, for example, Deborah. 
Deborah qualified for Meals on Wheels. In fact, in our first assessment with her as part of the 
Meals on Wheels program, we learned that Deborah could use additional help. 
And Southern Maine Agency on Aging was able to help Deborah with the following:
- She qualified for LIHEAP and has received two rounds of fuel assistance 
- Through a local Home repair program - Deborah qualified for a grant and received a new 
roof 
- During Medicare Open Enrollment Period - We helped Deborah change her supplemental 
plan and her prescription drug plan - which had not been reviewed for over 10 years- 
and this saved her $4,500 in the course of a year 
- We connected Deborah to MedAcess and she now receives an extremely expensive 
medication - Victoza - for free 
- We helped Deborah an application for homemaker services and she now someone 
coming in to help with cleaning 
Today, Deborah reports that her stress is greatly reduced. She feels that she can live in her home 
until she dies which is an expressed goal. Her health is more stable as a result of feeling less 
stressed and being on the Victoza medication; she has expressed being happy. 
When we first met with Deborah, she was tearful and scared of losing her home due to its 
condition. She was not answering the phone. 
Your support today will ensure that hundreds of individuals like Deborah who need additional 
support are identified, matched, and hopefully connected to services that are available. And 
when services are not available, we, as area Agencies on Aging, will advocate for older 
individuals and work with local community partners to help support, create and design 
coordinated systems of care so that individuals can get the help they need. 
This budget contains critically needed funding for needed safety net supports and services for 
older adults, like funding for Legal Services for the Elderly, the Independent Housing with 
Supports Program, the Elder Services Connection Program, Adult Day Services, and Adult 
Protective Services, just to name a few. On behalf of the needs of older adults in our region, we 
support these initiatives and ask you to include them in the Biennial Budget. 
Thank you! 
Megan Walton, CEO 
Southern Maine Agency on Aging 
207.396.6501 office / 617.833.9898 mobile 
mwalton@smaaa.org 
www.smaaa.org
Meals On Wheels 
A Vital, Life-Saving Program for Older Adults in Maine 
Meals-On-Wheels is a successful public-private partnership. 
To ensure its success and the health of older Mainers, the 
State of Maine MUST increase its funding so that the Area 
Agencies on Aging can continue to meet the demand for this 
critical program, and take care of thousands of older 
Mainers.’ 
Meals Served 2022 Numberg 
2016:2629: 661,266 U -700 Vomnteers 
46’ 
-I -1 26214622; 1,022,352 6 
531886 HO U F5 
Equivalent to $1,710,228 in 
The COVID-19 pandemic doubled the d°“ated time‘ 
demand for Meals on Wheels, 
and the demand is not going away. 
A §§€€i'i'i’l1”€:'?? ;r2ectr;uq AROOSTOOK I
_ 
"°'“° §@"“”’l"”§ SBHIOYSPIHS 
On behalf of the l\/laine Association of Area Agencies on Aging
