Contact: Meredith Gutheinz, Senior Director of Childcare, Penobscot Bay YMCA
P: 207.236.3375 E: mgutheinz@penbayymca.org
Testimony of Meredith Gutheinz before 
the Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
the Committee on Health and Human Services 
in support of
LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs
February 21, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Meredith Gutheinz and I’m the Senior Director of 
Childcare for the Penobscot Bay YMCA.  I support the investments in the child care industry in 
the Governor’s budget proposal.
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy. 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for 
the YMCA. We greatly appreciate the Governor’s inclusion of these initiatives.
1) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 635 for salary 
supplements awarded to individuals who provide childcare or are early childhood 
educators. (Page 307)
The $200 salary supplements have provided us a way to pay our staff a salary they deserve. It 
makes staff feel valued as a teacher and has helped to retain staff during a time when they 
could have left child care to make more at a big box store. It is a huge challenge to find qualified 
caring staff and the $200 stipend is an added benefit that helps to attract potential staff to our 
center. Most importantly it helps us to retain staff so the children and families can receive 
consistent quality care from the teachers they love.
2) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 679, An Act to Expand 
the Statewide Voluntary Early Childhood Consultation Program, for the Early Childhood 
Consultation Program. (Page 333)
Our program is very excited and eagerly awaiting the availability of ECCP. It could not come at 
more important time as we are dealing with more behaviors in children from the unknown 
effects of the pandemic. What we do know is that children and families are experiencing a level 
Contact: Meredith Gutheinz, Senior Director of Childcare, Penobscot Bay YMCA
P: 207.236.3375 E: mgutheinz@penbayymca.org
of PTSD and child care staff are not trained in how to help children though this difficult time. The 
ECCP program is willing to help teachers, centers, families and children at a time when it is 
critical for the success of children to thrive and teachers to find tools and resources to help as 
they have never seen this level of trauma in the children they care for. We have yet to utilize 
this program as it is not yet available in our county but we are ready to apply as soon as it 
becomes available. The ECCP is a thoughtfully created vital program for the success of early 
childhood education in Maine
Ensuring that all young children have an equal opportunity for healthy growth and development 
is a long-term investment in Maine’s future prosperity. 90% of a child’s brain develops as early 
as five years old, and positive early learning experiences establish strong foundations for the 
brain’s architecture. We appreciate the initiatives outlined in the Governor’s budget, and look 
forward to working with you and your colleagues this session to further increase the state 
investment in this critical sector.
Respectfully submitted,
Meredith Gutheinz
Senior Director of Childcare
Penobscot Bay YMCA
207-236-3375
mgutheinz@penbayymca.org
