Good afternoon Senator Rotundo; Representative Sachs and co-chairs Representative Gere 
and Senator Pierce, 
My name is Merritt Carey and l’m a co-founder of Maine Working Homes, a small LLC aimed at 
creating home ownership opportunities for year round Mainers. Our work is focused primarily in 
the midcoast. I'm an attorney by training, but have long worked in rural economic development 
and in fisheries. I formed Maine Working Homes after completing a report on the state of 
Maine’s Working Waterfront for the island institute; the interviews l conducted up and down the 
coast for that report demonstrated what I already knew, the housing crisis was negatively 
impacting Maine's ability to grow. From small aquaculture farmers, to larger employers like 
Brooks Trap Mill and famed boat builder Lyman Morse, every business had a story about how 
the housing crisis was negatively impacting growth. The overarching theme was an inability to 
hire and or retain workers because employees, or prospective employees, could not ﬁnd a place 
to live. 
Maine Working Homes’ ﬁrst project was the creation and sale of condominiums in South 
Thomaston - one was sold to a nurse from Pen Bay Medical Center. Prior to purchasing our 
condo, the nurse had put in multiple offers on houses, beat out every time by cash buyers; and 
she was about to become a traveling nurse because she was so discouraged with her inability 
to purchase a home. 
While our focus has been on ownership, we have recently turned our attention to rental 
properties. With rising interest rates many who could have become home owners 6 months ago, 
are now priced out. A lender in Knox County recently told me that the bulk of her pre approved 
buyers tap out at $250k. Currently in Rockland and Thomaston, there are 3 houses for sale 
under $250, all of which need considerable work. 
Finding ways for people to live in the communities they work in is critical to the well being 0%‘ 
every community, both in practical terms - think ﬁreﬁghters, EMTs etc., and in cultural terms- 
coastal and seasonal communities should not be places only the very wealthy can afford. The 
Rural Rental Affordable housing program provides the best chance we have for easing this 
tension both in the short and long term. The program mirrors the communities it's intended to 
serve: small, nimble, gritty. Like Maine's small communities, the Rural Rental program gets the 
job done in a straightforward and no frills fashion. That is what we need more of ~ programs that 
create incentives for getting projects done and hold developers accountable to provide 
reasonably priced housing. 
In Maine, we are excellent doers, but private capital will not ﬂow to affordable housing creation 
without support - there is too much risk and even the most frugal and best intended 
development projects will not succeed in creating housing that is affordable. With the cost of 
materials and labor, the math simply does not work. l know because we have tried multiple 
times to make the numbers work on prospective projects and any new build will result in rents 
that are too expensive for rural communities. The Rural Rental Affordable Housing Program with 
its straightforward and small scale approach encourages those in smaller communities to get 
involved in solving the housing problem, and that's the kind of skin in the game that will help 
Maine block and tackle its way to a solution. And because Mainers know how to get stuff done, 
this program will get leveraged; housing will get built, and the pressure will ease. Let’s get this
funding appropriated so along with birds chirping this spring, we‘ll hear the sound of hammers 
ringing throughout rural Maine. 
Thank you for your time and collective consideration. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Merritt Carey 
Co-founder, Maine Working Homes 
208-828-4882 
www.maineworkinghomes.com
