 1 TESTIMONY  
OF 
MICHAEL J. SAUSCHUCK  
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee s on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and 
Transportation  
 
Hearing Date: March  2, 2023  
 
“An Act Makin g Un ified Appropriatio ns and  Allocatio ns for the  Expenditures of State 
Government, General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government f or the Fiscal Years Ending June 
30, 2024 and June 30, 202 5” 
 
     Good afternoon,  Senator  Rotundo , Representative Sachs , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs ; Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , 
and members of the Joint St anding Com mittee on Transportation .  My name is  Michae l 
Sauschuck,  and I a m the  Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety .  I am here tod ay to 
testify in support of the biennial  budget . 
 
Overall Budget  
This budget advances the Governor’s guiding belief that to build a stro nger, more 
prosperous state wher e opportunity is av ailable to all, we must invest in the infrastructure that 
supports the people of Maine, our greatest asset.  
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on 
every day to succeed, building on the stro ng success of the c urrently enacted  budget and the last 
legislative session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges.  
We have governed cautiously and in a fiscally prudent way over the past four years, 
making sure that – even i n the hardest of times during th e pandemic – we liv ed within our 
means. This budget proposal continues that practice.   
 
 2 We look forward to the discussions over the next several months as we outline each initiative and 
impact of the proposed investments.  
 
Departmental Overview  
 The Departm ent of Public Safe ty was esta blished to serve  the people by providing, 
coordinating, and leading a responsive and comprehensive public safety system to protect their 
lives, rights,  and properties.  This broad mission is acco mplished with 643 positions spre ad 
across 10 burea us.  The Bu reaus are Admini stration, Capitol Police, Consolidated Emergency 
Communications, Emergency Medical Services, Fire Marshal's Office, Gambling Control, 
Highway Safety, Maine Criminal Justice Academ y, Maine Drug Enforce ment Agency , and the 
Maine State Police.  
     
State Police  
     The Maine State Police  Program  begins on page A-602.  The Maine Sta te Po lice provides full 
law enfor cement services to areas tha t do not have organized police departments.  Troopers 
respon d to all manners of  calls for ser vice much like any other poli ce department  would .  
Troopers  also patrol the rural roads,  interst ate syste m, and Maine Turnpik e enforcing motor 
vehicle la ws and responding to acciden ts.  Maine State Police detectiv es investi gate all 
homicides outside of Por tland and Bangor as well as o ther major crimes. The Maine State Police 
operate s a crime lab, com puter cri mes lab, and a comme rcial vehicle unit .  They  maintain the 
state’s criminal history records and sex offende r registry .  They also provide  many other 
specialized teams and law enfor cement services  to the State of Maine . 
The first initiative  provides funding for a higher an ticipated cost of fuel for State Polic e 
vehicles.  The request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by $442,000 in FY24 and 
 3 FY25.  There is also a Highway  Fund  impact labe led as  “HIGHWAY FUND  – Infor mational” as 
State Police expenditures  have both ge neral fund and highway fund impacts.   You will se e 
entries labeled as “ HIGHWAY FUND  – Infor mational” throughout the budget documen t.  To be 
respective  of everyone ’s time this will be the only time it is mentioned in my testimony.  
The next initiative provides one -time funding to add 13 required redundant air supply 
systems for t he State Police Dive Tea m.  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  
Fund by $7,749 in FY24 only. 
The third  initiative provides one -time funding to replace  13 dive computers for 
transmitters  for the State Police Dive Team .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the 
General  Fund  by $11,779 in FY24 only. 
The fourth  initiative provides one -time funding to replace  one trailer  for the State Police 
Dive Team .  This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in the General  Fund by $6,175 
in FY24 only. 
The fifth initiative provides o ne-time fundi ng to add pyrolysis  equipment for the g as 
chromatography mass spectrometry machine for the Stat e Police  Crime Lab .  This request wi ll 
increase the Capital Expenditures  in the General  Fund by $6,500 in FY24 only. 
The sixth initiative provides one -time fundi ng to replace one DNA testing machine for 
the State Police Crime Lab .  This request will increase the Capital Expenditures in the Federal 
Expenditures Fund by $53,000 in FY24 only.  
The seventh  initiative provides o ne-time fundi ng to purchase  two rifle ligh t/laser switches 
for the State Police .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by $4,420 in 
FY24 only. 
 4 The eight  initiative  provides one -time funding to add two optics to the equipment 
inven tory for the State Police Tactical Team .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the 
General  Fund by $3,250 in FY24 only. 
The ninth  initiative  provides one -time funding for specialized training  for the State Police 
Tactical Team .  This request wi ll increase the A ll Other in the General  Fund by $13,000 in FY24 
only. 
The tenth  initiative  provides one -time funding for repairs to the current  State Police  
Crisis Negotiation T eam mobile unit .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in th e General  
Fund by $26,183 in FY24 only. 
The eleventh initiative  provides one -time funding to add hydra ulic breaching equipment 
for the State Police .  This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in the General  Fund by 
$11,050 in FY24 only. 
The twelfth  initiative provides  one-time f unding to replace  6 dry suits for the State Police 
Dive Team .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by $12,652 in FY24 
only. 
The next initiative provides one -time funding to replace  307 rifle  upper re ceiver devices  
for the State Police .  This request wi ll increa se the All Other in the General  Fund by $72,836  in 
FY24 only. 
The fourteenth  initiative  provides one -time funding  to replace 50 pistols for the State 
Police .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund  by $16,250 in FY24 only. 
The fifteen th initiative provides one -time funding to purchase noise supp ression 
equipment for the State Police.  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by 
$49,779 in FY24 only. 
 5 The sixteenth  initiative provi des one -time f unding to replace the p ortable X-ray 
equipment for the State Police Bomb  Team.   This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  
in the General  Fund by $45,500 in FY24 only.    
The seventeenth  initiative provides one -time funding to purchase  a replac ement bomb 
suit for  the St ate Police Bomb  Team.   This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in the 
General  Fund by $22,750 in FY24 only. 
The eighteenth  initiative provides funding for inc reases to insurance premium rat es and 
increases th e All Oth er in th e General  Fund  by $59,021  in both FY24 and F Y25, in the Federal 
Expenditures Fund by $308 in both FY2 4 and FY2 5 as well as the All Other in the Other Spe cial 
Revenue Funds by $ 154 in FY24  and FY25.  
The nineteenth  initiative provides one -time funding to replace  the standard -issued taser 
equipment including holst ers, cartridges, and spare batteries f or 290 State Police positions .  This 
request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by $942,500  in FY24 only. 
The twentieth  initiative provide s funding for a marketing ca mpaign to advertise the 
benefits of j oining the State Police.   This request will increase the All Other in the General  Fund 
by $13,00 0 in FY24 and FY25.  
The next initiative provides funding for an anti cipated 10% increase in the cost of 
firearms.   This reque st wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by $650 in FY24 and 
FY25 . 
The twent y-second  initiative  provides funding for an anticipated 30% increase in the cos t 
of ammunition.   This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by $22,750 in FY24 
and FY25 . 
 6 The twenty -third  initiative provides funding for an anticipated 65% increase  in uniform 
costs due to rising production and shipping costs .  This request wi ll increase  the All Other in the 
General  Fund by $80,275 in FY24 and FY25 . 
 The twen ty-fourth  initiative provides one -time f unding to replace  8 sniper sco pe units  for 
the State P olice Tactical Team .  This request wi ll increase the All Other in the General  Fund by 
$13,000  in FY24 only. 
The twenty-fifth initiative provides one -time funding to replace  two sniper night vision 
units for the State Police Tactical Team .  This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in 
the General  Fund by $13,650 in FY24 only. 
   The next initiative provides one -time funding to replace  the thermal imaging 
equipment .  This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in the General  Fund by $42,250 
in FY24 only. 
The twenty -seventh  initiative provides one -time funding to purchase a second un manned  
aerial vehicle for use by the State Police Evidence Res ponse T eam.  This request wi ll increase 
the Capi tal Expenditures  in the General  Fund by $11,870 in FY24 only. 
The twenty -eighth initiative provides one -time funding to purchas e a thermal equippe d 
unmanned aerial vehicle for the  Maine State  Police Crime Lab .  This request wi ll increase the 
Capital Expen ditures  in the General  Fund by $6,500 in FY24 only. 
The t wenty -ninth  initiative establishes  one DNA Forensic Analyst position f unded by 65% 
Genera l Fund and 35% Highway Fund to assist with case  work for the State Pol ice Crime Lab 
and provides fund ing for related All Other costs.  This reque st increases the  General Fund  
appropri ation by  one headc ount, Personal  Services of $72,651  in FY24 and $ 76,491 in FY2 5, 
and All Othe r of $3,495  in both FY24 and FY25. 
 7 The next thirte en ini tiatives all involve necessary re pairs , replacements, and repairs  at the 
Troop Barrac ks and total $ 227,825 in one -time funding in Highway Funds.  
The first o f these initiatives  provides one -time funding to replace an air conditio ning unit at 
one of th e troop barracks.  This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in the General  
Fund by $3,575 in FY24 only. 
The second of these initiatives provides one -time funding to re pair siding  and stairs at one of 
the troop barracks.   This request wi ll increa se the All Other  in the General  Fund by  $9,750 in 
FY24 only. 
The third  of these initiatives  provides one -time funding to replace an exterior door at one of  
the tr oop barracks.   This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by $7,150  in 
FY24 only. 
The fourth  of these initiatives p rovides one -time funding to replace a generator  at one of  the 
troop barracks.   This request wi ll increase the Capital Expen ditures  in the Gener al Fund by 
$18,200 in FY24 only.     
    The fifth of these initiatives pr ovides one -time funding to replace a garage bay door  at one 
of the troop barracks.   This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by $7,150  in 
FY24 only.     
The sixth  of these initiatives provides one -time funding to replace an interior til ed floor  at 
one of  the troop barracks.   This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by $4,550 
in FY24 only. 
The seventh  of these initiatives provi des one -time fundin g to replace the roof at the State 
Police Garage .  This request wi ll incre ase the All Other  in the General  Fund b y $19,500 in FY24 
only. 
 8 The eighth of these initiativ es provides one -time funding to resurface the parking lot at one 
of the  troop barracks .  This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by $65,000 in 
FY24 only. 
The ninth  of these initiativ es provides one -time funding to replace the concrete entry  at one 
of the troop barracks .  This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by $13,000  in 
FY24 only. 
The tenth  of these initiatives provides o ne-time funding to repair the entrance area and 
provide office space for new State Police per sonnel  at one of  the troop barracks .  This request 
will increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by $16,250 in FY24 only. 
The eleventh  of these initiatives provi des one -time funding to replace  the ext erior siding  at 
one of  the troop barracks .  This reques t will increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by 
$26,000  in FY24 only. 
The twelfth  of these initiatives provides one -time funding to renovate the lobby and ki tchen 
at the State Police Crime Lab .  This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General  Fund by 
$32,500  in FY24 only. 
The last of these initiatives provides on e-time funding to replace office furniture at one of the 
troop barracks .  This request wi ll increase the Capital Expenditures  in the General Fund  by 
$5,200  in FY24 only. 
The next initiative provides funding for the annual license renewal for Laboratory 
Information Management Sy stem for the State Police Com puter Crimes Unit.  A federal grant 
will provide the funding for the acquisitio n costs.  This request will increase the All Other in the 
Other Special Reven ue Funds by $55,972 in FY24 and FY25.  
The final initiative for the  State Police account provides funding for increased debt service 
associat ed with the purchase of State Police ve hicles on a regular  vehicle replacement schedule.  
 9 This request wi ll increase the All Other  in the General Fund  by $585,550 in FY24 and $ 964,861 
in FY2 5. 
 
Traffic Safety – Comme rcial Ve hicle Enforcemen t 
     The next program to be discussed is the Tr affic Safety – Commerc ial Vehicle Enforc ement 
program whic h begins on page  A-613.  This unit, referred to as CVE U, oversees and enforces the  
laws regar ding vehicle s ize and weight for the protection of Maine's in frastructur e.  The unit  
verifies compliance with the Federal  Motor  Carrier Safety Re gulatio ns through both roadside 
enforcem ent effor ts and termina l safety reviews of Motor Carriers, t o reduce co mmercial 
vehic le-related crashes stat ewide.  Roadside enforce ment includ es the verification of valid 
comm ercial driver's licens es, hours -of-servi ce for drivers, ve hicle safety inspectio ns, and t he 
weighing of  vehicles . 
The only initiative  in this program  continues and makes permanent one Contract/Grant 
Specialist position prev iously con tinued by Financial Order 002273 F3 and provides funding for 
related All Other costs .  This request  increase s the Federal Expenditures Fund  by one he adcount  
and Personal  Services of $102,443 in FY 24 and $ 104,470 in FY25 and All Other of $2,534 in 
FY24 and FY25. 
 
Turnpike Enforcement  
The Maine State Police provides full law enforcement services to areas that d o not have 
police departments.  Troopers respond to all manners of calls for service much like any other 
police department  would.  Troopers a lso patrol the rural roads, interstate  system, and Maine 
Turnpike enforcing motor vehicle laws and responding to ac cidents .  Turnpike Enforcement 
 10 (Troop G) patrols the Maine Turnpike 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to ensure safety and enforce 
the laws of th e State.    
The first in itiative  provide s funding for increases to statewide technology services a nd 
increases  the All Other in the Other Specia l Revenue Funds  by $3,326 in FY24 and FY25. 
The second  initiative provides funding for inc reases to insurance pre mium rates and increases 
the All Other in th e Other Special Revenue Funds  by $4,499  in both FY24 and F Y25. 
The thir d initiative provides funding for the purchase of hybrid vehicles for turnpike  
enforcement  consistent with an established vehicle replacement  schedule.  This re quest will 
increase the Capital Expenditures in the Other Special Revenue Funds by $351, 044 in F Y24 and 
FY25.  
Language Part OOO  
The final item I will be testifying on today is Language Part OOO which can be found on 
page 51.   This Part a uthorizes the Department of Administrative and Financial Services and the 
Department of P ublic Safety to enter into  financial arrangements in fiscal year 2023 -24 and 
2024 -25 for the acquisition of motor vehicles for the State Police.  
This concludes my test imony.  Thank you for your time and I would be happy to a nswer any 
questions that you may  have.  
 
 
