TESTIMONY 
OF 
MICHAEL J. SAUSCHUCK 
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
Before the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Veterans and 
Legal Affairs 
Hearing Date: March lst, 2023 
“An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State 
Government, General Fund and Other Funds and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 
30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, 
and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is 
Derek Gorneau, and I am the Assistant to the Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety. 
I am here today to testify in support of the biennial budget. 
Overall Budget 
This budget advances the Governor ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more 
prosperous state where opportunity is available to all, we must invest in the infrastructure that 
supports the people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on 
every day to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted budget and the last 
legislative session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. . 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, 
making sure that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — we lived within our 
means. This budget proposal continues that practice.
l
We look forward to the discussions over the next several months as we outline each initiative and 
impact of the proposed investments. 
Departmental Overview 
The Department of Public Safety was established to serve the people by providing, 
coordinating, and leading a responsive and comprehensive public safety system to protect their 
lives, rights, and properties. This broad mission is accomplished with 643 positions spread 
across 10 bureaus. The Bureaus are Administration, Capitol Police, Consolidated Emergency 
Communications, Emergency Medical Services, Fire Marshal's Ofﬁce, Gambling Control, 
Highway Safety, Maine Criminal Justice Academy, Maine Drug Enforcement Agency, and the 
Maine State Police. 
Gambling Control Unit 
The Gambling Control Unit (the Unit) supports a ﬁve-member Board that licenses and 
regulates companies and employees associated with two casinos, the distribution of casino- 
related equipment, and advance deposit wagering allowing bets on horse races throughout the 
country. The Unit also regulates fantasy sports contests and charitable non-proﬁt Games of 
Chance, Beano, and Bingo. 
The ﬁrst initiative provides funding for increases to statewide technology services and 
increases the All Other in the Other Special Revenue Funds by $52,208 in FY24 and in F Y25. 
The second initiative provides funding for increases to insurance premium rates and 
increases the All Other in the General Fund by $1,518 in both FY24 and FY25 and the All Other 
in the Other Special Revenue Funds by $154 in both FY24 and F Y25.
2
The third initiative adjusts funding to align with revenues as recommended in the 
December 1, 2022 forecast of the Revenue Forecasting Cormnittee. This increases the Other 
Special Revenue Funds All Other by $2,112,738 in FY24 and $1,839,057 in FY25. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer 
any questions that you may have.
3
