 
 
 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330     |     (866) 376 -2463     |     efficiencymaine.com   
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust  --  Z100  (p. A -259)  
 
Re:  LD 256: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Yea rs Ending June 30, 2023, 
June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
 
Presented to :  
 the Joint Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and  
 the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
March 1 , 2023 
 
 
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , Senator Lawrence and Representative Zeigler, and Members of the 
Committee on  Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology , on behalf of the Efficiency Maine Trust ( the “Trust” or “EMT ”), I appreciate the opportunity to 
provide information about account Z -100 in this year’s  Biennial Budget . 
 
I am pleased to report that  the State of Maine was ranked fifth in the nation  for its successes on energy 
efficiency . The ranking s, updated each year by the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy  
(ACEEE) , are a testament to the policies and programs  that have been supported by Maine’s Legislature  and 
Governor and to the contributions of Efficiency Maine , MaineHousing,  the M aine Public Utilities 
Commission , the Governor’s Energy Office  and the Office of Public Advocate  to develop and implement 
those programs.  Of particular note, Maine earned high marks for its efficiency investments to benefit low - 
and moderate -income households, its policies to maximize cost -effective savings , and its best -in-the-nation 
programs promoting a transition to electric heat pumps.  Maine’s heat pump programs are so well regarded 
nationally that they are being studied by the federal government, copied by other states, and featured 
recently in the Washington Post , the New York Times , and numerous online publications.  
 
Rankings and recognition are nice, but they  are beside  the point. The point is to help Maine ’s homes and 
businesses  lower their energy costs, increase productivity, cut air pollution, improve grid reliability and 
enhance energy independence . The Trust’s Annual Report for FY20 22 shows the effectiveness of its 
programs. The Trust ’s programs  last year helped to :  
 
• Save more than 2.3 billion kilowatt -hours  of electricity  and 4.7 million MMBtu (equivalent to 
33.8 million gallons of oil)  of heating energy over the lifetime  of the energy upgrades ;  
• Reduce energy bills, over the lifetime  of the energy upgrades, by more than $356 million;  
• Prompt $126 million of incremental private investment using $70.67 million of program 
investment;  
• Support weatherization projects in 2,230 homes;
 
 • Build and maintain online registries of contractors for consumers to choose from, including 
more than 700 firms offering heat pump installations  in all regions of the state , and grow  jobs in 
the clean energy sector , 
• Continue the expansion of EV Initiatives with newly eligible electric pickup trucks and vans and 
building out a stat ewide network of public chargers;  
• Launch new programs to manage  peak demand on the grid and to develop battery storage ; and,  
• Avoid an estimated 76,972 short tons of annual greenhouse gas  emissions . 
 
These programs are working to help  Maine’s homeowners, businesses, institutions  and governmental bodies 
make smarter equipment purchases and accelerate their investment in building upgrades , which in turn is 
strengthen ing Maine’s economy and environment.   
 
The budgets for Efficiency Maine’s programs are funded through revenues recei ved directly from the electric 
utilities, the natural gas utilities, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative ( RGGI ), and the Forward Capacity 
Market  at ISO -New England . This year’s budget (see p. A-259) contains several revenue allocations to the 
Trust tha t reflect decisions from  last Legislative Session . Specifically, $500,000 was appropriated last year “to 
develop and support climate change mitigation strategies designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at 
industrial facilities in the State”  and another $3.5 million was appropriated to continue funding EV rebates.   
In all likelih ood, t hese initiatives will expenditures span  the current fiscal year  and the one that follo ws. Also 
last Session, LD 1733  (the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan)  allocated $50 million for expan ded energy 
efficiency programs . The objectives for the programs are to use half of the funds to increase weatherization 
for low - and moderate -income homes and the other half to promote efficiency in municipal buildings, 
schools, businesses and industry. The MJRP initially budgeted the reven ues across two years ($15 million in 
2021 -22 and $35 million in 2022 -23). The Trust began expending the MJRP funds in July 2022 and will 
continue to spend out over the next two years as forecasted in the budgets for 2023 -24 and 2024 -25. Only 
one person on Staff at the Trust is a State employee. The salary for that employee , together with associated 
overhead costs,  is reimbursed to the State by the Trust.  
 
If we can be of assistance answering further questions about our finances, please do not hesitate to ask.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
/s/MDS  
Michael D. Stoddard  
Executive Directo r 
