Laboratory The Jackson 
Leading the search 
for tomorrow's cures 
PUBLIC HEARING TESTIMONY 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
THE GOVERNOR'S CHANGE PACKAGE TO LD 258 
May 18, 2023 
An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary tothe Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years 
Ending June 30,2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Submitted by Michael McKernan, Director, Government and Community Relations, 
The Jackson Laboratory 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, my name is Mike McKernan. I am Director of Government and Community 
Relations at The Jackson Laboratory and a resident of Bar Harbor. I’m here to testify neither for 
nor against the Governor ’s change package to the biennial budget, and call to your attention to 
the fact that although the change package proposes one-time funding for bipartisan priorities 
including housing, workforce development, and transportation, no funding is included for other 
bipartisan priorities, notably, broad state-wide and competitive investments into research and 
development. 
We urge the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee to consider one-time funding for 
R&D in this change package, or pass LD 416, the bill already before your committee that will 
authorize a general fund bond issue that would fund competitively awarded research and 
development and commercialization projects, with a requirement of at least 1:1 matching 
investment — in effect, a doubling of the State’s investment. 
Dozens of individuals and institutions are already on record in strong support of state 
investments in R&D included in several billsm that have come before the Legislature this 
session. The Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee, in 
their March 10, 2023 report-back on the biennial budget, also expressed unanimous support for 
“ongoing efforts to promote research and development in the State of Maine.“ Two important 
1 LD 416 - An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development and Commercialization, 
https://legislature.maine.gov/l.awMakerWeb/summary.asp?lD=280085744 
2 
LD 1475 - An Act to Promote Biomanufacturing and Biotechnology Development by Establishing a Tax Credit, 
https://legislaturemaine.gov/LawMakerWeb/summary.asp?lD=280088281 
5 LD 427 - An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in Research, Development and 
Commercialization in Maine's Marine Technology and Aquaculture Sector, 
https1//legislature.maine.gov/LawMakerWeb/summary.asp?lD=280085777 
4 https1//legislature.maine.gov/doc/9899
themes reﬂected in this prior support can be restated here to make an even stronger case for 
one-time funding in the change package. 
First, the Administration justified the inclusion of one-time spending in this change package 
partly because revenues are expected to plateau in coming years. As this Committee 
understands, R&D investments lead to economic growth and contribute to increasing state 
revenues. If revenues are expected to plateau, it is sound fiscal policy to invest in initiatives that 
will grow future revenues with a program that, at a minimum, would double the State's 
investment. R&D investments help institutions like JAX and The University of Maine compete for 
multi-year, renewable, federal grants. In 2022, these grants included $19 million in NSF awards 
to UMaine and $79 million in NIH awards to JAX. These federal dollars are expended in Maine 
and provide direct economic impact for small and large businesses. For example, in 2022, JAX 
spent $60 million with 600 Maine-based vendors from 116 towns, purchasing wood pellets from 
Athens, insurance from Bangor, boiler sen/ices from Lincoln, and industrial equipment from 
Portland. 
Second, the Administration proposed in the change package one-time investments that “aim to 
address some of Maine’s most pressing and urgent problems, including housing, 
homelessness, food insecurity...and continued workforce development efforts"5 . Investment in 
R&D also helps solve these problems. Take housing: as you may know, the strength of the 
biosciences sector has helped JAX construct desperately-needed workforce housing and 
childcare in Bar Harbor. Consider workforce: in the last two weeks, JAX has converted five 
apprentices and interns from Eastern Maine Community College and Maine Maritime Academy 
to full-time employees in building automation, electrical, and stationary engineering roles. 
Finally, consider human health: R&D investments are helping JAX scientists understand the 
genetics of opioid overdose. ln fact, JAX is working with State Director of Opioid Response 
Gordon Smith to highlight Maine opioid research during Governor Mills’ Annual Opioid 
Response Summit, to be held this summer. Addiction is a genetic disorder and R&D investment 
can help JAX find solutions. 
The Administration has presented this change package as an opportunity to make strategic and 
necessary one-time investments to address critical issues. Even though lnnovation is called out 
as a driver of Maine's 10-year Economic Development Plan, subsequent investment has been 
insufficient and inconsistent. The absence of state-wide R&D investment in the change package 
is notable and we urge this Committee to amend the change package or authorize the R&D 
bond.t 
5 Testimony of Kirsten Figueroa, Commissioner, Department of Administrative and Financial Services, May 15, 
2023. https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/10092
