ermanent 01111111881011 
RACIAL, INDIGENOUS 
8; TRIBAL POPULATIONS 
Testimony of the 
Permanent Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous, and Tribal Populations 
LD 258 "An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023,]une 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025" 
February 17, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Senator Nangle, Representative Sachs, Representative Stover, and Honorable 
Members of the ]oint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and State and 
Local Government: 
My name is Morgan Pottle Urquhart, and I am the acting Policy and Communications Director of the 
Permanent Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous, and Tribal Populations. We extend deep 
gratitude to Representative Melanie Sachs for introducing this bill on behalf of Governor Mills. 
Whether we’re Black, brown, or white; Indigenous or newly arrived immigrants, we all Want our 
families to thrive, our dreams to be possible, and our communities to be vibrant and prosperous. But 
depending on who you are or where you live, not everyone has the same opportunities for many of the 
things We consider the basics of a fair and just society: health care when we need it, a safe place to call 
home, reliable transportation, honest work for a fair wage, and a Feeling of connection and hope for the 
future. 
Disparities are not limited to those based on race, however. A full analysis ofquality-of-life outcomes 
must also include disparities that White Mainers experience. The same structural factors that drive the 
racial disparities in our state hurt all of us. The opportunity before us is to repair those systemic and 
structural ﬂaws and improve the lives of all Maine people.
In 2019, the Maine Legislature took an important step in this direction by establishing the Permanent 
Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous and Tribal Populations, and Governor Janet Mills 
signed the Permanent Commission into law. In 2021, Maine made a historic investment in the 
Permanent Commission ’s Work by allocating funds for staff to begin building the agency and pursuing 
its mission through research, community engagement, and policy advising. 
The Permanent Commission is currently allocated ﬁve full-time staff positions; they are an Executive 
Director, Community Engagement Director, Operations Director, Research Director, and a Policy 
Associate. An additional contracted staff member is Working as Policy and Communications Director. 
The Permanent Cornmission ’s request in Governor Mills’ budget includes creating a new staff position 
for a Communications Director and reclassifying the Policy Associate position to reﬂect staffing needs. 
The Permanent Commission ’s streamlined staﬁing structure recognizes its broad scope of work and 
the importance of leveraging the energy and enthusiasm in our communities to tackle difficult 
challenges with a collaborative and innovative spirit that reﬂects Maine’s ﬁnest traditions. In this 
model, staff are responsible for coordinating and providing direction for projects that often include a 
robust network of businesses, service agencies, and community-led organizations in order to deliver the 
best possible results. 
We respectfully urge you to support this request in the Biennial Budget. We could not do this critical 
and urgent work without the support of these committees, the Legislature and Governor. We are 
committed to working together across race and place so all of us can thrive and nothing stands in the 
way of us providing a great life for all Maine people and families. 
Thank you for your time, attention, and consideration. I am happy to answer any questions or provide 
additional information.
duction
I. History and Structure of the Permanent Commission 
ABOUT THE PERMANENT COMMISSION 
Whedier we’re Black, brown, or white; Indigenous or newly arrived immigrants, we all want our families to 
thrive, our dreams to be possible, and our communities to be vibrant and prosperous. But depending on who 
you are or where you live, not everyone has the same opportunities for many of the things we consider the basics 
of a fair and just society: health care when we need it, a safe place to call home, reliable transportation, honest 
work for a fair wage, and a feeling of connection and hope for the future. 
Our systems and structures don’t work the same for everyone, and investments in our communities too often 
exacerbate disparities. Your age, your skin color, your hometown, your health - these can all determine whether 
doors of opportunity are open or closed to you. Now imagine what our communities would look like if Maine’s 
systems and infrastructure worked for everyone. Coming together to hear each other, learn from one another, 
acknowledge problems, and ﬁx what’s broken, we can make sure nothing stands in the way of living a good life— 
the way it should be — for all Maine families. 
Structural racism is a driving force behind many of the disparities we can see all around us. Black Mainers are 
nearly nine times as likely to be incarcerated as white Mainers.1 Maine’s tribal populations are treated like 
municipalities rather than the sovereign nations that they are and have been since time immemorial. Racial, 
Indigenous, and tribal populations typically experience unemployment and poverty at twice the rate of white 
Mainers.2 Structural disparities are not limited to those based on race, however. A full analysis of quality-of-life 
outcomes must include disparities that white Mainers experience. The same structural factors that drive the 
racial disparities in our state hurt all of us, including families in rural Maine, whose kids are nearly twice as likely 
to experience poverty than the rest of the state.3 
For far too long, Maine and the nation have allowed the institutions and racism that dictate these disparate 
outcomes to continue. We have addressed fragments of the problem, but it’s critical to evaluate the ways in 
which all systems and structures can be adapted to prevent future generations from confronting the same 
inequities. Government has a key role to play. 
In 2019, the Maine Legislature took an important step in this direction by establishing the Permanent 
Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous and Tribal Populations, and Governorjanet Mills signed the 
Permanent Commission into law. The independent entity has a mission to examine racial disparities across all 
systems and to speciﬁcally work at improving the status and outcomes for historically disadvantaged racial, 
Indigenous, and tribal populations in the state. The Permanent Commission is empowered by statute to advise 
and consult with all three branches of state government, as well as submit legislation. 
1 
State data compiled by the Sentencing Project. Retrieved January 2023 from: htggs:/gwww.sentencii1g;gro|' ect.orv ,1 2 
Myall, James. Data on racial inequality shows need for solutions to advance racial justice. (lune 2019). Maine Center for Economic Policy. Retrieved February 20, 2022 from: https:/'/w\v\v.mecep.org/wp-content/uploads/201 ‘J/06/MECEP-racial-inequality-fact —sheet-FIl\§AL.pdf 3 
Annie E. Casey Foundation ’s Kids Count Data Center, Children in poverty by county, 2005 —202l in Maine. Retrievedjanuary 19, 2023. hum. 5 /d.m mlwt hdﬁmnm Mg Hm {mm Q 562_ab1-]drm_,~ n_pm::m,,1_,,,_§~mIHI;,_2QQ§_2Q2§_p]m="» 1 §,km;:§t§ fauylxxmlfajsc /57:,’ 12,11,533 I /Qrmgﬁ!
1
In 2021, the Maine Legislature made a historic investment in the Permanent Commission ’s work by allocating 
funds for staff to begin building the agency and pursuing its mission through research, community engagement, 
and policy advising. 
Occupying a unique position in state government, the Permanent Commission represents a broad cross section 
of people most impacted by racial harm and colonization who have been excluded from policy making 
throughout Maine’s history. The Commission ’s primary role is to identify and help eliminate systemic injustices 
embedded in the state’s infrastructure, policies, and practices. Through its work, the Commission gives voice to 
the lived experience of impacted communities, promotes evidence-informed models for eliminating 
demographic and geographic disparities, and advances a vision of Maine where everyone, without exception, has 
the opportunity to live a good life and pursue their dreams. 
FUNCTIONS AND STRUCTURE 
Since the creation of the Permanent Commission, staff, Commissioners, and contracted content experts have 
worked collaboratively to establish the Permanent Commission as an entity within state government, and, at the 
same time, to carry out the work assigned to it by the Legislature. This required a delicate balance between 
building the Commission as an entity within state government while developing research, programming, 
community engagement opportunities, and other work. This has been and will continue to be a positive 
challenge. It speaks directly to the need for continued capacity —building support in order to fulﬁll the critically 
important mission of the Permanent Commission and build an accessible and sustainable entity. 
Throughout the spring and summer of 2022, the Permanent Commission conducted an analysis of its functions 
and structure. Four main categories ofwork, aligned with the duties and powers assigned to the Permanent 
Commission by statute, emerged during this process. At that time, the committee structure was not matched to 
these areas. As a result of this evaluation process, the Permanent Commission revised its committee structure to 
facilitate collaboration between commissioners, staff, and contracted content experts to support all areas of its 
work (see Fig. 1). 
Under the new structure, as approved in the Permanent Commission ’s bylaws in Ianuary 2023, each area of 
work now has a committee of jurisdiction and will have a staff member if the current budget request is included 
in the biennial budget.
2
>A__ ,_,:;. g,H 
5;-;~1‘i""~?"7“‘“ LR %":l‘E‘?-12> 
i.a,;¢_e ’s~*’ ~,==,v,.;;.-,;,5fq “ 
.~*<.S;’i}€‘;i;T;’:~ 
‘p 5 9' 
t VI 
»_ 
, ,,~» 
Fer maraen (J 
.1611} K111881911 lé” ‘ “ RACIAL, INDIGENOUS ‘>$<\_§_€¥ 
ammi POPLLATIONS »
_ ‘,9. 
I . t.~ _$, 
%\ Full Commission ’*'§g/ 
." Steermg / VisionM                       
"is                                      
; 
ii“ 
Fi & ”'i 
Community A?‘ nun(e . .-":¢:1¢»""/.-' =,»:,.. '1'.' 
\“ / 
5 Operations P -'§l _- .- 
. ,1, .1‘ 
_ . F Outreach . 
if 5u;|d_ manage‘ V \‘ \ 
V' 
:_-: , Outreach and engagement 
=-»=\=-in 9 ri
- 
I 5 _, 
. .. . 
W \ .. 
4' 
. H .::'-1. > \_' ,.- T_A,_ ;_ V_-,\<.»§;'
r » 3 
Crass-cutting: 
pf                     
» -~
3 , 
1 "';’£T_}¢».; Programs ~ 
Communications        
in 
:1. 
'2 
. . 3 _ .. 
,5; - 
2: Ws J l
' 
Public Policy Reseunh. ‘Q5. . . ‘i ’ =5: 
, ____i2 Advance policies :1' 
.. . 
Research, evoluule, 5'3 ;“ and practices “"'“”‘“*7 _<,:;£-fl" repcri
~ 
H '‘ 
‘A: 
*¥%. 
/5;, 
%%._ 1.4;??? 
'1€%‘*‘=‘@:a=_, 
ta»:F"’ e~ ,1/»:2<*' 
ﬂ‘.;,_1:V__,:A ?_: ;;;;,' ,,.IZ;E3?55E5£Z3.i5?$5
1 
Research: 
0 Carries out research on the status of historically disadvantaged racial, Indigenous, and tribal 
populations. 
Community Engagement: 
O Conducts public hearings, conferences, workshops, and other meetings to obtain information about, 
discuss, and publicize the needs of and solutions to the problems faced by historically disadvantaged 
racial, Indigenous, and tribal populations. 
Policy: 
O Has the power to submit legislation to improve opportunities and eliminate disparities for historically 
disadvantaged racial, Indigenous, and tribal populations. 
O Advise and consult with the Governor, Legislature, the Chiefjustice of the Supreme Judicial Court and 
other officials of the state and federal government with respect to policies, programs, and other activities 
relating to historically disadvantaged racial, Indigenous, and tribal populations. 
Finance 8: Operations: 
O Manages a new government entity, building appropriate, integrated systems that allow for the work of 
the Permanent Commission to operate smoothly and effectively. 
O Reports to the Governor and Legislature concerning the work and interests of the commission.
3
Staff Positions 
The Permanent Commission is currently allocated ﬁve full-time staff positions that align with the restructured 
committees; they are an Executive Director, Community Engagement Director, Operations Director, Research 
Director, and a Polic Associate. Two of those ﬁve ositions O erations and Communi En a ement are
Y A P P g8 
currently ﬁlled by individuals operating in an “acting” capacity. The Permanent Commission is working with 
the Bureau of Human Resources to hire an Executive Director. The hirin rocess for a Research Director will 5P 
begin in the coming Weeks. An additional contracted staff member is working as Policy and Communications 
Director. The Permanent Commission ’s budget request in Governor Mills’ budget includes creating a new staff 
position for a Communications Director and reclassifying the Policy Associate position to reﬂect stafﬁng needs. 
The Permanent Cornrnission ’s staiﬁng structure recognizes its broad scope of work and the importance of 
leveraging the energy and enthusiasm in our communities to tackle diﬂicult challenges with a collaborative and 
innovative spirit that is the Maine tradition. In this model, staff are responsible for coordinating and providing 
direction for projects that often include a robust network of businesses, service agencies, and community-led 
organizations in order to deliver the best possible results for this important work. 
II. Policy Priorities and Guiding Principles 
TEN CORE CATEGORIES OF DISPARITY 
In the summer of 202.0, the Permanent Commission embarked on an unprecedented process, collaborating with 
S5 state legislators across party lines, to assess legislation pending in the 129th Maine Legislature for possible 
impacts on racial disparities. Throughmhat process, the Permanent Commission identiﬁed ten core categories of 
disparity on which to focus. 
These categories are: 
O Basic Needs - Every Mainer deserves healthy food, economic security, and the opportunity to succeed. 
Unfortunately, not all communities receive the same access to the basic needs that allow them a fair 
chance at success. This is evident through the consistently higher poverty rates for most racial, 
Indigenous, and tribal communities as compared with the state overall. 
O Basic Rights - All people deserve equal protection under the law and equal support from their 
government. Protections for people of every background must be included in our most foundational 
laws in order to inﬂuence all policies.c 
I Criminal Justice - There is extensive evidence showing that Black people are treatedl more harshly at 
every phase in the criminal justice system. We/ They are more likely to be stopped by police, searched, 
ticketed, arrested, charged, and convicted, and when convicted, face longer sentences.4 
4 
State data compiled by the Sentencing Project. The Sentencing Project. Retrieved May 17, 2019 from:
4
I Education — Data about Maine schools suggests students of different iiaces have very different 
experiences with public education. For example, Black students are 2.4% times more likely to be 
suspended than white students in Maine schools, While White students are 1.6 times more likely to be 
enrolled in AP classes.5 Structural challenges such as fainilies ’ access to resources as Well as the practices 
and policies of schools may contribute to these disparities. A‘ 
O Employment and Workers’ Rights - Discrimination by individual employers, as well as unfair 
treatment in the education system, holds back opportunities for racial, Indigenous, and tribal 
populations even when We/ they attend college. ‘ This places a disproportionate number of racial, 
Indigenous, and tribal people in low-income jobs that lack adequate protections in the workplace and 
beneﬁts. 
0 Health Care - Structural racism is deeply ingrained in our health care system, leading to inferior care 
and worse health outcomes for impacted communities. Even for individuals of the racial, Indigenous, 
and tribal population Who have access to health care, We/ they still have vastly different experiences than 
White people. Lack of access to comprehensive health care that help prevent or manage chronic 
diseases.7 ’S 
0 Housing and Homelessness - Discrimination in housing based on race Was legal in this country as late 
as the 1960s, and there have been many documented examples of illegal discrimination since. One can 
easily see the eﬂtects of this in the shape of cities and towns across the country today. It is no surprise 
then that only one in four Black Mainers are homeowners as compkared with three-quarters ofwhite 
Mainers. Affordable and acceptable rental housing is more diﬁicult to obtain for racial, Indigenous, and 
tribal populations in the state. Those with housing report a lack of basic housing necessities, such as 
proper facilities or space, at a higher rate than people who are whiteyﬂ In addition, Mainers who 
represent the racial, Indigenous, and tribal populations eirperience homelessness at a greater rate than 
those who are white. This disparity is most pronounced for Black people, who represent 19% of those 
who are homeless while only consisting of 1% of the state? s total population. ” 
5 
Eads, David. Miseducation: Is there Racial Inequality at Your School? (October 2018). Retrieved May 17, 2019 ﬁom: 
6 
Myall, james. Data on racial inequality shows need for solutions to advance racial justice. (June 2019). Maine Center For Economic Policy. Retrieved June 
15, 2020 from: l1ttp.§;//w\vw.mecep.org/wp-content./uploads/201 9/ 06/ M ECEP-racial-inequalit ﬂaet-sheet-FINAL.pdf 7 
Race, Racism and Health. (July 2020). Robert Woodjohnson Foundation. Retrieved August 20, 2020 from: 
www.r»@f,%r/en/library/collections/racism-and-healtlmhtml. 
8 
Maxwell, Connor. Coronavirus Compounds Inequality and Endangers Communities of Color. (March 2020). Center for American Progress. Retrieved 
August 20 2020 from- 
hgtpsg [ /ggyyglg m §’[i_§§ﬂ. p[Q$_{‘§§ Qrg/jgsgiggfmgg/' Dg'yg§[ 7! PA V 2 271 1' §'7 337/Q1[ng gyigis-{gm pg}; Q d 5-jngqjjg] [jg ';-gdgnogg-{gm m]]nj_ﬁg.§-fg]Q[[ 9 
State of Maine Consolidated Plan. (November 2019). Maine State Housing Authority and Maine Department of Economic and Community Development. Retrieved August 20, 2020 from: 
https://www. mﬂjﬂCi‘iOU5II1§'.01 ‘iI/ClOCS/ClCf3!.IlC —S0ll1'CC/IJOl.iC} ’~ICS€2ICl'l/f €CI€f2l-ﬁll1CiS/2(l2(l —2024—COl1SOli €l11F€d-Dlilll.pdQS ﬁ'!‘Sl1=l.9978B1S4 1° 
Homeless Statistics: State Fiscal Year 2018. (Iuly 2018). Maine State Housing Authority. Retrieved August 27, 2020 from: 
bilpyKL“3a1M£m3jn£bQ]]q' ng Qrcr[dQ£5Ld ' 
gﬁnlt-SnnzcglhQn§jng-L§p_Qr[$/ Z1 ['7-2!}! S»§m 1:.E§§d rygat-humg §§§-5mu' §g' cS p_d£2§ﬁu;5n=: [2(1
Juvenile Justice - The current system and use of juvenile detention centers undoubtedly places those 
incarcerated at a societal and economic disadvantage upon reentry. “ While the number of juveniles who 
are incarcerated nationwide has dropped signiﬁcantly, racial, Indigenous, and tribal populations are 
overrepresented in the juvenile prison system as they ﬁnd themselves facing charges, being unable to 
post bail and being convicted more often than our/ their white counterparts. “ In addition, Black 
children are far more likely to be tried as an adult for the same crime as white children. ” 
Tribal Sovereignty - The state of Maine has proven reluctant to meet the needs of the tribes, whose 
lands the state now rests upon, but it also simultaneously has repressed the ability for the tribes to be 
selﬁgoverning at the same level as tribes in other parts of the nation. The state’s recognition of the 
inherent and sacred sovereignty of the tribes, which has been in place thousands of years prior to 
European settlement, would enable the tribes to act in the best interest of our/ their people, and 
therefore help address the issues, many of which are mentioned throughout this section, that stem from 
the oppression and discrimination that we/ they incur from the state and nation. 
Wealth and Income - Despite there being equal employment and opportunity laws in place to prevent 
economically driven racial disparities, people who represent the racial, Indigenous, and tribal 
populations are shown to consistently earn less, regardless of gender, than our/ their white 
counterparts. “ This wage parity is due to various forms of discrimination that exist in many workplaces. 
Ultimately, this leads to racial, Indigenous, and tribal populations experiencing lower rates of 
employment and pay in comparison to those who are white.“ 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES 
In addition to the ten core categories of disparity, the 2020 report also outlined seven guiding principles for‘ 
addressing structural racism through lawmaking. 
Building awareness takes resources. We know that there are many gaps in the data that is collected, 
analyzed, and made publicly available in Maine. State agencies will need a mandate and more resources 
to adequately measure and track disparities, and to partner with impacted communities in building 
trust and ensuring that the data collected is secure and collected in partnership with impacted 
populations. *LD 1610 allocated resource: to estalalish data governance in Maine. 
Holman, B. and Ziedenberg,]. The Dangers of Detention: The Impact oflncarcerating Youth in Detention and Other Secure Facilities. (2006)_ 
Retrieved August 20, 2020 from hitprl /\v\vw.\'ija.org/ Res0urces/ Publications/ Dangers of Detention lustice Policy Institute 2006.pdf 
u Sawyer, Wendy. Youth Conﬁnement: The Whole Pie 2019. (December 2019). Prison Policy Initiative. Retrieved August 20,2020 from: 
httns //Wwwaprisonpolicyorg/reports/vouth201 ‘).html 
Gray, Megan. Secretive police unit gathers information on Maine citizens, commissioner tells lawmakers. (lune 2020). Portland Press Herald. Retrieved 
Sept 3, 2020 from: httpszl /ww\v.pressherald.com/ 2020/ 06/ 24/maine-p0lice-unit-gathers-information —on-citizens-commissioner-says/
6
Awareness alone is not enough. Building awareness of the disparities is a ﬁrst and important step, but 
awareness alone is not enough. Action needs to be taken to address their causes alongside a long-term 
commitment to learning, investigating, and, most importantly, listening to impacted communities. 
Financial and human resources must be allocated. Much ofwhat is needed to reverse the effects of 
racism requires resources. We urge legislators to resist falling into a mentality of scarcity and austerity if 
doing so means delaying the changes that are needed. While the state’s resources are limited, there is 
wealth here, and it falls disproportionately along racial lines. Much of that wealth has direct or indirect 
historical roots in racist institutions, laws, policies, and practices, such as slavery, ]im Crow, separate but 
unequal, segregation, redlining, predatory lending, discrimination, and more. Ifwe as a state aim to 
reverse the centuries-long effects of racism, the Legislature must support and advocate for the allocation 
of ﬁnancial and human resources for this purpose. To do otherwise would artiﬁcially limit what is 
possible and potentially prohibit any real progress on these issues. 
Policies that are ‘race-neutral ’ will ultimately maintain existing disparities. Disparate impacts 
require disparate solutions. It also requires an examination of the impact of our laws and systems. 
An adequate response requires a structural analysis. Speciﬁc bills and policies may help provide 
relief in the short-term, but they generally are embedded in and reactive to the racist structures in our 
current systems. We need to re-examine those systems and how they intersect. 
Develo in solutions should be led b im acted communities. We stron l believe that the ri ht P g Y P g Y g 
solutions will come from the communities most im acted b structural racism. This should o be ond P Y 3Y 
policymakers seeking input and partnership with individuals from historically disadvantaged racial, 
Indigenous, and tribal populations. A signiﬁcant part of the structural change that is needed to ﬁnally 
be in to reverse racial dis arities includes re resentation within those entities with decision-makin 8 P P g 
power over our State’s laws. 
Policies that affect tribal nations in Maine must be enacted in a government-to-government 
relationship that honors and respects sovereignty. The Passamaquoddy Tribe, Penobscot Nation, 
the Houlton Band ofMaliseets, and Mi’kmaq Nation have lived in the region we now call Maine for 
millennia. Our/ Their sovereignty long predates the State of Maine. However, as a result of the 
structural racism of European settlers, the State of Maine and the Federal government, we/ they have 
had our/ their sovereignty and ability to control our/ their own lives severely limited. Since the 
implementation of the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Implementing Act, Maine’s state government 
has treated tribes as if we/ they were municipalities rather than the sovereign nations that we/ they are. 
To move forward in a more constructive manner, legislators must work in partnership with tribal 
representatives when crafting legislation that will impact our/ their communities.
7
III. Accomplishments and Goals 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
The Permanent Commission is grateful for our mission to examine the racial disparities across Maine, and to 
work toward improving the status and outcomes for those who have been harmed by structural racism. Among 
the accomplishments of the Permanent Commission are: 
0 2020 Report to the Legislature, outlining policy priorities and guiding principles for addressing 
structural racism in lawmaking; 
0 Planned and hosted two public forums. The ﬁrst was a remote meeting with more than 300 people 
registered to attend this forum from all 16 of Maine’s counties; the second was an in-person community 
listening session in Bangor; 
0 Established the Permanent Commission as an entity within Maine state government; 
I Advised the Maine Legislature by submitting testimony on more than 30 bills in the second session of 
the 130th Legislature; 
O Formed advisory subcommittees for entities within the Executive Branch who sought input from the 
Commission; 
O Submitted reports to the Legislature on prenatal and maternal health disparities, on racial disparities in 
land access, and published a report on the history of tribal-state relations; 
O Hosted Maine’s ﬁrst celebration of a new holiday, james Weldon ]ohnson Day; 
O Established an advisory committee to identify offensive place names in Maine, craft a uniform renaming 
process, and recommend any additional changes to statute; 
O Developed a new committee structure that reﬂects the work and anticipated needs of the Permanent 
Commission into the future; 
O Developed a model for community engagement that fosters trust and collaboration between the 
Commission and the populations and communities it serves. 
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE 
Ongoing Projects 
There are several ongoing areas of work that you can expect to hear more about from the Permanent 
Commission in the coming months. Among them are: 
0 Community Listening Sessions - The Permanent Commission hosted its ﬁrst community listening 
session in Bangor on December 19, 2022. This was the ﬁrst in a planned series of events that will 
provide an opportunity for the Permanent Commission to hear directly from impacted populations 
related to disparities caused by structural racism in Maine. These listening sessions are part of the 
Permanent Commission ’s goal to build the capacity of overburdened communities to identify issues
8
that affect their communities and participate in, inﬂuence, and take on leadership roles in related 
decision-making processes. 
Long-Range Strategic Planning - The development and growth of the Permanent Commission as an 
integrated department of state government is now well underway. As such, the Commission will 
embark on its ﬁrst long-range strategic planning effort in 2023, which will result in a blueprint for its 
Work over the next 3-5 years. With support from governance and planning consultants, the 
Commission will develop goals and measurable objectives to guide its work to improve the systems and 
structures that hold Maine people back from achieving their dreams and reaching their full potential. 
LD 2, “An Act To Require The Inclusion Of Racial Impact Statements In The Legislative Process" - 
The Permanent Commission submitted recommendations regarding the extended pilot of Racial 
Impact Statements and will continue to collaborate with the Legislature in their implementation. 
LD 1226, "Resolve, Directing the Permanent Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous and 
Tribal Populations To Examine Restorative Justice" - The Permanent Commission will submit a report 
to the ]oint Standing Committee on the judiciary in early 2023. 
LD 1/141, "An Act To Create ajames Weldon johnson Annual Observance Day and an Observance 
Task Force" -The ﬁrst celebration ofjames Weldon Johnson Day in 2022. was a success and planning for 
the 2023 celebration is underway. 
LD 1610, "An Act To Promote Equity In Policy Making By Enhancing The State’ s Ability To Collect, 
Analyze And Apply Data" ~ The Permanent Commission is working with the Bureau of Human 
Resources to hire a Research Director who will collaborate with other state partners to implement data 
governance. 
LD 1934, "Resolve, Changing the Identifying and Reporting Responsibilities and Extending the 
Reporting Deadline for the Identiﬁcation of Places in the State with Offensive Names" - Contracted 
content experts have formed an advisory board and are currently hosting programs and developing 
recommendations. An additional report is expected later this year. 
THANK YOU!
9
