 
  
 
 
Testimony by the Bingham  Program in Support of L.D. 258 , An Act Making Unified 
Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the 
Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary 
to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, 
June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
 
Appropriations  and Financial  Affairs  Committee  and  
the Health  and Human  Services  Committee  
Public  Hearing:  February  22, 2022  
 
Senator  Rotundo , Senator  Baldacci,  Representative  Sachs,  Representative  Meyer,  and esteemed  
members  of the Appropriations  and Financial  Affairs  and Health  and Human  Services  
Committees,  my name  is Morgan  Hynd,  and I am the Director  of the Bingham  Program , a 
charitable  endowment  held at Tufts’  Medical  Center,  established  in 1932  to promote  health  and 
advance  medicine  in Maine.  
 
I am testifying  today  to encourage  the Committees  to add the necessary  funding  into the budget  
to ensure  Maine  CDC’s  School  Oral Health  Program  has the resources  to expand  to all schools  
by 2025,  as enacted  last legislative  session.  
 
In partnership  with several  other  Maine  charitable  foundations,  the Bingham  Program  has been  a 
long-time supporter  of efforts  to improve  the oral health  of children  in Maine.   However,  despite  
decades  of investment  by groups  like Bingham,  we have  seen little progress  in improving  
children’s  oral health.   While  our investments  can seed important  innovation,  we do not have  the 
resources  to bring  that innovation  to scale, or to even  ensure  the most  basic  level  of care for our 
kids.   Only  the State  of Maine  is in the position  to do that.  The Maine  CDC’s  School  Oral 
Health  Program  is the most  efficient,  scalable  way to improve  the oral health  of Maine  children,  
and, when  adequately  funded,  has a successful  track  record.  
 
I ask all members  of both Committees  to include  the necessary  funding  in this budget  to allow  
the School  Oral Health  program  to expand  to all public  schools  in Maine  by 2025 .  This modest  
investment  will help to improve  children’s  oral health  in our state for generations  to come.  
 
Thank  you for your consideration  of this critical  piece  of funding .   
 

