`
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ 
feedingmaine.org
February 28, 2023
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee On Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs in support of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations 
from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025. 
Good afternoon Senators Rotundo and Ingwersen, Representatives Sachs and Pluecker, and 
members of both the Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Agriculture, Conservation, and 
Forestry Committees.
My name is Nancy Perry, and I am Senior Sourcing Manager for Good Shepherd Food Bank. I 
am here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of the Mainers Feeding Mainers 
funding included in the budget before you for consideration. 
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access 
to nutritious food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the 
public in the fight to end hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 
600 organizations to help distribute food to community members in need. Our network of partner 
agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior centers, school programs, and healthcare 
facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working with communities of color 
to address food security in a culturally responsive way. 
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with 
the state legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make 
Maine a stronger, better place to work and live.
Now more than ever, in a time when many Mainers are recovering from the pandemic, inflation, 
and economic uncertainty, we must continue to invest in innovative programs such as Mainers 
Feeding Mainers that seek to strengthen food/nutrition security and our local, agricultural 
economy. Through Mainers Feeding Mainers, Good Shepherd Food Bank purchases local 
products from Maine farms on behalf of local hunger relief partners throughout the state.  
Mainers Feeding Mainers has become a critical source of income for the 80 farm partners and 
10 food processors we work with throughout the state. Time and time again, farmers have 
shared how their contract with Good Sheperd Food Bank provides financial security and peace of 
mind. The program offers flexibility to farmers. Good Shepherd Food Bank can pivot and 
`
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ 
feedingmaine.org
purchase what is available if our farm partners face seasonal crop failures or unforeseen 
challenges. Greg Jordan of Jordan Farms in Chester has shared that Mainers Feeding Mainers 
has helped him grow his business and invest in cold storage and new equipment. Greg 
appreciates the mission of the program and putting more money back into the local farm 
economy. In fact, last year Good Shepherd Food Bank invested $1 million dollars back into the 
economy through the program. In recent years, 70% of Mainers Feeding Mainers farms have 
hired additional staff, 84% have purchased equipment and 72% have expanded acreage!
Greg also shared he never anticipated how much more exposure, interactions, and friendships 
would result from participating in Mainers Feeding Mainers. Last summer he met a woman at his 
farm stand. She is an in-home caretaker and had accompanied her clients to a local food pantry 
where they received beautiful produce. She told him she was impressed with the product and had 
to get some for herself. 92% of farm partners report higher farm revenue after participating in 
Mainers Feeding Mainers.
Many of the farm partners and pantries highlight the relationships they are building together. 
Last year 1 millions pounds of Maine’s finest produce was delivered to Good Shepherd Food 
Bank’s distribution centers, and subsequently distributed throughout the whole state. In addition, 
another half a million pounds of produce were delivered directly from the farm partner to the 
pantry partner. These meaningful relationships build a strong food network in Maine. 
Mainers Feeding Mainers ensures we are able to provide fresh, beautiful locally grown, nutrient 
dense produce to all Mainers facing hunger. We are entering our 13th growing season with this 
program and we continue to find ways to build stronger partnerships, more efficient, innovative 
ways to meet the need. In recent years, we have expanded our work with BIPOC growers and 
now partner with 15 farms. We have worked with all of our farmers to grow more culturally 
relevant produce such as sweet potato leaves and fresh herbs for our New Mainer populations.
As you have heard today, Mainers Feeding Mainers, is an important program that invests in the 
farm economy while ensuring all Mainers have access to nutritious, local food. Thank you for 
your consideration of our testimony.
Sincerely,
Nancy Perry 
Senior Sourcing Manager 
nperry@gsfb.org
207-212-1889
Good Shepherd Food Bank
