Maine Developmental Disabilities Council 
February 14, 2023 
Testimony in favor of LD 258 An Act Making Unified Appropriations and 
Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State 
Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper 
Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 
30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and the distinguished members of the Joint 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs: 
My name is Nancy Cronin and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council (DD Council). I am here to testify in support of PART A Section 
Z185. 
Who We Are: _ 
Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental 
Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970. Maine’s DD Council has 
been advocating for individuals with Developmental Disabilities (DD) for over 40 years. 
The DD Council is a federally-funded, independent organization with members from 
across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and 
representatives of public and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for 
services for individuals with developmental disabilities. 
As required in federal law‘ , our purpose is to promote systems change to ensure that all 
individuals with developmental disabilities are able to live and fully participate in their 
communities of choice. Working in partnership with people with disabilities, parents, 
advocates, and policy makers, Maine’s DD Council works to promote the independence, 
‘ The Council’s Work is govemed by the federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act, 
which defines a "developmental disability" as a severe chronic disability of an individual that is attributable toa 
mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical impairments, manifested before the individual 
attains age 22 and likely to continue indeﬁnitely, which results in substantial functional limitations in 3 or more of 
the following areas of major life activity: self-care; receptive and expressive language; leaming; mobility; self- 
direction; capacity for independent living and economic self-sufficiency. 
225 Westem Avenue, Suite 4, Augusta, l\/iaine 04330 207-28'/~42l3 800-244-3990 wwwmaineddc org
integration, and inclusion of all people with disabilities through advocacy, capacity 
building, and systems change activities throughout the state of Maine and on the 
national level. The DD Council's mission is to create a Maine in which all people are 
valued and respected because we believe communities are stronger when 
everyone is included. The Maine DD Council employs 3.5 full-time staff who are 
responsible for all of the internal projects, external grants, and business of the Council. 
What We Do: 
~ Promote and provide grants for activities that expand the capacity of communities 
to provide opportunities for individuals with developmental disabilities to actively 
participate in all aspects of community life. 
v Advocate for systemic changes that allow individuals with developmental 
disabilities to achieve full integration and pursue meaningful and productive lives. 
0 Increase public awareness and work to eliminate barriers that impact the 
independence, productivity and inclusion of people with developmental 
disabilities. 
0 Foster and support coalitions and other advocacy and community groups. 
0 Support close working relationships among the various public and private service 
providers. 
With our Federal Funds and the required State Match, the Maine DD Council will 
continue our novel work to improve the lives of l\/laine people with DD and the systems 
they utilize. The DD Council works with State Agencies to identify potential solutions to 
systemic problems and funds projects to test whether or not the solutions are effective. 
We are a unique agency in that it is ourjob to try out new ideas, evaluate their 
effectiveness, and apply the lessons learned for systemic improvements. While more 
can be read about our programs in the 2023 legislative report, I would like to highlight a 
few projects that we have recently worked on to improve the system, for example the 
Maine DD Council: 
0 Provides funding and technical assistance to Speaking Up For Us (SUFU) to 
support individuals with DD to have real, self-determined lives in the community. 
In just the last couple of years, in the midst of a pandemic, hundreds of 
individuals with DD either received training or achieved greater independence as 
a result of SUFU’s work. SUFU’s work was especially important during COVID 
preventing complete isolation by providing peer contact and opportunities to be 
involved and share what concerns in the middle of a global pandemic. 
225 Western Avenue, Suite 4, Augusta, Mains 04330 207-287-4213 800-244-3990 www.maineddc org
I 
o Provide expertise in public policy about existing systems and how systems work 
together. Forever grounded and directed by our Council members with lived 
experience the Maine DD Council takes the long view in systems change witha 
keen eye towards outcomes as opposed just to outputs. A couple examples: 
0 Maine DD Council recognizes that the earlier a child is identified as having 
a disability and receiving intervention the better. Over the last 15 years 
we have worked to identify children with delays earlier and advocated for 
barriers to be removed to access necessary educational and medical 
interventions. We have done this through multiple advocacy projects to 
increase screening, identification, and decrease barriers to children 
accessing effective early intervention. Our hope is through our efforts the 
system will be improved and we have seen some progress. While we 
recognize early identification still needs to be even earlier the needle has 
moved from an average identification ten years ago of age 8 to age 4 in 
Maine. We look forward to reporting one day that the average age has 
reached 18 months — until that time we will continue to push the system to 
do better. 
We continue to be a prominent voice in Maine for early, comprehensive, 
and effective early intervention through our advocacy, but we also provide 
funding to test novel approaches. Currently we are funding a pediatric 
center to house an enhanced model of care navigation aimed at 
advocating and guiding families of young children after diagnosis until they 
are able to fully access services. We hope that this project not only helps 
some children and families but that we learn more about current gaps and 
gain insight on how to close those gaps so that all children with disabilities 
are able to access the services they need faster. The ultimate goal is to 
ensure all young children with delays are able to maximize early 
inten/ention. 
o Another long term change that the Maine DD Council has focused on is to 
advocate for a self-directed service delivery model to be available here in 
Maine as an alternative to traditionally delivered and managed services, 
such as an agency delivery model. Self-direction of sen/ices allows 
participants to have the responsibility for managing all aspects of service 
delivery in a person-centered planning process. After many years of 
advocacy and work we are thrilled to report that a self-directed option is 
available to recipients of one of the adult DD waivers. 
225 Western Avenue, Suite 4, Augusta, Maine 04330 207-287-4213 800-244-3990 www.maineddc.org
- Provide funding and technical assistance to improve healthcare for people of all 
ages with DD. Over the last few years the Maine DD Council has partnered with 
the Maine Primary Care Association through a multipronged approach, including 
increasing understanding of adverse occurrences experienced by individuals with 
DD, planning and implementing a response to address adverse occurrences, 
increasing clinical capacity to address the needs of individuals with DD through 
evidence-based practices (project ECHO), and modifying typical clinical 
processes/practices to address specific needs of individuals with DD through 
evidence-based practices (project ECHO). Part of that work included the creation 
of a “practice readiness document ” , outlining how to create a safe and supportive 
environment for these patients. ECRI, a nationally renowned institute for safe 
medical practices, became a partner in testing that document. As a result of this 
work MDDC has been recognized by HRSA for its role in innovation in utilizing a 
patient safety organization to partner with a local agency on a shared need (in 
this case, how to best provide care for patients with developmental disabilities). 
An impact study highlighting our work as a promising practice can be found on 
The Administration for Research and Health Quality (AHRQ) website. 
All of the above work products are high-quality and are highly beneficial to the systems 
that serve people with DD. The State Match Funds go and will continue to go to funding 
projects throughout Maine to develop and test models of sen/ices of supports that meet 
the needs of Maine communities and directly improve people’s lives. 
I really could go on and on about the wonderful work that the DD Council does. 
How We Are Funded: 
Every State and Territory in the United States of America has its own Developmental 
Disabilities Council. The Administration for intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 
provides each state with an allotment of federal funding to support Council work. In 
return, the federal government requires that each state provide funds to their DD 
Council via a State Match. The funding proposed in this bill would do just that by 
providing a State Match for the current fiscal year. The Maine DD Council works ona 
five-year State Plan system, in which as soon as staff completes a project they move on 
to the next. 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak. I am happy to take any questions. 
225 Western Avenue, Suite 4, Augusta, 1\/tainc Q4330 207'~28?-4213 800844-3990 wwwrnaineddc ow
Maine Developmental 
Disabilities Council 
Annual Report 
Submitted to the 131“ Legislature 
State of Maine, 1“ session 
Pursuant to 34B: 17001 
January 1-December 31, 2022 
This information has been compiled by Maine Developmental Disabilities Council, pursuant to its duties under the federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights 
Act of 2000, to complete and update a comprehensive review and analysis of services, supports, and other assistance [or individuals with developmentaldisabilities (as speciﬁed 
in 42 United States Code, Chapter 144, Section 15024(c)(3)). 
This project was supported, in part by grant number ZOOIMESCDD-O2, from the U.S. Administration for Community Living, Department of Health and Human Services, 
Washington, D. C. Z0201. Grantees undertaking projects with governmentsponsorship are encouraged to express /reely their findings and conclusions. Points of view or opinions 
do not, therefore, necessarily represent ofﬁcial AC L policy.
Throughout FY22, as the l\/laine Developmental Disability Council 
initiated its 2022-26 State Plan, we heard from members, 
stakeholders, and community members about their “ending the 
pandemic" experience. As restrictions eased, persons at high risk, 
including many persons with developmental disabilities, continued to 
experience challenges in accessing their communities and needed 
supports. Families report gaps and long waitlists to access both 
community and education services. Concern from advocacy groups 
and providers regarding young children failing to access needed 
services increased. Adult's report continued un and 
underemployment, even with historically low unemployment. This 
stress has been exacerbated by financial challenges related to 
inflation and by ongoing workforce challenges. 
We appreciate the leadership of Governor Janet Mills and her 
administration as over the past several years the system continues to 
adjust to meet the needs of individuals with DD in a post-pandemic 
world. 
We thank our members and staff for their flexibility and commitment 
throughout 2022. 
Finally, we wish the 131$‘ Legislature all our best as it undertakes a 
difficult job. 
Nancy Cronin 
Executive Director 
207-480-1478 
nancy.e.cronin@maine.gov 
www.maineddc.org
Table of Contents 
I. Maine Developmental Disabilities Council Overview ................. ..5 
Who We Are ................................................................................................................................... .. 
What We Do ................................................................................................................................... ..5
6 
ll. Defining Developmental Disability .... .......................................... ............ .......... ..7 
lll. Concerns of Maine Families Affected by Developmental Disability ............... .. 
Access to Services and Supports .......... .... ....... .... .. 
Adult Developmental Services .................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 
Children's Services and Special E ducation........ .... .. 
Other Services .................................................................................................................... .. 
Other issues .................................................................................................................................... .. 
Poverty ............................................................................................................................. .. u | - - - ¢ ¢ ¢ - - - - ¢ - - ¢ - - u - ¢ - - - u ¢ u a II                
Unemployment ................................................................................................................ .. 10 
Aging Care Givers ............................................................................................................ .. 10 
Dental Care ...................................................................................................................... .. 10 
Transportation ...................................................................... .. 
IV. Maine Developmental Disabilities Council Projects and Initiatives 2022 ........ .. 
Appendix A — Five Year State Plan ............................................................ .. ........................................ ..1O 
........................... ..11 
..................................... ..14
I. Maine Developmental Disabilities Council Overview 
Who We Are 
Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance 
and Bill of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970 to "engage in advocacy, capacity building, and systemic change 
activities that are consistent with the purpose of the DD Act; and contribute to a coordinated, consumer 
and family-centered, consumer and family-directed, comprehensive system of community services, 
individualized supports and other forms of assistance that enable individuals with developmental 
disabilities to exercise self-determination, be independent, be productive and be integrated and 
included in all facets of community life." 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council (MDDC) is a partnership of people with disabilities, their 
families, and agencies which identifies barriers to community inclusion, self-determination, and 
independence, and acts to effect positive change. The Council has a vision that all people are included, 
supported, and valued in communities that provide opportunities to participate and succeed as they 
choose. MDDC acts to affect positive change through advocacy, capacity building, training, 
demonstration projects, and support for other inclusive and collaborative systems change activities. 
Mission 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council is committed to creating a Maine in which all people are 
valued and respected because we believe communities are stronger when everyone is included. 
Purpose 
To promote systems change to ensure that all individuals with developmental and other disabilities 
are able to live and fully participate in their communities of choice. Working in partnership with 
people with disabilities, parents, advocates, and policy makers, MDDC works to promote the 
independence, integration, and inclusion of all people with disabilities through advocacy, capacity 
building, and systems change activities throughout the state of Maine and on the national level. 
Enablino Federal Leqislation 
Under the federal Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 2000, MDDC is 
required to ensure that individuals with developmental disabilities and their families participate in 
the design of, and have access to, needed community services, individualized supports, and other 
forms of assistance that promote self-determination, independence, productivity, integration, and 
inclusion in all facets of family and community life.' 
Council Membership 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council's specific priorities are shaped by its governing council. 
The Council consists of 27 members, 19 of whom are appointed by the Governor. 60% of MDDC’s 
membership is made up of people with developmental disabilities or their representative family 
members. The remaining 40% of MDDC’s membership is made up of representatives of State 
agencies administering federally-funded programs related to individuals with developmental 
disabilities, local non-governmental agencies/organizations that serve people with developmental 
disabilities, and MDDC’s "sister agencies" , so-called because they are also funded through the DD 
Act: Disability Rights Maine, Maine's Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities,
5
and the Center for Community Inclusion and Disability Studies at the University of Maine, Maine's 
University Center for Excellence in Developmental Disabilities. 
The breakdown of membership includes: 
0 5 seats designated for individuals with developmental disabilities 
0 5 seats designated for parents, guardians, or family members of individuals with 
developmental disabilities 
0 6 seats designated for either individuals with developmental disabilities or parents, guardians, 
or family members of individuals with developmental disabilities 
Q 1 seat designated for a local non-governmental agency/organization that serves people with 
developmental disabilities 
0 1 seat for the University Center for Excellence in Developmental Disabilities 
0 1 seat for the Protection and Advocacy agency for people with disabilities 
0 1 seat for a statewide self-advocacy organization 
0 1 seat for each of the following State Agencies: 
o Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Aging and Disability Services 
o Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Child and Family Services 
Department of Health and Human Services, Children with Special Health Needs 
Department of Education, Special Services 
Department of Education, Child Development Services 
o Department of Labor, Vocational Rehabilitation 
Due to its diverse membership, the Council provides opportunities for disparate perspectives to come 
together to work toward systems that support individuals with developmental disabilities to be fully 
included in their communities.     
What We Do 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council is required to engage in advocacy, capacity building, and 
systems change activities that address:A 
Employment Transportation 
Health Community Supports 
Child Care Quality Assurance/Self-Determination 
Recreation Education and Early Intervention 
'2' Housing 
MDDC develops a five-year plan that best suits the needs of the community. Current strategies 
include:_
V 
0 Promote and provide small grants for activities that expand the capacity of communities to 
provide opportunities for individuals with developmental disabilities to actively participate in 
community life 
0 Advocate for systems change that allow individuals with developmental disabilities to achieve 
full integration and to pursue meaningful and productive lives 
0 increase public awareness and work to eliminate barriers that negatively impact independence, 
productivity, and inclusion of people with developmental disabilities 
0 Foster and support coalitions and other advocacy and community groups 
0 Support close working relationships among the various public and private service providers                                   
Five-Year State Plan — See Appendix A.
6
ll. Defining Developmental Disability 
The US Department of Health and Human Services ’ Administration on intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities states that: 
”A developmental disability is a severe chronic disability of an individual that: 
~ ls attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical 
impairments 
o ls manifested before the individual attains age 22 
~ ls likely to continue indefinitely 
~ Results in substantial functional limitations in 3 or more of the following areas of major life 
activity: self-care; receptive and expressive language; learning; mobility; self-direction; 
capacity for independent living; and economic self-sufficiency 
- Reflects the individual ’s need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or 
generic services, individualized supports, or other forms of assistance that are of lifelong or 
extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated 
An individual from birth to age 9, who has a substantial developmental delay or specific congenital or 
acquired condition, may be considered to have a developmental disability without meeting 3 or more 
ofthe criteria described above if the individual, without services and supports, has a high probability 
of meeting those criteria later in life.” (Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act of 
2000) 
The federal definition isfunctional; that is, it is intended to describe the nature and scope of 
limitations without reference to medical diagnosis. 
How Many People Have Developmental Disabilities? 
The Administration on intellectual and Developmental Disabilities estimates the population 
prevalence of developmental disabilities at 1.58%. 
Approximately 21,000 Mainers of all ages have developmental disabilities. 
The overall prevalence of disability among all people in the United States is 12.6%1; among people in 
Maine it is 16.3%2 Approximately 217,000 Mainers report having a disability 
1 
https://www.disabilitystatistics.0rg/repo11s/ acs.cfm?statistic=1 
2 https://WWW.disabilitystatistics.org/reports/acs.cfm?statistic=1
7
Ill. Concerns of Maine Families Affected by Developmental Disability 
Access to Services and Supports 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council monitors available data about services and supports 
available to Mainers with developmental disabilities and gathers input about gaps in the system. 
Adult Developmental Services 
Upon reaching adulthood, the availability of individual and family supports changes from a model of 
entitlement to eligibility. To be eligible for Developmental Services, an individual must demonstrate 
substantial functional limitations in three (3) or more of the areas of major life activity (such as self- 
care, receptive and expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent 
living, and economic self-sufficiency). 
MDDC has noted with appreciation the attention to the state's addressing the waitlists for waiver 
services. However, there continues to be a significant, growing, need for services. MDDC also notes 
the challenges encountered by eligible persons in actually accessing those services, particularly 
l h peop e wit challenging behaviors. Waitlist data was obtained by the Office of Aging and Disability 
Services and its predecessors. 
2500 W Adult Developmental Service Waitlists 
-2000 
1500 
1000 
500 l
l 
.-
l
< 
.. 1,-..,~ >»1 —» .. .._.._-.7. ,- v"" . .I                                                                                                                                                                                                     
_ L, _ Sec U M on 29
8
Children's Services and Special Education 
Children with developmental disabilities are entitled to a fairly robust array of services and supports. 
However, Maine families experience very significant challenges in accessing those services, especially 
the areas of: 
Early intervention: Young children who are at risk of developmental disabilities need early 
intervention services. They are not receiving timely and effective services due to (de facto) 
waitlists, high rates of staff turnover, insufficient funding, lack of inter-department coordination 
and erosion of service delivery capacity due to systematic regulatory changes. 
Obtaining community sugports: At times, families do not receive needed services because 
qualified providers are not available. This is noteworthy in long waits for Section 28 services. One 
father spoke to MDDC of having to decide whether an unreliable support person was preferable 
to no support person and of changing holiday plans based upon the availability of support. 
Another spoke of having no choice but to pursue residential placement (due to the lack of 
availability of support). Another parent spoke of a child receiving speech therapy once every 
other week for a 90-minute session rather than the 20 minutes three times a week that the child 
needed. 
Inadequate transition planning: One mother's comments reflect many other families ’ concerns. 
She said:
” ...Transition is one thing, but if there is little of quality or even adequate to 
transition to, the point of transitioning is completely lost. My experience and 
observations are that a sufficient and qualified pool of support people doesn't exist, 
aren't paid or supported well enough, etc. Right now, my husband and I feel like 
the most realistic plan for our daughter's future is that we must never become ill 
and must never die OR we should c/one ourselves. I know that seems absurd, but it 
is not said necessarily in jest. I'm sure many other families relate to those kinds of 
sentiments, nor is it new to you." 
Other Services 
While the Office of Aging and Disability Services (OADS) provides developmental services to 
approximately 6000 individuals, there are thousands more Mainers who meet the federal criteria of 
having a developmental disability. Some receive appropriate services through another section of 
Maine Care such as Section 19, 20, or 50. Some have multiple diagnoses and receive services such as 
Section 65 or 96 which may create emphasis on alternative diagnoses, leading to less than 
effective/efficient care. Some do well with no services at all. Some do not, Some are in the criminal 
justice system. MDDC hears from/of many Mainers with significant intellectual and developmental 
impairments and their family members who simply do not qualify for services. They struggle to obtain 
and retain housing, transportation, employment, and healthcare. These people are 
disproportionately poor and have been impacted by such issues as Maine's response to Medicaid 
expansion, affordable housing policy, and income-based supports such as SNAP, TANF, general 
assistance, and heating subsidies. 
Other Issues 
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council monitors other issues that significantly impact Maine 
families affected by developmental disabilities.
9
Povertif 32.4% of working-age Mainers with disabilities live at or below the federal poverty level 
(compared to 7.7% for people without disabilities). 
Unemployment 
Historically, the unemployment rate‘ of people with disabilities is double that of the general 
unemployment rate. While numbers specific to people with developmental disabilities are not 
available, relevant data such as the National Core lndicatorsssuggest that the numbers for people 
with developmental disabilities are considerably worse, with only 30% of people employed. 
For individuals with developmental disabilities who do not receive waiver-level services, access to 
ongoing employment supports is extremely limited. This significantly limits people's ability to work. 
Aging Caregivers 
The aging of Maine's population stands to pose serious challenges in meeting the support needs of 
persons with developmental disabilities. Families continue to be the primary providers of care. 
According to national statistics, an estimated 76% of individuals with developmental disabilities live 
at home. ln 25% of these households, the family caregiver was age 60 or older and the average age 
of the family member with a disability was 38 years. There are an estimated 641,000 adults over age 
aged 60 who have developmental and related disabilities, a number that is projected to double by 
2030. 6 ln Maine it is estimated that approximately 4,230 persons with developmental disabilities 
are living at home with caregivers over the age of 60.7 
Dental Care 
Limited or lack of access to both preventative and restorative dental care is a barrier to the health of 
people with developmental disabilities who are not institutionalized. Lack of access is even more 
significant for those who do not have access to waiver-level services. 
Transportation 
Most people with developmental disabilities do not drive. ln a state that is largely rural with little 
public transit infrastructure, this severely limits the ability to travel. People with developmental 
disabilities rely on a patchwork of service providers, family and friends, public transit, taxis, and 
volunteer drivers. individuals with developmental disabilities report that obtaining transportation to 
social and recreational opportunities, particularly individual activities, is especially difficult. 
Community transportation (public/regional and volunteer) is limited geographically, making short 
trips complicated and limiting vocational andsocial opportunities, and is essentially non-existent in. 
the evening or on weekends. People with physical disabilities have additional difficulties with 
transportation in that taxis and private vehicles of family, friends, and volunteer drivers may not be 
accessible, public transit has limited accessible seating, and in the winter, people may have difficulty 
negotiating icy conditions. 
MDDC has noted with concern the access and safety challenges of persons with developmental 
disabilities utilizing Non-Emergency Medical Transportation. 
3 
https://wvvw.disabilitystatistics.org/reports/acs.cfm?statistic=7 
4 
Www.maine.gov/labor/cwri/disabilities/index.html 
5 
https://www.nationalcoreindicators.org/upload/coreindicators/ME_IPS_state_508 .pdf 
6 Heller, Tamar Ph.D. (2011) Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Aging with Developmental Disabilities, 
Clearinghouse on Aging and Developmental Disabilities, Chicago, IL 
7 
Braddock, et al. (2015) The State of the States in Developmental Disabilities Tenth Edition, The University of Colorado
10
lV. Maine Developmental Disabilities Council Projects and initiatives 2022 Highlights 
Supporting Self Advocacy 
Speaking Up for Us (SUFU) is Maine's self-advocacy organization run by and for people with I/DD. 
Created in 1993 to help ensure that individuals living with I/DD in Maine are equal, thriving members 
of their communities. SUFU’s mission is to create new opportunities for adults living with l/DD to 
discover their abilities, exercise freedom and contribute to their communities. Supporting self- 
advocacy has been MDDC's most important initiative for many years in terms of fiscal effort and 
organizational support. In FY22 MDDC provided funding and technical assistance for self-advocates to 
develop leadership and advocacy skills, to increase understanding of and participation in 
policymaking and expanding awareness of and membership in self- advocacy, including youth and 
underserved populations. SUFU, like many organizations, began the year operating on a virtual 
platform and transitioned back into some in-person activities by the year's end. After overcoming 
very significant barriers to the digital shift of recent years, this hybrid format presented operational 
challenges. Self-advocate feedback was positive, although some members had challenges with 
participation throughout the year due to continued public health concerns. 
Advocacy 
ln accordance with its responsibilities under the federal DD Act, l\/laine Developmental Disabilities 
Council has provided ongoing information and support to legislators and other public policymakers in 
the development and review of proposed legislation, rules, and other policies affecting individuals 
with developmental disabilities and their families. MDDC has provided information and participated 
in the revision of statutes and rules affecting civil rights, education, healthcare, employment, housing, 
and other matters of concern to individuals with disabilities, parents, and other family members. The 
legislative and rulemaking process continued to take place virtually. This seems to have decreased 
travel related barriers, increasing geographic diversity of stakeholders in all types of policymaking 
Addressinq Sexual Abuse 
Early in 2022, MDDC received a request for evidence-supported methods to treat people with DD 
who have been sexually assaulted. We conducted a literature review and community canvas and 
learned that trauma therapists and other practitioners express concern that they do not have the 
necessary skills to work with persons who have DD and may turn them away because they feel as 
though they won't be effective. Therapists fluent in working with persons with DD feel that they don't 
have the skill to treat the trauma. This leaves the individual with DD without many places to find 
help. MDDC realized that there wasn't an easy answer and therefore conceived the Community of 
Praxis as a way to increase clinical capacity and professional ability to support people with l/DD who 
have experienced sexual abuse. MDDC gathered 7 clinicians with expertise treating diverse 
individuals with I/DD, including persons with limited communication skills, and expertise in trauma 
informed for sexual abuse and an Advisory Committee composed of people with lived experience and 
representatives from the self-advocacy and sexual assault response organizations. This Community 
of Praxis created a resource compendium of existing best or emerging practice and recommendations 
to improve the care of individuals with DD who have experienced or witnessed sexual assault. 
Documentinq our Hist0riﬂTellinq Our Stories 
The history of the treatment of people with developmental disabilities, both in Maine and elsewhere, 
is a story of stigmatization, isolation, and abuse — but within that tragic history live stories of
11
perseverance, joy, and progress towards something better. ln 1908, the Maine School for the Feeble- 
Minded opened in New Gloucester. Over the years, its name changed several times, and eventually 
became known as Pineland Center, but the idea behind its creation remained: that the proper place 
for people with developmental disabilities was in an institution, shut away from the rest of society. 
When the rampant abuses and neglect in Pineland and elsewhere were exposed in the middle of the 
20th century, a movement for disability rights was born. Self-advocates and their allies fought to 
close Pineland (which finally happened in 1996) and create a system of services that would serve 
people with developmental disabilities in their homes and communities. 
To mark the 25"‘ anniversary of the closure of Pineland that took place in 2021, MDDC has created 
this online exhibit to document the history of the system's response to people with developmental 
disabilities in Maine. Please visit https:[/shadowsofpineland.org[ 
Early Intervention 
The National Center for Disease Control and Prevention's Act Early program aims to improve early 
identification of children with autism and other developmental disabilities so children and families 
can get needed services and support to improve functional outcomes. MDDC's Executive Director 
chaired the independent Advisory Review Committee on Maine's Early Childhood Special Education 
Services and oversaw the implantation of Help Me Grow, system so that young children can be 
screened for disabilities and families can access what they need. MDDC will continue to serve asa 
long-term resource to this program. 
Health 
People with developmental disabilities experience a variety of health disparities including but not 
limited to being more likely to report being in poor health, having shorter average life expectancy 
than the general population, being less likely to receive preventative care, having higher rates of 
undiagnosed hearing and vision impairments, higher rates of/poorly managed chronic health 
conditions, and being prescribed higher rates of psychotropic medication. There are a variety of 
contributing factors, including societal/attitudinal barriers (stigma), barriers due to disability related 
conditions and/or functional limitations related to his/her disability, and other barriers. 
MDDC is working with Maine Primary Care Association to address these issues through a 
multipronged approach, including increasing understanding of adverse occurrences experienced by 
individuals with DD, planning and implementing a response to address adverse occurrences, 
increasing clinical capacity to address the needs of individuals with DD through evidence-based 
practices (project ECHO), and modifying typical clinical processes/practices to address specific needs 
of individuals with DD through evidence-based practices (project ECHO). Part ofthat work included a 
"practice readiness document" , outlining how to create a safe and supportive environment for these 
patients. ECRI, a nationally renowned institute for safe medication practices, became a partner in 
testing that document. The Administration for Research and Health Quality (AHRQ) invited l\/IPCA, 
ECRI, and MDDC to present on the partnerships and readiness brief at the national conference. The 
presentation was so well received, and interest in the readiness brief so positive, AHRQ subsequently 
honored the work by completing an impact case study on the project which can be found at their 
website. As a result of this work MDDC has been recognized by HRSA for its role in innovation in 
utilizing a patient safety organization to partner with a local agency on a shared need (in this case, 
how to best provide care for patients with developmental disabilities). 
Post-Secondary Education
12
Despite many years of effort with the state colleges and universities, Maine does not have any 
residential postsecondary education options for youth with ID. Thus, MDDC was excited to support a 
small liberal arts college that had identified this need to conduct program planning, in-person and 
virtual outreach, education, and technical assistance to increase understanding of and interest in 
campus based post-secondary education to youth with intellectual disabilities and their family 
members. 
Reducinq Restraint and Seclusion 
MDDC supported the Coalition Against Restraint & Seclusion (CARS), a workgroup consisting of family 
members, self-advocates, & other advocates, and funded a pilot project, in which a service provider 
who runs both a special purpose program and residential programs engages in a quality improvement 
and fidelity assessment process study to determine whether restraint, seclusion, and isolation can be 
reduced when staff receives increased training and technical assistance in the program. MDDC 
worked the AUCD to complete a formal program evaluation. Despite significant programmatic 
challenges due to the pandemic, results showed that fidelity was, indeed, associated with a reduction 
of incident reports by twofold in residential settings & threefold in educational settings. MDDC will 
use these promising outcomes to inform its continued advocacy aimed at eliminating the use of 
restraint and seclusion. 
Se/f-Direction 
CMS says: "Self-directed Medicaid services means that participants, or their representatives if 
applicable, have decision-making authority over certain services and take direct responsibility to 
manage their services with the assistance of a system of available supports. The self-directed service 
delivery model is an alternative to traditionally delivered and managed services, such as an agency 
delivery model. Self-direction of services allows participants to have the responsibility for managing 
all aspects of service delivery in a person-centered planning process." 
MDDC contracted with Applied Self Direction to provide technical assistance and with the state's 
community service provider organization to support this effort and has worked with a coalition of 
advocates, service providers, and state agency representatives to provide input towards and 
information about a system that allows people with developmental disabilities more say and 
flexibility in their services. After many years of advocacy, MDDC is thrilled to report that a self- 
directed option is available to recipients of one of the waivers. 
Appendix A -MDDC Five-Year State Plan +2022-2026 + Goals and Objectives 
GOAL # 1 People with developmental disabilities, families, and communities will have increased 
opportunities for choice, self-determination, and community membership.
13
o Objective 1.1: MDDC will promote the civil rights of individuals with developmental disabilities. 
o Objective 1.2: Support Maine's self-advocacy organization and promote development of diverse 
leaders among people with developmental disabilities and families. 
GOAL # 2 Improve systems of support for people with developmental disabilities and families. 
o Objective 2.1: Decrease health and educational disparities experienced by people with 
developmental disabilities. 
o Objective 2.2: improve access, quality, and integration of services and supports for individuals with 
developmental disabilities and families. 
o Objective 2.3: Support efforts to expand access to information and services for underserved 
individuals with developmental disabilities and families.
14
