LD 258 An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to 
the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 
and June 30, 2025
Testimony – Finance Authority of Maine 
February 15, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee, Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee On Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business my name is Natalie Trombley.  I am a registered 
nurse and President of the Organization of Maine Nursing Leadership (OMNL)  presenting our comments 
on the Governor’s budget.  OMNL represents nursing leaders from patient to policy. It is a professional 
organization that directs the course for nursing by promoting sound healthcare policies within our 
organizations and at the local, state, and national level. Towards this Mission, OMNL creates an 
environment that encourages collaborative partnerships.
OMNL recognizes that addressing the nursing shortage is multifaceted, starting with the supply of 
eligible candidates interested in joining a profession that is continually recognized as the most 
respected.  We support the Health Professions Loan Repayment Pilot Program knowing that many 
nurses applied and received loan support funding.  We are in full support of the Governor’s proposal to 
provide FAME with an additional $4 million dollars for the loan repayment program.
OMNL members are also supporting the needs of Maine’s nursing education programs with support for 
faculty and clinical preceptorships providing hands on clinical education for nursing students.  Our 
members also support new nursing graduates as they begin professional practice in Maine’s hospitals 
and health care settings.  
OMNL joined Maine’s nursing organizations and faculty in supporting funding for the Nurse Educator 
Loan Repayment Program during the 130th Legislature.  The $1 million dollars in original funding was 
quickly allocated by FAME in the initial round of applications during the late summer of 2022.  Funds will 
support 12 masters prepared nurses and 12 doctoral prepared nurses to pay off advanced education 
debt with a commitment to teach for 3 years in a Maine based nursing education program.  This is 
significant progress in addressing the faculty needs of our nursing programs.  The funds were allocated 
as one-time funding that is now nearly fully spent.  We ask that the committee’s include $1 million 
dollars in the biennial budget to provide ongoing funds to sustain the nursing education loan 
repayment program into future years.  The addition funds will not be time limited and provide flexibility 
to support nurse educator loan funding for future faculty needs as older faculty retire over time.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the need to support loan repayment for nurses and 
nursing faculty.
