 
 
 
 
Written Testimony of Nathan Miller, LMSW, Vice President of Aging and Disability Services, Spectrum 
Generations (the Central Maine Area Agency on Aging) . 
 
To the Committee on APPROPRIATIONS AND FINANCIAL AFFAIRS 131st Maine Legislature neither for or 
against LD 258 – "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper 
Opera tions of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025"  
 
Delivered Electronically May 18, 2023 after verbal, in -person, testimony May 17, 2023.  
 
This testimony is to urge the committee to amend LD 258 to (or to do so by other means)  appropriate funding  
for older Maine residents as outlined in  LD 1684 – “An Act to Invest in the Health and Wellness of Older Maine  
Residents by Expanding Coordinated Community Programming.”  
 
LD 1684’s fiscal note is smaller co mpared to other line items in the change package but  would still represent a 
large impact and a return on investment.  LD 1684 was voted OTP by the Committee on Health and Human 
Services with significant and incredibly positive bi -partisan support.  
 
Maine’ s social welfare system can be complex and difficult to navigate.  It can be particularly difficult for older 
adults with diminishing capacity to access public benefits and services.  This can lead to negative outcomes like 
homelessness or avoidable hospit alization and institutionalization.  
 
As a Licensed Master of Social Work, providing community services for older adults for nearly 2 decades, I can 
tell you this service is needed, and the need is growing.  Throughout my career it has been the present and 
persistent need.  Something that would not only help individual outcomes, but also improve the efficiency of our 
safety net for older adults.   
 
Numerous older adults are currently in  need of Case Management  services to include, but not limited to 
comprehensive assessment, person -centered service plans, and ongoing service monitoring . However , these 
individuals are unable to receive Case Management support because they do not have the behavioral health, 
Intel lectual or developmental  disabilities that qualify for Case Management services under current guidelines 
and policies.  
 
Maine’s Area Agencies on Aging are best known for Meals on Wheels, but also provide services under Title III B, 
C, D, and E of the Olde r Americans Act.  One of the services within  this scope  is Case Management  for older 
adults, but there is no dedicated funding for this service.  As a result, older adults are falling through the cracks 
of a complicated social welfare system.  
  
Recently, Sp ectrum Generations wrote a grant with the support of Legal Services for the Elderly  (LSE)  to provide 
Case Managemen t services to older clients that are burdened by  eviction cases.  In Central Maine alone, over 
the last year, there were about 100 eviction c ases for older adults.  LSE estimates Case Management services 
could have made the difference in 30 -50% of these cases  – aiding people to remain in their homes  of choice  and 
age with dignity, as we all hope to do . 
 
Maine’s AAA’s provide  a plethora of  supportive services, information, referral, and general assistance through 
Aging and Disability Resource Centers . The d emand for services is so great  that the methodology of providing 
services is ‘catch and release’ in which assistance is pr ovided without ongoing follow -up and suppo rt.  Funding 
for this bill will  ensure tha t ongoing service monitoring is  available to those that need it the most.  This service 
would not conflict with current activities of the ADRC,  and it would not conflict wi th, or duplicate, current Case 
Management or Care Coordination models. Taking this step can only further enhance service capabilities for the 
betterment of our older community members.   
 
Systemic reviews show that for older adults with chronic conditions, Case Management has a positive impact on 
institutionalization delay and nursing home admission rate s.i  Study reviews  also show that Case Management is 
one of the most important services to support caregivers of people with dementia , and that it is an important 
factor in delaying institutionalization.ii  To ensure positive outcomes, we need to ensure older adults have access 
to navigational support for medical care and Long Term Services and Supports.iii 
 
This funding would build a state -wide, s tandardized infrastructure of best practices to support older adults to 
remain in their communities of choice.  It would help older adults navigate social and health services based in 
communities to avoid institutionalization  and unnecessary hospitalizatio n.   
 
Thank you  for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Nate Miller, LMSW  
Vice President of Aging and Disability Services  
nmiller@spectrumgenerations.org  
 
 
 
 
i Pimouguet, C., Lavaud, T., Dartigues , J.F. et al. Dementia case management effectiveness on health care costs and resource utilization: a 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. J Nutr Health Aging 14, 669 –676 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12603 -010-0314 -4 
ii Chu, Paul & Edwards , Joy & Levin, Ron & Thomson, Jim. (2000). The use of clinical case management for early stage Alzheimer' 
patients and their families. American Journal of Alzheimers Disease and Other Dementias - AM J ALZHEIMERS DIS OTHER DEM. 15. 
284-290. 10.1177/15333175 0001500506.  
iii Lines, L . M., Ahaghotu, C ., Tilly, J ., Wiener, J . M. (2013). Care coordination for people with Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias: 
literature review. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Assistant Secretary for Planning and Eva luation Office of Disability, 
Aging and Long -Term Policy Contract #HHSP23320100021WI. https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/private/pdf/76771/AlzCC.pdf  

