{k St. Croix International Watenivay Commission 
February 16, 2023 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources with respect to the proposed Governor's 2024-2025 Biennial Budget 
Neal Berry, Executive Director 
St. Croix International Waterway Commission 
112 Barker Street, PO Box 610, Calais, ME 04619 
O) 207-952-9069 
director@stcroix.org 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is 
Neal Berry, and I am the executive director for the St. Croix International Waterway Commission 
(SCIWC). The SCIWC was established through reciprocal legislation between the State of Maine 
and the Province of New Brunswick in 1987. We are governed through a 1986 Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) signed between the Governor of Maine, and Premier of New Brunswick. 
The MOU highlights the following 8 key points. 
0 To protect and manage a valuable natural and recreational resource for current and future 
usage. 
0 To encourage and maintain a high quality back country recreational and educational 
experience for users. 
0 To encourage tourism with resultant economic benefits to the region. 
0 To protect and promote awareness of human heritage resources including both Indian and 
early European. 
0 To ensure coordination in the planning and management of a shared watershed. 
Q Establish the processes of ensuring fair representation of all user groups within the 
watershed to minimize conflict. 
0 Obtain optimal benefits from the recreational and educational use of the resource. 
The SCIWC board consists of 8 appointed commissioners, 4 from Maine, and 4 from New 
Brunswick. We also have appointed liaisons from both Maine and New Brunswick, through their 
departments of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry (DACF), and Natural Resources and Energy 
Development (DNRED), respectively. 
The St. Croix watershed is large, rural, and primarily forested, with its East branch constituting the 
federal border between the US and Canada. It is the 7"‘ largest watershed in Maine, and the 4*" 
largest in New Brunswick. The watershed represents some of the largest tracts of conservation 
lands in northeastern North America, with over 70% of its landmass (700,000+ acres) under some
{k St. Croix International Waterway Commission 
form of conservation, with almost half under permanent protection. The SCIWC coverage area is 
from the headwaters in Monument Brook (Orient, ME), to the Chiputneticook Lakes (North, East 
Grand, Mud, Spednic, Palfrey Lakes), the upper river corridor flowing into Grand Falls, then down 
to the tidewater past Calais/St. Stephen, into Passamaquoddy Bay at Robbinston/St. Andrews. Our 
coverage area is extremely large, representing some of the largest lakes in Maine (East Grand is 
the 8"‘ largest lake in Maine, Spednic is the 6"‘ largest), and comprises 118 Miles of continuous 
waterway.
i 
Note: number of conservation lands has increased since this graphic was made in 2008 — a 12,000 acre 
conservation easement on the Maine shoreline of East Grand Lake, and 7,265 acres of permanently protected 
lands were added to the Chiputneticook lakes parcel on the New Brunswick side. There are also several other 
smaller conservation parcels contributed by land conservancies in both Maine and New Brunswick.
{k St. Croix International Waterway Commission 
The St. Croix is worthy of protection, it holds the largest concentration of bald eagles in the 
northeast, over 5% of the common loons of Northern Maine, a native population of landlocked 
salmon, as well as an increasing number of native sea-run fish species that are returning to the 
river each year to complete their life cycle. The St. Croix is currently the subject of the largest river 
restoration project in northeastern North America, with the first dam on the river scheduled to be 
removed in July of 2023, and a fish lift scheduled to be built at the second dam beginning in 2024. 
The SCIWC has monitored anadromous fish throughout the watershed since its inception. 
Currently we are conducting fish counts at the first dam, and tracking fish as they move through 
the watershed at various other dams in order to inform stakeholders about restoration efforts, 
and future fish passage design at dams. 
The St. Croix has some of the highest quality sportfishing in Maine and New Brunswick. The 
watershed comprises the highest concentration of registered Maine Guides in the state, with 
many lodges, camps, and workers dependent upon the bountiful natural resources in order to 
make a living. The SCIWC works with guides, lodges, and other organizations to enhance, restore, 
and monitor fish and wildlife populations in order to sustain this rural economy. 
While sharing a border can provide unique collaborations, it can also hinder organizations working 
on both sides. As an international organization we strive ourselves on being able to employ 
workers from both the US and Canada, providing essential services in both Maine and New 
Brunswick, as well as maintaining a non-biased approach to the management of resources from 
both countries. in doing so we must maintain non-profit and charitable status in both countries, 
maintain federal work visas and work permits, maintain separate banking and accounting services, 
file two separate federal income taxes, and more. It has become increasingly difficult and 
expensive to maintain insurance coverage while operating commercially in both countries. 
inflation has hit our organization particularly hard, with increased costs for transportation, wages, 
fuel, currency exchange fluctuations, and more. As a primarily recreational and environmental 
organization with such a large coverage area, increased costs for gas to power our boats, trucks, 
chainsaws, lawnmowers, and more have greatly increased expenditures. As both Washington and 
Charlotte (New Brunswick) counties are some of the most economically depressed regions in both 
Maine and New Brunswick, we strive to provide meaningful seasonal and full time employment to
{Q St. Croix international Waterway Commission 
locals. As wages in both Maine and New Brunswick have increased, maintaining our standard of 
providing jobs paying more than minimum wage has become increasingly difficult. 
Maine has provided funding through the general fund since the SClWC’s inception. Currently 
$25,000 goes towards general administrative overhead - rent, office supplies, employee training, 
and equipment. $25,000 also goes toward the hiring of an administrative assistant (employee isa 
Maine resident), a cost which is shared with New Brunswick, which has allowed the SCIWC to grow 
and flourish. In 2022 we were awarded with the non-profit of the year award by our local Calais 
chamber of commerce. Maine has also provided the SCIWC with $5,300 annually from the DACF 
for care, maintenance, and management of 18 canoe-access only campsites, 2 portages, and3 
access points to the upper St. Croix River. In December of 2022, the department acknowledged 
they would no longer be able to contribute this funding as we are now classiﬁed as a general fund 
organization. As of 2023, this funding was barely able to cover the cost of sewage pumping at the 
three access points. ln addition to the previously supplied $5,300, SCIWC has received a varying 
amount of funding through the privately owned St. Croix Endowment Fund. This fund was setup as 
part of the 2003 acquisition of approximately 51 miles (2,773 acres) of shorefront and islands 
within Maine's Spednic Lake/Upper St. Croix River corridor. The lands and campsites on Spednic 
Lake are owned by the Department of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife (DlF&W), while the lands and 
campsites on the upper river corridor are owned by DACF. The ownership, management, 
maintenance, and responsibility of the various state and privately owned conservation lands, 
campsites, boat launches, public access, recreation areas, and portages have been complex and 
contentious on the St. Croix watershed. Currently some funding is provided to SCIWC through the 
St. Croix Endowment Fund to look after these various recreation sites along the waterway, 
however this amount fluctuates depending upon fund performance. 
The number of users on the St. Croix River has continued to increase. The global pandemic has 
shown the public that access to recreational natural resources can provide an outlet to escape 
from the daily pressures of a modern society, this is reflected in our obsen/ations as stewards of 
the river. More and more people are coming to our watershed to canoe, fish, recreate, and enjoy 
the surrounding beauty and scenery associated with the waterway. In our yearly survey of local 
guides, recent years have been their busiest to date, with their observations being backed up by 
our own. With increased usage comes increased conflict between user groups, increased campsite 
care and maintenance, and having to increase our presence on the watershed. Starting in 2022we
ii St. Croix lnternational Waterway Commission 
have been diligently working with our state liaisons to secure permanent, public access to the 
upper river corridor in Vanceboro. The SCIWC has had an increasingly constrained budget to be 
able to maintain all of our existing programs and work, and has always managed to do more, with 
less. 
The St. Croix International Waterway Commission is committed to working with both the State 
of Maine, and the Province of New Brunswick in managing our shared watershed, and we ask for 
your assistance in continuing this great and prosperous partnership in achieving our common 
goals and assisting in future projects. 
Thank you for your consideration in this matter, I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have. Our doors will always remain open to the people of the State of Maine, and we are always 
working to maintain our shared vision for this incredible waterway. 
Sincerely, 
Neal Berry 
Executive Director 
St. Croix International Waterway Commission
