Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and 
members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Nickole Wesley. l am a Judicial 
Branch employee here on my own time to speak in support of LD 258, the biennial 
budget. I have been with the Judicial Branch for thirteen years, starting out as an 
Assistant Clerk in Portland and currently work in the Administrative Office of the Courts 
as the Communication Access Specialist managing the Branch’s interpreter program. l 
am also the President of the Judicial Chapter of the Maine Service Employees 
Association Local 1989. Those roles have afforded me the opportunity to speak to 
employees all over the state and learn about the many struggles they face on a daily 
basis. 
Clerks from Springvale to Houlton, and beyond have been working overtime to keep up 
with the volume of work. One clerk l talked to had worked until 11 p.m. the previous 
evening and was in at 7:00 a.m. the following morning to try and get as much done 
during the quiet hours as possible. Another clerk was on her tenth consecutive day of 
work, working full days on the weekends. One count had a notebook full of all of the 
overtime hours each employee has worked since June 2022 and the pages were full.A 
clerk at one location just two weeks ago told me “it's a good day if someone doesn’t 
II 
cry. 
When l worked as a clerk I had the occasional difficult customer or customer presenting 
with mental health problems. That has dramatically changed over the last couple years. 
Court employees are not prepared or equipped to deal with such things yet they do it to 
the best of their ability and often remarkably everyday. As one would expect this has 
resulted in massive employee burnout that caused many experienced employees to 
seek other, less stressful and more flexible options. That has taken atoll on the 
employees that have stayed, some offices were severely understaffed to a point that 
courts had to occasionally close. Despite all of that the general public and many that 
interact with the court system expect “business as usual” and the employees are doing 
their absolute best to provide that, but it’s getting harder to sustain the longer things
continue the way they are. Relying on overtime to run an entire branch of government is 
not sustainable. Employees have had to take time off for their own mental health and 
many who wished they could and just kept going anyway because the work needed to 
be done. 
All of these struggles also extend to employees in the Branch that work in support 
services like court operations, court access, and technology as well as administrative 
services like finance. They all care immensely about the work they do and recognize the 
significance that the court system plays in the lives of Maine citizens. They take that 
responsibility seriously and work hard every day to keep the justice system moving. All 
the Judicial Branch employees I've talked to are exhausted and doing the best they can 
with what they have. Increasing positions and funding to make other improvements so 
the hard-working employees of the Maine Judicial Branch can continue to facilitate 
justice is not an unreasonable request and is ultimately in the best interest of Maine 
people. l urge you to please vote yes on LD 258 and approve the Judicial Branch’s 
biennial budget request. Thank you for your time.
