Testimony of Nicole Rea
Coordinator/Biddeford Ready!
In Support of LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General 
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal 
Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025" 
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and the Joint 
Standing Committee on on Health and Human Services 
Tuesday, February 21, 2023, State House Room 228
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Health and 
Human Services, my name is Nicole Rea, Coordinator for Biddeford Ready!, and I reside in 
Kennebunk, Maine. 
Initiative: Provides funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 635 for 
salary supplements awarded to individuals who provide childcare or are early childhood 
educators.
I’m testifying to support the salary supplement investments for early childhood educators 
working in childcare programs. I’m also asking for you to increase the investments in this salary 
supplement program. 
As aforementioned, I work for a collective impact initiative called Biddeford Ready! Our mission 
is to ensure all children in Biddeford enter school ready to thrive. That means increasing access 
to quality early childhood education for all children in Biddeford. My role as coordinator for this 
initiative requires that I listen to and form relationships with early educators and childcare 
providers, business owners, parents/caregivers, and other nonprofit organizations working on 
behalf of children. 
Early educators tell me of children entering their programs with increased socio-emotional 
challenges because they are isolated from other children due to the lasting effects of COVID-19 
and the childcare crisis. They have done everything they can to entice workers, but profit 
margins have shrunk to an unsustainable level, and most are operating under-staffed and under 
capacity. Many others have decided to close their doors in the years after 2020.
I hear from business owners that employee engagement and retention are down, and unreliable 
childcare is a significant contributor. Finally, I hear from families, parents, and caregivers who 
struggle to find openings in childcare centers for their children, and often when they do, they 
cannot afford to send their children. Low wages for early educators and childcare providers 
affect entire communities, our economy, and the health and well-being of families. 
An anacronym borrowed from United Way called ALICE stands for Asset Limited, Income 
Constrained, Employed, and describes families that are employed yet unable to meet basic 
needs like childcare. Families under this description make too much to qualify for subsidized 
childcare but not enough to afford placement for their children. The work I do is personal for me 
because I am ALICE. I am a full-time working mother with a master’s degree who cannot afford 
childcare. While I am fortunate that I have a family to help fill this need for us, many families do 
not have the luxury of having family members who can help. My daughter entered preschool 
with socio-emotional challenges. While she was loved and cared for at home, she did not have 
experience in early education environments with children her age and struggled to adapt. We 
must do better for our children, our families, our economy, and our communities. It is time to 
invest in early childhood education.
Later this session there will be a bill to propose increases to the salary supplement program and 
I ask you to support these measures to help save child care in the state of Maine.
