Testimony of Noami Brautigam of Monroe before the 131st Legislature’s Joint Standing Committee Appropriations CommitteeGood afternoon members of the Joint Standing Appropriations Committee, My name is Noami Brautigam, I am a resident of Monroe, and I am writing you today as both a farmer and a farmers’ market organizer urging you to support LD 258  and the appropriation in the Governor's Budget to the Nutrition Incentive Fund, but please change the funding from "one-time" to "CONTINUOUS" so that the program can have baseline state support indefinitely. My partner, James Gagne, and I own and operate Second Frost Farm, an organic vegetable farm in Waldo County.  Our farm participates in both the Belfast Farmers’ Market and Rockland Farmers’ Market.  Both of these farmers' markets are solely organized by its membership of farmers and small business owners.  This year members from each of these markets are volunteering their time to fundraise between $6,000 and $10,000 to bridge the gap in funds to support running the SNAP/ Maine Harvest Bucks program.  Our farm has the unique perspective of actively organizing the SNAP/Maine Harvest Bucks programs at both markets.  The Rockland Farmers’ Market, which runs May-October, has been running a SNAP/Maine Harvest Bucks program for less than five years where as the Belfast Farmers’ Market, which runs year round, has been running a SNAP/Maine Harvest Bucks program for nearly ten years.  Last year in Rockland shoppers spent a total of $12,500 SNAP and Maine Harvest Bucks while Belfast shoppers spent $55,000 SNAP and Maine Harvest Bucks.  Year after year, we watch each program grow in both number of SNAP shoppers and dollars spent. While running these food access programs at market is no small amount of extra work, we really value participating in farmers markets that are truly community spaces where locally produced food can be made more affordable. In addition to increasing market accessibility by creating an opportunity for community members from more income brackets to shop at the market and bring fresh food home to their kitchen table, hosting the SNAP/ Maine Harvest Bucks program also benefits the farmers and market members.  At my own farm, as we go into our 9th season growing and selling at farmers’ markets, SNAP and Maine Harvest Buck sales account for about 10% of our annual sales. Continuous state funding for this program will make a huge difference to its sustainability by helping cover the costs of: the bonus bucks (Maine Harvest Bucks) for the fresh produce incentive, SNAP/EBT equipment, staffing the farmers’ market info booths and promoting the program to increase the number of SNAP shoppers at market. Both farmers’ markets we participate in really value the Maine Harvest Bucks program and the way that it helps us create a market that can be a community experience for as many folks as possible.  However, with the markets being solely organized by its members who each operate our own farms or other small businesses, annual fundraising to keep this program a float can feel like a lot of extra work that can be difficult to find time to accomplish.  Continuous funding at the level of $600,000 per year would not only ensure accessible markets around the state but also would allow each market to plan for program growth without funding uncertainties.  From my vantage point where I see more SNAP shoppers and dollars spent at farmers’ markets each year at two different markets, it is really exciting to think about how much more potential expansion there is if LD 258 is supported and fully funded. Thank you for your consideration, Noami Brautigam 

Noami Brautigam
Monroe
LD 258
Testimony of Noami Brautigam of Monroe before the 131st Legislature’s Joint 
Standing Committee Appropriations Committee
Good afternoon members of the Joint Standing Appropriations Committee, 
My name is Noami Brautigam, I am a resident of Monroe, and I am writing you today
as both a farmer and a farmers’ market organizer urging you to support LD 258  and 
the appropriation in the Governor's Budget to the Nutrition Incentive Fund, but please
change the funding from "one-time" to "CONTINUOUS" so that the program can 
have baseline state support indefinitely. 
My partner, James Gagne, and I own and operate Second Frost Farm, an organic 
vegetable farm in Waldo County.  Our farm participates in both the Belfast Farmers’ 
Market and Rockland Farmers’ Market.  Both of these farmers' markets are solely 
organized by its membership of farmers and small business owners.  This year 
members from each of these markets are volunteering their time to fundraise between 
$6,000 and $10,000 to bridge the gap in funds to support running the SNAP/ Maine 
Harvest Bucks program. 
Our farm has the unique perspective of actively organizing the SNAP/Maine Harvest 
Bucks programs at both markets.  The Rockland Farmers’ Market, which runs 
May-October, has been running a SNAP/Maine Harvest Bucks program for less than 
five years where as the Belfast Farmers’ Market, which runs year round, has been 
running a SNAP/Maine Harvest Bucks program for nearly ten years.  Last year in 
Rockland shoppers spent a total of $12,500 SNAP and Maine Harvest Bucks while 
Belfast shoppers spent $55,000 SNAP and Maine Harvest Bucks.  Year after year, we 
watch each program grow in both number of SNAP shoppers and dollars spent.
While running these food access programs at market is no small amount of extra 
work, we really value participating in farmers markets that are truly community 
spaces where locally produced food can be made more affordable. In addition to 
increasing market accessibility by creating an opportunity for community members 
from more income brackets to shop at the market and bring fresh food home to their 
kitchen table, hosting the SNAP/ Maine Harvest Bucks program also benefits the 
farmers and market members.  At my own farm, as we go into our 9th season growing
and selling at farmers’ markets, SNAP and Maine Harvest Buck sales account for 
about 10% of our annual sales.
Continuous state funding for this program will make a huge difference to its 
sustainability by helping cover the costs of: the bonus bucks (Maine Harvest Bucks) 
for the fresh produce incentive, SNAP/EBT equipment, staffing the farmers’ market 
info booths and promoting the program to increase the number of SNAP shoppers at 
market.
Both farmers’ markets we participate in really value the Maine Harvest Bucks 
program and the way that it helps us create a market that can be a community 
experience for as many folks as possible.  However, with the markets being solely 
organized by its members who each operate our own farms or other small businesses, 
annual fundraising to keep this program a float can feel like a lot of extra work that 
can be difficult to find time to accomplish.  Continuous funding at the level of 
$600,000 per year would not only ensure accessible markets around the state but also 
would allow each market to plan for program growth without funding uncertainties.  
From my vantage point where I see more SNAP shoppers and dollars spent at 
farmers’ markets each year at two different markets, it is really exciting to think about
how much more potential expansion there is if LD 258 is supported and fully funded.
Thank you for your consideration,
Noami Brautigam

