Testimony of Patricia Kimball on Behalf of the Elder Abuse Institute of Maine
To Joint Standing Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs
In favor of LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General
Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government
___
Greetings Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer ,
and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services.
My name is Patricia Kimball and I am the Executive Director of the Elder Abuse Institute of
Maine.  I am testifying today in support of the proposed appropriation for Elder Justice
Investments which would include support for the Elder Service Connections program that my
nonprofit runs. That program, along with others that are part of the proposal considered today ,
were among the top recommendations identified in the Elder Justice Roadmap, developed by
a
public-private partnership convened by
the Governor
with numerous
stakeholders, including our
organization.
The Elder Abuse Institute of Maine is a statewide nonprofit that serves older Mainers at risk for ,
or experiencing abuse, neglect or exploitation. We run several programs, including the one this
appropriation would fund. Elder Service Connections provides community-based services for
clients referred to us by Adult Protective Services.
It’s the flagship program of the nationally recognized RISE model that was conceived of in
Maine and first pilot tested in Cumberland and Aroostook counties beginning in 2019. The
results exceeded even our hopes. Although APS refers its most intractable cases, our work with
clients significantly decreases re-referrals.

APS workers like RISE because it augments their ef forts with positive results for their clients.
And clients too have very positive views of the program. We know this because it’ s one of the
few programs around the country to collect outcomes data that researchers analyze.
Our Advocates work one-on-one with clients, state-wide, helping them to address their needs,
and ensuring that their choice, autonomy and dignity are upheld.  To date, we’ve served over 400
older Mainers.  The program was built on established methods: we help our clients believe
change is possible, we help build support around them so they’re not so isolated and vulnerable.
And if they want, we help them to repair relationships that have been breached.
The program’ s model and outcomes have been written up national journals. Other states want to
replicate it, in part, because it’ s better for clients and for APS and in part because we believe it
saves money over the long term by reducing the cost of cases boomeranging back to APS.
I have been doing this work for decades, and this is the most exciting and hopeful work of my
career . Why? It’ s having a great relationship with APS. It’ s working with researchers, who study
the impact of our work. And most of all, it’ s seeing our clients’  being able to live better lives,
with less suf fering, even when most everyone has given up on them.
Older peoples’  struggles are often invisible. They become isolated. They lack support networks,
sometimes forcing them to depend on people who might harm them. There’ s so much we can do.
We help our clients find the right housing. Get food. Get connected with legal services and health
care.  It’ s a new more hopeful way of doing things that saves money and improves lives. I hope
you will fund it.
Thank you.
