Testimony of Patrick Keliher, Commissioner 
Maine Department of Marine Resources 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
The Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
"An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law 
Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources, I am Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the 
Department of Marine Resources. I am here today to present testimony in support of Governor 
Mills’ biermial budget, LD 258, speciﬁcally those items related to the Maine the Department of 
Marine Resources (DMR). 
This budget advances the Govemor’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more prosperous state 
where opportunity is available to all, then We must invest in the infrastructure ﬂiat supports the 
people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is Why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on every day 
to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted budget and the last legislative 
session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent way over the past four years, making sure 
that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic —~ We lived within our means. This budget 
proposal continues that practice. 
DMR is established to conserve and develop marine and estuarine resources, conduct and sponsor 
scientiﬁc research, promote and develop the Maine coastal ﬁshing industries, advise and cooperate 
With local, state, and federal ofﬁcials concerning activities in coastal waters, and to implement, 
administer, and enforce the laws and regulations necessary for these purposes. 
There are more than 70 marine species that are harvested commercially, caught recreationally, and 
raised by aquaculturists. In 2021, lobster represented the highest value ﬁshery, followed by soft 
shell clams, elvers, oysters, menhaden, and scallops. In 2021, the landed value of both wild caught 
and aquaculture industries exceeded $890 million dollars. The increase was more than $150 
million over the previous year and exceeded the previous overall record of $733 million, that had 
been set in 2016. 
While there are many bright spots to celebrate regarding our marine ﬁsheries, there are also many 
pressing concems that we need to address. The Gulf of Maine is the second fastest warming body 
of water on the planet. This changing ocean enviromnent is one of the biggest challenges we face 
in every ﬁshery managed by the Department. DMR’s goal is to continue to prioritize research 
needs that allow proactive responses to changing resource health, rather than to maintain an agency 
focused on monitoring stock declines. This budget is part of a multi-faceted approach to help
1
position the Department to better understand and address management changes needed both now, 
and in the future. 
DMR is proposing initiatives comprised of a net increase of $5,170,676 in General Fund, which 
includes $3,600,600 in one-time funding, net increase of $240,349 in Federal, and a net increase 
of $416,824 in Other Special Revenue. This budget addresses some of the agency’s highest priority 
needs. 
The Department of Marine Resource budget requests can be summarized into six categories: 
1. New Aircraft Proposal. The Bureau of Maine Patrol has utilized an aircraft for Well 
over 70 years. Our aircraft supports aerial surveys, enforcement, effort monitoring 
and surveillance ﬂights, as well as providing critical search and rescue services. To 
support our current aircraft needs and to meet expanding needs related to North 
Atlantic right whale efforts, the department is requesting support to purchase a new 
aircraft that will allow Marine Patrol to expand its range and adequately address these 
new challenges. 
Our goal is to address both current and future needs. Our current Cessna aircraft has 
limited operational capabilities over offshore waters. Activity in the lobster ﬁshery 
is shifting further offshore as our waters warm, making this limitation even more ofa 
challenge. In addition, the Bureau’s role is expanding to help meet the evolving 
monitoring needs for the protection of North Atlantic Right Whales. Taken together, 
these realities make it clear that our aviation capabilities need to improve. In addition 
to being capable of performing all the inshore work currently done by the Cessna, the 
replacement aircraft, a Kodiak 100 Series III turbine, would be able to safely and 
efﬁciently extend Marine Patrol’s operational reach over offshore areas of the Gulf of 
Maine. The Kodak 100 is an investment in the future of Maine’s ﬁshing industry and 
represents the next 50 years of Marine Patrol aviation. 
2. West Boothbay Harbor Laboratory Facilities. The DMR lab was built new in the 
early 1990s. The 70,000 square foot facility encompasses several laboratories, a ﬂow 
through sea water and biosecurity system, staff offices, the Maine State Aquarium, 
two piers, eight ﬂoats, a carpentry and mechanical shop, parking lots and various 
other outbuildings. Recent signiﬁcant repairs have drawn sharp attention to the need 
to establish a non-lapsing maintenance fund to pro-actively address facility needs. 
Ongoing preventative maintenance of these facilities can prevent catastrophic failures 
while maintaining a safe and functional facility. This fund would address the 
preventative maintenance needs at the West Boothbay Harbor campus including 
HVAC, exterior structure maintenance needs such as windows, siding, rooﬁng, 
electrical systems, life support systems (laboratory), grounds and waterfront repairs. 
3. Continued support of Marine Patrol Increased Fuel costs. The Bureau of Marine 
Patrol maintains a ﬂeet of more than 30 watercraft used for patrol, enforcement, and 
search and rescue work in Maine's coastal waters. Marine Patrol Officers aboard these 
vessels patrol from the head of tide to very remote areas of the Gulf of Maine, up to 
40 miles offshore, year-round and in all weather conditions. Our Watercraft ﬂeet of 
patrol vessels in Maine is rivaled only by the U.S. Coast Guard. Marine Patrol is the
2
only statewide law enforcement agency on the coast of Maine with year-round 
response capabilities both for enforcement and search and rescue response. These 
patrol vessels are powered by either gasoline or diesel engines and the Bureau's 
ability to maintain a presence on the coastal waters of the State is directly tied to our 
ability to staff, maintain, and fuel these vessels. As with many agencies, the Bureau of 
Marine Patrol has not been immune to the signiﬁcant fuel cost increases over the last 
year. As an example of this increased burden, diesel fuel price at a fuel dock used by 
Marine Patrol in Rockland was $2.96 per gallon on August 30, 2021. The current 
fuel price at the same dock is $5.43 per gallon. Marine Patrol can’t maintain its 
traditional level of presence on the water in light of these unprecedented operating 
cost increases. 
4. Maintenance and Replacement Fund for DMR Watercraft. The Department hasa 
small ﬂeet of watercraft, across several Bureaus, designated to support research, 
assessments, public health and educational programs. The watercraft in this small 
ﬂeet range in size from l6 to 35 feet, mostly powered with outboards, with one 
powered with a small diesel engine. These programs operate from the head of tide to 
20 miles from shore. Establishing this fund would support ongoing operations and 
maintenance, (engines, reconditioning), and allow us to establish a replacement 
schedule for older outboards and smaller vessels. 
5. Central Service Rate Increases. The Department of Marine Resources has been 
notiﬁed of rate increases in many central services that are provided by the 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services. These increases impact our 
budgeted cost for MainelT, Central Fleet Management, the Natural Resources Service 
Center, Risk Management, the Office of the Attorney General and the Department of 
Public Safety Dispatch. 
6. Position Changes. DMR proposes several necessary position reorganizations, 
continuations, and an increase of hours for two positions. These changes bring 
positions in line organizationally, move budgeted positions to correspond to respective 
funding sources and continue limited-period positions that support important functions 
within the department. 
Many of the initiatives are repeated throughout the budget programs because, as you are aware, 
if they affect numerous budget programs and funding types they must be broken apart and 
repeated for each affected program. 
—~ ~-W . \-. .—_->-r~-.'=-:/- ~=-.-V . .' : —~.»- ;v1**'"<,'"'*,1"f ﬁ=1"l?‘€7"*r?-Prw"<r4 ”“’.*‘“‘§‘*‘“"“W7"!:’D't. =‘ .-'*,--~r~.~.\:n~"\ ~r ~ *.=~-—:~.-5.~e.;\-<>t-»' 1*: :~:§_=~+ —-:.-;.:-~.-/» . 1""- ."' , —M 
The ﬁrst Budget Program presented in the committee document is labeled “Bureau of Marine 
Science 0027” (page A-525). The baseline budget presented shows this Budget Program is 
comprised of General Fund, Federal and Other Special Revenue. The Bureau of Marine Science 
(BMS) engages in scientiﬁc research, monitoring, and assessment to manage and restore marine 
and estuarine resources; collects commercial landings and recreational harvest data; and 
participates in the development of management plans for state, interstate, and federal ﬁsheries. 
The BMS operates the Maine State Aquarium and educational programs to educate Maine school 
children and the public about marine resources. The sources of Other Special Revenue are
3
dedicated fees assessed on commercial ﬁshing licenses, the sale of lobster license plates, Gas Tax, 
Aquarium entrance fees, the Maine Living Lighthouse Program, donations, private contributions 
and non—federal grant awards. 
The ﬁrst initiative in this budget program is on page A-525. This ﬁrst initiative continues one 
limited-period Marine Resources Scientist I position previously continued by Financial Order 
002270 F3 and 2 limited period Marine Resource Scientist I positions previously continued from 
Financial Order 002271 F3 through June 7, 2025, in order to meet the 100% lobster harvester 
reporting requirement. This initiative also provides funding for all other costs associated with these 
positions. 
The next four initiatives are on page A-526. The ﬁrst of these initiatives increases funding for one 
Marine Resource Scientist I position from 76 hours to 80 hours bi-weekly. 
The next initiative provides funding for maintenance of the Department of Marine Resource 
Facilities. The increase in general fund of $200,000 would support ongoing facility maintenance 
needs on the West Boothbay Harbor campus. 
The next initiative transfers remaining Sea Run Fisheries (previously a Division Within the 
Bureau of Marine Science) funding to the Bureau of Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat Program. 
This will allow the funding to reﬂect in the proper appropriation, and allocation will be in the 
appropriate program. This initiative can also be found on page A-537. 
The ﬁnal initiative on this page transfers and reallocates one Marine Resource Scientist I position 
from 75% Federal Expenditures and 25% General Fund to 25% Federal Expenditures, 25% 
General Fund and 50% Other Special Revenue within the Bureau of Marine Science. 
The next initiative is on page A-527. This initiative provides funding for the statewide increases 
in Central Fleet Management Services provided by the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. There are multiple initiatives within the Department of Marine Resources to 
provide funding in each of the Bureaus. This initiative will also be found on pages A-530, A-533, 
A-535 and A-538. 
The next initiative is also on page A-527. This initiative reallocates the cost of one Marine 
Resource Scientistl position from 50% Federal Expenditures in the Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat 
program and 50% Other special revenue in the Bureau of Marine Science to 100% Federal 
Expenditures fund in the Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat program. 
The next initiative is on page A-527. This initiative provides funding for STA-CAP in the Marine 
Fisheries Research and Development fund. This initiative is also found on page A-533. 
The next initiative is also on page A-527. This initiative provides funding for statewide insurance 
coverage provided through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of 
Risk Management. This increase is based on claims experience, coverage increases, attorney fees 
on claims and actuarially recommended reserves. This initiative can also be found on pages A- 
530, A-533, A-536 and A-538.
4
The next Budget Program presented in the committee document is labeled “Bureau of Policy and 
Management ” (page A-400). The baseline budget presented shows this Budget Program is 
comprised of General Fund, Federal, and Other Special Revenue. The Bureau of Policy and 
Management performs the administrative functions of the DMIR and advises government agencies 
regarding development or activity in coastal waters. The sources of Other Special Revenue are 
dedicated fees assessed on commercial ﬁshing licenses, Gas Tax, private contributions, and non- 
federal grant awards. 
The frst initiative in this budget program is on page A-529. This initiative transfers and reallocates 
one Resource Management Coordinator position from 50% Federal Expenditures fund in the 
Bureau of Policy and Management and 50% Other Special Revenue in the Bureau of Marine 
Science to 50% Other Special Revenue in the Bureau of Policy and Management and 50% Other 
Special Revenue in the Bureau of Marine Science. 
The next initiative is on page A—530. This initiative provides funding to increase the hours of one 
Resource Management Coordinator from 56 hours to 80 hours biweekly. 
The next initiative is on page A-530. This initiative provides funding for the statewide increases 
in Central Fleet Management Services provided by the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. There are multiple initiatives Within the Department of Marine Resources to 
provide funding in each of the Bureaus. This initiative will also be found on pages A-527, A-533, 
A-535 and A-538. 
The next initiative is on page A-530. This initiative provides funding for the Department ’s increase 
in its share of the cost for the Financial and Human Resource services within the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services. 
The next initiative is also on page A-530. This initiative provides funding for the increased costs 
in legal services provided by the Department of the Attorney General. 
The next initiative is also on page A-530. This initiative provides funding for the approved 
reorganization one Secretary Associate position to a Secretary Specialist position. This isa 
management-initiated reorganization approved by the Bureau of Human Resources.' 
The next initiative is also on page A-530. This initiative provides funding for statewide technology 
services provided by the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Ofﬁce of 
Information Technology. 
The next initiative is also on page A-530. This initiative provides funding for statewide insurance 
coverage provided through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of 
Risk Management. This increase is based on claims experience, coverage increases, attorney fees 
on claims and actuarially recommended reserves. This initiative can also be found on pages A- 
527, A-533, A-536 and A-538. 
The next initiative on page A-531 provides funding for the maintenance of the Department of 
Marine Resource ’s boat fleet. This would be an increase of $100,000 in the general fund.
5
The next initiative on page A-531 continues and makes permanent one Business Systems 
Administrator position previously continued in Financial Order 002256 F3. This initiative also 
provides ftmding for “all other” costs related to this position. 
The next initiative on page A-531 establishes one Aquaculture Inspector position that will support 
lease compliance and provides additional funding for “all other” cost associated with the 
Aquaculture Inspector position. 
P" -W‘ ,3 1*" .<,~ - -» . . 
q ~ I =1’ :\ '7.» t_ T\>¢;,=;m';.\c;,g}7 . {y»'-_,-; “,\»>,'~,,\.'\;1.t;@»; .,\~.v -»-,*.-My-.>»_ ‘;T\r". I .» ~». ~ '"":>' ~~.' 
BUREAU QR 
The next Budget Program presented in the committee document is labeled “Bureau of Public 
Health Z154” (page A-403). The baseline budget presented shows this Budget Program is 
comprised of General Fund, Federal and Other Special Revenue. This program is responsible for 
the management of bivalve shellﬁsh resources in order to protect public health in accordance with 
the National Shellﬁsh Sanitation Program Model Ordinance (N SSP MO). The bureau engages in 
four primary functions: growing area classiﬁcation, marine biotoxin monitoring, dealer inspection 
and municipal management. The safety of shellﬁsh growing areas is monitored and maintained 
through routine water testing and shoreline survey Work. The marine biotoxin monitoring program 
ensures that shellﬁsh harvesting areas are closed when harmful algal blooms occur affecting the 
safety of the shellﬁsh. The dealer inspection program certiﬁes and inspects every shellﬁsh dealer 
in Maine to ensure that they are complying with the model ordinance guidelines to protect public 
health. The municipal management program Works with towns to develop and maintain shellﬁsh 
ordinances that control and enhance local shellﬁsh resources. The sources of Other Special 
Revenue are from fees on shellﬁsh licenses and wholesale seafood licenses. 
The ﬁrst initiative (C-A-19) in this budget program is on page A-532. This initiative provides 
funding for the approved reorganization of four Marine Resource Scientist I positions to Marine 
Resource Scientist II positions and related All Other costs. 
The next initiative is on page A-533. This initiative provides funding for the statewide increases 
in Central Fleet Management Services provided by the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. There are multiple initiatives within the Department of Marine Resources to 
provide funding in each of the Bureaus. This initiative will also be found on pages A-527, A-530, 
A-535 and A-538. 
The next initiative is on page A-533. This initiative provides funding for STA-CAP in the Marine 
Fisheries Research and Development fund. This initiative is also found on page A-527. 
The next initiative is also on page A-533. This initiative provides funding for statewide insurance 
coverage provided through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of 
Risk Management. This increase is based on claims experience, coverage increases, attorney fees 
on claims and actuarially recommended reserves. This initiative can also be found on pages A- 
527, A-530, A-536 and A-538.
6
This initiative reduces funding to recognize a decrease in license surcharge revenue resulting from 
revenue changes in Public Law 2021, Chapter 755. Speciﬁcally, this law redirected 20% of the 
license revenues collected for the Maine Lobster Marketing Collaborative to a new Lobster Legal 
Defense Fund, beginning in August 2022 and ending in June 2024. This initiative reﬂects the 
appropriate revenue to this Fund in accordance with the current law. 
._ .. ._ .-.__- —- Q - ..- .,,.. __.__ _ ..
i 
.. .. .-. 
, _ ._ . - ,.. . . L. ..._;k ., ...=,_-,,__,.,.\~ l 
--.,_.,, “_, »._.\ .~, ‘\‘ .».\»,_\\;_, H--,_i.. W. ., ~~-,~.. ,_ .. ..- 
. - > -I- ..», on ti ‘: 5- 
The next Budget Program presented in the committee document is labeled “Bureau of Marine 
Patrol 0029” (page A-405). The baseline budget presented shows this Budget Program is 
comprised of General Fund, Federal and Other Special Revenue. The Bureau of Marine Patrol's 
(BMP), primary responsibility is enforcing the State's marine commercial and recreational 
ﬁshing laws and regulations. The Bureau provides public safety and law enforcement services to 
mainland and coastal island residents, search and rescue and emergency maritime transport, as 
well as partnering with the Maine Emergency Management Agency on homeland security and 
emergency preparedness. The Bureau also enforces federal mandates, enforces recreational 
boating laws, and provides education, safety information and training. The Bureau works with 
the Department of Environmental Protection to provide personnel and equipment for hazardous 
material spills. The sources of Other Special Revenue are dedicated fees assessed on commercial 
ﬁshing licenses, lobster trap tags and a percentage of boat registration fees. 
The ﬁrst initiative in this budget program is on page A-535. This initiative provides funding for 
the increased fees from the Department of Safety for dispatch services. 
The next initiative is on page A-535. This initiative provides funding for the statewide increases 
in Central Fleet Management Services provided by the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. There are multiple initiatives within the Department of Marine Resources to 
provide funding in each of the Bureaus. This initiative will also be found on pages A-527, A-5 30, 
A-533 and A-538. 
The next initiative is on page A-536. This initiative provides funding for increased fuel costs. 
These increased costs are budgeted at $125,000. 
The next initiative is on page A-536. This initiative provides funding for statewide insurance 
coverage provided through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of 
Risk Management. This increase is based on claims experience, coverage increases, attorney fees 
on claims and actuarially recommended reserves. This initiative can also be found on pages A- 
527, A-530, A-533 and A-538 
The next initiative is on page A-536. This initiative provides one time funding for the purchase of 
one Marine Patrol Aircraft and continued ongoing maintenance expenses. The cost of the aircraft 
with the required ﬂoat is $3,600,600 and ongoing maintenance expenses are estimated at $256,500.
7
_ 
The next Budget Program presented in the committee document is labeled “Bureau of Sea Run 
Fisheries and Habitat Z295” (page A-407). The baseline budget presented shows this Budget 
Program is comprised of General Fund, Federal and Other Special Revenue. The Bureau of Sea 
Run Fisheries and Habitat (BSRFH) conducts research and population assessments of Maine's 
native diadromous ﬁsh populations. The focus of management activities is multi-species, 
ecosystem-based management and restoration of eleven diadromous species such as shad, striped 
bass and alewives. The BSRFH is focused on the importance of Maine's rivers, improved habitat 
restoration within the rivers and improved science and streamlined ﬁeld work. Much of the focus 
is aimed at multi-party/multi-species settlements that are connected with the hydro-dams that are 
licensed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The Bureau also works 
collaboratively with NOAA Fisheries and the US Fish and Wildlife Service on species oversight 
and leadership relating to Atlantic Salmon listed under the Endangered Species Act. 
The ﬁrst initiative found on page A-537 transfers remaining Sea Run Fisheries funding to the 
Bureau of Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat Program. This will allow the funding to reﬂect in the 
proper appropriation, and allocation will be in the appropriate program. This initiative can also 
be found on page A-526. 
The next initiative is on page A-537. This initiative reallocates one Marine Resource Scientist II 
position from 100% Federal Expenditures fund to 70% Federal Expenditures ﬁmd and 30% 
Other Special Revenue Fund, Within the same program. This initiative also provides All Other 
funding to support management and restoration effort for the diadromous ﬁsh species. 
The next initiative is on page A-538. This initiative provides funding for the statewide increases 
in Central Fleet Management Services provided by the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services. There are multiple initiates within the Department of Marine Resources to 
provide funding in each of the Bureaus. This initiative will also be found on pages A-527 A-530, 
A-533 and A-535. 
The next initiative is on page A-538. reallocates the cost of one Marine Resource Scientist I 
position from 50% Federal Expenditures in the Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat program and 50% 
Other Special Revenue in the Bureau of Marine Science to 100% Federal Expenditures fund in the 
Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat program. This initiative is also on page A-527. 
The next initiative on page A-538. This initiative provides funding for statewide insurance 
coverage provided through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Division of 
Risk Management. This increase is based on claims experience, coverage increases, attorney fees 
on claims and actuarially recommended reserves. This initiative can also be found on pages A- 
527, A-530, A-533 and A-536 
a-H.-x ,. ..-. —.-~'-. —--=_. » :< / _—.—- ., V. _ .. ---—=~--re-i, .'~=—-.,-— . =, \ .—~- :- "' "1 —- . yr. .__.. . O.-5.. . . - , - . , 
Concliisibinl ’ 
This concludes the testimony of the Department of Marine Resources. I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have.
8
