Testimony of Patrick Keliher, Commissioner 
On Behalf of The Maine Lobster Marketing Collaborative 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
The Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
"An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions 
of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years 
Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025” 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources, I am Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the 
Department of Marine Resources. I am here today to present testimony on behalf of the Maine 
Lobster Marketing Collaborative in support of the items in the Governor Mill’s FY24/25 
Biennial Budget, LD 258. 
This budget advances the Governor ’s guiding belief that to build a stronger, more prosperous 
state where opportunity is available to all, then We must invest in the infrastructure that supports 
the people of Maine, our greatest asset. 
That is why this budget proposal strengthens the very things that Maine people rely on every day 
to succeed, building on the strong success of the currently enacted budget and the last legislative 
session to tackle Maine’s greatest challenges. 
We have governed cautiously and in a ﬁscally prudent Way over the past four years, making sure 
that — even in the hardest of times during the pandemic — We lived Within our means. This budget 
proposal continues that practice. 
The Maine Lobster Marketing Collaborative (MLMC), founded in 2013, is funded by Maine 
lobster harvesters, dealers and processors to grow demand, both for Whole live lobster anda 
variety of value-added products. The MLMC supports that objective by promoting the core 
values of the Maine Lobster industry, which are sustainability and traceability that is deeply 
rooted in tradition. 
,, 
The only initiative in this budget program is on page A-522. This initiative provides funding to 
recognize an increase in license surcharge revenue resulting from revenue changes in Public Law 
2021, Chapter 755. Speciﬁcally, this law redirected 20% of the license revenues collected for 
the Maine Lobster Marketing Collaborative to a new Lobster Legal Defense Fund, beginning in 
August 2022 and ending in June 2024. This initiative reﬂects the appropriate revenue to this 
Fund in accordance With the current law.
l
This concludes the testimony of the Maine Lobster Marketing Collaborative. I would be happy 
to answer any questions you may have.
2
