Maine Indian Tribal -State Commission  
 
 
  
Chai rperson  
Newell Lewey  
Managing Director  
Paul G. Thibeault  
Projects Coordinator  
Rachel Bell  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P.O. Box 35  
Whiting , ME 046 91 Phone : (207) 271 -7762  
      pthibeault @mitsc.org  
 www.mitsc.org  
  
Testimony Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
and the  
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
February  27, 2023  
Good  afternoo n Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Carney, Representative Moonen , and 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary.   My name is Paul Thibeault, and I am the 
Managing Director of the Maine Indian Tribal -State Commission, or MITSC.   I am here today to testify 
on the biennial budget bill, LD 258.  
 The Commission’s budget Initiative is on page A -440 of the budget document.  
 The proposed annual funding of $268,5000 would enable MITSC to have two full -time employees and 
part -time contractors for special projects so that MITSC can fully perform its statutory duties.  
The annual base f unding from the State has been  $111,614. That base funding level s has been  flat 
since 2015 . For FY2 2 and FY 2 3 additional state funds were provided in the annual amount of $55,200. 
Combi ned with some carryover funds , that temporary incre ase made it possible for the Commission  
to add a second full-time staff member (the Projects Coordinator ) and to employ temporary part -time 
contractors for important projects. Use of temporary contractors on various projects and studies 
enables MITSC to benefit from a wide range of expertise. In FY22 and FY2 3 MITSC has been able t o 
address matters for  which it previously lacked adequate funding . For example, MITSC employed part -
time contractors with relevant expertise to conduct the recently completed study and report  entitled  
Sea Run , A Study Regarding the Impact of Maine Polici es on the Quality and Quantity of Traditional 
Tribal Fish Stocks and Sustenanc e Practices . The statutory provision s under which that study was done 
have been in place since the Settlement in 1980 but MITSC has not previously had the resources to 
conduct such a comprehensive study.  The Sea Run report is current ly available on the Commission 
website, mitsc.or g, and we are currently in the process of producing  and distributing hard copies.  Over 
the pas t year MITSC staff and contractors have devoted substantial time and resources  to completely 
redesign the MITSC website as part of a larger project to expand and improve MITSC’s capacity as a 
research and edu cation entity.   
 
While the influx of tempor ary additional state funding has been appreciated and well -utilized, t he 
uncertainty of adequate sustained funding  has continued. As a result , the Managing Director position 
was cut back to part -time  in mid -2022  so th at adequate  funds would be ava ilable for contractors 
working on projects. MITSC is currently operating with a staff consisting of a 60% -time Managing 
Director and a full -time Projects Coordinator, supplemented by  a limited amount for part -time 
contractors for special pr ojects and bookkeeping services.  As things currently stand, the extra State 
 
 
 
 2 P.O. Box 35  
Whiting , ME 04691 
 
Whiting, ME  04691 
  
Phone:  (207) 271 -7762  
pthibeault@mitsc.org  
 
 www.mitsc.org  
 funding of $55,200 per year w ould not continue beyond June . Without additional funding for FY24 
MITSC w ould again face a  difficult financial reality that w ould  likely requir e more staffing cuts . If state 
funding is limited to the current  base level of $ 111,614, then the Comm ission may be unable to 
maintain  even one f ull-time staff member , as was often the ca se in the  past.  
MITSC is currently working on numerous issues and projects, including distribution and follow -up on  
the Sea Run  report,  promoting full implementation of the Wabanaki Studies law, active  involvement 
with development  and implementation of the new triba l-state consultation  proce ss, providing 
education on the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples , ongoing study and monitoring 
of various environmental and natural resources issues th at impact both the Tribes and the State,  
ongoing  review and analysis of proposed  state and federal legislation, expansion of the MITSC onli ne 
librar y, and numerous other tribal -state matters.  The relationships between the W abanaki Tribes and 
the State encompass a very wide range of issues including but not limited to natural resources, 
cultural protection, education, health care, public safety, public welfare, and economic development. 
At various times in the past MITSC has been involved and made recommendations in all those areas. 
However, the limits of funding and staffing have always  impaired MITSC’s capacity to fully address 
many critical issues.  
The Commission has stretch ed its available resources in various wa ys. As noted, a t the end of FY22 the 
Managing Director position was reduced to 60% time. In July  2022  the MITSC office was relocated to  
less expensive rental space at the Cobscook Institute. MITSC has used Zoom for meetings to reduce 
travel and meal expenses. A Commissio n member who is an attorney donated many hours of pro 
bono legal work  on amicus briefs that MITSC could not otherwise have afforded  to prepar e. The part -
time contractors have been willing to work at reduced r ates. MITSC has developed a  strong 
collaborative relationship with the Cobscook Institute which allows MITSC to utilize the Institute’s 
excellent meeting, lodging, and dining facilities at low cost.   
The current Commission Members, Tribal and State, are talented and experienced peopl e with a wide 
range of expertise in natural resources management, business, finance, public policy, law, health care, 
education, law enforcement, and other fields. The Commission has great potential to carry out its 
statutory role s fully and effectively if it is not impaired  by inadequate funding.   
 
Respectfully Submi tted,  
Paul Thibeault  
Managing Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 P.O. Box 35  
Whiting , ME 04691 
 
Whiting, ME  04691 
  
Phone:  (207) 271 -7762  
pthibeault@mitsc.org  
 
 www.mitsc.org  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
