 
Serving the Municipalities of Southern  Maine for Over 50 years  
 
 
Southern Maine Planning & Development Commission  
110 Main St. Saco, ME 04072 | 207 -571-7065  
 
Testimony of Southern Maine Planning and Development Commission  in Support of  
 DECD’s Housing Opportunity Program  
a part of LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, 
and June 30, 2025 . 
 
February 8, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs 
Committee, and Senator Pierce, Rep resentative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing : I, Paul Schumacher, Executive Director of Southern Maine Planning and Development 
Commission (SMPDC) , urge the full funding for DECD’s Housing Opportunity Program, contained in the 
Governor’s biennial budget.  
 
SMPDC is a regional planning agency created by state statue serving 39 member communities in York, 
southern Oxford, and Cumberland Counties; our members range from coastal communities along the 
mainline of the Maine Turnpike to ru ral, inland communities in Western Maine.   
 
Our Brownfields program  is the most successful in New England and has facilitated millions of  dollars in  
redevelop ed and reactivat ed buildings , providing new opportunities for housing and commerce  through 
adapti ve reuse . Our sustainability and resiliency work, which convenes coastal communities to work 
together to address climate change , is at the forefront of such efforts within the state of Maine.  
 
SMPDC also operates an extremely robust land use planning prog ram that provides on-call 
comprehensive planning, development review , and technical assistance to member communities, many 
of which have little to no in -house staffing capacity given their small size. At any given time, we serve as 
the planner for numerous  jurisdictions , a number of which have seen significant staff turnover since the 
pandemic, thus further increasing our volume of work. No other regional planning agency  within Maine 
takes on land use planning activities to the extent that SMPDC does, and t he adoption of LD 2003, while 
laudable from a policy standpoint, will require significant work on the part of this agency to both brief 
local land use boards on the implications of the changes to statute and to draft the ordinance 
amendments needed to effe ctuate it.   
 
Land use policy changes are complex undertakings that many of our communities cannot successfully 
complete without adequate support. Regional planning agencies have expertise, local knowledge, 
existing trusted relationships, and the ability to help their municipalities make the best housing policies 
choices possible.  
 
The funding contained in the Governor’s budget will enable DECD to implement its Housing Opportunity 
Program through the work of regional planning agencies like SMPDC , together with many other qualified 
regional planning agencies  throughout  the state.  
 
Southern Maine Planning & Development Commission  
110 Main St. Saco, ME 04072 | 207 -571-7065  
  
With full funding we are confident that our municipal members with have the support they need to 
implement housing policies that make meaningful progress toward solving our regional and state 
housing crisis. Without this funding, every regional planning agen cy will be severely limited in their 
capacity to be effective  and efficient implementing partners with the state , thus handicapping 
municipalities and their ability to implement this legislation.  
 
For all these reasons we urge you to vote to support full f unding for DECD’s Housing Opportunity 
Program as proposed in the Governor’s budget.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and please let us know if SMPDC  can help you with your 
important work on the Governor’s budget, and the implementation of st ate housing policies.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 
Paul Schumacher, E xecutive Direc tor 
Southern Maine Planning and  Development Commission  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

