Senator Rotundo,  Representative  Sachs, 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and 
members of the Committee on 
Appro priations and Financial Affairs and 
Committee on Labor and Housing.  
 
I am Penny Whitney -Asdourian  from 
Scarborough .  I am retired , having worked for 
the Maine Judicial Branch for over 33 years.  
My husband and I both  currently receive a 
MainePERS pension and I am here to request 
this committee recommend  the funding of a 
full cost of living adjustment ( COLA ) for our 
retirees.  
 
Regar ding the COLA, as you know, state 
retirees are not  eligible for a full COLA based 
on CPI, but the COLA is capped at 3%.  
Additionally, the COLA is not calculated on 
your full pension, but the 2011 budget cuts 
impacting the pensions put a cap on that as 
well, making it impossible for retirees to ever 
keep up with the cost of living.  
 
While I certainly appreciate the budget that 
Governor Mills put forward, containing a 
“one -time ” increase for our retirees , one -time 
fixes simply are not enough and fail to 
incr ease the base on which the next COLA can 
be calculated.  This results in our retirees  
falling further and further behind. I am asking 
that you fund a full cumulative COLA in the 
biennial budget.   
 
I am part of an organization that has allowed 
me frequent c ontact with our state retirees 
over the past few years.  It is greatly 
concerning to me that there has been very 
little focus on the financial insecurities of 
retirees and the elderly in this state.  Every 
day when you venture out you will encounter 
older Mainers who are still working.  While 
some are doing it simply to stay busy, a 
conversation will reveal that they are very 
dependent on the additional income to heat 
their homes, pay for their medications, and 
food.   
 
I am asking that you take a small ste p in 
paying forward all that state retirees gave to 
assure quality services to the people of Maine.  
Please understand f ully funding the COLA, 
and making it cumulative will not address the 
devastation that the 2011 cuts created, but it 
will go a long way i n making sure our retirees 
feel that this Legislative body appreciates the 
commitment and dedication that were given 
during their careers with the state.   
 
Every year we wonder if this will be the time 
when the Legislature recognizes the val ue of 
the cont ributions , and in many instances, the 
sacrifices, we made during our careers and 
tries to d o right by us.  In my mind, THIS  is 
the time, THIS  is the year.  
 
I thank you for the job you are doing on 
behalf of all of us and for taking the time to 
listen to me.  I’m happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
 
Thank you.  
