Maine Joint Environmental 
Training Coordinating Committee 
NEIWPCC South Portland 
584 Main Street, South Portland, ME 04106 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural 
Resources and the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs inio@neiwpcc~jetcc.org p: 207-253-8020 
www.jetcc.org f: 207—771~9028 
Peter Zaykoski, South Portland Program Manager, NEIWPCC & Maine Joint Environmental Training 
Coordinating Committee Program Manager 
February 16, 2023 
The Maine Joint Environmental Training Coordinating Committee (JETCC) has served the citizens of 
Maine since 1985 by providing initial and continuing education programs for water and wastewater 
treatment plant operators in Maine. The New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission 
(NEIWPCC) has provided support to JETCC by staffing the committee and coordinating and 
managing its training catalog from its beginnings. 
The Committee is composed of eleven members who are appointed by the Commissioner of the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). The members of the committee represent 
Maine DEP, Maine Department of Health and Human Services, the Maine Water Environment 
Association, industrial wastewater treatment facilities, municipalities, and NEIWPCC, as the training 
contractor. 
Our core work is supported by a budget of about $104,000 annually. For each of the state fiscal 
years 2022 and 2023, JETCC has received $52,950 from the General Fund, about half of its budget 
for its core work. The other half is supported by a $10,000 annual contract with Maine DEP, 
registration fees for courses, sponsorship funds from the Maine Water Environment Association and 
the Maine Water Utilities Association, and reimbursement under the Maine DHHS Capacity 
Development Training Reimbursement Fund. 
The support from the General Fund has provided an anchor for the success of JETCC. lt has 
allowed registration costs to remain low and provided capacity for staff to coordinate with state 
agency and utility partners to understand and respond to current and upcoming training needs. 
JETCC leverages the funding provided by the state by engaging the community of environmental 
professionals throughout the state. JETCC relies on volunteers to share their knowledge and 
expertise as instructors for classes and relies on facilities to donate their spaces to host in-person 
training. Professional trainers can cost $100 per hour of training or more and may charge additional 
fees for preparation. Every volunteer that contributes to JETCC’s mission helps keep our 
programming at a reasonable cost and increases the reach of our state funding. In a year with a full 
suite of programming, JETCC typically relies on more than 100 volunteers to accomplish its mission. 
Additionally, state funding has helped maintain JETCC as a foundational program for NEIWPCC in 
Maine and helps justify NElWPCC’s investment in an office in South Portland, from which all of 
NElWPCC’s work in Maine is coordinated. 
~ 
< MAINE 1 
e' 
. ., ..___.___.,._W _ _ MW” _7 E?. .
9!! 
Core Work 
JETCC’s core work is the coordination of an ongoing training program that is offered throughout the 
year and consists of at least 24 training opportunities per year. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, 
nearly all of JETCC’s training programs were conducted in-person. At the beginning of the 
pandemic, all training was transitioned to a remote learning platform. This transition provided 
continuity in our offerings for operators throughout the state and increased the accessibility for any 
individual training topic. Additionally, through JETCC’s affiliation with NEIWPCC, continuing 
education credits from all of NElWPCC’s member states (all six New England states and New York) 
are offered for all applicable remote JETCC trainings. This has expanded the availability of JETCC 
trainings beyond Maine and provided additional revenue to the program. Beginning in 2023, JETCC 
has resumed offering in-person training, in addition to its remote training catalog. 
In the current biennium, JETCC has offered 35 classes as part of its core work, which have had 985 
participants. 2,696 training contact hours were awarded for those classes. Additional remote and in- 
person training opportunities will continue to be offered through the winter and into the spring. 
Additional Programming 
In addition to its core training work, JETCC offers additional programming focused on serving the 
specific needs of Maine's community of water professionals. Each of these offerings is designed to 
be self-sufficient, with program income covering the costs associated with planning and execution. 
Since 2009, JETCC has coordinated the Maine Management Candidate School. This program is 
designed for to prepare mid-career water and Wastewater professionals for leadership and 
management roles. Eleven classes have graduated since the program’s inception, with a total of 219 
graduates. The most recent class graduated in the current biennium, in February 2022. This class 
began in the fall of 2019 and transitioned from in-person to remote learning after a hiatus at the 
beginning of the pandemic. The next MCS class is expected to begin in the fall of this year. 
In 2017, JETCC began offering a Wastewater Operator School. This six-month program is designed 
for early career professionals and is focused on the fundamentals of Wastewater treatment plant 
operations. The program helps prepare participants for success and longevity in the industry. Since 
the initial class in 2017, the WOS program has been offered in 2018 and 2020. The next class is 
anticipated in 2024. 
Since 1990, JETCC has coordinated The North Country Convention in The County. This biennial 
event is focused on offering training to operators in the northern region of the state. After a hiatus 
due to the pandemic, the North Country Convention will return to Presque lsle on April 5-6 this year. 
This year’s event will be held at Northern Maine Community College and will offer two full days of 
training for attendees, including a laboratory track held in NMCC’s Water Treatment Technology 
Program classroom space. 
.§;4~r2‘~;4.:vY" ‘
i FCC 
ABOUT NEIWPCC 
Mission Statement: To advance clean water in the Northeast through collaboration with, and 
service to, our member states. 
Vision: Clean and sustainable water throughout the Northeast. 
Values: Leadership ~ Education - Collaboration - Service - Science 
Areas of Work and Impact 
- Connections: We engage and convene water quality professionals and other stakeholders 
across the Northeast to collaborate on clean water and environmental science challenges 
across shared regions, ecosystems, and areas of expertise. 
- Protection: We conduct research into water-related topics, monitor environmental factors, and 
fund such work by others. We also implement and fund environmental restoration and other on- 
the-ground projects. 
- Training: We develop, coordinate, and conduct training courses that sen/e water quality 
professionals regionally and nationwide. 
- Education: We fund and/or staff programs that engage the public through events, exhibits, web 
and print publications, and other outreach activities. 
- Engagement: We actively represent the interests of member states at meetings with federal and 
state officials and in regional and national water and wastewater associations. 
NElWPCC’s Work in Maine 
ln addition to support of JETCC, NEIWPCC works for the state of Maine on several programs. 
Wastewater Operator Certification 
in early 2006, Maine DEP transferred to NEIWPCC all administrative duties of Maine's 
Wastewater Operator Certification program. These duties include coordinating certificate renewal, 
record keeping, and applications for Maine’s Computer-based Wastewater Treatment Plant 
Operator exams. 
Nonpoint Source Training Resource Center Support 
NEIWPCC South Portland staff provide administrative support Maine DEP’s training and 
certification program in basic and advanced erosion control. 
Department of Health and Human Services 
NEIWPCC supports the Maine Drinking Water Program by providing eight full-time staff undera 
contract with the Maine Department of Health and Human Services. 
Collaboration & Communication Across the Region 
NElWPCC hosts almost twenty work groups that are composed of state and federal staff from 
throughout the Northeast region, including many staff from agencies in Maine. These work groups 
are designed to help state agency staff communicate with our federal partners and share 
information and success across state lines. NElWPCC’s regional training and certification work 
group is coordinated by staff in the South Portland office.
i 
osm-/'/Z7"v3 
ff¢§%?>@ ‘>,2t’$~*/
~»/1“<:6;=a ~92», 
, 'JL,_¢_&___£4_ ‘(\ 
LEWSTN-AUBURN WINTER P[ll.LllTIl1N Btlllllllll. i\llTll(lRlY ‘i' 
February 14, 2023 
Appropriations/Enviromnent & Natural Resources Committee Members 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: Support for JETCC 
Members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs and the Environmental & Natural Resources 
Committees, 
My name is Travis Peaslee and I am General Manager of the Lewiston-Aubum Water Pollution Control 
Authority (LAWPCA). We are the second largest wastewater treatment plant in Maine, handling 
millions of gallons of water daily and discharging the cleaned efﬂuent to the Androscoggin River. Clean 
water is one of Maine’s greatest attractions for residents, businesses, and travel/recreation. Wastewater 
treatment and water distribution services are integral pieces of maintaining this vital resource for years 
to come. 
It is a state requirement that our plant operators maintain licenses in order to carry out this critical work; 
therefore, we rely on the high-level training courses offered by the Joint Environmental Training 
Coordinating Committee (JETCC). This training provides everything from basic treatment concepts, 
equipment operation and maintenance, current industry issues, and new treatment technologies. The 
value of this training is immeasurable, but the effects that would be seen without it would be detrimental 
to our workforce. 
At minimum, JETCC should continue to be funded at its current level. In actuality, an increase should 
strongly be considered in order to adequately address the needs presented by the aging workforce (inﬂux 
of new water professionals) as well as the increasing number of issues water professionals must be 
trained on and respond to (e.g. contaminants of emerging concern, new and more stringent discharge 
limits). 
I appreciate your time and consideration on this matter. 
Sincerely, 
.&Z:/ Tr vis Peaslee, P.E. 
LAWPCA General Manager 
er”' 
~
at
Sincerely, 
// District Office Treatment Plant 
Telephone: 324-5313 T elephone: 324-0047 
Fax 324-5087 Fax: 324-9830 
SANFORD SEWERAGE DISTRICT 
281 River Street * P.O. Box 338 
SPRINGVALE, ME 04083-0338 
February 14, 2023 
Appropriations/ Environment & Natural Resources Committees Members 
100 Sate House Station~
, 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: Support for JETCC 
Dear Prestigious Members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs and the Environment &Natura1 
Resources committees, 
My name is André Brousseau —- Superintendent for the Sanford Sewerage District. I have been 
employed in the wastewater ﬁeld for 29 years. I am writing to you to express how important J ETCC 
training is to the water and wastewater ﬁeld. The District has eight certiﬁed operators. The state 
statue mandates the operators obtain 18 hours of training every two years. Training provided by 
JETCC includes a Wide variety of subjects from blue print reading, pump repair, basic laboratory skills 
and much more. More importantly, the training usually includes the latest technology advances within 
our industry. 
The water industry is in a precarious employment situation where our operators are now retiring. It is 
vitally important to continue to provide the necessary training for the new 0pet'ators who are entering 
the ﬁeld. The State of Maine relies on clean water for economic commerce from the small businesses 
that supports tourism to the large businesses that manufacture a multitude of products. Every business 
and resident generates ’ wastewater that must be properly collected and treated so that our water ways 
remain pristine. It is the operators who provide the ﬁrst line of defense in the protection of the health 
of humans and wildlife therefore training for our operators is vital. 
I am in hopes that this committee will continue to fund JETCC at its current level. Additionally, it 
would be very beneﬁcial to consider an increase with regards to the essential roll wastewater operators 
play every day in the State of Maine.- 
/'7 
Andre Brousseau
,.- 
__\~‘l’Ti 1M 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: » 
ADMINISTRATION OFFICE 
nommrnoyr, CHAIRMAN“ 
‘ M 5,5 21 BAY HAVENROAD WAYNE MCINTIRE, VICE CHAIRMAN (207)363-4232 
BARRY DAVIS, TREASURER *5 ;~3 
_ TREATMENT PLANT 
NICHOLAS noms, cusnx 9‘ /qf ;;"2~..*P;f;,~.1* 6' 106 mm srmtmr 
ROBERT KNOWLES, TRUSTEE 3 ‘Y’-pk; '11-xx" t. , 
6,6 
472%. ems‘                           
YORK SEWER DISTRICT 
PO. BOX 1039 
YORK BEACH, MAINE 03910 
February 14, 2023 
Appropriations/Enviromnent & Natural Resources Committee Members 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: Support for JETCC 
Dear Prestigious Members of the Appropriations & Financial Affairs and the Environmental & Natural Resources 
Committees, 
My name is Philip Tucker and I am the Superintendent for the York Sewer District. I have been employed in the 
wastewater ﬁeld for over 25 years. I would like to eigpress the importance of the budget allocation for the Joint 
Enviromnental Training Coordinating Committee (JETCC). The training sessions that JETCC offers to the roughly 
800 licensed wastewater operators throughout the State is exceptional and would not be possible without this 
allocation. 
With a wide range of topics to cover in the clean water, drinking water and stormwater ﬁelds, JET CC keeps members 
up to date with changing technologies, regulations and processes while keeping training costs to a minimum. In 
addition, JETCC recognized a need to address the growing number of managers at or near retirement in the profession 
and with partners, developed the Management Candidate School. 
I appreciate the ﬁmding that JETCC has received over the years and hope this funding continues. Additionally, it 
would be beneﬁcial to consider an increase as the State of Maine relies on qualiﬁed and trained drinking water and 
clean water operators to keep our drinking water, rivers, streams and oceans clean for this and future generations. 
Sincerely, 
w/tag’/ yiaiy Philip J. Tucker 
Letter of Support 
for the 
Maine Joint Environmental Training Coordinating Committee (JETCC) 
February 13, 2023 
I have been in the waste water ﬁeld for nearly 40 years as a Certiﬁed Waste Water 
Treatment Facility (WWTF) Operator here in the State of Maine and I have relied on 
the JETCC program for approximately 90% of the required continuing education 
units (CEU's) of training that l have received. 
As per the requirements of the State of Maine, certiﬁed WWTF operators must 
receive 18 hours of ME DEP approved training every 2 years in order to keep their 
certiﬁcations up to date and active. Certiﬁed Water Operators must receive 
between 18 to 24 hours (based on level of certiﬁcation) of ME DHHS approved 
training every 2 years to keep their certiﬁcations up to date and active. The JETCC 
Program is one of the largest sources of approved training for approximately 750 
Certiﬁed WWTF Operators and approximately 950 Certiﬁed Water Operators across 
the State of Maine. 
Since 2017, the JETCC program has offered individuals new to the waste water 
industry a multi-week course of studies entitled the ”Waste Water Operator School" 
where students learn the basic principles of waste water collection and treatment. 
To date, approximately 60 students have graduated from JETCC's Waste Water 
Operator School. (Note that the C-19 pandemic reduced the number of graduates 
due to the difﬁculties in attending classes in-person — otherwise, more individuals 
would likely have received training.) 
Since 2009, the JETCC Program has offered individuals interested in becoming 
future Superintendents and Business Managers in the water and waste water ﬁelds 
a multi-week course of studies entitled the ”Management Candidate School" where 
the students learn the intricacies of budgeting, licensing, personnel, and related 
management strategies pertaining to the overall operation of Maine's Water and 
Sewer Departments and Districts. To date, approximately 200 students have 
graduated from JETCC's Management Candidate School. (Note that this program 
would likely have had more graduates had it not been for the C-19 pandemic.)
During the C-19 pandemic, the JETCC Program transitioned to a virtual on-line 
training platform to supply the water and wase water industry professionals their 
required training in a timely manner. This was a tremendous feat to accomplish 
because nearly 100% of the training offered prior to the C-19 pandemic was 
attended in person. Transitioning to an online platform, in only a few short months, 
is a testament to the dedication, depth of knowledge and overall quality of the Staff 
of the JETCC Program. If not for the funding from the State of l\/laine coupled with 
the bottom-line budgeting savvy of the JETCC staff, the required training would not 
have reached Maine's certiﬁed water and waste water professionals. 
Without the training that has been provided by the JETCC Program for more than3 
decades, todays water and waste water professionals would not be able to obtain 
the necessary training at an affordable cost. Attaining quality training that is 
pertinent to the day to day operation of the facilities at a reasonable cost is 
important to all l\/laine communities in order to keep local usage rates as low as 
possible while keeping staff well trained and up to date on trending issues. 
Supplying affordable and relevant training has been, and will continue to be, the 
type of training that the JETCC Program offers l\/laine's Water and Waste Water 
Operators. However, JETCC relies on the funding received from the State of l\/laine 
to keep the cost reasonable for its trainees. This is why it is important for the JETCC 
program to receive its requested funding on an annual basis from the State of 
l\/laine. 
Please consider this my request for the State of l\/laine to continue, at a minimum, 
its current level of ﬁnancial support for the l\/laine JETCC Program. 
Respectfully, 
Mark L. Holt 
l\/laine Grade 5 WW Operator 
Supt., Livermore Falls & Jay Sewer Departments 
Vice-Chair, JETCC Board
