_____ 
* In the interest of honesty and disclosure , a personal background statement is available on request.   
 
 
 
Testimony to the   
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  and the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
February 14 , 202 3  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Beebe -Center, 
Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Criminal Justice and Public Safety :  
Good afternoon. My name is Peter Lehman and I live in Thomaston. I am a formerly incarcerated citizen and a person in 
long-term recovery.* I am here testifying against the proposed 
budget on behalf of the Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition. Our 
goal is to promote restorative practices to increase public safety and the health of the community.  
I am sure you hear a lot about “Evidence Based Practices” when 
people are asking you for money. I know a little about this concept since before I destroyed my life and those around me I was a sociology and criminology professor . 
Let’s start with incarceration. Incarceration is not an 
evidence -based practice.  
Just one year from release, almost 20% are back in custody and 
three years later, it’s around 30%. Over time, more than 50% 
return. 42% of the DOC admissions last year were returnees.  
This is not effective.  
Each returnee costs us money every year. On and on.  
Peter M. Lehman, PhD  
20 Lawrence Ave.  
Thomaston, Maine 04861  
(207) 542-1496  
Peter@GrowInME.com  
February 14 , 2023 Lehman , CJPS  Page 2 
The purpose of intervention is so that it doesn’t happen again.  
Incarceration doesn’t do that. Programs and treatment do.  
From Council of State Governments, First Presentation to the Maine Commission  
 to Improve the Sentencing, Supervision, Incarceration and Management  
of Prisoners, October 3, 2019  
I’m sure you have heard the old Chinese saying: "Give a family  a 
fish, and you'll feed them for a day. Teach a family to fish, and 
you've fed them for a lifetime."  Translated to corrections, that 
reads:  “Put a man in jail and he will be back  again. T each him 
how to stay out of jail and you will have saved a ton of money.”  
Programs and treatment are not a luxury, they are the route to 
success. Giv e the DOC enough money to actually help men and 
women stay out. That’s an evidence -based practice. In other 
words, it works!  
And a significant investment could dramatically and permanently 
reduce the corrections budget.  
One obvious source  of funding is the Maine Drug Enforcement 
Agency in the Public Safety  budget .  The MDEA is another NOT 
evidence -based program.  There is no evidence that the MDEA 

February 14 , 2023 Lehman , CJPS  Page 3 
has reduced drug use. Yet they are requesting a substantial 
increase in funding.  
 
Forty Years of Drug War Failure in a Single Chart  
https://reason.com/2012/10/11/forty -years -of-drug- war-failure -in-a-sin/ 
 
In truth, funding the MDEA has diverted attention and money that could have been used for treatment, harm reduction and other interventions . In this sense, funding the MDEA has probably  
cost lives.  
Eliminating the MDEA would free up more than $13.6 millio n. 
Based on the experience of other states and countries I can 
confidently promise you that eliminating it won’t increase drug 
use.  
If we invest that money  in evidence- based treatment , other 
intervention and programs  in the DOC and elsewhere, it will 
undoubtedly save lives.  
Thank you for your consideration and support.  
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  

