Maine State Cultural Affairs Council 
Maine Arts Commission 
Maine Historic Preservation Commission 
Maine Library Commission 
Maine State Museum Commission 
Maine State Archives 
Maine Historical Society 
Maine Humanities Council 
l3 1*“ Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
February 13, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Rafferty, Representative Bremian, members of 
the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Education and 
Cultural Affairs, my name is Peter Merrill, Chair of the Maine State Cultural Affairs Council. 
The Maine State Cultural Affairs Council was established in 1991 to ensure a coordinated, 
integrated system of cultural resource programming and projects and to ensure the support of 
cultural heritage institutions and activities of the State. It is unique among the ﬁfty states and was 
created to ensure that the cultural agencies are independent, that they are not subsumed withina 
larger bureaucracy, but that their activities are coordinated and complementary. 
The members of the Council are the Maine Arts Commission, the Maine Historic Preservation 
Commission, the Maine State Library, the Maine State Museum, the Maine Humanities Council, 
the Maine Historical Society, and the Maine State Archives. Each agency has a Board of 
Trustees or Commission. The Chair and Vice-Chair (or designee) of each board serves on the 
Council. The chair of the Council is appointed by the Governor from among the members. The 
agency directors and a representative from the Governor ’s Ofﬁce are ex-ofﬁcio members. The 
Maine Historical Society and the Maine Humanities Council are not state agencies.
The Council has three items in the budget. 
First is a General Fund appropriation of $39,445. This is not much money, but it is important. 
Currently the agencies use the money to support their missions. The agencies can speak to how 
they use the funds but here are two representative examples: At the Maine Historical Society, 
which I represent on the Council, the funds are used to support the Maine Memory Network, a 
web based repository of Maine’s oral history. At the Maine Humanities Council, the funds are 
used to support humanities projects at non-proﬁt organizations statewide. It is also important to 
keep the account active. Over the years we have received more than $6,000,000 from general 
obligation bonds and general ftmd appropriations and we hope receive more again in the future. 
The second item is an Other Special Revenue allocation of $65,424. These funds came froma 
portion of the revenue generated by the sale of the Bicentennial license plates. These are one 
time funds. To date we have funded publishing a collection of essays on Maine history and 
supported Maine History day. A major project was scuttled by COVID. We are currently 
discussing other projects. 
Our third item is in Part NN. This sweeps the funds that remain from the Bicentennial 
celebration. These funds were designated for projects that we were not able to complete due to 
COVID. In our last ﬁnancial order we identiﬁed funds that were not likely to be used; Part NN 
returns them to the General Fund. 
Those are the Council’s budget items. We appreciate your interest and support.
