Testimony Neither For Nor Against:   
LD 258 - Governor’s Change Package  
May 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs.  I am Peter Lindsay and I am testifying neither for nor against LD 258 The 
Governor’s Change Packet. 
 
I am writing concerning support for our child care system across Maine. There are a number of 
great efforts to support our workforce that supports the workforce in Maine, and that supports 
parents and their young children. I appreciate that the Governor has included in this Change 
Package an increase in the child and dependent care tax credit for families. However, this 
proposal does not adequately address the critical needs in our state to help children and families 
utilizing early care and education settings. 
 
The proposed tax credit increase is limited in its potential use and many families will not be able 
to benefit from this increase, including many lower income families that especially need supports 
at this time.   
 
I was so pleased that, while dealing with the incredibly challenging pandemic, Maine and the 
United States saw a significant drop in child poverty. Why? The research shows that the federal 
Child Tax Credit law was the one major change that affected poverty rates across the country! 
 
Research backs the claim that the Child Tax Credit directly caused the drop in poverty rates. A 
Brookings Institution report concluded, “The 2021 expansion of the Child Tax Credit (CTC) led 
to a historic reduction in poverty in the United States, particularly for children.” The report 
continues, “Specifically, transfer programs that provide cash and near-cash supports have been 
shown to promote stronger educational, emotional, and health outcomes (Akee et al. 2018; Hardy 
2022; Hardy, Hill, and Romich 2019; Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and Almond 2016; Rothstein and 
Wozny 2013).1 
 
The Governor’s proposal is totally different than the federal Child Tax Credit. The proposed 
child and dependent care tax credit is available to a limited number of families, to families who 
use high quality child care programs (that are not available in all areas of Maine and most often 
have long waiting lists), and, while helpful to certain families, still does not address the child 
care crisis and expense of child care for most families.   
 
LD 1726 An Act to Build Maine’s Economy by Supporting Child Care for Working 
Families is not before you yet (Health and Human Services Coimmittee members are reviewing 
this bill at this time.) This bill would raise child care wages that will help increase availability of 
 
1 The antipoverty effects of the expanded Child Tax Credit across states: Where were the historic reductions felt?  
Sophie Collyer , Bradley Hardy , and Christopher Wimer  Wednesday, March 1, 2023, Brookings Institution, 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-antipoverty-effects-of-the-expanded-child-tax-credit-across-states-where-
were-the-historic-reductions-felt/   
slots across the state, expand child care subsidies, and broaden Head Start eligibility. These 
proposals would reduce the cost burden on families across the state and include all lower income 
families who are working and needing child care for their precious children. 
 
I strongly urge you on the Committee to look to how to help lower the child poverty rate by 
extending as best you can the federal Child Care Tax credit that has sunset at the national level, 
and by supporting the funding to implement the changes proposed in the bipartisan-sponsored 
LD 1726 that specifically address the challenges facing Maine’s child care system. 
 
Peter Lindsay 
North Yarmouth, ME 
 
 
