 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101  
 
131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Testimony of Laura Mitchell, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition on May 18, 2023 
in favor of the Budget Change Package LD 258 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations. My name 
is _________, I serve as the _________________TITLE at ORGANIZATION. 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to you all in support of the Change Package to Biennial Budget, LD 258. Specifically, the 
section on allocating $80 million to the Maine Housing Authority with $35 million for the Rural Rental Assistance Program; $35 
million for the Low Income Housing Tax Credit program; and $10 million for innovative affordable housing development strategies. 
 Maine Housing is currently out of funding for these programs. This new investment can quickly be put to use building affordable 
homes. There are affordable housing projects across Maine that are ready to begin construction, if this funding is made available. 
The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition is a nonprofit membership organization of more than 140 Maine housing development, 
architecture, construction, design, engineering, shelter, and housing services organizations. We work to address Maine’s housing 
crisis by advocating for the creation and preservation of housing for all people in Maine.  
The National Low Income Housing Coalition’s data shows that Maine is short 20,000 units of affordable housing for our most vulnerable 
Mainers – seniors, people with disabilities, people experiencing homelessness, and those working for minimum wage. With Maine’s 
population aging and retiring, we also need new 5,000 new workers a year to move to Maine. That requires more housing. 
Maine needs to be building at least 1,000 new units of affordable housing a year for Maine’s housing supply to begin to meet the 
current demand. Maine hasn’t done that since the 1970s. The number one barrier to addressing Maine's housing crisis is a lack of 
funding to build affordable housing. The policy solution is to invest in building affordable housing for people all across Maine in 
need. LD 258 with this Biennial Budget allocation to build housing makes a historic step in doing this.  
Housing is critical infrastructure for our state’s economy and health.  The proposed biennial budget you are considering today as LD 
258 can help Maine turn the tide. Right now, in Maine, there are 15,000 people on waitlists for rent vouchers so they can afford a 
place to live. There are increasing numbers of people experiencing homelessness. Rental vacancy rates are less than 1% in Portland, 
Bangor and other cities, and Maine is ranked #2 in the nation with the lowest rental vacancy rates. There are also increasing numbers 
of evictions. Now is the time for bipartisan action to build housing, so all Maine people have a home. 
I am testifying today in support of the great State of Maine investing in building affordable housing through this budget change 
package. This is the vital foundation for a comprehensive strategy needed in this legislative session to address the affordable 
housing crisis. The Maine Affordable Housing Coalition urges you to support this step forward. Because all people in Maine deserve a 
home. Thank you. 
 
   
