Rachel Vallance
Rockland
LD 258
Testimony of Rachel Vallance of Rockland before the 131st Legislature’s 
Appropriations & Financial Affairs Committee for bill LD 258
Good afternoon members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee,
My name is Rachel Vallance, I am a resident of Rockland and I am testifying today as
a shopper to express my support of LD 258, asking you to support the Governor's 
Budget to the Nutrition Incentive Fund, to offer continuous support for nutrition 
incentives, specifically the Maine Harvest Bucks Program. 
As a mom of four young children on a tight budget we struggled to afford healthy food even 
before the pandemic. We learned through SNAP education that through the Maine Harvest 
Bucks program we could get extra tokens or vouchers for fresh fruit and vegetables when 
using our EBT funds. Fruits and vegetables at grocery stores are expensive, often harvested 
before they’re ripe, treated with preservative coatings and frequently recalled because of 
various contamination. I have found several markets that participate in the Maine Harvest 
Bucks program, including the Farmers Market at Mill Park in Augusta, Pumpkin Vine Farm 
market in Somerville, Brunswick Farmers Market, and the Rockland Farmers Market and 
because I stretching our budget with Maine Harvest Bucks has changed our health and family
life in so many positive ways. 
   A trip to the Farmer’s Market has become a weekly family adventure and educational 
opportunity for myself and my children. We have the opportunity to meet the farmers, they 
take the time to tell us about different varieties of veggies and fruits and the animals they 
raise, we have established relationships with many of them who help us further stretch our 
budget with deals on slightly imperfect crops or bulk purchases.   We often spend an hour or 
more walking around the market, seeing which farmers have special deals, planning meals 
for now and to store for the winter. We will often buy a loaf of fresh bread made from all 
Maine ingredients, a couple dozen farm fresh eggs with golden orange yolks, a jar of creamy 
organic yogurt, a package of natural sausage from forest raised pigs for a special weekend 
breakfast. Many markets are located in parks or next to nature preserves, so we can take our 
bread, cheese, and bag of cucumbers for a light meal and enjoy a hike or bring a soccer ball 
to play in the field. Without Maine Harvest Bucks I would not have the ability to buy from 
these farmers, to support their work, and to enjoy the outdoors. It provides us with healthy 
food and a reason to go outside as a family. 
 In the spring we rely on Maine Harvest Bucks for a csa, saving additional money and 
guaranteeing the farmer has funds to grow a fun healthy variety of organic vegetables for us, 
allowing us to try new foods like sunflower shoots, purple carrots, and sunshine squash. The 
Maine Harvest Bucks bonus for fruits and veggies means I have enough in my grocery 
budget to use my SNAP benefits to purchase seedlings to grow some of our food, my children
learn how food is grown while having the pride and satisfaction of seeing a small plant turn 
into a fresh salad, a loaf of zucchini bread, a jar of roasted tomato sauce, a jar of low sugar 
jam, and processing green beans, kale, and spinach into the freezer for soups during the 
winter months. In summer because of the Maine Harvest Bucks program we have been able 
to shop weekly instead of once a year as we did before the program, and we have developed 
relationships with vendors, knowing which ones sell discounted bags of greens at the 
Brunswick Farmers Market such as Six River Farm in Bowdoinham, that we can order flats of 
strawberries from Fairwinds Farms, 5 pound boxes of Wild Maine blueberries, bushels of 
mixed winter squashes. We can shop directly from farms who offer the Maine Harvest Bucks, 
buying bulk bags of sweet peppers from Whatley Farms in Topsham, or bulk tomatoes and 
summer squashes and meats from Olde Haven Farms while learning how their happy pigs 
help transform tick-infested woods into clear space and how sheep help ‘mow’ the solar 
farms. 
 Originally the Maine Harvest Program doubled what we spent, a dollar for dollar match. In 
2022, the program turned down into a 50% match, and with the massive price increases for 
all groceries we were forced to make tough choices and only spend $100 per week of our 
SNAP benefits at the markets, where previously we often spent $200 plus the bonus Maine 
Harvest Bucks; $50 is a small amount to provide vegetables for a family of six. This hurt our 
family, as I’m sure it hurt the farmers we had been shopping with. The cut in Maine Harvest 
Bucks matching meant we often had to choose between filling up on cheap processed meats 
and rice, and breakfasts of sugary commercial yogurts and cereals so we could still buy a box
of tomatoes and bags of greens. Instead of a plate filled with microgreens, a pan of roasted 
root vegetables, or a bowl of tomato soup from the freezer, we have looked for veggies at 
community free food tables 
and the food pantry. The reduction of Maine Harvest Bucks from dollar to dollar, to a 50% 
match was hard enough, but if the Maine Harvest Bucks program is not supported my family 
will be back to eating ramen and whatever canned or frozen vegetables we can find on sale. 
Failure to support the Maine Harvest Bucks program at a time when the cost of living has 
skyrocketed and the SNAP program is set to return to pre-pandemic benefits level in March, 
would be a travesty for the health of Maine families, the elderly, and the many farmers who 
grow and raise and produce the foods we purchase with our Maine Harvest Bucks. 
Continuously and fully funding the Maine Harvest Bucks program is vital to the health of 
Mainers and the healthy growing agricultural economy. 
