Randy Lagasse  
Presque Isle ME 04769  
Forester Maine  Forest Service  
 
February 27th, 2023  
 
To whom it may concern,  
 
My name is Randy Lagasse, I live in Northern Maine and have worked in the woods most of my life. I am 
58 years old and have been a state employee for 24 years. I have held a state forester position now for 
some time.  I am writing this testimony on my own t ime.  
For a long time, being a state employee meant,  good benefits, defined pension retirement and a 
generous health care package. When I first started in 1998 health insurance was free. Now I pay $50 per 
month  just for myself .  
Mobility in moving to and fr om private and public sector  jobs is practically impossible once you have 
been vested  with the state of Maine. This I consider a disadvantage for leverage of improving one’s 
professional career.  Someone told me working for the state is “like  being in the m afia – you can’t leave”. 
This is an impediment that should be compensated for.  
Our division,  (Maine Forest Service) is uncompetitive with the private sector in our hiring process  and 
employee retention . For example , just recently we had two great forester position  openings located in 
the central  and southern Maine area that only revealed one qualified candidate . Granted the employee 
market is unprecedented at this time but it shows the reluctance of the workforce considering being a 
public servant.  
The idea  of better benefits and work life balance for state employees leveled the playing field has not 
come to be proven. The private sector foresters are better paid, enjoy the use of company vehicles on 
non-work -related  uses. State employees do not have that ad ded benefit. Private company foresters 
have free use of company lands, camps,  and equipment such as snowmobiles and ATV’s.  To be certain, 
we do not want to use these things on “time off” as that can create much controversy and problems,  
but fringe benefits  are a major reason why the private sector is at an advantage. And they can bring 
their dog to work!  
Throughout my entire career,  I have seen the equivalent private sector more up to date on technology 
and peripherals and current on innovation and workflow  challenges. The state has reacted to new stuff 
with tepidity . 
And finally, State employees are public servants that must  be much more cogni zant in public of their 
opinions , cannot run for certain offices and can run into “conflicts of interest”.  This as w ell, is not 
compensated for.  
 
The Compensations and Classification  study proves the discrepancies  and should be used to create a 
better state workforce.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration , 
 
Randy Lagasse  
 
 

