 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 258 – “Part 2” Biennial Budget -- Additional Jail Funding 
May 30, 2023 
 
 Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and distinguished members of the Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony requesting the inclusion 
of appropriate funding for county jails under the LD 258 Part 2 Biennial Budget on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association’s 70 member Legislative Policy Committee. 
 The bulk of county jail operations fall on the financial resources of the property taxpayers in the 
counties they serve through annual bills sent to municipalities. Those same property taxpayers have been 
hit with inflationary costs in all sectors of government service delivery at the local and county level. The 
inflation costs for jails are no different than any other sector of government and their anticipated shortfall 
is on track to mirror such a change. While the Department of Corrections required an inflationary increase 
in their operations costs, the state has decided to flat fund their appropriations to county jails, falling short 
of the 20% commitment to fund their operation.  
 Officials believe that this failure to recognize the inflationary costs for county facilities is a 
rollback on negotiated terms to provide essential services demanded by the legislature that came without 
additional support for those obligations under the promise that all stakeholders would work together to 
find efficiencies and identify pressures under a newly created County Corrections Professional Standards 
Council.  
 This unstaffed, unsupported council has been meeting since August to identify the pressures on 
the system that are equally felt amongst facilities. Inflation in operating costs, a lack of residential 
treatment options for substance use disorder in the state, the back log of cases in the state court system, a 
list of unfunded mandates for medically assisted treatment, and a prosecutorial system that favors 
sentences that place an inmate in a county over a state facility are just some of the factors established by 
state practice that drive up the cost of running county jails on property taxpayers. 
County jails have no ability to influence the individuals who are assigned to their facilities any 
more than property taxpayers have the ability to influence how those services are delivered. However, the 
legislature has dictated terms that counties willingly undertook, and is failing to honor that work, and 
partnership by not affording the county jail operation fund an anticipated inflationary rise in that 
dedicated 20% cost share amount, even while asking for the same increase in the operation of state 
prisons. While communities receiving the 80% bill for their operation will already see an increase in that 
amount, the state is flat funding their portion telling those communities to fund even more for state 
required services.  

Public safety threats to our communities are increasingly drug related, violent, and linked to other 
social deficits that lack resources to be addressed in a community setting. While most county jail 
administrators will state that their facilities are filled with people who belong in secured health care 
settings, there are no such options or enough behavioral and mental health beds in the state to address this 
need, while the protection of victims, and the community writ large remains a priority.   
If the increased asked in county jail operations were extraordinary to the circumstances, not in 
line with all other cost inflation measures experienced by government service delivery, and not directly 
driven by factors within the state’s control, then perhaps the position to flat fund county jail operations in 
this biennium would be understandable. However, as they are not, such a move devalues the state 
partnership with local government partners, shifts the burden onto those residents who struggled to heat 
their homes on fixed incomes with no agency to influence state policy.  
Instead, the work of law enforcement and county facilities in keeping our communities safe and 
attractive for the millions of visitors about to descend on our communities should be supported by the 
proceeds received by the state for those services.  
For all these reasons, municipal officials and the Association ask that you support the change in 
LD 258 to make county jail operations whole and honor the state’s 20% commitment to their operation.  
