Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs; Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, my 
name is Rhonda Ouellette.  I have completed this testimony on my own time in support of LD 258, the 
biennial budget.  
I have been with the Judicial Branch for ten years.  I work in the York County Superior Court in the 
criminal division.  The past 3 years have been extremely stressful and has taken a toll  on all employees.  
The past year in particular has hit the branch hard.  We have not been fully staffed, as employees we are 
constantly “putting out fires”, only able to handle emergencies and not get work done as we would 
normally.  It does not seem we w ill be able to get back to normal, maybe this is the new normal.  The 
Judicial Branch needs to increase wages.  We are not able to recruit because the starting pay is too low, 
we are not able to retain employees because the increases are minimal but the wo rk is overwhelming.  
The Judicial Branch needs to evolve and start pay at a higher rate, create opportunities for all employees 
to grow and evolve rather than stay in a stagnant environment.  Create realistic training opportunities 
that do not overwhelm th e current employees trying to do their job as well as train. Cases have become 
more complex and more severe over the years as has scheduling and docketing and reporting 
requirements.  The Judicial Branch needs to change and evolve with technology and recru iting and 
retaining quality employees.  
I am attaching a picture of the docketing on my desk.  I barely have room or time to sit at my desk and 
docket.  I have courtroom responsibilities as well as training three new employees.  We need more 
positions.   As you can see, files are separated, this is to determine which ones have the highest priority.  
Sadly, it is weeks before I can get to the lower priority cases.  The added stress of the Court Appointed 
Attorneys have also added to the work backlog.  We used to pick an  attorney from the list easily, if there 
was a conflict or needed to withdraw we were able to find another easily.  Now when we only have one 
qualified attorney rostered, it is very challenging if we need to find another one.  We are constantly 
receiving phone calls and written letters from defendants and their families, wanting more action on 
their cases.   The courts need more resources.  
In 2020 we started having court via Zoom.  We have continued as we have a marshal shortage, not 
enough room f or allowing more personal space as well as convenience and cost savings for all parties.  I 
went from completing paperwork with minimal computer work in the courtroom to  holding court with 3 
keyboards and terminals in front of me while I completed paperwor k.  Instead of relying on the marshals 
to handle any interruptions it is now falling on me.  I ha ve to determine who was not muted, tell people 
they can not interrupt court proceedings, they can not swear, who needed to be told to remove their 
hat, to stop  smoking,  not eat,  put on clothing , not drive a car.   Set up breakout rooms and move people 
in and out of them, receive chats from people in the hearing, as well as from co -workers.  It has become 
extremely stressful and intimidating.  Training a new clerk  in the courtroom is not easy, it is time 
consuming.  In all of my years I have never seen so many co -workers break down in tears.  We 
desperately need the time off but we come back in to piles and piles of work.  I can not stress this 
enough the courts ne ed more qualified, appropriately compensated employees.  
I thank you for hearing from me today as I request your support for LD 258, the biennial budget.  
 
Sincerely,  
Rhonda Ouellette  
Kennebunk, Maine  
 
 

