Members of the Appropriations Committee - You have two similar, but competing, proposals for 
consideration regarding critical support for Emergency Medical Services (EMS). These recommendations 
came from the findings of the Blue Ribbon  Commission that EMS in the State of Maine was in serious 
trouble because of poor reimbursement, a declining workforce, and increasing demand. One of their 
recommendations was that EMS needed a cash infusion of 70 million dollars per year for 5 years to hel p 
them get their  head above water and start rebuilding their infrastructure while pushing for better 
reimbursement and a more efficient delivery system. The recommendation was for the money to go 
directly  to Licensed EMS services; not Maine EMS office oper ations, not training centers, and not 
regions. There are certainly  other areas in the Maine EMS system that need attention, but, right now, 
our ability to respond to emergencies and transfer  patients is being impacted.   There was also no 
discussion about l ong and involved application processes to prove that they "needed" the money. Our 
EMS services that respond to 911 calls lose money on every call, estimated at $400 per call for urban 
services and $2000 per call for rural services. They have already comple ted their "need" assessment by 
working long hours for terrible pay under extreme conditions to respond when called. Once the Bills 
were submitted, the 70 million was pared down to 31 million with the hope that we could find some 
other funding mechanisms  to make up the difference and start us down the path of long -term 
sustainability.    
 
We desperately need your help, and we need the complete 31 million dollar allocation to be sent out 
immediately upon adoption and signing using the formula developed by the Maine Ambulance 
Association and presented to the Blue Ribbon Commission.   There has been a request process, criteria 
for which the money can be used, and a reporting requirement proposed that addresses the 
accountability concern.  
 
Please consider allocatin g the entire 31 million to  where it is desperately needed, Licensed EMS 
agencies.  
 
Thank you for your consideration  
 
 
Rick Petrie, EMT -P 
Special Projects Advisor  
Atlantic Partners EMS  
71 Halifax Street  
Winslow, Maine 04901  
rpetrie@apems.org   
Office: (207) 877 -0936 (Corporate Office)  
Cell: (207) 754 -9109  
Fax: (207) 872 -2753  
ENHANCING THE DELIVERY OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
 
