Tes$mony on Governor Mills Proposed Final 2023 Biennial Budget Senator Rotundo, Representa$ve Sachs and members of the CommiDee on Appropria$ons and Financial Aﬀairs My name is Rob Peale. I am a Readﬁeld resident and a re$red State of Maine employee.  This year Maine again has a historic surplus, and a projected con6nuing large surplus in the next biennium. Therefore I am asking that you use some of that surplus to fully fund a 9.1% COLA for Maine Public Employees Re6rement System (MainePERS) re6rees retroac6ve to September 2022 when the annual COLA for 2022 was applied. This should also include a 9.1% increase in the pension base to which the COLA applies.  MainePERS re$rees need relief from the damage commiDed in 2011 by the then republican legislature and governor against public employees and our pensions. I am sure you are all well aware of those changes, and their impacts, so I will not repeat them here. Those changes have created a stark contrast to the private sector equivalent of our pensions, Social Security, which private sector workers and business owners receive. Social Security payments include COLAs equal to the full rate of inﬂa$on, and that COLA applies to the en$re social security payment, both unlike MainePERS pensions. The Financial Markets, even given the declines of 2022, have come roaring back since 2011 during one of the greatest long term bull market periods in stock market history. However, no legislature or governor has permanently reversed any of the pension beneﬁt cuts that many considered temporary in 2011. Therefore I am reques6ng, instead of the governor’s proposed one-6me 3% payment in this 
budget, that you pass and fund a 9.1% COLA (or at least something closer to it) as of September 2022 to bring the COLA in line with the actual inﬂa6on, and also supply funding to apply this COLA permanently to the COLA pension base. This is exactly what was done by the prior legisla$ve session to bring our COLA for 2021 up to 5.4%, the rate of inﬂa$on as of June 30th, 2021. A 9.1% COLA will cost much more than the 19 million dollars currently proposed by the Governor (I expect it will cost somewhere between 100 and 200 million dollars) but it will truly provide both current and long term relief for re$rees unlike the Governor’s proposal.  If you cannot ﬁnd the money in this year of historic surpluses, when will any Maine legislature or governor be able to ﬁnd it? Please do limit your ac$ons to just passing measures that kick the can down the road such as LD 1607 seang up a Pension Improvement Fund. This is what governors and legislators have been doing for most of the last 50 years and this is what has created the current situa$on. The current budget surplus presents an opportunity for the current legislature and governor to make some small amends for past ac$ons even though the improvement will not come close to making public employees whole.  Thank you.  Robert Peale 42 Mooer Road Readﬁeld, ME
Robert Peale
Readfield
LD 258
Testimony on Governor Mills Proposed Final 2023 Biennial Budget
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs
My name is Rob Peale. I am a Readfield resident and a retired State of Maine 
employee.  This year Maine again has a historic surplus, and a projected continuing 
large surplus in the next biennium. Therefore I am asking that you use some of that 
surplus to fully fund a 9.1% COLA for Maine Public Employees Retirement System 
(MainePERS) retirees retroactive to September 2022 when the annual COLA for 2022
was applied. This should also include a 9.1% increase in the pension base to which 
the COLA applies.
 MainePERS retirees need relief from the damage committed in 2011 by the then 
republican legislature and governor against public employees and our pensions. I am 
sure you are all well aware of those changes, and their impacts, so I will not repeat 
them here. Those changes have created a stark contrast to the private sector equivalent
of our pensions, Social Security, which private sector workers and business owners 
receive. Social Security payments include COLAs equal to the full rate of inflation, 
and that COLA applies to the entire social security payment, both unlike MainePERS 
pensions.
The Financial Markets, even given the declines of 2022, have come roaring back 
since 2011 during one of the greatest long term bull market periods in stock market 
history. However, no legislature or governor has permanently reversed any of the 
pension benefit cuts that many considered temporary in 2011. Therefore I am 
requesting, instead of the governor’s proposed one-time 3% payment in this budget, 
that you pass and fund a 9.1% COLA (or at least something closer to it) as of 
September 2022 to bring the COLA in line with the actual inflation, and also supply 
funding to apply this COLA permanently to the COLA pension base. This is exactly 
what was done by the prior legislative session to bring our COLA for 2021 up to 
5.4%, the rate of inflation as of June 30th, 2021. A 9.1% COLA will cost much more 
than the 19 million dollars currently proposed by the Governor (I expect it will cost 
somewhere between 100 and 200 million dollars) but it will truly provide both current
and long term relief for retirees unlike the Governor’s proposal. 
If you cannot find the money in this year of historic surpluses, when will any Maine 
legislature or governor be able to find it? Please do limit your actions to just passing 
measures that kick the can down the road such as LD 1607 setting up a Pension 
Improvement Fund. This is what governors and legislators have been doing for most 
of the last 50 years and this is what has created the current situation. The current 
budget surplus presents an opportunity for the current legislature and governor to 
make some small amends for past actions even though the improvement will not come
close to making public employees whole. 
Thank you. 
Robert Peale
Readfield, ME
