Rob Peale 2023 Tes.mony on Governor Mills Proposed 2023 Biennial Budget Senator Rotundo, Representa.ve Sachs and members of the CommiCee on Appropria.ons, Financial Aﬀairs & Senator Tipping, Representa.ve Roeder and members of the CommiCee on Labor and Housing.   My name is Rob Peale and I am a Readﬁeld resident. I am also a re.red State of Maine employee.  I am asking for your support to fully fund a 9.1% COLA for Maine Public Employees ReBrement System (MainePERS) reBrees as of September 2022 when the annual COLA for 2022 was applied. This should also include a 9.1% increase in the pension base to which the COLA applies.  MainePERS re.rees need relief from the damage commiCed in 2011 by the then republican legislature and governor against public employees and our pensions. The cuts to my contractually promised pension (based on Maine Law prior to 2011) were billed by some elected oﬃcials as “shared sacriﬁce”. However, the ones who made most of the sacriﬁces when the cuts to our pensions were made were the public employees.  The damage included (1) a substan.al cut in the amount (base) to which cost-of-living adjustments (COLA) apply, (2) lowering the COLA cap to a level below the likely long term average inﬂa.on rate, and (3) a 3-year COLA freeze. These changes were ins.gated by long term underfunding of the pension system by Maine poli.cians exacerbated by the Stock Market collapse during the Great Recession.  The changes are in stark contrast to the private sector equivalent of our pensions, Social Security, which private sector workers receive. Social 
Security payments include COLAs equal to the rate of inﬂa.on on the en.re payment. The Financial Markets, even given the declines of 2022, have come roaring back since 2011 during one of the greatest long term bull market periods in stock market history. However, no legislature or governor has permanently reversed any of the pension beneﬁt cuts from 2011. Therefore I am requesBng, instead of the governor’s proposed one-Bme payment in this budget, that you pass and fund a 9.1% COLA as of September 2022 to bring it in line with the actual inﬂaBon, and also supply funding to apply this COLA permanently to the COLA base. Adding the money to the base will be much more helpful to public employees over the long term than the governor’s proposal of a one-.me payment directly to public employee re.rees.  In agreeing to work for state government, I was promised a far stronger pension than I have today, and it’s falling further, and more quickly behind the increasing cost of living. Bringing the 2022 COLA in line with current inﬂa.on and applying it to the base will be a signiﬁcant help to all public employees even if the current COLA cap of 3% con.nues to be applied in the future. The current budget surplus presents an opportunity for the current legislature and governor to make some small amends for past ac.ons even though the improvement will not come close to making public employees whole.  Please fully fund a 2022 9.1% COLA for reBred public employee pensions, including a 9.1% increase in the base. I also ask that you be open to addiBonal changes that will help reBrees recover addiBonal pension beneﬁts that were promised to us. Thank you.  Robert Peale 
42 Mooer Road Readﬁeld, ME
