 
 
 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry  
By Robin Kerber, American Farmland Trust, New England Policy Associate  
February 28, 2023  
 
RE: Support for LD 258  Sec. Z 328 and Sec. Z 364 - An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from 
the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years End ing June 30, 2023, June 
30, 2024 , and June 30, 2025 .  
Dear Senator Ingwe rsen, Representative Pluecker , Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs  and esteemed members 
of the Appropriations and Financial Affair s and Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry  Joint Committee :  
My name is Robin Kerber, and I am American Farmland Trust’s New England Policy Associate. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify on behalf of American Farmland Trust in support  of the proposed funding 
for the Maine Healthy Soils Program, and the Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program . 
I am pleased to present testimony today on behalf of American Farmland Trust (AFT). AFT is the 
nation’s leading conservation organization dedicated to protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, 
and keeping farmers on the land. Since its foundi ng in 1980 by farmers and citizens concerned about the rapid 
loss of farmland to development, AFT has helped protect over 6.5 million acres of farmland and led the way for 
the adoption of conservation practices on millions more. Established in 1985, AFT’s New England office works 
to save the land that sustains us across the region.  
In Maine and across the region, we have seen record -breaking droughts in the summer followed by 
sporadic and heavy rain in the fall, rain that often washes away valuable topsoil rather than slowly permeating and 
nourishing the ground. As a result, farmers need immediate relief to continue farming and improve critical topsoil 
this upcoming growing season. Furthermore, farming is a weather -dependent occupation requiring farmers to be 
innovative in adopting conservation practices for many years. Many farmers i n the state are already adapting and 
transitioning their farming practices to meet the increased and unpredictable pressures of a changing environment. 
Still, they will need more support through sustained and adequate funding. Supporting innovative farmers  and 
ranchers in adopting conservation practices is crucial in adapting to and mitigating climate change while 
improving water and air quality, soil health, and profitability.  
Funding for the Farmers Drough t Relief Grant Program  
AFT also supports the proposed $2 million in funding for the Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program. 
Signed into law in August 2022 and housed within DACF,  this Program  is intended to provide direct financial 
assistance to farmers adversely affected by droug ht conditions. This Program  siphons money directly into 
immediate opportunities that allay the challenges of climate c hange. Farms affected  by droughts with limited or 
unsubstantial  irrigation in place have  reduced crop y ields thus impa cting the productivity and viability of the 
farm . Another important factor  in considering the effects of climate change related challenges  on farms is the 
health and wellbeing of the farmers managing  their businesses in times of intense variability.   
Funding for the Healthy Soils Program  
The Healthy Soils Program was signed into law when LD 437 passed in June 2021. This legislation 
created a statewide soil health program within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
(DACF). AFT advocated for the passing of LD 437 and now  supports the proposed funding of $3 million in the 
FY 202 3-24 Budget.  Approval of this funding is vital to the success of this Program, which has been esta blished 
but has thus far needed more funding to be fully implemented. Funding for this Program would also align with 
AFT’s 2023 Farm Bill recommendations, including a proposal to create federal block grants for states to further 
improve and expand state -run soil health programs.  
As Maine strives to increase local food production, increasing the adoption of healthy soil practices  and 
addressing the challenges of climate change  is of paramount importance. Farm ers that implement these practices 
increase productivity, mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, sequester carbon, and improve the overall agricultural 
viability for the state’s food producers and Maine’s food economy. The Healthy Soils Program components are 
practical, impactful, and are based upon methods proven to be successful in advancing the adoption of healthy soil 
practices.   
The Time to Support Farmers i s Now! 
Both the Healthy Soils Program and the Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program have the potential to play 
an important role in Maine’s climate goals . In a 2021 University of Maine report on “Natural Climate Solutions” , 
it was estimated that the state can meet its climate goals by investing $25-29 million per year  into agriculture and 
the management of natural resources .1 For practices to be at a scale to significantly promote better soil health, we 
need policies, resources, and incentives to support climate -smart farming. Maine’s agricultural community is on 
the frontlines of  dealing with  the effects of climate change. With the funding of these two Programs , farmers will 
have increased opportunities to understand and implement practice s that improve their farm’s viability and 
resiliency. These two Programs  together will  work to combat  climate change, improv e Maine’s water quality and 
quantity, advanc e farmland’s resilience to extreme weather, and increase  the profitability of Maine’s farms . 
In conclusion, American Farmland Trust supports the funding of both the Healthy Soils Program, and the 
Farmers Drought Relief Grant Program in the FY 23-25 Budget  as outlined in Sec. Z 328 and Sec. Z 364. Thank 
you for the opportunity to testify  and if you have any questions about our testimony , please feel free to email me 
rkerber@farmland.org .  
With sincerity,  
Robin Kerber  
New England Policy Associate  
American Farmland Trus t 
 
American Farmland Trust  is an agricultural non -profit organization with a mission to save the land that sustains us by 
protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. AFT is the only national 
agricultural organization that approaches its work in this comprehensive, holistic manner. We recognize the connection 
between the land, forward -looking farming practices, and the farmers who do the work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Short Street    •   Northampton, MA 01060   •  (413) 586 -9330  •  www.farmland.org  
 
1 UMaine -NCS-Interim -Report_1Sept20.pdf  
