 
 
 
 
 
  
15 University Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
207-623-9511  
 
 
February 15, 2023  
 
Senator Margaret Rotundo, Chair  
Representative Melanie Sachs, Chair  
Members of Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee  
5 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 258 – Biennial Budget - Department of Administrat ive and Financial Serv ices – 
Information Services - GeoLibrary Related Budget Items  
 
Dear Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and Members of the Appropriations and Finance 
Committee:  
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates th e opportunity to provide a letter  
in support  for two budget proposals related to the Maine Library of Geographic Information 
(“the GeoLibrary”). The two initiatives are:  
• Administrative and Financial Services  
− Information Services  
− Office of Information Services Fund  
▪ Establishes one Public Service Coordinator I position and one System 
Analyst position to serve Geospatial mapping needs and provides All 
Other related costs.  
▪ Provides funding for state Orthoimagery Collection Projects coordinated 
by the GeoLibrary Board providing high resolution aerial images of the 
State of Maine . 
 
About MWUA.   The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in 
Augusta that provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in 
advocating for safe drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as 
advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts 
approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members.   
 
Water utilities across the State of Maine make significant use of the GeoLibrary’s data. We rely 
on the GeoLibrary for orthoimagery (aerial imagery), statewide parcel data, and LiDAR -based 
elevation datasets. These datasets are highly important to a util ity’s daily operation as well as in 
our planning processes. The GeoLibrary also provides valuable services coordinating the 
production of high -resolution landcover data with National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) and the University of Maine ; such datasets are critical in our efforts to 
protect water resources.  
 
An adequately funded GeoLibrary allows water utilities to focus on their mission – public health 
and safety. Without state coordination of spatial data, we would face significant data  acquisition 
costs. For example, focusing only on the orthoimagery program, the Portland Water District 
alone estimates they would need to spend well in excess of $200,000 over a period of five years 
for equivalent imagery. If utilities contracted to acqui re the data themselves, and not through the 
State, they would incur greater demands on their resources due to managing and coordinating the 
data. These costs would be passed directly to customers.  
 
MWUA  encourages you to support these initiatives. Thank yo u for your consideration.  
 
Yours for safe drinking water,  
 
 
 
Roger Crouse , 
Chair, Legislative Committee, Maine Water Utilities Association   
General Manager, Kennebec Water District  
