 
 
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair  
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations  & Financial Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Letter of Support of the Governor’s Change Package Part MMMM  funding for water and wastewater 
infrastructure investments  
 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee:  
 
The Kennebec Water District (KWD ) appreciates the opportunit y to provide the following testimony in strong support  of 
Part MMMM  of the Governor’s Change Package for LD 258 which proposes to fund critical investments in drinking water 
system investments throughout our State.   
 
KWD annually provides more than one billion gallons of drinking water to more than 9,000 customers in the 
communities of Waterville, Winslow, Fairfield, Benton, and Vassalboro.  We also wholesale water to the community of 
Oakland.  The treatment and delive ry system to meet the needs of our customers includes more than 170 miles of 
buried water main, 12 million gallons of storage, three pumping stations, and a treatment plant capable of producing 
nearly 12 million gallons per day.  
 
Governor Mills has submit ted a “change package,” which provides more than $16 million over the biennium for water 
infrastructure investment.  These funds will provide the necessary state match to secure federal funds from the US 
Environmental Protection Agency used for the replace ment of aging water infrastructure around the State. For each $1 
of state matc h, Maine will receive $5 in  federal funds.  
 
These funds go to the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) as part of the Drinking Water State Revolving 
Fund (DWSRF) . The  DWSRF provides funding for public water system infrastructure improvements.  
 
KWD has been fortunate to be the recipient of more than $12 million in loan and grant funding packages over  the past 
eight  years through the DWSRF.  Projects have included an upgrade to our primary pumping station (capable of pumping 
12 mil lion gallons of water per day) originally constructed in 1923, replacement of several miles of deteriorating water 
main (some installed prior to 1900 ), and an upgrade to the chemical storage and handling systems at our water 
treatment plant.  
 
DWSRF fundin g subsidies  (reduced interest loans and grants) have reduced the financial impact on KWD ratepayers 
while accelerating the infrastructure replacement rate.   Consequently, KWD’s infrastructure is more reliable . 
 
 
The DWSRF has been amazingly successful with more than $350 million invested in water systems across the State of 
Maine in the past  25 years.   Congress has recently increased infrastructure funding available to states through the 
DWSRF .  Therefore, the state match needs have increased . 
 
We strongly urge the Committee to support Part MMMM of the Change Package so Maine can continue to provide the 
state match necessary to secure five times more in federal funds to support water infrastructure investments.  
 
Yours for safe drinking water,  
 
 
 
Roger Crouse,  
General Manager  
 
Ec:  Representatives Bruce White, Colleen Madigan, Shelly Rudnicki , and Robert Nutting,   
 Senator David LaFountain  
 Amy Stabins, KWD Board President  
