To whom it may concern : 
 
My name is Ronnette Partridge, I have worked for the state of Maine for almost 
17 years.  I am a person not just part of the numbers on your budget pages.  I 
have been married for 33 years and I have 6 children.  
 
I work for the Department of Health and Human Services Disability Determination 
Services.  I am testifying on my own time as a private citizen.  
 
I started working for the state of Maine in May 2006 I started as a Disability 
examiner in the Pro Tech  Salary Scale grade 20.  When I started the minimum 
wage was $6.75 my starting wage was $13.75, $7.00 above minimum wage. 
Today the minimum wage is $13.80 and the pay grade I started at is $18.94, only 
$5.14 above minimum wage. Some McDonalds locations are  hiring unskilled crew 
members at $18.00 per hour.  
 
Some years ago,  the state did a wage analysis clearly showing state employees 
are underpaid, in the intervening time state wages have not gone up all that 
much. They certainly have not kept up with the cos t of living nor have the upper 
pay scales been adjusted to keep in line with the increases in the minimum wage.  
 
Our office , DDS, is contracted with the federal government adjudicating Social 
Security Disability Claims  for Maine residents .  We currently have 35 case 
deciders.  The work is highly skilled and takes years to learn the process and 
policies are constantly changing , and it requires a dynamic workforce to 
adjudicate accurate and timely disability decisions for the people of Maine.  
 
When I started her e, all case deciders had to start as Disability Examiners and 
after a year they could apply to promote to a Disability Adjudicator. Due to staff 
retention challenges  our Director has worked with DHHS and HR and eliminated 
the Disability Examiner line from our office and promoted all case deciders 
regardless of skill level from  Examiners to Adjudicators. They have further taken 
to starting new employees at step 4 of the pay scale instead of step 1.  This has 
left our long -term  employees demoralized and somew hat upset. We have one 
employee that has been here 7 years and she is now making the same amount as 
new hires . This is discouraging  as experienced and highly skilled staff are paid 
close to that of unexperienced and unskilled staff.  
 
We here at Disability D etermination services definitely have a hiring and retention 
problem. Of our 35 case deciders we only have 8 that have been here more than 7 
years, and the rest have 3 years or less. Since 11/2020 , we have lost 27 Examiners 
and Adjudicators, most of who we re new employees that did not stay long.  
 
The sad part of all of this is that being 100% federally funded, the federal 
government has offered more money for wages to improve retention,  but the 
state has said no because we cannot make more than other employe es in the 
DHHS pay scales.  Disability adjudication for social security is very different from 
other state programs and Maine Disability Determination Adjudicators should be 
compensated fairly and appropriately.  
 
The sad part is that Maine is going to lose workers to other states that pay more 
and have better climates. 43.9% of Maine’s population is 50 and older, 20.6% are 
19 or younger. 35.4% are between 20 -49. Many companies are scrambling for 
workers and many of Maine’s restaurants already close early due  to lack of staff.  
 
MAINE needs to take immediate action with increased and competitive pay to 
attract and retain a talented workforce to best serve our citizens.  
