MAINE HUMANITIES COUNCIL 
131"‘ Maine Legislature 
]oint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Ioint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
February 13, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, 
members of the Ioint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: My name is 
Samaa Abdurraqib - I am the Executive Director of the Maine Humanities Council. I am 
speaking in support of the Council's initiative which the Governor has included in her 
supplemental budget request.K 
The Maine Humanities Council is an independent statewide nonprofit that supports life- 
long learning and civic engagement. We are the State of Maine affiliate of the National 
Endowment for the Humanities and the Library of Congress Center for the Book. We 
provide educational programs throughout the state addressing a range of needs, 
including literacy, promotion of reading, teacher enrichment, community history, 
increased civic engagement, and cultural tourism. Our constituents include low—literacy 
adults, public school teachers, Veterans, domestic violence agencies, Department of 
Corrections facilities, health care workers, library patrons, and all Mainers from all walks 
of life. Maine Humanities provided both direct programs and grant funding for 
community cultural activities. 
All funding received from the State of Maine is distributed as grants to community 
organizations throughout the State. These grants offer an avenue for community-based 
cultural organizations to mount public programs on a wide range of local history and 
other cultural topics. 100% of state funding to the Maine Humanities Council is 
distributed to communities through matching_grants. The Council does not retain any 
of the funds to cover overhead, personnel, or administrative costs. Grants are awarded 
through a competitive review conducted by members of the Council's statewide 
volunteer Board of Directors. Any organization that receives grant funds from Maine 
Humanities is required to match it at least one to one, meaning that, in effect, the impact 
of these State funds is doubled. 
Between 2021 and 2022, we received grant requests totaling over $400,000. Through the 
funds allocated to Maine Humanities during that same period, we were able to award 
grants to 59 organizations, totaling just over $158,000. The grants we award are 
relatively small — between $1,000 and $7,500 — but we know firsthand how impactful 
these grants are for both the organizations we fund and the various Maine communities 
they serve.
This year, as a result of our outreach efforts, we are poised to receive, for us, a record 
number of grant applications. We recently closed our first cycle of grant applications— 
applications were due Ianuary 31$‘ — we took in a total of 61 applications for this cycle; 19 
more applications than we received for this same grant cycle last year. I expect our 
remaining grant cycles will see a similar increase this year. Because of the increase to our 
allocation that was voted on and approved last fiscal year, we are excited to be able to 
provide grant funds to even more organizations and communities across Maine. 
I have included a sample list of recent Maine Humanities grantees. I invite you to look 
through it to get a sense of the kinds of community-based organizations and projects that 
benefit from this funding. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak; I will happily answer any questions you may 
have. Thank you very much. 
Samaa Abdurraqib, Ph.D. 
Executive Director
maine 
humanities council 
Grants Program 
2022 
Grunt Awards 
Sorted by Town 
Augusta Literacy Volunteers of Kennebec $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Virginia Marriner Augusta Community Permanent Sto1fyWalk. , 21-22-MIN-11 
A community effort to advance the concepts of family literacy, encouraging parents to read to their 
children and be involved and interested in their education, at the same time encouraging outdoor, 
healthy activity. 
Bangor Maine Multicultural Center $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Bill Phillips Maine Multicultural Community Forum 21-22-MIN-09 
The Maine Multicultural Community Forum is a series of presentations on various aspects of cultural 
diversity with the purpose of fostering intercultural harmony. Forum presentations are held monthly 
over zoom from September to June. Each presentation is ninety minutes long and includes some form 
of interactivity with those in attendance. 
Boothbay Harbor Snowlion Repertory Company $1000 
My Witch: Margaret Hamilton's Stories of Maine,0 
Proj. Dir.: A1 D’Andrea _ Hollywood and Beyond! _ 21-22. -MAC-05 
Snowlion Repertory Company will present the world premiere production of the new one-woman show 
"My Witch: Margaret Hamilton's Stories of Maine, Hollywood, and Beyond," running at Meetinghouse 
Arts. The matinee performance on Halloween will be followed by a talk-back with the audience, the 
playwright, director, and actress playing Margaret Hamilton, moderated by Snowlion Rep's Producing 
Director Margit Ahlin. 
Bucksport i 
"Buck Memorial Library P $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Lisa Ladd BIPOC @ BML g 21-22 ,-MIN,-01 
Creating a more Diverse Library Collection that can be highlighted on Special Days/ Months and 
incorporated into our Storytimes and other Programs. 
Damariscotta ‘ 
The Peace Gallery _l' 
_ , . _ i 
f $933 
Proj. Dir.: Olivia DeLisle _ 
y Empty Hand, Empty Brush . _ l . . _ 
_ 21~22,-AH-05 
Korean-born artist Kichung Lizee will engage up to 8 veterans in a 4-week healing arts course. The last 
class will feature a roundtable discussion of the series.
Dover Foxcroit Center Theatre for the Performing Arts $1450 
Proj. Dir.: Patrick Myers Bounty Screening and Discussion 21-22-MIN-02 
We want to screen the new ﬁlm Bounty at the Center Theatre and invite the ﬁlmakers and speakers to 
lead an audience discussion. 
Dresden , The Maine Review $1600 
Proj. Dir.: Ian Reid Environs 21-22-MIN-O3 
A home for brief poetry and prose about the graceful, brutal, life-sustaining planet we call home, 
considering the importance of place, experiences of belonging (or not), wildernesses discovered or lost, 
ﬂora and fauna encounters, and anthropogenic climate change, which threatens it all. 
Eastport Eastport Arts Center $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Mark Macey Dialogue Mural 21-22-MAC-02 
Eastport Arts Center will collaborate with Ellen Nicholas, a local Passamaquoddy artist and educator, to 
install an original mural in their recently remodeled lobby. The mural will incorporate responses froma 
community questionnaire that addresses what the arts mean to responders. The aggregated responses 
will provide inspiration for Nicholas ’ work. 
Falmouth Azerbaijan Society of Maine $7500 
Building Resilience and Community Belonging 
Proj. Dir.: Tarlan Ahmadov Through Our Diverse Culture and Traditions 21-22-07 
The Azerbaijan Society of Maine will host programs for a diverse group of immigrants that were deeply 
impacted by the pandemic. An immersive program on Ethno-Jazz music, led by a professional 
musician, will explore the genre's inﬂuence on both American and global culture. Funds will also be 
used to host a series of storytelling and cultural events focused on traditional folklore, music, literature 
and food for intergenerational groups who share the same language and culture. 
Farmington ArtsFarmington $1791 
Performance for Students and General Public in 
Farmington of Shakespeare's "As You Like It" "By 
Proj. Dir.: Robert Hayes Theater at Monmouth 21-22-MIN-13 
On October 21 Theater at Monmouth will perform Shakespeare ’s “As You Like It” twice during school 
hours for high school and middle school students, and in the evening for the general public. Theater at 
Monmouth will provide a thorough Teacher Resource Guide to help introduce students to the play, and 
some of that information will be used in the printed program for the evening show. A 15 minute 
question and answer session will follow each performance. 
Fort Kent University of Maine at Fort Kent $2314 
Voices of the Borderland: The Social Impact of 
International Travel Restrictions in Northem 
Proj. Dir.: Patrick Lacroix Maine 21-22-02 
This oral history project aims to chronicle the profound effects of border restrictions due to the 
pandemic on the communities of the Upper St. John River valley, a transnational region consisting of 
western New Brunswick and the far northern reaches of Maine. This 18-month prohibition on cross- 
border travel fractured a region that scholars often represent as a borderland. A concluding conference 
will share the ﬁndings of the project with the communities involved.
Freeport Arts & Cultural Alliance of Freeport $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Dana Legawiec David Thomas Exhibition "Finding Parkinson's" 21-22-MIN-05 
FINDING PARKINSONS: DOING BATTLE WITH MY BRAIN is an art exhibition, documentary 
screening, and panel discussion focused on the work of Boston-based artist C. David Thomas, who 
contracted Parkinson ’s Disease from exposure to Agent Orange while stationed in Vietnam. An 
exhibition of 25 digital prints will be installed at the Meetinghouse Arts Gallery, along with a reception, 
a screening of the documentary The Last Ghost of War, panel discussions with the artist. 
Kennebunk Brick Store Museum" $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Cynthia Walker Museum-School Learning Partnership 21-22-MIN-04 
Local elementary schools host traveling exhibit cases from the Museum, and students receive activity 
booklet that can be traded in (when completed) for Museum admission and a prize (children's history 
book). 
LewistonI 
Maine Public $7000 
Proj. Dir.: Scott Marchildon Connecting Communities 21-22-01 
Maine Public News Connect, our multi-language programming, is geared to getting critical information, 
news, and cultural information out to Maine's immigrant populations. We engage Maine's diverse 
immigrant communities in the four most common languages understood in Maine other than English - 
French, Somali, Portuguese, and Spanish - by supplying translation of weekly news stories that impact 
their communities. 
Lewiston Maine Community Integration $4400 
Proj. Dir.: Fowsia Musse Hadal Zone (Talk Zone) Podcast - 
21-22-09 
The Hadal Zone podcast will use the power of traditional music and spoken word to foster 
conversations and critical thinking about hidden structures such as like patriarchy, the role of elders, 
and the role of religious leaders within Somali American culture. We want to encourage discussion of 
the most pressing issues facing our community, including mental health concerns and the opioid 
pandemic. 
Lewiston Maine Museum of Innovation, Learning and Labor $2000’ 
I Researching, Collecting, and Sharing Black 
Proj. Dir.: Traci Gere . Immigrant Oral Histories . 
, _ 21-22-MIN-07 
This project will collect the oral histories of immigrants to the Lewiston-Auburn area from African 
countries and present these oral histories, along with background research, in an upcoming 
immigration exhibit at Museum L-A. 
Mount Desert Mount Desert Island Historical Society _ $6000 
Proj. Dir.: Raney Bench We Change .T_ h_em f ~ 
21-22-05 
Local artist Jennifer Steen Booher will produce two sets of six large-scale exhibit panels that depicts 
ecological shifts due to human-caused climate change. Five public programs will use these artworks 
built off of ecological data sets as a starting point for discussions about the importance of historic 
documents to understanding issues like climate change.
Newcastle Lincoln Academy $5000 
Proj. Dir.: Heather 
D'Ippolito Lincoln Academy's The Talon Student Newspaper 21-22-DJIC-01 
The Lincoln Academy Talon student newspaper launched in the fall of 2021. Each week, students 
voluntarily meet during school hours as a journalism club. Working with Lincoln Academy's Director of 
Communications, a Lincoln Academy English teacher, and the deputy editor of the Lincoln County 
News, they produce a monthly printed paper that covers school news, sports, opinion, games and 
puzzles. The student newspaper group prints and distributes 500 issues of the newspaper across the 
school campus and downtown Newcastle and Damariscotta. 
Old Town _ Leonard Middle School $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Alexandra 
Hinrichs LMS Big Read 21-22-MAC-04 
400 students in grades 5-8 and their teachers will all read the same book and engage in a series of 
workshops, discussions, presentations, and other activities over multiple months to explore the text in 
many different ways. This project will encourage students to become stronger nonﬁction readers, 
critical thinkers, and thoughtful citizens. 
Old Town Leonard Middle School $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Alexandra 
Hinrichs LMS Big Read 2022 _ 21-22-Al-I-02 
The LMS Big Read centers conversations around a single book, engaging over 400 students, their 
teachers, and their families in a series of workshops, discussions, guest speakers, and community- 
building activities to create more thoughtful citizens 
Portland SPEEDWELL Projects . $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Annika Earley Documenting LGBTQ+ Artists and Activists 21-22-MAC-01 
This 20-minute documentary will focus on Maine-based LGBTQ+ artists, highlighting the cultural 
contributions of LGBTQ+ artists and shed light on human rights issues that the LGBTQ+ community 
faces. Accompanied by a 6-month exhibition at SPEEDWELL, it will play during open gallery hours. 
Portland Portland Ovations $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Casey Oakes Classical Pre-Performance Lecture Series 21-22-MAC-03 
Portland Ovations will engage George Lopez, Bowdoin College's ﬁrst Artist in Residence, as a guest 
curator. Using his expertise and connections in both the arts and education community, Lopez is 
crafting a pre-performance lecture series that highlights the emotional and historical context of the 
program and engages audiences with dynamic speakers. 
Portland University of Southem Maine Libraries ’ 
$7000 
Proj. Dir.: Wendy Chapkis Digital LGBTQ+ History Trail 21-22-03 
This project will reclaim and disseminate Maine queer history and culture through the creation ofa 
digital heritage trail featuring ﬁve or more locations in Portland, Maine. The trail will be accessible via 
an app, for mobile download, and will incorporate audio and ﬁlm material from oral history interviews, 
photographs, and other artifacts found in University of Southern Maine's (USM) Special Collections.
PortlandA 
Dawnland Voices 2.0 Advisory Council $7500 
Proj. Dir.: Mihku Paul Dawnland Voices 2.0 21-22-04 
Davmland Voices 2.0 will create a new website that will be an online platform for Indigenous literature 
from northern New England with a focus on new work published once annually. Writer proﬁles and 
contact information will be included, to facilitate access and connection between Indigenous writers 
and editors, scholars, publishers. Goals also include new media, an annual writing contest, mentorship 
opportunities for new Indigenous writers, and a literary event that includes a spoken word performance 
and supportive writing workshops. 
Portland Side x Side“ $3500 
Proj. Dir.: Beth Wilbur van » 
Sustenance 
Mierlo V 21-22-06 
This multigenerational endeavor, which includes an exhibition, immersive content engagement with 
elementary students, and a performance and community conversation will provide a space for artists 
and the general public to reﬂect and contemplate a basic human condition, sustenance. The breadth of 
the concept includes publicly interrogating questions of mental health, economics, hunger, the 
environment and community. 
Portland The Black in Maine Podcast $5000 
Proj. Dir.: Samuel James The Black in Maine Podcast 21-22-DJIC-02 
This project is an exclusively Black-voiced journalistic podcast covering historical anti-Black 
institutional racism in Maine and its contemporary effects. Through research and interviews with Black 
historians and Black elected officials the podcast will primarily cover four events: Malaga Island, the 
Place Names Battle, the KKK’s involvement in the 1923 changes to Portland ’s charter and the 2021- 
2022 charter commission ’s attempts to reverse those changes. 
Portland ' 
Maine Writers & Publishers Alliance $1000 
Maine Lit Fest Bilingual, Multicultural Story Hour- 
Proj. Dir.: Taryn Bowe and Book Giveaway » ' 
21-22-AH-01 
Bilingual, Multicultural Story Hour at the Maine Lit Fest will welcome immigrant and migrant families, 
showcase Latinx children's books, include book giveaways, and invite audience members to deepen 
their understanding of Latin cultures. 
Portland A 
” 
SPEEDWELL Projects A $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Annika Earley A Art of Transformation _ _ 21-22-AH-03 
A ﬁlm and discussion series featuring artists whose work fosters social change or explores identity, 
visibility, or connection. Community-based art Workshop(s) with Maine artists focused on social change 
efforts identiﬁed by the participants. 
Portland Side X Side $1000 
Proj. Dir.: Beth Wilbur vanl 
lVll_61"lO SUSTENANCE _ .' 
, Z1-22-AH —04 
SUSTENANCE Will be an art exhibit/ performance/ discussion at the Portland Public Library, 
May/ June 2023, showcasing Work from Maine artists, including food/ performance artist Flor Cron, 
and Portland students working with Arts Integrator, SidexSide.
Portland Portland Public Library $2000 
SUSTENANCE: A Multi-Cultural Art Exhibit on 
Food Sourcing and Sustenance in Maine 
Proj. Dir.: Zoe Alexis Scott Communities 21-22-MIN-15 
SUSTENANCE is an art exhibit/ perf0rmance/ discussion at the Portland Public Library, May & June, 
2023. Showcasing Maine artists in collaboration with students from SideXSide the exhibit will bring 
attention to food insecurity and inspire multigenerational public conversation around sustenance 
across cultures. 
Portland Portland Ovations $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Casey Oakes The Last Girl 21-22-MIN-16 
Portland Ovations requests support for the premiere full-length staged reading of Dianne ‘dee’ Clarke’s 
play The Last Girl and integral post-performance conversation led by Clarke’s legacy organization 
Survivors Speak USA. Deeply rooted in the humanities, the power of theater has been a channel for 
empathy and social discourse for centuries. The Last Girl -- from script to stage to community dialogue 
—embodies all of this and more. 
Rockland Halcyon Music $2000 
Wonderful World: A Musical Retelling of 
Proj. Dir.: Sophie Davis Blueberries for Sal 21-22-MIN-14 
This project combines music and story to celebrate two of Maine’s most beloved children ’s book 
authors and illustrators: Ashley Bryan and Robert McCloskey. In partnership With the Waldoboro 
Public Library, Halcyon will curate live performances and educational programming that combines 
song, string quartet music, narration, and projection of illustrations from McCloskey ’s, “Blueberries for 
Sal” and Ashley Bryan’s “Wonderful World,” and “Let it Shine.” 
Rockport Maine Media Workshop & College _ $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Amy Morley Convening Lecture Series 21-22-MIN-08 
Critical Dialogue on the History and Future of Media Arts with Columbia 
University Scholar Daniel Dawson, professor of African Art and the Diaspora 
Saco Saco School Distict $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Deanna Contrino Welcoming Library for the Saco School District 21-22-MIN-10 
Our school district will be welcoming 100 families from Angola and the Central Democratic of Congo 
this fall. Our district needs many different kinds of resources so our new families feel included and 
supported by the community. My hope is to obtain funding to purchase a Welcoming Library from I'm 
Your Neighbor Books, at a cost of $2500, and to allow each school within the district to borrow the WL 
for a period of time during the school year. 
South Portland South Portland Public Library $2200 
Proj. Dir.: Lisa Marie Joyce Maine Bicentennial 2.0 21-22-10 
As a part of their renewed Bicentennial celebration programming, South Portland Public Llbrary will 
present Maine history and the humanities in new and more historically accurate ways, through a series 
of speaker presentations.
South Portland Art at Work $2000 
Proj. Dir.: Marty Pottenger Ferry Village, USA 21-2_2—MIN-06 
A humanities-placemaking project with over 100 participants of all ages, backgrounds, ethnicities, 
classes, and perspectives. Participants ’ knowledge of Ferry Village, founded by settlers in the 1600’s, is 
transformed via historical and personal stories and photographs, as their connections deepen. 
Sullivan » 
Frenchman Bay Library ‘F 
$2000 
g Exploring Native Culture through Books, Stories 
Proj. Dir; Candy Eaton and Song _ L 21-22-MIN-12 
Frenchman Bay Library is located in the heart of the Wabanaki, "People of the Dawnland" , which 
include the four Maine tribes of 1\/Ialiseet, Mi'kmaq, Penobscot and Passamaquoddy. There is so much 
history of our region, our community, and our neighborhoods that is not taught in school. This project 
will increase access to this information through a variety of networks, programs and literature.
