Sarah Leavitt
Athens
LD 258
My name is Sarah Leavitt, I am a resident of Athens, and I wish to express my 
support of LD 5688 - An Act to Provide Funding for the Fund to Address Food 
Insecurity and Provide Nutrition Incentives. I have experienced the value of this 
program as a farmer, a market organizer, and also as a customer using SNAP to 
subsidize my family food budget. I was a vendor and market manager at the 
Skowhegan Farmers’ Market years ago when Wholesome Wave funded the first 
incentive program in Maine, the infancy of Maine Harvest Bucks as we know it 
today. This program is a win-win for farmers and SNAP consumers alike. 
Incentivizing the use of SNAP at farmers’ markets and local grocers encourages 
households receiving SNAP to keep a larger percentage of the $484 million (2022) 
federal food dollars in State, which is a boost to the agricultural economy. 
Additionally, the incentive encourages consumption of fruits and vegetables, which is 
such an important factor in the health of all Maine citizens including SNAP 
households. Many consumers are unsure of how to best use vegetables in their 
cooking at home and in my personal experience, SNAP customers are much more 
likely to choose high quality, healthy foods when they can connect with a farmer who 
is able to explain the process for cooking and offer recipes. In addition to keeping 
money in the local economy and improving health outcomes by increasing fruit and 
vegetable consumption, the nutrition incentives open the door for SNAP customers to 
feel welcome and supported to shop at farmers’ markets. I have been blessed to 
experience, on both sides of the cash register, the mental health improvement when 
SNAP shoppers connect with people who truly care about their health and their 
children’s health. As food costs continue to rise in traditional grocery outlets, the 
access to these nutrition incentives allows SNAP customers to stretch their food 
budgets, which is extremely valuable to families like mine at this time. Please support
the appropriation in the Governor's Budget to the Nutrition Incentive Fund, but please
change the funding from "one-time" to "CONTINUOUS" so that the program can 
have baseline state support indefinitely. With your support of continuous funding at 
the $600,000 level per year, then markets and the Maine Federation of Farmers’ 
Markets can plan for growth and expansion of these programs without any funding 
uncertainties or interruption. Again, this benefits the Maine agricultural economy as 
well as low income consumers. On behalf of Maine farmers, markets, and SNAP 
households across the state I encourage you to support LD 5688. Please contact me if 
you wish to discuss my thoughts and experiences directly.
Sincerely, 
Sarah Leavitt
18 Fox Hill Road, Athens, ME 04912
207-399-4923

