O0“; NEAS1 INSTI1-U7_ €
i 
Q Testimony in Support of LD 258 
1 Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Located on the shores of 
Black Duck Cove on 
Great Wass Island Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Endinglune 30, 2o23,]une 30, 2024 andlune 
30,2025 
F b 1 ,2o2 
Address e ruary S3 
39 Wildflower Lane 
P.O. Box 83 
l 
,- . . Bea S ME 04611 0083 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members ofthe ]o|nt 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. 
Phone 
Z07-497-5769 My name is Sara Randall, and l am the Associate Director ofthe Downeast 
institute located in the Washington County town of Beals. I reside in 
Website Freeport. Part of myjob is coordinatingthe intertidal soft-shell clam 
""‘”‘”-d°W"ea5tl"5 “t“‘e-°'g research conducted by Downeast Institute all along Maine's coast. 
We are proud to receive this seemingly modest allocation in the 2024 and 
2025 biennial budget bill as it represents a vote ofconﬁdence by our state 
government in our efforts to sustain Maine's valuable and iconic soft-shell 
clam ﬁshery. Besides conducting groundbreaking research on behalfof 
the ﬁshery, Downeast institute runs the only soft—shell clam hatchery in 
the state, which some ofyou may have visited recently, and we provide 
seed clams to municipalities and others. 
This funding, ﬁrst added to the Governor's budget by]ohn Baldacci, helps 
support an important public resource necessary to Maine's economy. We 
appreciate your consistent support over the years, and all the workyou do 
on behalfofthe people of Maine. 
Thank you foryourtime and attention and I'm happy to answer any 
questions. 
The mission of the Downeast Institute is to improve the quality ofiife for the people of 
downeast and coastal Maine through marine research, marine science education, and 
innovations in wild and cultured fisheries.
