 
 
          
 
Norway  Downtown  www.norwaydowntown.org  
 
Dear Senator Margaret Rotundo, Chair Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs Representative Melanie Sachs, Chair Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
 I am writing in support of your allocation of at least $25,000 to the Maine Downtown Center (MDC).  
 
I am the current President of Norway Downtown , an MDC Affiliate Community,  and a member of the 
Advisory Council to the  MDC.  
 
For 20 years, Norway Downtown has been at the forefront of the successful revitalization of Norway’s Main Street. Using the Main Street Approach of historic preservation, transformational strategies, and the Four Points (Economic Vitality, Organizat ion, Promotion, and Design) we have helped steer the town 
and our beloved street from the depths of degradation and empty storefronts in 2002 to the vibrant 
downtown we get to enjoy today. None of this would have been possible without the leadership, 
econo mic assistance, and education provided by the MDC.  
 The MDC was established in state law in 1999 as a public -private partnership based at the Maine 
Development Foundation ( MDF ). MDC serves as the state coordinator for the National Main Street 
Center, utilizing the  43-year -old Main Street Four- Point Approach which has earned a reputation as one 
of the most powerful local economic development tools in the nation . 
 The MDC’s  mission is to advance preservation -based economic development in downtowns across 
Main e, resulting in business growth, job creation, building rehabilitation, cultural enhancement, and 
organizational leadership.  This program has a proven track record of success across the State of Maine. 
It has helped and continues to help communities becom e places where people want to move to, live in 
and work.  
 In early 2020 as Norway faced the crisis of the pandemic, as so many towns across Maine did, our 
economic future was far from certain. But, because of the steady leadership of the MDC,  the guidance  
of Norway Downtown, and incredible outpouring of support from people who have come to love and rely on our Main Street, all of our businesses survived and many of them thrived. I believe things would have played out far differently if we had not been a part of Maine’s Main Street Community.  
 
With the continuing support of the MDC, Norway’s downtown is looking at a bright future. Your 
continued financial support is critical to the Mission of the MDC.  
 Thank you for your consideration.  
 Sincerely,  
 
 
Scott Berk  
President of Norway Downtown  
Member of the Advisory Council to the MDC  
Business and property owner on Main Street in Norway  

