Q 
, MAINE 
AQUACULTURE 
\ ASSOCIATION 
February 16, 2023 
The Honorable Margaret Rotundo, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Melanie Sachs, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
State House, Room 228 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, Honorable members of the Joint Committee on Marine 
Resources: 
My name is Sebastian Belle and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Aquaculture Association 
(MAA). l stand before you today to testify in strong support of the proposed biennial budget request 
for the Department of Marine Resources. The MAA represents Maine's aquatic farmers and the many 
infrastructure companies that provide goods and services to our producers. Our farmers annually 
produce over 100 million dollars in farm gate revenue and directly employ roughly 700 Maine citizens 
year-round. We purchase goods and services from over 400 Maine businesses and our total 
economic impact is roughly 150 million dollars annually. 
The Department of Marine Resources and the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources both 
work hard to protect and manage the valuable resources that form the foundation of this economic 
engine. ln order to operate, our farmers lease roughly 1700 acres of public waters annually. We 
acquire permission to use those few acres by going through a rigorous, transparent adjudicatoiy 
process that has been developed by the state over a forty-five-year period. The leasing process 
includes three public meetings, including a formal public hearing and a review by state and federal 
authorities to ensure the lease will comply with a series of technical criteria designed to protect the 
public trust, the environment and to ensure there are no other significant uses of the area. Oncea 
lease is granted, the farmer must comply with a series of specific lease conditions and a strict set of 
state and federal environmental regulations. The Maine aquaculture leasing system is seen as the 
gold standard and many other states and even countries have modeled their aquaculture 
management programs on Maines's system. 
The Department of Marine Resources biennial budget request has a number of components that are 
important to our members. In particular, MAA supports the request by the Department for additional 
resources for the Marine Patrol, Bureau of Public Health and the establishment of a Maintenance 
Fund for the Department's fleet of vessels. All of these functions are vital to our members. 
339 Water Street 
Gardiner, ME 04345 
(207) 622-0136 
www.maineaqua.org
° 
MAINE 
AQUACULTURE I ASSOCIATION 
Maine has a long tradition of producing high quality, healthy seafood that has supported the strong 
Maine brand identity. Maine seafood is an iconic part of the Maine brand and Maine aquaculture 
products have earned their place as part of that brand. Please help us continue to build that brand 
and give DMR the resources they need to help us grow and defend Maines working waterfronts. l 
thank you for your attention and patience and would be glad to answer any questions you may have 
Sincerely, 
.- ,7’ 
V: if //’ I-‘_ 
fr ‘V 
"7 :- ./l ~ 
,' .» /1:.
? 
Sebastian M. Belle 
Executive Director 
339 Water Street 
Gardiner, ME 04345 
(207) 622-0136 
www.maineaqua.org
