Sophia Spiller
Office of Child and Family Services
LD 258
My name is Sophia Spiller and I am a Child Protective Caseworker out of District Three and 
have been with the Department for almost five years. 
I am testifying for myself but also on behalf of all of my colleagues who do not feel heard. 
Funding is a major issue in the work that we do. We do not have any preventative resources 
available due to a lack of funding, particularly for mental and behavioral health services, and 
this leads to an influx of reports. Once reports are received, cases are dragged on due to 
having long wait lists for providers, leaving cases to pile up.
The biggest issue with funding is that we are not paid enough. It is disheartening that as an 
individual who serves arguably Maine's most vulnerable population, that I could go down the 
street to Target and only make a dollar an hour or two less. 
This is not a normal social work job. I have had my life threatened, I've been spit at, almost hit
by a vehicle driven by a an angry client, and I am verbally abused and harassed on a regular 
basis. We have such high turnover in this job because nobody wants to be treated this way 
and get paid peanuts. It's time that our pay reflects the incredibly challenging work that we do.
As Caseworkers we are now responsible for not only our high workload, but clerical and case 
aid tasks as well. They are not paid enough which also results in turnover and adds 
unrealistic expectations to Caseworker's workload. 
With all of this turnover due to funding, the job has become impossible. To break it down, I 
have 16 cases when the federal recommendation for a caseload is 12. I've never been under 
14 in the five years I've been here. I have to see 87 people once a month. The time it takes to
travel and visit with them is 83 hours. The time it takes to document all those contacts is 29 
hours. That adds up to 112 hours of work, just to do the bare minimum; see people and 
document it. There are 160 working hours in a month. It's impossible to meet the expectations
of the State when we are this overworked. Higher caseloads do not equal safer children. In 
fact, it will do the opposite. 
We cannot wait for change to happen. It needs to be now.  
