 
 
 
 
 
May 17, 2023 
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair 
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations  
& Financial Affairs  
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: Comments of MSBA regarding LD 258, Part A regarding Judicial Branch funding in 
Governor’s “Change Package”  
 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee: 
 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we are pleased to provide 
comments in support  of increased funding for the Judicial Branch as proposed in the Governor’s 
“Part 2” Budget change package. 
 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3,000 attorneys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintains 28 separate sections covering nearly 
every field of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. Access 
to justice is a key element of our mission, hence our strong and longstanding interest in issues pertaining 
to the Judicial Branch. 
Part 2 Budget increased Judicial Branch Funding.  The COVID-19 pandemic brought several issues 
to the forefront, including issues of adequate staffing and resources for our State’s Judicial Branch. Such 
issues have resulted in a backlog of dockets that can only be addressed with adequate resources and 
funding to work through such backlog and ensure that all Mainers have access to Maine courts on a 
timely basis. The Governor’s “Part 2” Budget proposes to fund four new judges – three District Court 
judges and one Superior Court judge – to assist in addressing the backlog of dockets in the State’s courts. 
The Governor previously proposed the same addition of judges in her “Part 1” Budget, which MSBA 
supported. This additional funding for new judges is needed, and for this reason, we once again write to 
express our support.  
 
Conclusion.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 258. If you have questions 
or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely,  
 
Stacy O. Stitham 
President, Board of Governors 
 

 
 
MSBA Letter re: Part 2 Budget Change Package – Judicial Branch Funding  
May 17, 2023 
Page 2  
cc: Angela Armstrong, Executive Director 
 Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP 
 Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions 
