 
 
 
 
 
March 7, 2023  
 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair  
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations  
& Financial Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  Sen. Anne Carney, Chair  
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary  
Maine State Legisl ature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: Supplemental Testimony of MSBA regarding Biennial Budget, Part A related to Guardia n ad 
Litem rates   
 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs , and Members of the Appropriations  and Financial Affairs  Committee ; 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee:  
 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we are pleased to provide 
this supplemental testimony regarding G uardian Ad Litem funding in Part A of the Governor’s 
Biennial Budget proposal (p . 485 ). We previously provided testimony in support of ensuring 
sufficient attorney rates for providers of indigent legal defense services through the Maine 
Commission on Indig ent Legal Services. In this supplemental testimony, we further recommend that 
the rates for providers of guardian ad litem services be raised to a level similar to that provided to 
indigent defense attorneys.  
 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3 ,000 attorneys in the State 
in both public service and private practice. The Association maintai ns 28  separate sect ions covering 
nearly every field of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation 
Law to Family Law.  Access to justice  for all  is a key element of our mission, hence our strong 
interest i n ensuring an appropriate level of funding  for guardian ad litem  services.  
 
Guardian ad litem  funding . Guardians ad litem  (GALs) are a critical part of our judicial system  and 
child welfare system, and they perform important functions within  both systems. I t is imperative that 
children have the benefit of competent GALs, who provide investigations independent of the Department 
of Health and Human Services and the parents, advocating for the best interests of children during times 
when they are the most vulne rable. Through guardians ad litem, courts can benefit from children ’s 
perspectives, along with the GAL ’s independent investigatory reporting and problem solvin g.  
 
Despite the importance of guardians ad litem, the roster of individuals available to take on these important 
cases has shrunk over the past several years. In many respect, the challenges confronting the GAL system 
are similar to the challenges facing Maine’s indigent criminal defense system.  
 
To address the challenge of shrinking MCILS ros ters, the Legislature appropriated additional funds in the 
Supplemental Budget to enable rates to increase to $150 per hour. These higher rates were recently 
adopted by MCILS on an emergency basis.  At the same time, the Supplemental Budget did not provide 
for an increase in rates for guardians ad litem, even though the rates for guardians has historically been 
 
 
MSBA Letter re: Biennial Budget  – Guardian Ad Litem Funding  
March 7, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
coupled with the rates of indigent legal defense attorneys. However, in the Governor’s Biennial Budget , 
additional funds are appropriated to enable a n increase in GAL rates.  We believe an increase in GAL 
rates is important, and given that many of attorneys who undertake indigent legal defense work also 
undertake GAL work , it makes sense to appropriate sufficient funds to enable GAL rates to rise to $1 50 
an hour as well .  
 
Conclusion.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments  in support of raising guardian ad 
litem rates to $150 per hour.  If you have questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate 
to let us know.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Stacy O. Stitham  
President, Board of Governors  
 
cc: Angela Armstrong, Executive Director  
 Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee  
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP  
 Clara McConnell , Maine Street Solution s 

