/\ A Maine State Bar ASSOCIATE(f)N L iM.'It}‘t‘tl in ISM‘ 
February 27, 2023 
Sen. Margaret Rotundo, Chair Sen. Anne Carney, Chair 
Rep. Melanie Sachs, Chair Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary 
& Financial Affairs Maine State Legislature 
Maine State Legislature 100 State House Station 
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Comments of MSBA regarding LD 258, 2023 Biennial Budget, PartA regarding civil legal 
services, Judicial Branch funding, and MCILS funding 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee; 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we are pleased to provide 
comments on the following provisions related to Part A of the Governor ’s Biennial Budget proposal 
(pp. 441-443; 477; 487): 
¢ We express qualiﬁed support for increases in funding for the Maine Commission on 
Indigent Legal Services (MCILS) as noted in the Budget, but at higher amounts over the 
biennium necessary to sustain a $150/hour rate for rostered attorneys; 
0 We support funding for civil legal services as proposed in the Budget, or higher levels of 
funding, as long as any increases are not offset by reductions in funding for MCILS; and 
0 We support increased funding for the Judicial Branch as proposed in the Budget. 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3,000 attorneys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintains 28 separate sections covering nearly 
every ﬁeld of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. Access 
to justice is a key element of our mission, hence our strong and longstanding interest in the MCILS 
system, civil legal aid, and issues pertaining to the Judicial Branch. 
MCILS Funding. Part A, pp. 441-443. MSBA has long advocated for increases in attorney fees in order 
to retain and attract attorneys to become rostered and participate in indigent legal defense through 
MCILS. Given the recent precipitous drop in rostered attorneys, and the crisis it has created for indigent 
Mainers in need of defense counsel services, such rate increases have become more important than ever. 
For this reason, MSBA strongly supported the ﬁnal Supplemental Budget recently adopted through LD 
206 that enabled MCILS to increase attorney rates to $150 an hour. However, it is important to note that 
the current biennial budget includes proposed funding for MCILS in the amount of $13.2 million, which 
amount contemplated that attorney fees would be “tiered” depending on the nature of the case. Now that 
the Legislature in the recent Supplemental Budget has removed such direction to “tier” rates, it is likely 
that additional state funds will be needed in the next biennium to support the higher attomey fees 
established by MCILS. For this reason, we support not only the proposal to increase ﬁnancial support for 
MCILS in the current Budget, but we also urge a further increase in such support in order to sustain the 
needed attorney fees to attract and retain lawyers to the system. With regard to the $3.6 million proposed
MSBA Letter re: Biennial Budget - MCILS, Civil Legal Services, and Judicial Branch Funding 
February 27, 2023 
Page2 
in the Budget to hire ten new public defenders at MCILS, our Association does not have a position 
regarding the hiring of public defenders as opposed to other strategies, but We do support the allocation of 
additional resources to ensure Maine meets its constitutional obligations. 
Civil Legal Services Funding. Part/1, p. 487. Access to civil legal aid is critical for Mainers with little 
to no ﬁnancial resources who must ﬁnd a Way to navigate our State’s legal system. Civil legal aid is 
provided to indigent Mainers through numerous non-proﬁt agencies in critical areas ranging from 
evictions to protection from abuse to family law matters, to child support. Providing pro bono legal 
services to indigent Mainers is one of the obligations of lawyers under the Maine Bar rules, and lawyers 
and law ﬁrms throughout the State contribute generously in this regard — both ﬁnancially, and through 
their time. But, the need of Mainers for civil legal support remains great, and continued support for civil 
legal services is needed for those Mainers who cannot otherwise afford help. MSBA testiﬁed in support 
of legislation during the Legislature ’s last session that added funding for civil legal services to the State 
budget for the ﬁrst time. Now, MSBA is supporting continued funding for such services as proposed in 
the Budget, or higher levels of ﬁnancial support, provided that such funds are in addition to funding 
allocated to MCILS to meet the State’s constitutional obligation to provide counsel to indigent Mainers 
who are entitled to such representation under the United States Constitution and the Constitution of 
Maine. 
Judicial Branch Funding. Part A, p. 477. Our Judicial Branch continues to struggle with issues of 
adequate stafﬁng and resources that were brought to the forefront during the COVID-l9 pandemic. Only 
With adequate resources and funding can the courts Work through the current backlog of dockets and 
ensure that the doors to Maine courts remain open to all Mainers on a timely basis. In her State of the 
Budget Address, the Govemor stated that the increased funding for the Judicial Branch in her Budget 
proposal would fund four new district court judges to assist in reducing this backlog of dockets, along 
with additional clerks and marshals. This needed additional funding is reﬂected in the Biennial Budget 
proposal, and for this reason, we support this component of the proposed Biennial Budget. 
Conclusion. Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 258. If you have questions 
or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely, 
.»/ / /—/ 
/. 
// 
Stacy O. Stitham 
President, Board of Governors 
cc: Angela Annstrong, Executive Director 
Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP 
Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions
