                                                                                                                                          February 10, 2023  
 
Testimony in support of  Paid Family Medical Leave .  LD258   
 
Good morning, Senator Rotundo, Represen tative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Star Pelsue and I am a resident of Portland, Maine. I 
am writing in neither support or opposition of LD 258. I would  like to take this opportunity  to ask that 
you please consider allocating the start up funding for Paid Family Medical Leave  in LD 258 An Act Making 
Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of 
State Government and Changing Certain  Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of 
State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 .  
Paid Family Medical Leave is crucial in supporting Maine families as they care for their loved ones . The 
program is one that could alleviate  one additional stress during what for most is a highly stressful time. 
Eleven years ago,  my youngest brother and his family stationed in Guam  sent the wonderful news that 
his latest child had been born. Our families were excited at the news of another girl. Six weeks later we 
received the devastating  news that my niece had a massive stroke. The military was sending the family to 
the hospital in Pearl Harbor.  After several days we received word that the doctors there b elieved my 
niece had contracted meningitis which resulted in the stroke, damaging 85% of the brain.  It was 
determined that she was born with Severe Combined Immune Deficiency (SCID). The Air Force  
transferred my brother and his family stateside  to the Char leston, South Carolina area because of their 
imm unity  ward. It didn’t take long for them to find that my niece Fiona was the worst case that they had 
seen,  and they recommended that she see the specialist who created the protocol for treating SCID. This 
Dr. and her team were  located at the Duke medical center  in North Carolina . In the meantime, my 
brother’s oldest child who was 2 at the time was being bounced around from family member to family 
member. Each took vacation time to be home with the toddler un til it was the turn of the next relative 
who had time to donate to her care. I am fortunate that the school I was teaching at let me take leave so 
I could move into my brother’s home to be the caregiver while he, his wife, and Fiona went to North 
Carolina for a year!   
My family always comes first. I didn’t flinch when I offered my support during this difficult time. A child 
we were told would never walk or talk and likely not be expected to make it to her first birthday. If it 
meant eating ramen noodles or working 2 jobs when I returned to straighten out the loss of my paycheck  
I would gladly do it again. I worry about families who can’t  afford to pay for the caregiving of a child or 
parent  and need to leave work to do so. I hope you will find start -up fundi ng for this much -needed 
program.  It was the most stressful year for both sides of our family. As a volunteer at Ronald McDonald 
House in Portland, I worry about the families who need our services. Those that have short or long stays 
would have one less thi ng to worry about.  
 I urge you to support the start -up funds for this all-important  program that will help all Maine residents 
at some point in their life. One never knows which curve ball may come one’s  way,  but this will help 
lessen the burden when that occurs.  
 
Thank you,  
Star Pelsue  
