Maine County Commissioners Association 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
wvvv\/.mainecounties.org 
LD 258, General Fund Budget for FY24-25, PartA Q2. 154) 
State Support for County Jail Operations 
February 14, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs; Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving asa 
member of the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the 
legislative policy committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to 
provide testimony to your committees regarding Part A (p.154) of LD 258, the Governor ’s proposed Bl6I11'll8.l 
Budget. 
Executive summary. A year ago, our Association worked collaboratively with the Administration, the 
Legislature, Maine Municipal Association, and the Maine Sheriffs ’ Association to adopt LD 1654. This bill was 
aimed at stabilizing funding for Maine’s county jail operations, and as part of the arrangement, the Legislature 
increased the annual State allocation to county jails to $20.34 million. The proposed Biennial Budget carries 
forward the same $20.34 million even though operating costs for county jails have increased in the intervening 
year. We appear today to ask the Legislature to increase the proposed $20.34 million appropriation for county 
jails in Part A, p. 154. We recommend an increase of $1,444,289 for each ﬁscal year to reﬂect current inﬂation 
levels of 7.1 percent. Without an increase, the State’s share of financial support for county jails will decline from 
last year’s level, which will place more of a burden on Maine’s property taxpayers. 
About MCCA. Brieﬂy, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county. 
Discussion. MCCA is providing comments regarding the County Jail Operations Fund (Part A, pg. 154) in the 
Governor ’s proposed Biennial Budget. As you may know, during the 130“ Legislature, our organization worked 
closely with the Mills Administration, the Maine Sheriffs Association (MSA), and the Maine Municipal 
Association (MMA) on legislation to stabilize funding for and improve administration of county jails. This was 
a successful collaborative endeavor and resulted in a bill that passed the Legislature with bipartisan support and 
was signed by the Governor (LD I654, An Act to Stabilize Funding for County Jails). As a result, baseline State 
funding for county jails was increased from $18,442,104 to $20,342,104. This year’s Biennial Budget proposal 
includes an appropriation for the County Jail Operations Fund at the same baseline level of $20,342,104. 
Unfortunately, the cost of operating our county jails has not remained stagnant over the past year. 
Costs are on the rise for all aspects of administering our county jails. Most notably, labor costs and costs 
associated with providing medical services are both increasing precipitously. In order to attract talent and ﬁll 
vacant positions, we are having to increase the salaries and beneﬁts offered to potential employees. In addition, 
we must cover rising costs of providing medical services that jails are now mandated to offer, including mental 
health and substance use treatment.
Comments of MCCA re LD 258 (Biennial Budget) 
February 14, 2023 
Page2 
Our county administrators and Sheriffs are currently working collaboratively to gather data around the speciﬁc 
rising costs of county jail operations over the past year. We hope to have that information to share with your 
committees and the Administration very soon. 
By way of background, the language developed in LD 1654 regarding the State appropriation for county jails 
was collaboratively developed among our organizations, the Administration, and members of the Legislature. 
The language from the ﬁnal law provided as follows: “for ﬁscal year 2022-23, the Legislature shall appropriate 
at least $20,342,104 in General Fund funding to the County Jail Operations Fund.” This language resulted in an 
increase in ﬁinding for county jails. However, it is important to note that this language was for the last ﬁscal 
year, and speciﬁcally notes that $20,342,104 was to be a minimum. In this regard, the language does not serve as 
a constraint for additional State funding for county jails in the upcoming biennium. 
Also, as part of the ﬁnal resolution of LD 1654, the parties agreed — and the Legislature passed ~ language 
creating a County Jail Standards Council comprised of seven members, including two members from the 
Department of Corrections and ﬁve members representing MCCA, MSA, and MMA. One designated function 
of this Council is to make budget recommendations to the Administration for county jail appropriations. Last 
month, the Council met and voted to recommend that the annual appropriation for county jails be increased to 
reﬂect a 7.1 percent inﬂationary adjustment (with DOC Council members abstaining from that vote). That 
would be an additional $1,444,289 over the proposed amount currently in LD 258. 
We hope to continue the collaborative work that has taken place in recent years on this issue and hope to work 
with your committees and the Administration on an appropriate inﬂationary increase for county jail operations 
in this year’s Biemiial Budget. 
Conclusion. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Respectfully submitted, 
%,7/ZIZV 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, MCCA Legislative Policy Committee 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, MCCA Board President 
Mary-Arm LaMarre, Maine Sheriffs ’ Association Executive Director 
Rebecca Graham, Maine Municipal Association Legislative Advocate 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
21406131 __2
