M C counscrms PEOPLE 
Maine Economic 
m a snwsmes to omve" 
Growth Council MAlNE’S ECONOMY 
Testimony in Support of LD 258 
Maine Economic Growth Council Biennial Budget (within DECD) 
by 
Stephen Von Vogt & Honorable Jim Dill, Co- Chairs, Maine Economic Growth Council 
February l5, 2023 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEES ON APPROPRIATIONS AND FINANCIAL 
AFFAIRS; INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND 
BUSINESS: 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs; Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
Our names are Stephen Von Vogt, a resident of Portland, Maine, and Rep. James F. Dill,a 
resident of Old Town, Maine; together we are the private and public sector co-Chairs of the 
Maine Economic Growth Council. Steve is the president of Maine Marine Composites, an ocean 
engineering ﬁrm in Portland Maine as well as a principal in several companies involved in 
energy development and the reuse of shuttered industrial facilities in Maine for new purposes 
and uses. He has been involved on the ground in efforts to develop and redevelop the economy 
in Maine and is one of the longest serving non-legislative members of the Maine Economic 
Growth Council. Rep. Dill serves House District 26, and has also served on the Council for 
many years. Professionally, Jim serves in the UMaine Cooperative Extension Service and 
directs the Cooperative Extension Diagnostic and Research Laboratory. 
We offer our support for and advocate your support for the budget appropriation for the 
Economic Growth Council of $90,395 per year listed on page A-204 of the Governor ’s proposed 
biennial budget bill. First, we note our gratitude to the prior Legislature and Governor Mills for 
increasing the annual funding from $55k per year begirming in F Y21-22. This is important 
work, but the quality and scope of the work had grown dependent over the years on relying 
unsustainably on the commitment of our partner, Maine Development Foundation, to fundraise 
or subsidize the core products. The supplemental funding restored strong, sustainable footing. 
To know where you are going, you must know Where you are today and where you have come 
from. The Measures of Growth report is a valuable guide to policymakers at all levels, helping 
them to focus their efforts and understand the comtections between and among the major issues 
affecting the economy and the well-being of Maine people. 
Overall, the long-term insights provided by the Measures of Growth are still invaluable because 
the extreme short-term disruptions like recessions and pandemic magnify the importance of 
Maine’s workforce, innovation, and connectivity -- and show the impacts of both our 
longstanding strengths and our most notable challenges on shaping the recession and our path 
forward.
M couuscnue PEOPLE 
Mame Economic 
m & snwesnss T0 omvsL 
Gl'OWll'l COUHC" MMNEIS ECONOMY 
The Council is staffed by and the report is produced by the Maine Development Foundation and 
is overseen by an incredible group of non-partisan individuals comprised of representatives of 
many sectors of the Maine economy, Maine’s academic institutions, both houses and parties of 
the legislature, economic development, trade groups and experts. It provides consistent and 
invaluable benchmarks by which policy makers can guide and steer the economic future of the 
state. It tells us where we are, where we have been, and where We hope to go. It is an incredible 
value delivered by volunteers in the interest of the economy of the State of Maine. It is 
consistent and well-produced under the guidance of the Maine Development Foundation — and it 
has only gotten better and more useful and can continue to do so if resourced adequately. 
Over the past three years, the Council actively participated in developing and then aligning 
metrics to track Maine’s 10-Year Economic Development Strategy developed in 2019; retained 
highly credible contracted Maine economists to assemble the Measures of Growth data; 
ampliﬁed the measurement of racial equity, climate outcomes, broadband, and mental health in 
the report; and most recently, migrated the Measures of Growth to a true digital and mobile- 
friendly product with a strong user experience for the public rather than one massive pdf ﬁle. 
The invaluable Work of the Council and the constant improvement to the utility of the Measures 
of Growth for policymakers and the public should be worthy of adequate public funding as 
proposed. With this support, we and MDF can continue to ensure the Council work products 
remain contemporary, evolving, and go deeper on the economic issues of our time. 
We know the Legislature has been appreciative of the work of the Council and the value of 
Measures of Growth. We urge you to continue this ﬁne work and support the budget 
appropriation. Thank you. 
Steve Von Vogt, C0-Chair, sv0nv0gt@mainemarinec0mp0sites.c0m 
Rep. Jim Dill, C0-Chair, james.dill@maine.edu
