MAINE
4 Jersey Circle / Topsham, ME 04086 / 207.725.5946
February 21, 2023
Re: "An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other 
Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025," specifically the child care wage support 
program (pg. A307)
Dear Chairs Rotundo, Baldacci, Sachs and Meyer, and distinguished members of the Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services Committees,
Please accept my written testimony in support of the child care wage supplements within the Health 
and Human Services portion of the biennial budget before you today. 
I offer my comments as a business leader, as a member of Educate Maine’s Board of Directors and 
as a member of the business organization ReadyNation. Gorham Saving Bank and these 
organizations are working to support the MaineSpark Coalition’s work toward achieving Maine’s 
educational attainment goal that 60 percent of Maine adults have a credential of value by 2025. 
I believe that the lack of access to quality early learning found in child care is an economic issue for 
Maine. 
Over the course of the last few years there has been an increasing number of news reports and 
editorials commenting on the fragility of the child care sector, how that was made worse by the 
pandemic, and the ongoing struggles within the child care workforce plagued by low wages, long 
hours, and high turnover.  And the fact that all of these issues are challenging every sector of 
Maine’s economy, especially in rural Maine. 
For industries like mine and many others, many of my employees rely on child care so they can work 
with the peace of mind that their children are safe, and nurtured.  The stark reality is that child care 
is the workforce that supports all other workforces in Maine. 
Without affordable and accessible child care, Maine’s economy suffers.  
From a business perspective, the lack of access to child care programs, especially that faced by 
rural children and their families, is a real economic challenge for Maine.
As policymakers know well, Maine is the most rural state in our nation. Nearly a quarter – 23 
percent – of kids in rural Maine live in poverty. They often lack access to resources, including early 
education programs and child care. In fact,  2021 and 2023 reports by Council for a Strong America 
MAINE
StrongNation.org/ReadyNation
indicate that 26 percent of Maine’s rural children today live in “child care deserts,” where three times 
more kids are eligible for child care than there are licensed slots.
Quality early learning and child care programs significantly help kids build a strong foundation for 
success throughout school and as adults. They are a key part of the solution to increasing both the 
number of people in Maine’s workforce and their skill level, two of Maine’s biggest economic 
challenges. These programs can also serve to attract new families to our state, helping to grow 
Maine’s workforce.
For all of these reasons, I am pleased to support Governor Mill’s biennial budget commitment to 
continue to fund the $200/month in wage stipends to all child care providers.  I also understand that 
later this session Senate President Jackson will propose legislation to further increase the wage 
supplement.  It is my hope that all of you will work in a bi-partisan fashion to also support that 
proposal when it is before your respective Committees.
It is an economic imperative that Maine prioritize investments that improve access to quality child 
care for our kids. It also is our responsibility to make sure every child – regardless of where they live 
– has access to the resources and supports that will help them succeed in life.
Thank you for our consideration of my comments and your work and dedication to building a strong 
economy for Maine.
Sincerely,
Steve deCastro
Steve deCastro
President and CEO, Gorham Savings Bank
Gorham
