Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs , members of the Appropriations and Financial 
Affairs Committee.  Senator  Tipping, Representative Roeder, members of the Labor and 
Housing Committee  
 
My name is Steven Butterfield.  I am retired , but I am not a State of  Maine retiree.  I 
retired in December of 2017 after a total of 42 years serving on the staff of the Maine 
Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 .  My last 26 years was as their 
Director of Information Services.  
 
During my tenure with MSEA -SEIU , I was appointed by Governors, State Senators, 
State Representatives and Union Presidents to a myriad of Committees, Commissions , 
Taskforces  and Workgroups involving studies, redesigns and modifications to the Maine 
Public Employees Retirement System .  Current ly I am Governor Mills ’ appointee to the 
MainePERS Participating Local District Advisory Committee.  Given all of this, I have a 
pretty good understanding of the State and Teacher Retirement Plan.  
 
When it comes to the cost of living adjustment (COLA ) portion of the pension system , 
state workers and teachers have taken more than their share of hits over the last 
several decades.  
 
The McKernan Administration fired the first salvo back in the early 90’s by putting state 
workers and teachers a year behind on their COLA by making new retiree s wait a full 
year before becoming COLA eligible.  Formerly  new retirees were COLA eligible if they 
retired by August of any year.   That Administration  also imposed the 4% COLA cap.  
 
Fast forward to 2011 and the LePage Admin istration lowered the boom even more 
severely!  
 
Not only did the LePage Administration reduce the COLA cap from 4% to 3% they also 
added a $20,000 cap on the amount of pension benefit  that would be COLA eligible .  
Then they froze the COLA for 2 years.  Thi s was nothing more than financia l terrorism 
for Maine’s state worker and teacher retirees.   The frozen COLA s added two more 
years of falling further behind financially.  
 
Now with these added hindrances and the current rampant inflation , which is far more 
than even the current cap could sustain , we see our retirees who gave years of 
dedicated service to the citizens of the State of Maine falling into financial despair.  
 
I urge you to fully fund  the additional 6.1% of the 2022 9.1 % MainePERS calculated 
COLA.  
 
Let’s show retired state worke rs and teachers that they ARE still appreciated!  
 
Thank you for your time and I’ll be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
