Contact: Suzanne Pelkey, Child Development Director, Bangor Region YMCA
P: 207.941.2808 E: Spelkey@Bangory.org
Testimony of Suzanne Pelkey before 
the Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
the Committee on Health and Human Services 
in support of
LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs
February 21, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Suzanne Pelkey and I am the Director of Child 
Development for the Bangor Region YMCA. I support the investments in the child care industry 
in the Governor’s budget proposal.
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy. 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for 
the Bangor Region YMCA. We greatly appreciate the Governor’s inclusion of these initiatives.
1) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 635 for salary 
supplements awarded to individuals who provide childcare or are early childhood 
educators. (Page 307)
The salary supplements allotted to direct care providers were appreciated and 
beneficial to our teachers and staff. This program essentially added a dollar to their 
hourly pay. This allowed them to align more closely or slightly exceed the local service 
areas rates of pay in our community for child care workers, allowing them to attempt 
to meet the skyrocketing cost of living that has occurred nationwide. This increase 
potentially allowed us to meet the increased education and training requirements of 
QRIS. Losing this funding will not only strain program budgets beyond capacity as we 
try to meet that higher pay rate, but negatively impact the staff members who already 
struggle to survive with salaries lower than most industries in the state. 
The field of Early Childhood Education (ECE) is currently experiencing a work force 
shortage that affects not only the staff, but the families in Maine communities. We are 
Contact: Suzanne Pelkey, Child Development Director, Bangor Region YMCA
P: 207.941.2808 E: Spelkey@Bangory.org
no exception to the hiring and staff shortage issues that are plaguing the country and 
State of Maine. As the educational and training standards have been implemented 
through programs such as QRIS and NAEYC have grown, the ability for centers to meet 
these standards has decreased due in part to salary inequality and availability of 
essential and mandatory trainings. We are expecting teachers to hold two and four-
year degrees that are equivalent to certified teachers and educational technicians in 
school systems, yet they are paid significantly less for the same work, often with 
higher standards and responsibilities. Highly trained, skilled and educated early 
education teachers cannot support themselves and their families on the current 
salaries and they often move into the public and private school sector or even worse, 
they leave the field of education altogether. To be able to pay equitable and living 
wages, centers would need to increase parent fees to a point that families would not 
be able to afford them. The state subsidy system does not meet the financial burden 
for high quality centers forcing centers to not accept or limit financial assistance 
because they can not afford to, causing more hardship on families in need.
Teacher and staff turnover and vacancies have negatively impacted our program 
immensely in a number of ways. First and foremost, the lack of consistent staffing due 
to the inability to hire and retain staff has caused staff to experience extreme levels of 
stress and burnout. This leads to highly qualified staff calling out to care for their own 
mental and physical needs. Teachers and staff who are experiencing this level of stress 
cannot be expected to be at their best when working with children. They then leave 
the field for job opportunities that do not put them in this place mentally or physically, 
even if that means outright leaving education fully. 
With lack of staffing, the program is impacted in a number of ways that leads to a 
higher potential for lower quality of education and care. These include the inability for 
teachers to utilize time out of the classrooms to have authentic supervision to support 
and grow professionally, create and prepare curriculums, complete assessments and 
connect with families in meaningful ways- all standards in the Quality Rating and 
Improvement System. There are times teachers cannot leave the rooms to use the 
bathroom or attend to personal needs during their working hours because that will put 
the classroom out of ratio, which is a serious licensing violation, and there are literally 
no other people to step in to support them. This does not lend itself to a healthy 
working environment. Programmatically we often need to move children into 
classrooms they are not assigned to or temporarily close full classrooms down in order 
to be in licensing ratio compliance. Children need consistency and structure, this 
creates a system in which we are not fully able to practice best practices in our field 
nor meet the QRIS standards that we have strived to meet. Without proper staffing 
structures, teachers must do the bare minimum to meet the basic needs of the 
children in our care while trying to implement the evidence-based curriculum that is in 
place. This is an impossible and unfair situation to teachers, children and the families 
Contact: Suzanne Pelkey, Child Development Director, Bangor Region YMCA
P: 207.941.2808 E: Spelkey@Bangory.org
that place their children in our care expecting a high-quality program. 
The work of educating and caring for young children is highly skilled and complex. 
In this field, we fight for recognition and respect for what is done in programs every 
day and what the actual expectations are from society, families and our governmental 
bodies. Quality early education lays the base for healthy adults and strong 
communities. Research is clear that providing our youngest population with high 
quality, supportive, evidence-based programs sets children up to be successful in 
school and beyond in all aspects of human development. Those of us who have been in 
the field for decades as well as those who are just starting their careers do not do it for 
any other reason than for the children. We make a difference. They may never 
remember our names or faces, but we helped them develop lifelong skills that continue 
to be built on and support them throughout their lives. We influence the future of our 
communities by working with children and we love this. We love this enough to fight 
for equality and recognition for the work that we do, for ourselves and our children. We 
stay, but we struggle personally and professionally.
2) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 679, An Act to Expand 
the Statewide Voluntary The work of teaching and caring for young children is highly 
skilled and complex, yet employment in early care and education has largely failed to 
generate wages that allow early educators to meet their basic needs. Early Childhood 
Consultation Program, for the Early Childhood Consultation Program. (Page 333)
Our program at the Bangor Region YMCA has seen a significant increase in negative 
behaviors in children as young as 18 months old. They include (but are not limited to) 
moderate to severe aggressive and dangerous behaviors, hyperactivity, impaired social 
and emotional skills, dysregulated behaviors atypical to developmental levels and 
anxiety. This issue has a significant effect on the program which strives to be inclusive 
for children and families. Staff are not equipped to understand or deal with the high 
level and sheer number of high level atypical needs these children have. Many staff are 
not trained or educated for special purpose programs at this level. We are not funded 
to support the staffing needed to help these children, nor do we have the mental 
health specialists to assist us in planning for this degree of behaviors. Resources for 
these children and families are scarce and waiting lists for referrals and services are 
long, meanwhile teachers are struggling to keep children safe while meeting the needs 
of the classrooms. Teachers, staff and children are getting physically abused daily by 
very young children, forcing the program to repeatedly send children home to 
frustrated families that do not know how to navigate a large and complicated mental 
health system. Many teachers, staff and interns do not return due to the stress that 
behavior related issues cause. Budgets barely pay the current staff, much less adding 
support staff to numerous children within one classroom and a center. The teachers 
Contact: Suzanne Pelkey, Child Development Director, Bangor Region YMCA
P: 207.941.2808 E: Spelkey@Bangory.org
and staff are frustrated and feel helpless to help the children that need them the most. 
The media focuses on the high numbers of suspension and expulsions, but without 
truly exploring the causes and the extreme behaviors which disable our classrooms 
with little support to address. This creates animosity in the communities towards our 
early education teachers and programs. It is an epidemic which needs to be further 
addressed quickly. 
The implementation of state supported programs such as the Early Childhood   
Consultation Partnership and the Help Me Grow network has been a fantastic start to 
addressing this need, though expansion is necessary. Our center was fortunate enough 
to be a pilot program over the last year with the ECCP. We found it helpful and it 
allowed us to have some short term classroom support with classroom management 
and mental health support ideas, as well as to offer families support and resources in 
the home. The issue that remains at the crux of the problem is that all too often, we 
cannot fully implement the plans and suggestions that the mental health consultants 
share over the short span of weeks they spend with us observing and discussing with 
the teachers because that takes manpower. These are staff hours that we do not have 
available due to tightening budgets and scarce staffing options. This, and other 
programs like it, is a crucial program that needs to be expanded to support centers, 
staff, families and children struggling every day.
Early education programs in the state of Maine have been gifted the chance to 
influence the future and the impact high quality programs on that is immense. To do 
this the State has put in place a framework of standards. The QRIS program the state 
has implemented is a strong tool to advance quality and enhance not only the learning 
for children in developmentally appropriate ways, but to encourage professional growth 
as well as family partnerships. The State has set the bar high and as professionals, we 
want our programs to excel. The issue at hand is not the high bar. We believe in the 
importance of the standards. The issue is that we have not been given the resources 
and financial support to meet this goal at this time. Until these issues are truly 
addressed we will continue to see highly qualified and amazing staff leave our centers, 
not because they want to but because they have no other choice. Without addressing 
the financial support to staff, families and programs, centers will continue to struggle 
and many will fail when Maine’s communities need them the most for our working 
families.
Ensuring that all young children have an equal opportunity for healthy growth and development 
is a long-term investment in Maine’s future prosperity. 90% of a child’s brain develops as early 
as five years old, and positive early learning experiences establish strong foundations for the 
brain’s architecture. We appreciate the initiatives outlined in the Governor’s budget, and look 
Contact: Suzanne Pelkey, Child Development Director, Bangor Region YMCA
P: 207.941.2808 E: Spelkey@Bangory.org
forward to working with you and your colleagues this session to further increase the state 
investment in this critical sector.
Respectfully submitted,
Suzanne Pelkey, Child Development Director, Bangor Region YMCA
