P,O. Box 488   •  Yarmouth, Maine 04096  
207.847. 3577  •  info@mainepreservation.org  
mainepreservation.org  
 
 
February 7, 2023 
Senator Margaret Rotundo , Chair , Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
Representative Melanie Sachs, Chair, Committee Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
RE: Support of F unding for the Maine Downtown Center of Maine Development Foundation for  
$25,000 as part of a $58,000 appropriation to Maine Development Foundation for the Realize Maine Network 
Founded in 1972, Maine Preservation is a  statewide nonprofit organization dedicated to  promoting and preserving 
historic places, buildings, downtowns and neighborhoods, strengthening the cultural and economic vitality of Maine 
communities.  We have partne red with the Maine Downtown Center since its inception and  I have been a member of 
its Advisory Council since 20 21. 
The Maine Downtown Center of Maine Development Foundation is affiliated with the National Main Street Center of 
the National Trust for  Historic Preservation. Since 1980 this program has been the nation’s leading downtown 
revitalization program with more than  2,200 communities enrolled nationwide. In Maine , 26 communities are 
participating in this program, which continues to show great success.  In fact, communities that use this program’s 
historic tagline, “Economic development in the context of historic preservation,” have seen successful throughout  not 
just Maine , but the entire country.  
In communities like Biddeford, Norway , and August a, the tangible results of millions of dollars of investment in 
rehabilitating downtown buildings clearly shows the impact of this program. But in many other communities like Gardner, Belfast , and Skowhegan, the consistent and focused approach practiced th rough this program is also 
producing great results.  
The Maine Downtown Center is regularly convening these communities to discuss strategies and working on the 
ground to support businesses that are helping sustain vitality through this challenging time. Frankly , the $25,000 
requested is not nearly enough to support the critical activities of the Main e Downtown Center , and Maine 
Preservation is strongly and unreservedly supportive of this appropriation.  We hope that you will continue the 
support of the State of Maine for this critical program.  
Sincerely,  
 
Tara Kelly  
Executive Director  
 
cc. Clerk Justin Purvis, (State House Room 228, AFA@legislature.maine.gov)  

