DEVELOP ~ BUILD ~ MANAGE 
Testimony of 
Timothy Reinken 
In Support of 
The Governor ’s Biennial Budget Change Package to LD 258 
Before 
The Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
May 18, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Tim Reinken, and I am here today representing 
ReinCorp. We are a real estate development, construction, and property management company based in 
Sanford, Maine. We have been in business since 1986 and have focused on residential, multi-family, and 
commercial development. 
I am here today to speak in support of the Governor ’s Biennial Budget Change Package to LD 258. York 
County is currently experiencing a housing crisis unparalleled to anything our company has experienced. 
We are seeing an overall lack of housing availability, but most noticeable is the lack of affordable 
housing. You will hear testimony from several organizations this afternoon focusing on the numbers and 
extent of the housing shortage. I would like to focus on solutions. 
Historically, our business has catered to market rate housing. But today, we are seeing hard working 
individuals like teachers, service workers, and government employees who cannot afford market rate 
rents. We have seen unprecedented inﬂation in operating costs on our existing housing units including 
utilities, maintenance, and increased interest payments. These costs translate to rent increases that outpace 
wage growth and cause hardships for our tenants. Newly constructed market rate housing units will 
necessitate even higher rents due to increases in construction costs and high interest rates. We see this 
trend continuing for the foreseeable future stiﬂing our local economies. 
Our company would like to commend the efforts by MaineHousi11g to address these issues. We believe 
the Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program is an excellent opportunity to provide housing units across 
the state in a timely manner. Any solution to the housing crisis will require an extensive investment from 
the State. The systems currently in place are based on a private public partnership. MaineHousing 
leverages the local knowledge, relationships, and capital of developers to provide cost efficient housing 
construction. MaineHousing can provide a subsidy to reduce the debt service of a project allowing a 
developer to reduce rents from market rate to an affordable rent. 
Our company has prepared an 18-unit workforce housing development that is shovel ready. We are 
prepared to submit an application to MaineHousing as soon as funding is available and are equipped to 
break ground immediately. Our company, and others throughout the state, have committed extensive 
resources to develop solutions addressing the housing crisis. State funding is the ﬁnal step to make these 
housing units a reality. The Governor ’s Biennial Budget Change Package to LD 258 is a major step 
towards addressing the housing needs in Maine and will provide a real impact on thousands of people’s 
lives. 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
ReinCorp ~ 469 Main Street ' Suite 300 ' Springvale, Maine 04083 
Phone (207) 490-1878 - Fax (207) 396-4402 - ReinCorpDevelopment.com
