My name is Tim Hebert and I am testifying on my own time as a private citizen. I work as a Senior 
Technician for MaineDOT  as a resident with contractors that place bids on the work through Project 
Development. I work primarily on bridges in the region 4 area but have worked throughout the state. I 
am a 25 year employee that started with the Department of Defense & Emergency Management at the 
former Loring Air Force Base. After 2 and a half years I applied and transferred to the MaineDOT to 
Division 1 before it got changed to region 5. I started with the DOT as an Engineer Technician I  (ET 1). 
They reorganized in 2001 to the T echnician series. With this transition , Engineer Technician 5  changed to 
Senior Technician in name only , with no pay increase. The very first year (2000) I was running a project 
by myself as an inspector and by 2003 I had gone from ET 1 to Assistant Techni cian and then to 
Technician. Since 2003 I have been doing exactly the same thing in my job as many other job 
classifications. Some people in Management claim that the complexity of the jobs for the higher paying 
classifications is more, but I can provide d ocumentation of the projects I have been on verses the higher 
classifications. The 4 job classifications that do the same work are as follows: Technician (pay range 21), 
Assistant Transportation Engineer (pay range 25), Senior Technician (pay range 26) and  Transportation 
Engineer II (pay range 31). Furthermore, when there is a more complex job in Management words, they 
give the Transportation Engineer II, Transportation Engineer III pay. I have done work on projects that 
the higher pay Engineers have not , and the Engineers in the field do not use their PE stamp at all in the 
field.  
  
In 2019 Management submitted an FJA along with the cost of the FJA in the budget for MaineDOT to 
move Assistant Engineer (pay range 22) to Assistant Transportation Engineer (pa y range 25) as well as 
Civil Engineer II (pay range 28) to Transportation Engineer II (pay range 31) as well as a one year backpay 
of these ranges. Fortunately, everyone in Maine DOT from pay range 28 and up got this same three pay 
ranges and a one year ba ckpay (I have proof of this). At the time I was in Pay range 26 as a Senior 
technician. Everyone from pay range 27 and down excluding the Assistant Engineer did not get this pay 
adjustment. I asked why the technician series was not included and was told th at they will get it 
eventually when Human Resources  got to it. Management also stated they  did the FJA due to loosing 
Engineers to outside competition. I asked why Assistant Engineers were included , as some never 
become Engineers , and I got no response. Ex actly 1 year and 4 months later the pay study came out and 
the state mislead the study by using Civil Engineer II and Engineer Technician , both of which have maybe 
one person employed in them now, and possibly not even filled (none with DOT). I did put in an FJA and 
not only did management in DOT fight it and denied , so did  Human Resources. It currently being 
appealed but have not heard anything about it. If recruitment is the main reason for this pay bump 
through FJA I can assure you many Senior Technician s have left for this same reason and are currently 
working as consultants on DOT and Maine Turnpike projects. Talking about consultants , I don’t dare say 
how many DOT currently has in many areas of the MaineDOT forces that could be filled with DOT 
personne l if the pay range gap is taken care of. I am not sure if MSEA is even aware of how many 
consultants are used throughout positions that should be public employee positions.  
  
What I would like to propose  as a solution:  
- A new Classification called a Residen t (pay range 30) for anyone who is currently working as a 
resident on projects in any one of the three classifications (Technician, Assistant Transportation 
Engineer and Senior Technician) would be moved step for step to it.  
  
- A new classification called Assistant Resident (pay range 25) for anyone who is currently working 
in any one of the three classifications that are on projects and who are not Residents shall be 
put in this classification. The idea of this classification is if at some point an assista nt resident 
becomes a residen t, they automatically become a resident pay range 30. We currently at DOT 
already do this with Assistant Transportation Engineers that pass the PE get a position to 
Transportation Engineer II and this would still apply to them but also the Resident series.  
 
MaineDOT can keep the Assistant Technician, Technician, Assistant Transportation Engineer and Senior 
Technician for in office positions and reclassify (pay increase) as needed.  
  
One of the reasons I am proposing that Transpo rtation Engineers IIs in the field stay pay range 31 is to 
acknowledge their PE stamp accomplishment otherwise they too should be redlined to Resident and or 
pay them a stipend for that.  
  
I want to also state that the only reason I have not left state gov ernment is I want to fight in this position 
for my fellow employees for what is right, equitable and fair.  We deserve to be compensated fairly and 
competitively  for the hard work that we do for the State of Maine.  
  
 
