Contact: Tina Jennings Association Director of Community & Youth Engagement 
YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston  
P: 207-784-4995 E: tjennings@alymca.org
Testimony of Tina Jennings before 
the Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
the Committee on Health and Human Services 
in support of
LD 258: An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund 
and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain 
Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the 
Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024, and June 30, 2025
(Governor's Bill) Sponsored by Representative Melanie Sachs
February 21, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Tina Jennings and I’m the Community & Youth 
Engagement Director for the YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston.  I support the investments in the child 
care industry in the Governor’s budget proposal.
Collectively, the 15 YMCAs in Maine are the largest childcare provider in the state. We serve 
thousands of children in our early childhood education programs, before/afterschool programs, 
and summer camp. These programs provide children with safe, nurturing and enriching care, 
and are a critical component of our state’s infrastructure to support working parents and our 
economy. 
There are a couple components of this bill in particular that I want to highlight as impactful for 
the YMCA. We greatly appreciate the Governor’s inclusion of these initiatives.
1) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 635 for salary 
supplements awarded to individuals who provide childcare or are early childhood 
educators. (Page 307)
The $200 a month wage stipend has helped staff in our field tremendously. Childcare is not a 
money making field, people work in this field for the love of educating tomorrow’s leaders and it 
is one of the lowest paying fields to be in. The extra $200 has allowed many people to stay in 
the job, even with the rising costs of food, housing and basic essentials. 
Non-profits like the YMCA cannot afford to compete with businesses who are offering high wages 
for jobs that require little skill. Childcare is not a money maker, but providing quality care and 
educating children is one of the most important, and challenging jobs you could have. We have 
seen GOOD early childhood educators leave the field to work in jobs that are much less 
demanding and pay much more. This also leaves our loyal staff prone to burnout. I have been in 
Contact: Tina Jennings Association Director of Community & Youth Engagement 
YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston  
P: 207-784-4995 E: tjennings@alymca.org
this field for 19 years and I have never seen it as bad as this. Without quality providers, or 
providers at all, families will not be able to work.  
We have, and continue to struggle with hiring staff, any staff, never mind quality early childhood 
educators. This work is challenging, and we continue to be short staffed, see high rates of 
turnover and have had to hold off on opening new classrooms/sites because we simply cannot 
staff them. 
Raising children is difficult, the role of a childcare provider is to give families a safe caregiver 
when they need to work, but it is also to give children opportunities to learn and thrive 
throughout their day, to ensure that they are on track to hit their developmental milestones, 
observe for delays, provide resources to families, be mentors, the list could go on forever!
2) Funding to annualize funds received in Public Law 2021, chapter 679, An Act to Expand 
the Statewide Voluntary Early Childhood Consultation Program, for the Early Childhood 
Consultation Program. (Page 333)
We have seen a HUGE increase in social emotional behaviors in children and childcare providers 
need help to support these children, keep them in care and help them thrive. It is as plain as 
that. 
Ensuring that all young children have an equal opportunity for healthy growth and development 
is a long-term investment in Maine’s future prosperity. 90% of a child’s brain develops as early 
as five years old, and positive early learning experiences establish strong foundations for the 
brain’s architecture. We appreciate the initiatives outlined in the Governor’s budget, and look 
forward to working with you and your colleagues this session to further increase the state 
investment in this critical sector.
Respectfully submitted,
Tina Jennings
Association Director of Community & Youth Engagement 
YMCA of Auburn-Lewiston
