City of Presque Isle, Maine  
 
12 Second Street             Presque Isle, ME 04769 -2459             Phone: 207.76 0.2785               Fax 207.764.2501   
 
The City of Presque Isle is an equal opportunity provider. To file a complaint, write to  
Human Resources , 12 Second Street Presque Isle, ME 04769, or call (207) 760 -2700.  
The Office of  Executive Director  
Presque Isle Industrial Council  
Thomas w.  Powers  
Email:  TomP@pqiic.com  
 
 
 
 
February 13, 2023  
 
Dear Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, and members of the 
Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations & Financial Affairs and Education & Cultural 
Affairs,  
 
Good afternoon and thank you for this opportunity to speak about why support for our university 
system is critical to Maine’s economic future and the stabilization of its workforce.  
 
My name is Tom Powers and I hold the position of Executive Director of the Presque Isle 
Industrial Council and serve as the Vice Chair of the University of Maine at Presque Isle Board 
of Visitors. My family has lived in Presque Isle since it was incorporat ed in 1859. I’m an UMPI 
alumnus and my son graduated with two Bachelor’s degrees from the University of Maine at 
Fort Kent. Both of us chose to attend these institutions because they allowed us to attain a high 
quality –and affordable –post-secondary educati on in our desired work fields while staying in the 
part of the state we call home.  
 
I believe my past work experiences and current roles allow me to deliver an honest viewpoint 
regarding the critical importance of these two institutions to northern Maine, and, by extension, 
all of our University of Maine System campuses, in developing the workforce Maine needs to 
grow and thrive.  
 
UMPI and UMFK have the physical and human assets needed to train students for success in 
today’s work environment. They are comm itted to career readiness efforts in and out of the 
classroom. UMFK programs like Forestry and Nursing and UMPI programs like Medical 
Laboratory Technology and Physical Therapist Assistant are producing students recruited even 
before they graduate. Our uni versities’ proven ability to adapt to tomorrow’s workplace 
requirements is one of the most important ways they define their true value to Maine’s future.  
 
Take the GIS offerings at UMPI. GIS has become an integral part of Maine’s economic 
development activ ities and is used daily by almost every municipality and entity focused on 
economic development. At UMPI, students learn by using state -of-the-art GIS technology and 
take on real -world projects that not only prepare them for the workforce, but also benefit  the 
community in tangible and long lasting ways. In Presque Isle, we use GIS databases created by 
UMPI students to help with identifying public works infrastructures that aid in our planning and 
zoning activities. Through a partnership among the 7 campuse s of the University of Maine 
System and state agencies to include industries, and communities the Maine Geospatial 
Institute efforts make these informational depositories possible for statewide use.  
 
Consider also UMPI’s Agricultural Science and Agribusine ss program, designed to strengthen 
Maine’s ability to grow in the increasingly complex and profitable field of agriculture, especially 
sustainable agriculture. The shift across the country of increased food production due to climate 
change is already under way and Maine is becoming a larger player in this transition. Northern 
Maine farming is now a multi -million -dollar industry at the grower’s level and a billion -dollar 
industry at the processor level. UMPI’s AgScience program is targeting young people from this 
area to work and help grow this industry, training them in the latest ag technologies, and 
providing opportunities to learn from industry leaders, which helps ensure that Maine becomes 
an even bigger partner in this growth. UMPI AgScience alums like C ody Theriault have been 
able to conduct industry -impacting research, stay in the industry locally after graduation, and 
apply their own research findings in their daily work.  
 
Imagine how continued education and research investment will allow UMPI to grow these 
programs and efforts like these. An investment in the University of Maine System is an 
investment in the vitality and the future of rural regions like Aroostook County; it’s an investment 
in our universities’ ability to provide an affordable educatio n that prepares people for the 
workforce, help to keep individuals within our communities,  and to provide a time honored and 
respected institution in the communities they are located while supporting local jobs and 
economies.  
 
I am requesting your support regarding education and research funding for the FY 24 -25 
Biennial Budget to help us ensure the future growth of Maine.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I would be happy to answer any 
questions you may have.  
 
Tom Powers  
Execu tive Director, Presque Isle Industrial Council  
 
 
