 
 
 56 Drummond  Avenue, Waterville, ME  04901  
Phone (207) 680- 7200 
Fax (207) 861- 9508 
www.educarecentralmaine.org  
 
 
Educare Central Maine  
Governance Board:  
 
Jim Clair, Chairperson  
Clair Group of Companies   
Eric Haley, Vice- Chairperson  
Waterville Public Schools   
Suzanne Walsh, Secretary/Treasurer  
Kennebec Valley Community  
 Action Program  
 
Bill Alfond  
Bill & Joan Alfond Foundation   
Mike Burke 
Buffett Early Childhood Fund   
Rabbi Rachel Isaacs 
Colby College  
 
Michael Mitchell, LCSW 
KVCAP Board of Directors  
 
Peter Hallen  
Waterville Public Schools  
 
 
Ensuring school readiness for children birth to age five.  
 
  
 
TESTIMONY BY TRACYE FORTIN  
of Educare Central Maine 
Tuesday, February 21, 2023, state House Room 228 
 
In Support of LD 258, “An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations 
from the General Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State 
Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the 
Proper Operations of State Government for  the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 
2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025”.  
  
Good a fternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, members of the 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, and Senator Baldacci, 
Representative Myer, members of the Health and Human Services .   
 
I’m Tracye Fortin, Chief Operating Officer of Kennebec Valley Community 
Action Program , Child & Family Services. I oversee our Head Start and child 
care program  model  at Educare Central Maine and community partnership 
models  with public schools and center and family child care providers.  
 
Our communities, our state and our country realize now more than ever before 
that childcare access and quality are paramount to a healthy econ omy. This was 
highlighted with the pandemic. This has been known to the early childhood field 
for years from research -based evidence, and certainly came to light -  brightly -  
since COVID -19, for business leaders, public educators, government officials, 
families and children. Child care is the workforce behind the workforce.  
 
Since research informed us of children’s brain development, with the greatest 
synapsis for learning capacity initiated prior to age three, Adverse Childhood 
Experiences ( ACE s) and the long -term impact on children’s development and 
social -emotional well- being, and intensive parent engagement for a whole 
family approach for positive and lasting outcomes, early childhood programs 
have continued to advocate for supports to increas e childcare quality and access, 
recognizing that it takes a village.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Tracye Fortin  testimony 
Page 2
 
 
 
That is why you will hear various legislation this session to continue to make improvements on behalf of 
the child care workforce, beginning with increasing the allocation of the child care educator salary 
supplement. Stipends contained in LD258 are both recognized and appreciated as a start to increase child  
care worker wages. Continuing to build upon this as a baseline effort is the right step forward as Maine continues to build a syst em to advance high quality early care and education in Maine. We must attract 
and retain quality educators in the early childhood field.   Educare’s turnover rate tripled during the pandemic  when we are historically below 10%. Our 
community efforts with h igher education, Career & Technical Centers, Department of Education, 
AmeriCorps, Apprenticeship, and a Parent Substitute Training Program take focused time to cultivate in order to yield an increased candidate pool. Like other child care programs, we cont inue to be challenged 
with full staffing when a public school educator  with comparable degree/certification  earns at least 20% 
more in their annual salary. Likewise, the wage comparability of service sector positions are competition 
as well, leaving potential workers to leave, or not enter, the early childhood field.  I urge you to support investing in Maine’s movement forward, joining in the significant syst ems 
partnerships that are established  and ready to be strengthened and expanded  with LD 258 and other child 
care related bills during this legislative session .  
 Thank you for your time.    Tracye Fortin  
Chief Operating Officer, Child & Family Services  
Kennebec Valley Community Action Program  
Educare Central Maine  
101 Water Street  
Waterville, ME  04901 (207) 859- 1616  
tracyef@kvcap.org
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
