Good Morning Members of the  Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee,  
 
My name is Tracy Cunningham and I am an employee of the Department of Professional and 
Financial Regulation, Bureau of Insurance. I have been a State of Maine employee for over 20 
years and am testifying/writing on my own time as a private citizen. I am writing to express my 
concerns regarding the lack of funding and general upkeep of St ate office buildings, especially 
leased spaces. In 20 years I have experienced repeated and ongoing water intrusion, heating 
issues, lack of cleanliness, mold, asbestos, general disrepair of old windows, crumbling exterior 
and the list goes on. Poor air qu ality has sent employees to the e.r. and forced others to work 
from home. We've had to endure comments from the public and insurance professionals 
regarding the general disrepair of the building.   Staff have made repeated complaints and yet 
the lease conti nues to be renewed. Recently we were temporarily moved out of that location 
when asbestos was discovered and mold remediation began while employees were still in the 
office. We were moved to a State owned building that is in even worse disrepair. It is bey ond 
time that the State start investing in their employees' health and well being by providing them 
with safe and healthy work spaces.   
 
Lastly, it is time for the State to invest in the future of their workforce. As one of, if not the 
largest, employers i n the State, it is time to pay its current and future employees a fair wage. 
Several years ago a pay study was completed for the Professional/Technical work units that has 
yet to be funded. Many employees continue to be paid less than their counterparts in  the 
Administrative units who are on a lower pay scale and of those in the private sector. Hiring and 
retaining skilled workers has become increasingly difficult due to the ongoing pay disparities. 
Please provide much needed funding to ensure the citizens of the State of Maine continue to 
receive all of the services they deserve.  
 
Thank you,  
Tracy Cunningham  
 
