Testimony of Wanda Pelkey, CPA 
CFO First Atlantic HealthCare and Board Chair of Maine Healt h Care Association  
 
To the Joint Committee on Appropriations and Financial  Affairs 
With the Joint Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
Wednesday, February 22, 2023 at 10:00 AM 
 
Neither For Nor Against Long Term Care Provisions in: 
 
LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations fr om the General Fund and 
Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of 
the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Govern ment for the Fiscal Years Ending 
June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
 
Good morning Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Senator Ba ldacci, Representative 
Meyer and distinguished members of the joint standing c ommittees. My name is Wanda Pelkey, 
and I serve as the board chair of the Maine Health Car e Association and CFO of First Atlantic 
HealthCare. My company represents 23 nursing facility and residential care homes throughout 
Maine, located in towns of Saco, Portland, Freeport, F almouth, Skowhegan, Lewiston, Dexter, 
Dover-Foxcroft, Bangor, Ellsworth, Machias, Lincoln, Millinocket, Calais, Houlton, Waterville 
and Madawaska. 
I am here today to provide testimony neither for nor agains t sections of the Biennial 
Budget that pertain to long term care. 
Let me begin by saying I’m deeply grateful for the past  support the legislature and the 
administration has provided to the long term care industry .  Even though Maine has endured 
closures, without a doubt the assistance prevented doze ns more.   
As we climb out of the pandemic, the virus challenges have been replaced by 
worsening workforce shortages .  We’re struggling to regain occupancy numbers because o f too 
few workers.  STAFFING STAFFING STAFFING is by far o ur number-one problem.  I know 
the State is working on solutions with a variety of w orker-development programs yet we’re a 
long way from solving the crisis.   
We all understand the simple economics that scarcity  drives costs.  The repeated and 
substantial pay increases that’s been a huge benefit f or our workers (and staffing agencies) are at 
once a looming financial disaster for our homes.  Last y ear the legislature funded Medicaid rate 
increases to afford 125% minimum wage for direct care workers  or $17.25/hr.  That helps, but 
literally everywhere in Maine market rates for new CN As starts at closer to $20+/hr.  
Furthermore, shortages of RNs, LPNs and med-techs is ev en more extreme and driving far 
higher wage rates for them.   
As a result, costs continue to outpace Mainecare rate s.  The biennium budget for nursing 
facilities includes a COLA in year 1 and rebasing increas e for year 2, but amounts don’t bridge 
the funding gap.  Under today’s rates Berry Dunn CPAs have  projected a nursing facility 
shortfall of $60 million starting July 1.  That’s a gap o f roughly $45 million for year 1 alone.     
This year the $25 million for NFs just passed in the sup plemental budget for nursing 
homes helps to fund this current state fiscal year’s gap .  It’s bridge funding at best and 
unfortunately doesn’t solve the structural rate gap startin g July 1.   
After several years of “just in time” relief fundin g that’s barely kept our facilities 
operating, many are now not in compliance with bank len ding covenants and have dangerously 
low cash reserves.  Rightfully so, banks very are ner vous about the collective industry’s ability to 
make mortgage payments.   Banks are denying access to capita l when more is needed, shortening 
lending terms on existing debt and raising interest rates o n what they view are troubled loans.    
Many facilities are a replacement roof or busted boiler away from financial ruin.   
So while I appreciate and support the proposed funding in the drafted biennium budget, 
please be aware a substantial funding gap will remain  that I believe will lead to closures unless 
addressed by this legislature. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
