FINANCE AUTHORITY 0? MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
In Support of L.D. 258 
An Act Making Uniﬁed Appropriations and Allocations for the Expenditures of State 
Government, General Fund and Other Funds, and Changing Certain Provisions of the 
Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for the Fiscal Years 
Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
February 13, 2023 
Senators Rotundo and Rafferty, Representatives Sachs and Brennan, and Distinguished 
Members of the Joint Standing Committees on Appropriations and Financial Affairs and 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify in support of the Governor ’s proposed initiative related to Free Community 
College found on page A-137 of your printed materials and in the language section Part 
QQQ 
FAME is a quasi-independent state agency that provides ﬁnancial solutions that 
help Maine people achieve their business and higher education goals. We create business 
and educational opportunities tlnough our willingness to invest at greater risk based on 
public beneﬁt. FAME’s mission is to provide ﬁnancial solutions that help Maine people 
achieve their business and higher educational goals. Our vision is to help create a Maine 
workforce with good paying jobs by focusing on the nexus of economic and educational 
development. 
As you know, the Maine Community College System Free Community College 
Scholarship covers tuition and mandatory fees for eligible high school graduates who are 
pursuing a two-year associate degree or one-year certiﬁcate at a Maine community 
college, are living in Maine while enrolled and have ﬁrst accepted any available state and 
federal grant aid. FAME supports this initiative, which would provide one-time funding 
of $7.5 million in each year of the biennium for up to two years of free community 
college for all high school graduates in the classes of 2024 and 2025 who enroll ina 
Maine community college full-time. We support this effort for various reasons, including 
that it increases affordable access to higher education, helps to achieve our shared goal of
1
at least 60% of Mainers obtaining a credential of value; helps to reduce student debt; and 
helps to meet our workforce needs. 
FAME plays a critical role in Free Application for Federal Student Aid (F ASF A) 
completion in the state, as well as administering the Maine State Grant Program, which 
helps approximately 15,000 Maine students per year afford some form of higher 
education. FAFSA completion is the gateway to ﬁnancial aid, the Maine State Grant, and 
Free Community College. The collaboration between the Maine Community College 
System and FAME has been important as we have helped to implement the Free College 
program. We have Worked closely with the Maine Community College System as they 
rolled out their Free College Initiative, providing support at open houses as well as 
FAFSA training for their various staff. We believe this initiative is crucial for Maine’s 
workforce development. More students will have the opportunity to continue their 
education and gain the skills needed to participate in the workforce with well-paying jobs 
that match their interests and talents. 
FAFSA completion is closely associated with the pursuit of higher education. 
FAME staff works hard throughout the year to assist Maine students and families with 
FAFSA completion and ﬁnancial aid sessions. The 2023-2024 FAFSA became available 
on October 1, 2022. Thankfully, due to recent congressional action, a much simpler form 
with far fewer questions is set to launch this fall. In addition to hosting Financial Aid 
Information Sessions and sharing resources to help prepare individuals to ﬁle the 
FAFSA, FAME offered 48 in-person and virtual FAF SA Help Sessions throughout the 
fall. Additionally, we provided one-to-one Zoom appointments two to three days per 
week and engaged in hundreds of upon-request meetings and phone calls to support 
FAFSA completion. As of the end of December 2022, FAFSA completions were up 
about 2% over last year. The most signiﬁcant increase was for ﬁrst-time ﬁlers (mostly 
high school seniors), with an increase in FAFSA submissions of about 10% over last 
year. Within this group we are seeing an increased number of students indicating they 
plan to pursue an associate degree as compared to last year. We are also seeing a decline 
in FAFSA ﬁlings for returning students pursuing a bachelor ’s degree. FAME sent 
reminders to former Maine State Grant recipients to ﬁle a FAFSA in January. We believe 
the increase in FAFSA ﬁling percentage for the Class of 2022 over the Class of 2021 has 
been helped, in part, by the Free Community College Scholarship and its accompanying 
FAFSA ﬁling requirement for eligibility. 
We urge you to support this initiative and thereby continue for another two years 
the Free Community College effort critical for our workforce. 
Thank you for this opportunity and I would be happy to answer any questions.
2
