                                                                        William F. King Jr.  
                                                                           300 Front St.  
                                                                        Bath, Me. 04530  
To: Senator Margaret Rotundo . Chair,  Committee on A pprop riations and Financial Affairs  
To: Representative Melanie Sach s, Chair Committee on Appr opriations and Financial Affairs  
I have been involved with the Maine Development Foundation’s Downtown Restoration program known 
as the Maine Downtown Center while  serving on the Advisory Council for 24 years  and as its Chair for 6 
years . I was o ne of the original founders bri nging to Maine the National Historic Trust’s Main Street 
Model for Downtown Revitalization in  Maine. I was also a founder of Main Street Bath and am still a 
committee volunteer. I have done restoration consul ting and advis ing in some 40 Maine old downtowns   
with my wife Jayne Palmer and in N.Y., Ct., Mass. and N.H.  
I have over half a century of business experience in the wholesale and retail trades in old downtowns in 
Bath and Camden, Maine , in Burlington, Vt. a nd Boston, Mass.  I know how important it is to have  one’s 
business in a vibrant downtown. The MDC Main Street Model  brings people downtown with events that  
are, social, cultural, and economic so people  want to be part of their downtown in their shopping and 
dining and may be have a business downtown and eventually they might want to live in this very busy 
environment .  
In Bath after 30 plus years  our downtown first floor store fronts are all full, our second  floor apartments 
and offices are full, and our third and fourth floors are virtually full of tenants. Then too Bath’s 
immediate residential community to downtown which was sliding to commercial use as is the usual case in old downtowns is going back to residential , because people want to live within walking distance of 
their vibrant downtown.  This is a true sign of successful downtown revitalization.  
The alternative to downtown revitalization is to do nothing. Let the merchants leave for the malls or other towns. Then the offices leave followed by the residents. Then the tax base erodes and taxes go up 
for lack of paying  businesses, offices, and residents. The town can’t pay its bills for utilities and 
Maintenance services and the town will become a financial drag to the county and state.  
With ever more demand from distre ssed old Maine downtowns for help with revitalization MDF/MDC 
needs funding for staff, training sessions, seminars, and conferences. Most recent figures from the 
National Trust claim that for every $1 invested in preservation of our old downtowns there is presently a   
$20 return on that investment. Where else can the State of Maine get such a return? We hope you can 
help us to gain funding to better maintain th is important attraction that is Maine’s old downtowns.  
 
            Sincerely yours,  William F. King Jr                                                                                2/13/2023 
                       207-751-2988 
 
