Senator Rotundo,  Senator Tipping, Representative Sa chs, Representative Roeder and Members of the 
Committees of Appropriations  and Financial Affairs and Labor and Housing  
 
My name is Winifred Malia. I am a Principal Economic Research Analyst;  I have worked for the Maine 
Dept of Labor for over 35 years and I am the current Chapter President of the Eichel -Crinion Chapter of 
the Maine Service Employee Association. I am submitti ng this testimony on my own time concerning of 
LD 258, An Act Making Unified Appropriations and Allocations from the General Fund and Other Funds 
for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the 
Proper Op erations of State Government for Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 20, 2024 and  June 
30, 2025.  
 
As you know, the Dept of Labor provides vital services for the State of Maine such as employment and 
training services for workers and employers, workplace  safety tra ining, wage and hour standards, 
services for the blind & visually impaired, deaf, hard of hearing & late deafened, and vocational 
rehabilitation, labor market information, and economic stability from the unemployment benefits while 
workers find re employment.  In order to provide these services, the Dept of Labor needs to be able to 
fully staff the positions.  Retention and recruitment is made more difficult as the pay gap widens without 
any meaningful progress to close it.  
 
The pay gap is causing posit ions to remain vacant or employees to accept positions elsewhere. There are 
regular job postings for rehabilitation  counselor, career  center consultants, occupational safety 
specialist,  and customer service representatives to name a few because qualified indiv iduals are not 
applying due to the low wages. There are numerous employees that have or will be retiring in the next 
few years. These positions need to be filled with qualified individuals and that will only happen if wages 
are competitive.  
 
I am asking th at you support the workers of the Dept of Labor that serve the citizens of th e State of 
Maine every day by funding the Department at levels that closes the pay gap.  
 
Winifred Malia  
Scarborough, ME  
