  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
IN SUPPORT of LD 1705: An Act to Give Consumers Control over Sensitive Personal Data by 
Requiring Consumer Consent Prior to Collection of Data  
May 22, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, I am  writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End 
Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 1705, “An Act to Give Consumers Control over 
Sensitive Personal Data by Requiring Consumer Consent Prior to Collection of Data.”  
 
Consumer privacy is important to  all people in Maine, but especially crucial for 
survivors of domestic violence. Many survivors who manage to separate from the person 
harming them  take steps to  change their identities to protect themselves and their families. 
Maine has made strides in recent years to make it easier for  survivors to change their name  
without alerting an abusive partner. It is  also possible , albeit not easy,  for survivors to change 
their social security numbers. But there is no protection in Maine law for survivors’ biometric 
identifiers: their faces,  fingerprints , DNA, and retinas. These things are individual to each one 
of us  and cannot be exchanged or changed if they are compromised by an abus ive partner.  
 
Survivors of domestic abuse and violence regularly face identity theft  and are often  
put into si tuations where their abusers have access to or control over their most intimate 
information. LD 1705 would provide a measure of safety for survivors being stalked by their 
abusers, and it would give survivors back control over their most private and personal 
information.  LD 1705  would  require businesses to inform people about the businesses’ 
biometric collection practices, obtain written consent before collecting, and have processes 
in place to destroy biometric information that has been collected within a reasonable time. 
Crucially, it allows survivors to opt in, as opposed to forcing them to opt out, of collection of 
their biometric data.  
 
1 MCEDV represents a membership of victim service providers, including the regional domestic violence resource 
centers across Maine as well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided 
services to more than 12,000 survivors  of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state.  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
 
The proliferation of technology has opened doors to abusers to track their victims in 
scarier and more invasive ways. One example of th is is companies that scrape images from 
the internet —from blog posts, Facebook, YouTube, etc. —and create searchable databases 
that allow customers to run a photo through the database using facial recognition technology 
to identify potential matches, along wi th names, addresses and phone numbers. One of the 
most egregious examples of these companies is Clearview AI, a secretive face surveillance 
company that claims to have amassed 10 billion faceprints from people s’ online photos across 
the world . Clearview ma kes its money selling access to those faceprints, and their location 
data, to anyone willing to pay.  
 
It wasn’t until groups representing survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault, 
immigrants, and people engaged in sex work sued Clearview AI for v iolating Illinois’ biometric 
privacy act, that Clearview AI agreed to stop selling access to private actors. But Clearview AI 
is only one company . Many other  companies offer the same services  - services that can 
endanger Maine victims of domestic violence . 
 
Without this bill’s limitations on collecting, storing and disseminating biometric 
identifiers , companies are free to ignore the fact that this information  can be misused to 
create dangerous situations and threats to people’s lives. Technology has given  well -heeled 
abusers unprecedented power to track and stalk survivors. Please give survivors control over 
their most personal information  and prevent the misuse of technology that can further 
endanger your most vulnerable constituents . 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
