   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1 705, An Act to Give Consumers Control over Sensitive 
Persona l Data by Requiring Consumer Consent Prior to Collection of Data  
  
May 22 , 202 3 
Arthur Phillips, Maine Center for Econom ic Policy  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is  Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst for the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. Please accept this testimony in support of LD 1 705, An Act to Give 
Consumers Control over Sensitive Personal Data by Requiring Consumer Consent Prior to 
Collection of Data . MECEP supports LD 1 705 because it builds on recent progress our state  
has taken to protect Maine residents’ rights to privacy.  
 
Two years ago , Maine passed an important bill to limit the use of facial recognition 
software by public actors. This bill would build on our state’s  commitment to civil liberties 
by ensuring Maine resid ents are protected from unwanted biometric data collection 
practices by private actors. With ever more transactions and interactions taking place 
online, it is imperative we maintain control over our privacy.  
 
Biometric data, including fingerprints, retina recognition scans, and voiceprints, are 
sensitive to breaches which cannot be reversed once data is compromised, because it is 
unique to each person. This bill would minimize the collection and use of this biometric 
data and provide sensible safeguards so people maintain control of their privacy.  
 
Currently, corporations are not required to inform us when they are using, aggregating, or 
selling our personal biometric identifiers. LD 1705 would require technology firms to get 
consent before collecting consume rs’ biometric information; ban companies from 
discriminating against users who do not consent; ban companies from selling biometric 
data; and require reasonable safeguards to protect biometric data.  
 
MECEP supports the bill’s inclusion of a private right of  action, which would empower 
Maine residents to bring lawsuits against companies violating the bill’s provisions. This 
framework would minimize the state’s burden of enforcement and disincentivize firms 
from violating the law. Thank you for your considerat ion of our testimony. Respectfully,  
 
Arthur Phillips  
aphillips@mecep.org  
 
