 
 
 
 
 
EPIC Statement  1 LD 1705 Biometric Privacy  
Maine State Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  
 
May 22, 2023  
 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair  
The Honorable Matt Moonen , House Chair  
Maine State Legislature  
Judiciary Committee  
230 State Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
 
Dear Chair Carney, Chair Moonen , and Members of the Committee:  
 
EPIC writes in support of LD 1705  regarding biometric identifiers and biometric information 
privacy . Biometric data is highly sensitive. A person’s biometric data is linked to that person’s 
dignity, autonomy,  safety,  and identity.1 Unlike a password or account number, a person’s 
biometrics cannot be changed if they are compromised. HB33  would protect Mainers  by requiring 
that the use and retention of biometric data is minimized and that data is kept secure.  
 
The Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) is a public interest research center 
established in 1994 to focus public attention on emerging privacy and civil liberties issues.2 EPIC 
has long advocated for strict limits on the collection and use of biometric data.3 
 
Late last year, the owner of Madison Square Garden  and Radio City Music Hall  began using 
facial recognition to deny all lawyers working for law firms en gaged in litigation against MSG 
access to concerts  and sporting events.4 A Girl Scout leader chaperoning her troop to the annual 
Christmas Spectacular at Radio City Music Hall was refused entry because she worked at a law firm 
that was inv olved in litigation against MSG – even though she wasn’t involved in the case . Facial 
recognition makes it possible to gate entry to otherwise public spaces . A business owner could just 
as easily use facial recognition deny  services to  members of this Committee who voted against the 
owner’ s interests. A biometric privacy bill like LD 1705  would prevent this and many other harms.  
 
 
1 Woodrow Hartzog, Facial Recognition Is the Perfect Tool for Oppression , Medium  (Aug. 2, 2018), 
https://medium.com/s/story/facial -recognition -is-the-perfect -tool-for-oppress ion-bc2a08f0fe66 .   
2 EPIC, About EPIC , https://epic.org/about/ .  
3 See e.g. Brief for EPIC as Amici Curiae, Patel v. Facebook., 932 F.3d 1264 (9th Cir. 2019), 
https://epic.org/amicus/bipa/patel -v-facebook/;  
Brief for EPIC as Amici Curiae, Rosenbach v. Six Flags Entm’t Corp., 2017 Ill. App. 2d 170317 (Ill. 2019), 
https://epic.org/amicus/bipa/rosenbach/; Comments of EPIC to the Dept. of Homeland S ecurity, Collection 
and Use of Biometrics by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, 85 F.R. 56338, 4 (Oct. 13, 2020), 
https://epic.org/apa/comments/EPIC -DHS - BiometricNPRM -Oct2020.pdf.  
4 Kashmir Hill and Cory Kilgannon, Madison Square Garden Uses Facia l Recognition to Ban Its Owner’s 
Enemies , N.Y. Times ( Jan. 3, 2023), https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/22/nyregion/madison -square -garden -
facial -recognitio n.html .  
EPIC  Statement   LD 1705  Biometric  Privacy  
Maine  State  Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  2 
LD 1705  is modeled after the Illinois Biometric Information Privacy Act (BIPA) .5 Passed in 
2008, BIPA has been referred to a s one of the most effective and important privacy laws in 
America.6 BIPA and HB33  set out a simple privacy framework: businesses may not sell, lease, trade, 
or otherwise profit from a person’s biometric information; businesses must comply with specific 
retention and deletion guidelines; and companies must use a reasonable standard of care in 
transmitting, storing, and protecting biometric information .  
LD 1705  also include s a requirement that a business obtains informed, written consent before 
collecting a  person’s biometric information. Though “notice - and-choice” regimes are not sufficient 
to protect privacy, the consent provision in BIPA has been  effective because it is easy to enforce. It 
is easier for an individual to prove that a company collected the ir biometric data without consent 
than it is to prove a violation of the retention and deletion rules that are implemented by businesses 
after the data is collected.  
The inclusion of a strong private right of action is the most important tool the Legislat ure can 
give to Mainers  to protect their privacy. Modeled after BIPA’s private right of action, the bills would 
impose enforceable legal obligations on companies that choose to collect individuals’ biometric data. 
As EPIC Advisory Board member Professor Woody Hartzog has written :  
So far, only private causes of action seem capable of meaningfully deterring companies 
from engaging in practices with biometrics based on business models that inevitably 
lead to unacceptable abuses. Regulators are more predictable than plaintiffs and a re 
vulnerable to political pressure. Facebook’s share price actually rose 2 percent after the 
FTC announced its historic $5 billion fine for the social media company’s privacy 
lapses in the Cambridge Analytica debacle. Meanwhile, Clearview AI specifically cited 
BIPA as the reason it is no longer pursuing non - government contracts. On top of that, 
Clearview AI is being sued by the ACLU for violating BIPA by creating faceprints of 
people without their consent. [...] In general, businesses have opposed private  causes 
of action more than other proposed privacy rules, short of an outright ban.7  
Many privacy laws include a private right of action to empower individuals and have made it 
possible to hold accountable those who fail to protect or respect personal data. In crafting liability 
provisions in privacy statutes, legislatures have frequently included a liquidated damages provision 
to avoid protracted disputes over quantifying privacy damages. This is necessary because it is often 
difficult to assi gn a specific economic value to the harm caused by a privacy violation.  
For example, when federal legislators passed the Cable Communications Policy Act in 1984, 
they established privacy rights for cable subscribers and created a private right of action fo r recovery 
of actual damages not less than liquidated damages of $100 per for violation or $1,000, whichever is 
 
5 740 Ill. Comp. State. Ann. 14/15.  
6 Woodrow Hartzog, BIPA: The Most Important Biometric Privacy Law in the US? , AI Now   Institute  (2020), 
https://ainowinstitute.org/regulatingbiometrics -hartzog.pdf .  
7 Hartzog, supra  note 7  (note: The ACLU’s suit against facial recognition company Clearview AI recently 
settled, with Clearview agreeing not to sell its face surveillance system to any private company in the United 
States , see Ryan Mac and Kashmir Hill, Clearview AI settles suit and agrees to limit sales of facial 
recognition database , N.Y. Times (May 9, 2022), 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/09/technology/clearview -ai-suit.html .) 
EPIC  Statement   LD 1705  Biometric  Privacy  
Maine  State  Legislature   May 22, 2023  
  3 
higher.8 The Video Privacy Protection Act specifies liquidated damages of $2,500.9 The Fair Credit 
Reporting Act a ffords individuals a private  right of action that can be pursued in federal or state 
court against credit reporting agencies , users of credit reports, and furnishers.10 In certain 
circumstances, individuals can also recover  attorney's fees, court costs, and punitive damages.  The 
Drivers Privacy Protection Act similarly includes a private right of action.11 The Telephone 
Consumer Protection Act allows individuals who receive unsolicited telemarketing calls to recover 
actual monetary loss or up to $500 in damages per violation.12  
The s tatutory damages set in privacy laws are not exorbitant; they are necessary to ensure 
that privacy rights will be taken seriously and violations not ignored. In the absence of a private right 
of action, there is a very real risk that companies will not com ply with the law because they think it 
is unlikely that they would get caught or fined. Private enforcement ensures that data collectors have 
strong financial incentives to meet their data protection obligations. EPIC strongly supports the 
private right of  action provisions in LD 1945.  
Conclusion  
 
An individual’s ability to control access to their identity, including determining when to 
reveal it, is an essential aspect of personal security and privacy. The unregulated collection and use 
of biometrics threatens that right to privacy and puts individuals’ identities at risk . We urge the 
Committee to vote “ought to pass” on  LD 1705.  
If EPIC can be of any assistance to the Committee, please contact EPIC Deputy Director 
Caitriona Fitzgerald at fitzgerald@epic. org.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ Caitriona Fitzgerald  
Caitriona Fitzgerald  
EPIC Deputy Director  
 
8 47 USC § 551(f).  
9 18 USC § 2710(c)(2).  
10 15 U.S.C. §§ 1681 n-1681 o. 
11 18 U.S.C. §  2724.  
12 47 USC § 227(c)(5).  
