 
1400 16th Street, NW  ·   Suite 600  ·   Washington, DC 20036  ·   www.ctia.org  
Testimony of  
JAKE LESTOCK  
CTIA  
 
In Opposition to Maine LD 1705  
 
Before the  
Maine Joint Committee on  Judiciary  
 
May 22 , 2023  
 
Chairs  and members of the committee, on behalf of CTIA®, the trade association  
for the wireless communications industry, I submit this testimony in opposition to  LD 1705 . 
This bill places businesses under a strong threat of litigation with  little benefit for consumers.  
This legislation  is modeled after a biometric privacy law in Illinois, enacted in 2008, 
which has  led to myriad lawsuits and little consumer protection. Maine  should not look to 
replicate  this problematic law. The private right of action contained in the bill  would subject 
companies  to the risk of expensive litigation that primarily benefits the plaintiffs’ bar and 
offers little  relief to consumers. This has shown true in Illinois, where at  the end of 2019, nearly 
300 lawsuits were filed regarding their law – almost four times the total for 2018, the previous 
high  watermark. Through September of 2021, according to a search of court filings, plaintiffs’  
lawyers have filed over 900 cases alleg ing violations under the BIPA law in Illinois.1 These  
lawsuits have targeted businesses both large and small for alleged technical violations linked  
 
1 https://instituteforlegalreform.com/research/ilr -briefly -a-bad -match -illinois -and -the-
biometricinformation -privacy -act/   
 
 
 
 
 
 
to collecting, using, and sharing biometric identifiers, like those indicated in this bill . 
Moreover, for over 20 years, the Federal Trade Commission has developed and  
enforced an effective privacy framework that applies to all players in the internet ecosystem.  
The FTC is an active consumer privacy enforcer. It has brought over 500 enforcement actions  
protect ing consumer privacy. Through these enforcement actions, as well as through  
extensive policy guidance, the FTC has articulated a consumer privacy framework in which  
more sensitive personal information including biometric or genetic information, is generall y 
subject to heightened protections, while there is greater flexibility to collect, use, and disclose  
non -sensitive information. The FTC is also  polic ing the issue and has warned entities  about 
the misuse of such data.2 In addition, the Maine Attorney General already has the  authority to 
address unfair or deceptive acts or practices relating to consumer privacy under  state 
consumer protection laws. Because of these existing federal and state measures, and  other 
privacy laws, biometric data is already protected.  
This bill raises complex issues and replicates a litigious statute, which was passed  
over 15 years  ago and has not been enacted in any other state. It is not a path that Maine  
should follow. As stated, passage of this legislation open s businesses to the threat of  
abusive litigation. Accordingly, CTIA respectfully requests that you not mo ve this legislation.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
2 https://www.ftc.gov/news -events/news/press -releases/2023/05/ftc -warns -about -misuses -biometric -
information -harm -consumers   
