 
 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC.  
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333  
(207) 621-0087   Fax (207) 621-0742   
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle  
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY)  
www.mainelse.org   
 
May 18, 2023 
 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in support of LD 1705 – An Act 
to Give Consumers Control over Sensitive Personal Data by Requiring Consumer Consent Prior to 
Collection of Data. 
 
Good morning, Senator Carney and Representative Moonen. On behalf of Legal Services for the 
Elderly I would like to offer brief comments in support of LD 1705. Legal Services for the Elderly 
(LSE) is a nonprofit legal services organization with the mission of providing free legal assistance 
to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. Next year we will mark 50 
years of service. 
 
Biometric tracking refers to the use of unique physical or behavioral characteristics, such as 
fingerprints, facial recognition, or voice recognition, for identification or monitoring purposes. 
 
In general, we believe that collecting this information can pose a threat to the privacy and security 
of individuals in Maine. We are concerned that older Mainers may be vulnerable to those harms, 
and for that reason we support measures intended to constrain the use of such information. 
 
We support the provisions in LD 1705 requiring consent and disclosure, and we support the policy 
of destroying or deleting such information so that any risk of its misuse does not exist in perpetuity.  
  
We agree that there are benefits to the information revolution. But the emergence of widespread 
data-harvesting systems of unprecedented scope and power – often for commercial benefit – poses 
unknown risks. LD 1705 would apply to much of that data harvesting activity. 
 
Our ability to develop protective measures has not kept pace with technological change and the 
explosive innovation in the information ecosystem generally. Maine author Shoshana Zuboff 
explains these risks in her powerful book Surveillance Capitalism. 
 
Older people may face certain challenges or vulnerabilities when it comes to biometric tracking: 
 
1. Physical changes: As individuals age, physical changes can occur that might impact the 
accuracy and reliability of certain biometric measures. For example, wrinkles, changes in skin 
elasticity, or other age-related changes can potentially affect the accuracy of facial recognition 
systems. 
May 18, 2023                                                                                                                                         page 2 
LD 1705 
 
2 
 2. Health conditions: Older people may have certain health conditions that could impact biometric 
measurements. Conditions like arthritis or tremors could affect fingerprint scanning, while 
voice recognition might be impacted by vocal cord changes or speech difficulties. 
3. Sensory impairments: Age-related sensory impairments, such as diminished vision or hearing, 
may pose challenges for biometric systems that rely on those senses. For instance, an older 
person with poor eyesight might face difficulties aligning their eyes for iris recognition. 
4. Technology familiarity: Some older individuals may have less experience or familiarity with 
technology, including biometric systems. This lack of familiarity could lead to challenges in 
using or understanding the purpose and benefits of biometric tracking. 
Two additional points. These challenges are not exclusive to older people, as individuals of any age 
can encounter issues with biometric tracking. Advances in technology will address some of these 
limitations, but we are not there yet. 
 
Second, we do not subscribe to the stereotype that all older people are frail, vulnerable, and 
incapable of being self-reliant. All we are saying is that for some older people, these technologies 
may present a heightened risk. 
 
The Maine Attorney General website shows that a home care company by the name of Personal 
Touch Home Care was the victim of a data breach involving biometric information. We are 
concerned that some older Mainers could be vulnerable if a home care company data breach leads to 
financial exploitation, ransomware, and similar harms. 
 
One specific comment: Page 2, line 29 of the bill provides that facial surveillance information 
governed by Title 25, chapter 701 is not covered by the bill. We understand this to mean that the 
bill’s prohibitions and required disclosures do not apply to law enforcement activities, but that facial 
surveillance by non-law enforcement entities is covered by the bill.  
 
We support LD 1705 and thank Representative O’Neil for bringing this proposal forward and the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Maine for speaking out on this issue. Thank you. 
 
 
