 
 
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  1 :: 
 
 
 
1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Suite 400  
Washington, D.C. 20004  
P :: 202.783.8700   
F :: 202.783.8750   
W:: AdvaMed.org  
May 22, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair  Representative Matt Mo onen, Chair  
Committee on Judiciary  Committee on Judiciary  
State House, Room 438  State House, Room 438  
Augusta, ME 04333  Augusta, ME 04333  
 
 
RE: LD 1705 , An Act to Give Consumers Control over Sensitive Personal Data by 
Requiring Consumer Consent Prior to Collection of Data  
 
Dear Chair  Carney, Chair Moonen, and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee,  
  
On behalf of the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), I am writing to request an 
amendment  to LD 1705 to  further ensur e the safeguarding of patient data and provid e consistency 
across states. AdvaMed is the largest medical technology association, representing the innovators 
and manufacturers transforming health care through earlier disease detection, less invasive 
proced ures, and more effective treatments.  
AdvaMed advocates a patient -centered framework for the use and disclosure of health information . 
We believe this can be accomplished  by (i) ensuring transparency around collection, use, and 
sharing of health information; (ii) ensuring that obtaining consent does not unduly delay or 
diminish the quality of patient care; and (iii) harmonizing new laws and regulations with existing 
health privacy and security laws and regulations, including the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountabili ty Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy, Security, and Breach Notification Rules (HIPAA Rules), 
and relying on existing expertise within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
to address any gaps in existing health privacy and security laws as appli ed to the Medical 
Technology industry.   
We have worked with legislators in Colorado, Virginia, Utah, Connecticut, and other states who 
share  your goal of providing confidence to their constituents that their data privacy is secured.  
  
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  2 :: 
 
 
While the bill includes an exemption for HIP AA, it remains insuffi cient. We ask that you consider 
adopting the following language so that critical healthcare data does not remain in the scope of LD 
1705. 
 
This Article/Chapter/Part does not apply to Information that is:  
1. Protected Health Information (PHI) subject to HIPAA & related regulations (45 CFR 160, 45 
CFR 162, & 45 CFR 164)  
2. Patient Identifying Information (PII) subject to 42 CFR 2 (SAMHSA -Confidentiality o f 
Substance Use Disorder Patient Records)  
3. Personal data used or shared in Research Conducted in accordance with one or more of the 
following policies for the Protection of Human Research Subjects: 45 CFR 46; International 
Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Good Clinical Practice Guidelines (GCP); 21 CFR 50; or 
21 CFR 56.  
4. Created for purposes of the Federal Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, and 
related regulations;  
5. Patient Safety Work Product for purposes of 42 CFR 3, established pursuant to 42 USC  
299b-21 through 299b -26; 
6. Derived from any of the health care -related information listed in this subsection and De -
identified in accordance with the requirements in 45 CFR 164 (HIPAA);  
7. Maintained by an entity that meets the definition of Health Care Provid er under HIPAA (45 
CFR 160.103) to the extent that the entity maintains the information in the manner required 
of Covered Entities with respect to PHI under HIPAA and related regulations (45 CFR 160, 
45 CFR 162, & 45 CFR 164);  
8. Included in a Limited Data Se t as described at 45 CFR 164.514(e), to the extent that the 
information is used, disclosed, and maintained in the manner specified at 45 CFR 
164.514(e);  
9. Information originating from, and intermingled to be indistinguishable with, or information 
treated in  the same manner as PHI/PII that is maintained by:  
o A Covered Entity or Business Associate as defined by HIPAA and related regulations; 
or 
o A Program or a Qualified Service Organization as defined by 42 CFR 2 (SAMHSA)  
10. Used only for Public Health Activities a nd purposes as described in 45 CFR 164.512(b);  
11. Used only to address Evidentiary Requirements for Coding, Coverage, and Reimbursement 
associated with Medicare and other federal health care payers (Veteran’s Health 
Administration, TRICARE, Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP)), Tribal/Indian Health 
Services, State Medicaid and CHIP, and private insurance payers; and  
12. Subject to [STATE -SPECIFIC MEDICAL PRIVACY LAW(S)]  
 
  
 
 advamed.org   ::      @AdvaMedUpdate   ::      AdvaMed  3 :: 
 
 
Private Right of Action  
The US Chamber of Commerce, in a whitepaper released last year, demonstrates that private 
rights of action are inefficient and ineffective for addressing privacy concerns. In fact, private rights 
of action in the privacy context often:   
• Undermine appropriate agency enforcement and allow plaintiffs’ lawyers to set  policy 
nationwide, rather than allowing expert regulators to shape and balance policy and 
protections   
• Result in inconsistent and dramatically varied, district -by-district court rulings   
• Lead to grossly expensive litigation and staggeringly high settlemen ts that disproportionally 
do not benefit individuals whose privacy interests may have been infringed   
• Hinder innovation and consumer choice by threatening companies with frivolous, excessive, 
and expensive litigation, particularly if those companies are at  the forefront of 
transformative new technology   
 
AdvaMed respectfully proposes the amendments discuss ed here and striking the private right of 
action,  in furtherance of the principles espoused above. The proposed amendments would 
harmonize the Bill with existing laws and regulations, including HIPAA and the Illinois Biometric 
Information Privacy Act (BIPA), thereby promoting consistency and interoperability within the 
health care ecosystem.  For these  reasons , we urge you to take our concerns into consideration and 
adopt these exemptions in LD 1705.   
 
Thank you for considering our request, please contact me rkozyckyj@advamed.org  with any 
questions you may have .   
 
Sincerely,  
Roxy Kozyckyj  
Director, State Government and Regional Affairs  
Advanced Medical Techn ology Association (AdvaMed)   
 

