 
 
 
300 Fore Street, Portland, ME 04101 |  207 .780.4356  |  mainelaw.maine.edu  
May 21, 2023  
 
Dear Committee Members,  
My name is Scott Bloomberg and I am an Associate Professor at the University of Maine 
School of Law.  I  teach  and research in the area of  information privacy law and am the 
Director of Maine Law’s Information Privacy Law Program. In that capacity, I  am writing 
to give my support  to three bills designed to protect  the privacy of Mainers ’ personal 
information :  
 LD 1 945, An Act to Regulate the Use of Biometric Identifiers.  
 LD 1576, An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device Information as 
Evidence . 
 LD 1902, An Act to Protect Personal Health Data . 
As I shall explain, each  of these  bills is designed to fill a gap where existing law fails to 
adequately safeguard individual privacy. Moreover, each bill —in my view —merely 
codifies a privacy protection  that most Mainers ’ likely assume they already have . 
The testimony that I provide below reflects my own personal views and not the views of 
the University of Maine School of Law as a faculty or institution.  
 
LD 1 945, An Act to Regulate the Use of Biometric Identifiers.  
When it comes to the privacy of information, there is perhaps no personal infor mation more 
sensitive than data about your body: Your fingerprints or handprints. Your faceprint. Your 
voiceprint. Your eyescan. Your gait (the way you walk). This information —this biometric 
data—is unique in that it cannot be changed. It is immutable. If your biometric data falls 
into the wrong hands  you cannot get a new finger or face or voice (as opposed to, say, a 
new credit card number). The data could be used to your detriment for the remainder of 
your life.  
That is exactly why some states began to regulate companies’ collection, handling, and 
sharing of biometric data. To date, three states have specific  biometric data privacy laws 
(Washington, Texas, and Illinois) . Other states, such as California, have comprehensive 
privacy laws that classify  biom etric data within a broader category of “sensitive 
information” that are subject to heightened privacy protections.  And biometric data that is 
captured in the medical setting is, of course, generally subject to significant privacy 
protections under HIPAA.  
2 
 Of the three states with specific biometric data privacy laws, Illinois’ Biometric 
Information Privacy Act (“BIPA”) has proven to be by far the most impactful. That is so 
for a very simply reason: BIPA contains a private right of action, allowing classes o f 
plaintiffs to sue in federal or state court when a company mishandles their biometric data 
in a way that violates the law. That private right of action has given BIPA real teeth, 
whereas the laws in Washington and Texas have gone under -enforced.  
Upon reviewing LD 1945, I can see that it is similar to Illinois’  BIPA , including most 
importantly containing  a private right of action. Indeed, t he Bill has several desirable 
features of a biometric data privacy law (or any privacy law for that matter). It includes a 
data minimization requirement to ensure that companies do not store biometric data 
indefinitely and without purpose. It creates a standard of ca re around how companies store 
biometric data. It gives individuals a right to know about the biometric data companies 
collect about them. And, it prevents companies from collecting or disseminating biometric 
data without  first obtaining  informed consent. The Bill is, in s hort, very thoughtfully 
crafted, providing protections that most Mainers likely believe they already have (or at 
least should have) around one of the most sensi tive types of information they share with 
businesses.  
As a final thought on this bill, I would like to highlight an ambiguity in the draft  that may 
prove to be consequential.  The draft defines the term “biometric identifier ” as “information 
generated by measurements of an individual ’s unique biological characteristic s . . . that can 
be used to identify  that individual.  . . .” (Emphasi s added.) This defini tion’s emphasis on 
identi fication may allow companies that collect biometric data that is not , or cannot be , 
used to identify an individual  to circumvent the law .  Specifically , marketers could use  
biometric data like face and eye movements to gain insight in to consumers ’ preferences.  
And they may do so without having to identify t he individual consumer —indeed,  a 
marketer may be far more interested in understanding what a consumer ’s face or eye 
movements reveal about the  consumer ’s likes and dislikes  than they are in knowing the 
consumer ’s name and address.  Does the consumer  smile  or frown  when they see a 
company ’s advertisement ? Do they stare or look away? Given the term “biometric 
identifier ” and its definition ’s focus on identity, companies w ould likely argue that such 
uses of biometric data are not covered by the bill.  A reviewing court may or may not agree 
with that argument  in a given case,  but legislators should be aware of , and account for , the 
prospect  that the issue  will come up in future litigation . 
LD 1576, An Act to Update the Laws Governing Electronic Device Information as 
Evidence . 
LD 1576 likewise codifies a right that most Mainers probably believe they already have. 
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prevents the government from engaging 
in “unreasonable searches and seizures ” and, with only narrow exception , requires the 
3 
 government to obtain a warrant before searching a person,  their house, their papers, or their 
effects.1  Article 1, Section 5 of the Maine State Constitution provides the same protection.2 
Hundreds of years ago, the requirement  for government agents  to obtain  a warrant before 
searching a person, their house, their papers, or their effects covered virtually all 
information a pe rson possessed about themselves. After all, that information was contained 
in paper  letters and documents , which  people kept inside of their homes  or (when out and 
about) on their persons.  The secluded  desk drawer in the  Colonial  home ’s study is , of 
course, no longer the place where people store most of their information. Instead, people 
store troves of personal information online, through services offered by third -party 
businesses , which the businesses can  themselves  access.  The paradigmatic  example  is 
cloud -based  storage  services  (think Google Drive) , but any online app, service, or platform  
that you use may be a place wher e you store your personal information.  
LD 1576 would, simply put, take the same protection that the nation ’s founders  provided 
to letters  in the desk drawer  and extend it to data that you store online  with a third -party 
business . That protection is presently lacking due to a rule called the “third -party doctrine .” 
Beginning with a pair of cases in the 1970s,3 the Supreme Court has held that a person 
loses a reasonable expectation of privacy in their information  when they share th at 
information with a third party. In other words, the Supreme Court has required secrecy  and 
a precondition for privacy . While the  soundness of this principal is hotly contested, the 
result when applied to today ’s world is quite clear: Put your information in the hands of a 
third -party business, and the government can (generally4) compel th at business to divulge 
the information without obtaining a warrant based on probable cause.    
LD 1576 patches this gap in the law, r equiring the government to  obtain a warrant based 
on probabl e cause to search such information. Moreover, it does so in a manner that 
balances  individual privacy interests with law enforcement and public safety needs. The 
bill includes an exception for em ergency situations and allows la w enforcement  to request 
an order directing businesses to keep the existence of a warrant secret , where their 
investigation so requires. The bill also does not apply when the information in question is 
publicly available  or when it is obtained with the subject ’s consent.    
 
                                                             
1 U.S.  CONST ., amend. IV.  
2 MAINE . STATE CONST ., art. 1, § 5.  
3 United State s v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 (1976); Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979).  
4 There are a few notable exceptions. The Supreme Court , in a narrow 5 -4 decision,  held that the 
government must obtain a warrant to search  a type of data  called historical cell site location information.  
Carpenter  v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 220 6 (2018) . It is also widely accepted that the government must 
obtain a warrant to access t he content of emails, even though they are stored with third -party businesses.  
See, e.g. , United States v. Warshak, 631 F.3d 266 ( 6th Cir. 2010) . 
4 
 LD 1902, An Act to Protect Personal Health Data . 
I am willing to bet that the one privacy law that all of your constituents have heard of is 
HIPAA. Howev er, your constituents would likely be surprised to learn  that HIPAA does 
not, in fact, apply to  all of their health information.  It only protects health information 
handled by entities that deal with health insurance —basically,  providers, insurers, and 
certain  of their service providers. Health information that other businesses collect fall s 
outside of HIPAA ’s scope.  
Part of your constituents ’ surprise would stem from a mis conception  about the law ’s title . 
Most people think the law is called the Health Information Privacy  and Protection  Act (or 
something similar)  when  it is actually called the Health Insurance  Portability and 
Accountability Act . But more fundamentally, most people  have an expectation that if they 
share health information with a company, that company is  prohibited from further 
disclosing it without consent. They ’re surp rised to learn that the law  does not meet their 
expectation of privacy. And, in a world where people share health information wi th a 
growing range of companies (think genetic tes ting, fitness apps, WebMD) more and more 
health infor mation is falling outside of HIPAA ’s ambit.  
LD 1902 simply applies HIPAA -like protections to  Mainers ’ health information regardless 
of what type of business holds that information . The State of Washington recently passed 
a similar bill, HB 11 55, and  in my view  Maine would be  wise to follow suit.   
*** 
As I have explained, each of these bills  provides a form of privacy protection that Mainers 
likely assume they already enjoy, and would be surprised to learn that they do not.  I hope 
the Committee will push them forward.  
 
Best Regards,  
Scott Bloomberg  
 
