13181‘ Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Chiprnan 
S M ¢ 3 State House Station 
E11 (ll? Of Q1116 Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
. . Oﬁiee: (Z07) 28711515 
Senate District 28 Benjamin. Ch[pr11an@legislm ‘z1re.znaine. gov 
_Transportotion Comnrittee, Chair 
T oxation Cornnzittee, .Member 
Testimony of Senator Ben Chipman introducing LD 1320, “An Act to Improve Signature 
Requirements for Candidates by Allowing Unenrolled Voters to Sign Petitions for Party 
Candidates.” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
April 28, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Ben Chipman and I represent Senate 
District 28, which includes part of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 1320, “An Act to Improve 
Signature Requirements for Candidates by Allowing Unenrolled Voters to Sign Petitions for 
Party Candidates. ” 
This legislation would add unemolled voters to those eligible to sign onto primary petitions for 
party candidates. This new stipulation would apply to all elections held in Maine. 
As the law stands now, only those who are enrolled in the same party as the candidate can sign 
their petition to get on the ballot. lt is an infringement on one’s voting rights to only allow 
certain voters to sign a party candidate ’s petition. Unem'olled voters should be allowed to have 
their voice heard as to who they think should be on the ballot. 
Unenrolled voters are allowed to vote in primaries under Title 21-A, section 341, therefore it 
stands to reason that unenrolled voters should also be able to sign petitions of party candidates, 
those that they may vote for later on. While signing petitions is multiple steps removed from 
casting a vote in an election, it is still an opportunity for an individual to have a voice. 
Democracy only functions when the people are able to participate in the political process. 
Unenrolled voters are equal members of our democracy, but are prevented from a key part of the 
election process. This legislation would remove this barrier to allow all voters to be involved at 
each stage of the political process. By passing this legislation, we are protecting the integrity of 
our democracy. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Fax; (207) 287-1585 * TTYUZ Message Service 1~800~423-69()(} * legislature.Inainegov ﬁsenate
