Fred McCann (207) 209-3413       fred@fredmccann.com  244 Danforth Street, Apt 1 Portland, Maine 04102 Testimony of Fred McCann In Support of LD 1320, An Act to Improve Signature Requirements for Candidates by Allowing Unenrolled Voters to Sign Petitions for Party Candidates Before the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs April 28th, 2023 Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Fred McCann. I’ve resided in Portland for the past twelve years and I’m currently serving on the Portland Water District Board of Trustees. I appreciate the opportunity to speak in support of LD 1320, An Act to Improve Signature Requirements for Candidates by Allowing Unenrolled Voters to Sign Petitions for Party Candidates. In 2021 the legislature passed An Act To Establish Open Primaries with overwhelming majorities in the house and senate. It became law in 2022 which instituted semi-open primaries in the state of Maine. Over 33% of registered voters in the state of Maine are unenrolled. Their taxes pay for primary elections. An Act To Establish Open Primaries granted them the right to vote in primary elections but it did not give them the right to fully participate in primaries. While unenrolled voters may cast a vote on a primary ballot starting in 2024, they are unable to sign primary petitions to help decide which candidates will be on the ballot. The majority of Maine legislative races are determined by primary. The legislature instituted semi-open primaries because our shared values and our commitment to increasing participation in the political process demanded that we give unenrolled voters an equal opportunity to vote in those primaries. By that same reasoning, unenrolled voters ought to be able to sign primary petitions to place candidates on those primary ballots. I urge you to support LD 1320 to make elections in Maine more inclusive and to give unenrolled voters an equal voice. Thank you for considering this important reform to our voting system. Sincerely,  Fred McCann
