 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
Expressing concern for  LD 154 1, An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements for 
Health Care Providers   
 
Thursday, April 27, 2023 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 220   
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
 
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse, President of the Maine State Nurses 
Association, Vice -President of National Nurses United, and a resident of Brewer.  The 
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses Organizing Committee/National 
Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state 
of Maine , offers this testimony  expressing concern for  LD 1541 .  
 
Strong certificate of need laws support  effective health care planning  and access to cost -
effective services . For example, c ertificate of need laws  limit  corporations ’ ability to  
selectively target only the most -profitable patient groups , such as those covered by 
private insurance,  leaving  other  health care facilities to cover uninsured patients and 
those with public insurance.  Similarly , certificate of need laws limit corporations’ ability  
to siphon off profitable service  lines from hospitals that provide a variety services . For 
example,  corporations may attempt to siphon off lucrative orthopedic surgeries or 
cardiac procedures by  opening ambulatory surgery centers  or specialty hospitals . 
 
For these reasons, MSNA/NNU urges committee members to thoughtfully consider the 
implications before making any changes to Maine’s certificate of need law . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United  

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1541
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
Expressing concern for LD 1541, An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements 
for Health Care Providers
Thursday, April 27, 2023 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 220
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse, President of the Maine State 
Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a resident of 
Brewer. The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses Organizing 
Committee/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and 
caregivers across the state of Maine, offers this testimony expressing concern for LD 
1541.
Strong certificate of need laws support effective health care planning and access to 
cost-effective services. For example, certificate of need laws limit corporations’ 
ability to selectively target only the most-profitable patient groups, such as those 
covered by private insurance, leaving other health care facilities to cover uninsured 
patients and those with public insurance. Similarly, certificate of need laws limit 
corporations’ ability to siphon off profitable service lines from hospitals that provide 
a variety services. For example, corporations may attempt to siphon off lucrative 
orthopedic surgeries or cardiac procedures by opening ambulatory surgery centers or 
specialty hospitals.
For these reasons, MSNA/NNU urges committee members to thoughtfully consider 
the implications before making any changes to Maine’s certificate of need law.
Sincerely,
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United
