l\/lll—|A Maine Hospital Association 
MA|NE'S LEADING 
VOICE FOR HEALTHCARE 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION 
In Opposition To 
LD 1541 — An Act T 0 Repeal the Certificate of Need Requirement for Hospitals 
LD 1554 - An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements for Health Care Providers 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Brakey, Representative Hymanson, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Jeffrey Austin and I am here on behalf of the Maine Hospital Association. 
I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 1541 and LD 1554. 
The Maine Hospital Association represents all 36 community-govemed hospitals that include 34 
non-proﬁt general acute care hospitals, 2 private psychiatric hospitals, and l acute rehabilitation 
hospital. In addition to acute care hospital facilities, our hospitals represent home health agencies, 
skilled nursing facilities, nursing facilities, residential care facilities, and physician practices. 
Legislation repealing Maine’s Certiﬁcate of Need program is a biennial issue for this committee. 
This bill is similar to the repeal bills from 2021 (LDs 931, 932, 935, 927 and 1004), 2017 (LD 
482), 2015 (LD 734); 2013 (LD 162) and 2011 (LD 360). 
In 2011, this Committee initiated signiﬁcant changes to the CON program in Maine. MHA 
supported those changes. What’s leﬁ is a debate about full repeal and we do not believe that full 
repeal is the right policy for Maine. We recommend that you oppose this legislation. 
Policy Challenge 
Before any medical care provider in Maine may make a signiﬁcant investment in health care 
infrastructure, the provider must ﬁrst obtain a “Certiﬁcate of Need” from the Department of Health 
and Human Services (DHHS). The purpose of “Certiﬁcate of Need,” or CON, is to review the 
proposal in light of existing infrastructure to determine the impact of the proposal on health care 
spending in the community.
The supporters and opponents of CON are after the same thing — lower health care spending. The 
difference is in the strategy employed to achieve that goal. There are two primary aspects to total 
health care spending: 
Volume of Services x Price Per Service = Total Spending 
Supporters of CON laws, believe CON laws moderate the volume of services by restricting 
oversupply. Opponents of CON laws believe that restricting supply increases the price per service. 
This is the tension on CON laws. I don’t know if CON really does either. 
Background 
The concept of Certiﬁcate of Need (CON) originated with the federal govemment in the early 
1970s. Most states followed-suit by the end of the decade. The federal government repealed its 
CON law in 1986. States have generally modiﬁed their CON laws since 1986 but at least 36 still 
have a CON law applying to at least some capital expenditures (according to the National 
Conference of State Legislatures). Maine enacted its CON law in 1977 and it has seemingly been 
reviewed, revised and otherwise tinkered with ever since. The last major revision to CON took 
place last session. 
The CON process is basically a pennitting system where a hospital applies to the Department of 
Health and Human Services for permission to make an investment. The state can approve the 
request, deny it, or approve it with conditions. The vast majority of CON applications are granted 
(according to the Administration ’s testimony a few years ago, 95% of applications were granted). 
Proponents of repealing CON often claim, without producing any evidence by the way, that CON 
laws “block” competition. At least with respect to hospitals, we are not aware of any proposal for 
major surgical center, imaging center, lab or hospital that was denied by the CON process. 
Accordingly, it is more appropriate to think of CON as a check on development rather than a block. 
But, we believe the review process is positive. The process is not always easy and the process 
does not always produce results (projects) that are accurate. But, there it is a public process, where 
members of the community, large payers and others can understand, and where appropriate, 
comment on a major investment in health care infrastructure. 
Previous Reviews 
There are a number of prior reviews of CON if you want in-depth information. Our ﬁles have 
state reports from 1998, and 2001. There is a signiﬁcant Federal Trade Commission review from 
2004. The Legislature has all of these reports, and undoubtedly more, in previous committee ﬁles. 
Regulatory Overview 
There is a CON implementing rule (Chapter 503). There is a distinct CON unit at DHHS with its 
own webpage. The CON unit does an annual report on CON activity in Maine.
CON Statutes 
CON applies to both nursing homes and medical care facilities (e. g. hospitals). 
There are 5 basic triggers in the CON law that necessitates DHHS review. 
1. Transfer of Ownership or Control. 
If a “health care facility ” that provides medical care is going to be sold, the CON laws 
require that a certiﬁcate be issued ﬁrst. 
2. Acquisitions of Major Medical Equipment. 
- Medical Equipment over $4.5 M in value (doubled in 2011 and adjusted by inﬂation 
since) 
3. Capital Expenditures. 
- $14M (tripled in 2011 and adjusted by inﬂation since) 
4. New Health Service. 
- Capital Costs associated with NHS $4.2M (increased tenfold in 2011 plus inﬂation 
since) 
- Operating Costs associated with NHS $1.4M (increased 150% in 2011 plus inﬂation 
since) 
- New Technology associated with NHS $4.5M (doubled in 2011 plus inﬂation since) 
5. New Health Facility. 
- Capital Costs $3M 
As you can see, these are much higher standards than existed prior to the 125"‘ Legislature. 
Standard of Review 
Essentially, the review conducted by the CON unit of DHHS considers whether the applicant can 
provide the service and whether the area needs the service. 
0 The applicant must be “ﬁt, willing and able.”; 
0 The project must be “economically feasible ”; 
0 There must be a “public need” (§335(7)(C)); and, 
v The project’s sensibility in terms of: (i) overall cost to system, (ii) potential cost to state 
government, and, (iii) whether there were less costly alternatives (§335(7)(D)). 
These are obviously bulleted summaries of terms of art for which greater meaning has developed 
over the years. DHHS has also adopted rule changes that refonn the bureaucratic process of CON 
and we believe the changes made were positive.
Arguments For Maine’s CON Law Regime 
Let me brieﬂy identify our primary arguments in support of CON. 
1. The Health Care Industry is Not a Classically Competitive Marketplace. 
The argument for repeal of CON is clothed in the appealing call of free markets: ‘Let the 
marketplace decide need.’ ‘Hospitals are just aﬁaid of competition. ’ The free market is the best 
mechanism we’ve ever had to allocate resources and guide investment. Hospitals share the 
concems of many about government control of the marketplace. 
However, the hospital sector of the health care industry is a very distorted free market. 
At the most basic level, hospitals don’t set their prices for the vast majority of their customers. 
The government ﬁxes prices for Medicaid and Medicare patients. That government control 
wouldn’t necessarily be a problem; however, the prices are ﬁxed at approximately 85% of costs 
(Medicare) and 76% of cost (Medicaid). What rational industry receives less than cost for the 
majority of their customers. 
Furthermore, for another 2% of customers hospitals are compelled by law to charge nothing - 
hospitals must provide free care to Mainers below 150% of the poverty level under state law. Other 
providers do not. There is no level playing ﬁeld between hospitals and other providers Hospitals 
are obligated to see Medicaid patients. Private providers are not. 
Private doctors can, and some do, close their doors to Medicaid patients (or limit their caseloads) 
and hospitals are forced to provide the bulk of care to these patients. 
Hospitals then have to increase their prices to privately insured patients to cover the losses from 
providing care to Medicaid patients. This is a signiﬁcant, government-created, distortion in the 
market. There is a direct correlation between the prices a hospital charges and its volume of 
government (Medicaid/Medicare) patients. The higher a Maine hospital ’s share of govemment- 
funded patients. . .the higher the corresponding prices that hospital must charge to private insurers. 
If CON is repealed in the name of the free market, then private providers should be obligated to 
play by the same rules as hospitals — or else there is no level playing ﬁeld. lt’s just not fair to 
pursue only some changes to the health care regulatory regime in the name of competition. 
2. Hospitals are Not Like Other Businesses 
Hospitals provide vital services that a community must have, including: emergency care, 
rnatemity care, primary care as well as mental health and substance abuse services. Unfortunately, 
these services are under-reimbursed by our current payment systems. Consequently, hospitals 
need to provide other services that can help defray the costs of these essential components of our 
health care system.
Brieﬂy consider just one of these services, emergency care. Emergency care is essentially a stand- 
by service. It’s not a principal means to deliver health care, but an emergency department that can 
handle a broad range of medical crisis is essential. Payers do not make “stand by” payments to 
hospitals to fund the existence of emergency departments. Hospitals only get paid when the 
emergency department is in use. A rational marketplace would either: close underutilized, 
expensive and oﬁen loss-producing emergency departments or involve costs to patients that are 
far in excess of what they are even today. 
There is no private sector appetite to compete with hospitals to provide 24/hour per day, 365 day 
per year, full-service emergency room services. Urgent care centers is urban centers during normal 
business hours, maybe. States without CON laws do not see growth in emergency room providers. 
Instead, private sector providers want to cherry-pick and compete with hospitals on the services 
that do provide adequate reimbursement (e.g., surgery and imaging) in parts of the state where 
they can make proﬁts. They are happy to leave the services with much thinner margins, like 
primary care for Medicaid patients to hospitals. They are happy to ignore poorer, more nlral parts 
of Maine. If one assumes hospitals will not close their doors and go out of business — which does 
happen in free markets — then the hospital will have to make-up any revenue it loses to competition 
in the surgical and imaging markets. How does this lower health care costs? 
Conclusion 
Thank you for taking the time to review this material. We respect the goal of these bills, which is 
to lower health care costs. Generally speaking, we also agree that market competition isa 
dependable method to reduce costs. However, health care markets have signiﬁcant distortions, 
many of which are caused or created by the government. Private providers are not obligated to 
compete on a level playing ﬁeld with hospitals in Maine. Maine’s CON law cannot be shown to 
be a signiﬁcant deterrent to investment. The proponents are relying on a sound theory, market 
competition as a vehicle to reduce cost, but they are incorrectly applying it to health care.
