 
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services  
FROM: Coralie Giles, President of the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice President of 
National Nurses United, and resident of Brewer  
RE: Support for LD 1396  
DATE: Mon day, April 24, 2023  
 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
In SUPPORT of: LD 1396, An Act to Clarify the Laws Regarding De legating Authority 
for Services Performed by Emergency Medical Services Personnel or Others as a 
Medical Assistant  
 
Public Hearing: Tuesday, April 25, 2023 at 10:00 AM, Cross Building, Room 220  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished membe rs of the Joint Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
 
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse  of nearly 45 years , President of the 
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice -President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony today supporting LD 1396 on behalf of Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), represen ting 
4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine . On behalf of MSNA/NNU, I ask 
for your “Yes” vote for LD 1396.  
LD 1396 would ensure that both patients in health facilities and patients waiting for 
emergency services receive  the full attention of dedicated health care  workers . LD 1396 
would clarify that a person licensed as an emergency medical services person can perform 
services delegated by a physician or physician’s assistant in a health facility , as long as the  
services do not  require a license, registration , or certification to perform  that the 
Emergency medical services (EMS) person lacks . Additionally, the same person cannot 
simultaneously work under their EMS license and as  a medical assistant performing 
delegated tasks .  
 
EMS  person nel must be available to respond to emergencies  immediately . Working as a  
medical assistant in a health care facility is not compatible with that level of availability. 
Hospitals and health facilities need staff dedicated to patient care in the facility for the duration 
  
of their shifts. LD 1396 would protect the safety of workers  and  patients by ensuring that 
staff  can focus on one job at a time.  
 
LD 1396 would also amend the laws on delegation by physicians and physician assistant s to ensure that activities being delegated do not require a license  and that  the 
delegating physician or  physician assistant en sure s the staff performing the delegated 
activities have the appropriate training and perform the activities competently and safely. MSNA/NNU supports these provisions to make it clear that a licensed health 
care professional retains  the ultimate responsibility for any delegated medical care 
activities and is responsible for ensuring that delegation is safe and appropriate.  
 The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for accepting our comments  and asks for your “Yes” vote . 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United 

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1396
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services 
FROM: Coralie Giles, President of the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice 
President of National Nurses United, and resident of Brewer
RE: Support for LD 1396
DATE: Monday, April 24, 2023 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
In SUPPORT of: LD 1396, An Act to Clarify the Laws Regarding Delegating 
Authority for Services Performed by Emergency Medical Services Personnel or 
Others as a Medical Assistant
Public Hearing: Tuesday, April 25, 2023 at 10:00 AM, Cross Building, Room 220 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse of nearly 45 years, President of the 
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony today supporting LD 1396 on behalf of 
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 
4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine. On behalf of MSNA/NNU, I 
ask for your “Yes” vote for LD 1396.
LD 1396 would ensure that both patients in health facilities and patients waiting for 
emergency services receive the full attention of dedicated health care workers. LD 
1396 would clarify that a person licensed as an emergency medical services person 
can perform services delegated by a physician or physician’s assistant in a health 
facility, as long as the services do not require a license, registration, or certification to 
perform that the Emergency medical services (EMS) person lacks. Additionally, the 
same person cannot simultaneously work under their EMS license and as a medical 
assistant performing delegated tasks. 
EMS personnel must be available to respond to emergencies immediately. Working as
a medical assistant in a health care facility is not compatible with that level of 
availability. Hospitals and health facilities need staff dedicated to patient care in the 
facility for the duration of their shifts. LD 1396 would protect the safety of workers 
and patients by ensuring that staff can focus on one job at a time. 
LD 1396 would also amend the laws on delegation by physicians and physician 
assistants to ensure that activities being delegated do not require a license and that the 
delegating physician or physician assistant ensures the staff performing the delegated 
activities have the appropriate training and perform the activities competently and 
safely. MSNA/NNU supports these provisions to make it clear that a licensed health 
care professional retains the ultimate responsibility for any delegated medical care 
activities and is responsible for ensuring that delegation is safe and appropriate. 
The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for
accepting our comments and asks for your “Yes” vote.
Sincerely,
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United

