st/ma or MAINE 
<~ .-t. B OARD OFLICENSURE IN M EDICINE Ma’°“"*‘ S-G'ea‘°"-MD" 
cums 
_ 137 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. Q- 4,, '4 
- AUGUSTA. MAINE Dennis E. Smith, JD - 
“Y :¢=%~<‘ “’\'!*'“" 
() 4 3 3 3 _ Q 1 3 7 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Janet T. Mills
p 
GOVERNOR Tlmothy E. Terranova 
ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR -I-T I\I‘ 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Peny, Chair 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Stati'o'n" 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 1396 — ‘fAn Act to Clarify the Laws Regarding Delegating Authority for Services Performed 
by Emergency Medical Services Personnel or Others as a Medical Assistant ” 
Dear Senator Bailey and Representative Pen'y: 
L;/vs' 
The Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine (“BOLIM”) licenses and regulates allopathic physicians and 
physician assistants in Maine. BOLIM is composed of ll members: 6 physicians who actively practice 
medicine; 2 physician assistants who actively render medical services; and 3 public members. BOLIM’s 
mission is to protect the public by ensuring its licensees are ethical, professional and competent. It fulﬁlls 
this mission by licensing, regulating, and educating physician and physician assistants. 
BOLIM offers the following comments neither in support of nor against LD 1396: 
LD 1396 proposes statutory changes based upon recommendations in a report submitted to the 
Committee pursuant to Public Law 2021, chapter 587. That law added “or health care facility ” to 
provisions of 32 M.R.S. § 85, and also: 
1. Ensured that a previously authorized pilot project in Jackman, Maine known as “the Maine EMS 
Critical Access Integrated Paramedic (CAIP) Pilot Project” would be permitted to continue 
notwithstanding any other provision of law “for so long as the project remains approved by the 
Emergency Medical Services ’ Board.” 
, ..I .2" , 1.. 
2. Directed the Board of Licensure in Medicine (BOLIM) and the Board of Osteopathic Licensure 
(BOL), in consultation with the Emergency Medical Services ’ (EMS) Board and interested 
stakeholders, to develop guidance regarding the delegation of medical tasks by physicians and 
physician assistants to persons “acting contemporaneously pursuant to a contractual arrangement as 
a medical assistant under delegated authority and as an emergency medical services person... [and] 
submit a_re_port including the guidance and any recommendations for statutory changes to the joint 
standing committee ’ of the Legislature having jurisdiction over physician licensing matters no later 
than January 31, 2023.” 
The BOLIM and BOL established a workgroup to review the issues and receive input from interested 
stakeholders and the staff of EMS. Following consultation with interested stakeholders and EMS staff, 
BOLIM and BOL issued a report to the Committee that included recommendations for changes to the
.
l
l -4 
statutes of EMS, BOLIM and BOL. A copy of the report is attached to this letter. The recommended 
changes to the statutes clarify that: 
1. A person is either acting within their scope of practice as a licensed EMS professional or they are 
acting as a medicali assistant acting under the delegation of a physician or physician assistant — they 
cannot do both concurrently (i. e. at the same time). 
2. There are limitations on What activities relating to medical care and treatment thata 
physician/physician assistant can delegate. Those limitations include: 
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, a physician/physician assistant cannot delegate activities 
that require a license or registration to perform (i.e. taking radiographs); 
b. A physicians ’/physician must have the appropriate training/experience to perform the 
activities being delegated; 
c. A physician/physician assistant must ensure that the person to Whom activities are delegated 
has appropriate training, education, or experience to perform the activities; and 
d. A physician/physician assistant must ensure that the person to Whom activities are delegated 
performs them competently and safely. 
In addition, the recormnended changes to the BOL statute would eliminate the word “direct” when 
referring to physician control over delegated activities in order to make it consistent with the language 
regarding delegation in the BOLIM statute and to account for situations Where physicians delegating 
activities may not be physically present at the location where activities are being performed (i.e.a 
telehealth visit).- 
BOLIM would likeato thank the committee for accepting the report and moving the recommendations 
forward. ,
_ 
Thank you f opportunity to provide these comments regarding LD 1396.
/ 
Since , /' 
Dennis E. Smith, J .D._ 
Executive Director
2
,_.=* 5. 
' 
"1 ~ .-\ 
4 , ,-\ 
BOARD OF LICENSURE IN MEDICINE BOARD OF OSTEOPATHIC LICENSURE Marouila S. Gleaton, M.D., Chair Janet T. Mills Melissa Michaud, PA-C, Chair 
137 State House Station GOVENOR 142 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0137 Augusta, ME 04333~O142 
httQs://www.maine.gov/md/ httgsz/lwww.mainegovlosteo/home 
January 27, 2023 
Senator Donna Baily, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Report :5 the Committee Pursuant to LD 1858 An Act Regarding Delegating Authority for 
Services Performed by Emergency Medical Services Personnel in Health Care Facilities 
Dear Senator Baily, Representative Peny, and members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services: 
On April 12, 2022, LD 1858 was enacted into law. That law added “or health care facility ” to provisions 
of 32 M.R.S. § 85, and also: 
1. Ensured that a previously authorized pilot project in Jackman, Maine known as “the Maine EMS 
Critical Access Integrated Paramedic (CAIP) Pilot Project” would be permitted to continue 
notwithstanding any other provision of law “for so long as the project remains approved by the 
Emergency Medical Sen/ices ’ Board.” 
2. Directed the Board of Licensure in Medicine (BOLl1\/I) and the Board of Osteopathic Licensure 
(BOL), in consultation with the Emergency Medical Services ’ (EMS) Board and interested 
stakeholders; to develop guidance regarding the delegation of medical tasks by physicians and 
physician assistants to persons “acting contemporaneously pursuant to a contractual arrangement as 
a medical assistant under delegated authority and as an emergency medical services person... [and] 
submit a report including the guidance and any recommendations for statutory changes to the joint 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over physician licensing matters no later 
than January 31, 2023.” 
The BOLIM and BOL established a Workgroup to review the issues and receive input from interested 
stakeholders and the staff of EMS. Following consultation with interested stakeholders and EMS staff, 
BOLIM and BOL issue the following guidance:
l
I. Background.g 
A. Physician/Physician Assistant Delegation — BOLIM and BOL Laws. 
For four decades, the laws in Maine have authorized physicians licensed by BOLl1\4[ and BOL to 
delegate certain activities relating to medical care and treatment to medical assistants. ‘ In 2015 the 
Legislature expanded this authority to delegate these activities to physician assistants. 32 M.R.S. §§ 
2594-E(4),3270-.E(4).7 
Medical assistants are not licensed by BOLH\/l and BOL and receive education and training either 
directly by the physician: or physician assistant or by other means, such as a medical assistant course. The 
type of training provided ‘ts medical assistants depends upon the nature of the medical practice in which 
they Work — as do the types of medical acts that may be delegated. Because the practice of medicine and 
the provision of medical services is complex and includes numerous specialties and subspecialties as 
well as different methods of delivery (e.g., in person or via telehealth) it would be impossible to identify 
and categorize all of the different types of activities that may be performed by a medical assistant under 
delegation for all practice types and all settings. 
.»»' 
It is important to note that currently the applicable statutes, as interpreted by BOLIM and BOL. limita 
physician ’s and physician assistant ’s ability to delegate activities related to medical care and treatment in 
four signiﬁcant ways: 
1. The activities related to medical care and treatment being delegated must be of the type that are 
carried out by custom and usage. While the law does not deﬁne the terms custom and usage, 
BOLIM and BOL have interpreted this language to mean that activities may be delegated if those 
activities have traditionally been delegated and they are Widely accepted in the practice setting that 
the activities ‘ ailéltlélegable. In other words, the activities may be delegated if it is the customary 
practice that they"ar'é ‘tlelegated in those circumstances. Typical activities performed by a medical 
assistant may include communication with and the scheduling of patients, recording certain parts of 
an ofﬁce visit in medical documentation, and taking patient vital signs. 
2. If the activities being delegated would require a state license, registration, or certiﬁcation to perform, 
then the activity cannot be delegated. For example, a physician or physician assistant cannot 
delegate to a medical assistant the activity of taking radio graphs of patients as that requires speciﬁc 
education anditraiining and a license to perform radiologic technology in order to safely expose 
patients to ionizing radiation. 
3. The activities being delegated must be under the control of the physician or surgeon or under 
control of the physician assistant. The law does not deﬁne the tenns under the control of and would 
allow either direct (on-site) or indirect (remote/telehealth) control. At a minimum, BOLIM and BOL 
interpret these terms to mean that a physician or physician assistant delegating activities must be 
aware of the nature and scope of activities being delegated, ensures that the medical assistant has the 
appropriate training and education to safely and competently perform the delegated activities, and 
ensures that the activities were performed competently and safely. 
' 
BOLIM’s statute authorizing physician delegation is 32 M.R.S. § 3270-A 
https://legislaturemaine.gov/statutes/32/title32sec3270-A.html. BOL’s statute authorizing physician delegation is 32 
M R.S. § 2594-A https://legislaturemaine.gov/statutes/32/title32sec2594-A.html.
2
4. While not explictitlystated in the law, BOLIM and BOL interpret the law to implicitly require that 
the physician or physician assistant delegating the activity must be competent to perform the activity 
being delegated. As an extreme example, a physician or physician assistant could not delegate the 
activity of intubating a patient if they are unable to do so because they would be unable to ensure 
that the procedure was being done correctly and safely — a requisite for activity to be under the 
control of the physician or physician assistant. 
It is also important to e note that the law makes the physician or physician assistant delegating activities 
relating to medical- ‘cafe and treatment to medical assistants legally liable for the activities of those 
individuals. This includes at least: 
1. Civil/criminal liability -+ A physician/physician delegating activities relating to medical care and 
treatment are subject to medical malpractice actions for activities delegated to and perfonned bya 
medical assistant. ' ' 
2. Professional liability —‘ 
A physician/physician assistant delegating activities relating to medical care 
and treatment ﬁaresubject to investigation and possible discipline by BOLIM or BOL for activities 
delegated to and performed by a medical assistant. 
The expressly stated legal liability outlined in the law should ensure that physicians and physician 
assistants contemplating delegating an activity to a medical assistant ensure that the activity is one that is 
performed by custom and usage, is appropriately under their control, and that the medical assistant is 
appropriately trained to safely perform the activity. 
In conclusion, while BOL_Il\/I and BOL laws authorize physicians and physician assistants to delegate 
activities related to medical care and treatment, the law explicitly and implicitly places reasonable 
limitations upon that authority and imposes the ultimate legal liability and responsibility upon the 
delegating physician or physician assistant. 
B. Physician/Physician Assistant Delegation — EMS Laws. 
According to information provided by the stakeholders during the Workgroup meetings, EMS licensed 
personnel have beenpniployed as medical assistants by physicians and health care facilities for many 
years. Reportedly 30% EMS personnel Work as medical assistants under delegation of a physician ina 
private practice or hospiitaliemergency department. In addition, hospitals reportedly allow medical 
assistants to perform activities related to medical care and treatment that exceed the scope of practice of 
an Emergency Medical Technician. 
In 2019 and 2021, the Legislature amended the EMS law to make clear that licensed EMS personnel 
could not be prohibited ﬁom rendering medical services in a hospital or other health care facility setting 
if the person was anemployee of the hospital or health care facility, the activity being delegated was 
authorized by the hospital or health care facility, and the medical services were delegated by a physician 
pursuant to BOLlM’s or BOL’s laws? 
C. LD 1858. 
The reported impetus for LD 1858 as originally drafted was to ensure that persons who have been 
employed as medical assistants and Working under delegation in non-hospital and non- health care 
2 32 M.R.S. § 85(7) hitpsi‘ //legislature.maine.gov/statutes/32/title32sec85.h1ml.
3
facilities (i.e. private medical practices) for years — and who also happen to have an EMS license — were 
not prohibited by EMS law from continuing to do so. Due to concerns expressed by EMS staff regarding 
LD 185 8, the Committee passed the amended version and directed this review and report. 
II. BOLIM and BOL Guidance and Recommendations. 
A. EMS and BOLIM/BOL laws should be clear that a person is either acting within their scope of 
practice as a licensgd EMS professional or they are acting as a medical assistant acting under the 
delegation of aphysiiiian or physician assistant3 — they cannot do both concurrently (i. e. at the same 
time). ' HI' 
For example, a EMT on an ambulance run with a patient pursuant to their EMS license cam1ot— at the 
same time and moment — act as a medical assistant under the delegation of a physician and perform a 
service that is not within the scope of their EMT license. While BOLIM and BOL believe that the law is 
already clear on this point, EMS staff conveyed concerns about it — to include the preceding hypothetical 
situation. ._' 
Recommendation 1: The Committee may want to consider adding language to the EMS statute to require 
photo identiﬁcation badges be worn to identify the individual either as an EMS licensee or as a medical 
assistant and unless otherwise provided by law4 include language that EMS licensees cannot 
simultaneously act as EMS~licensed personnel and a medical assistant under delegation. 
B. BOLIM/BOL laws regarding delegation should fully align. The BOLIM law regarding delegation by 
physicians and physician assistants requires “control” while BOL’s law regarding physician assistants 
requires “controP~ ’*‘b“€t3p'l1ysician delegation requires “direct control. ”
' - I ‘-’ I11-a-. 
Recommendation 2: The Committee may want to consider amending BOL ’s statute 32 MR.S. § 2594-A 
to delete the word -“direct” when referring to physician control of activities being delegated. The term 
“direct” does not appear in BOLIM’s statute and implies that the delegating physician must be 
physically present which could impact access to care by patients who are seen in rural locations without 
a physician on site via telehealth. 
C. The EMS stat1.1t'e"'lii ‘nits delegation of activities to EMS-licensed personnel to physicians. Both 
BOL]M’s and BOL’s statutess speciﬁcally provide physician assistants with the authority to delegate 
activities related to medical care and treatment to medical assistants. 
Recommendation The Committee may want to consider amending the EMS statute regarding 
delegation to include references to BOLIM’s and BOL ’s laws regarding physician assistant delegation. 
D. BOLIM and BOL laws regarding delegation could be further clariﬁed by adding language to 
explicitly includespect ﬁc limitations. 
' 
H - VSLV. 
Recommendation 4: The Committee may want to consider amending BOLIM and BOL statues regarding 
delegation as follows: 
3 
As previously indicated, the current EMS statute regarding delegation only refers to physicians. 
4 For example, “The J ackman Project” which authorizes EMS licensed persormel to Work in a clinic pursuant to 
protocols approved by thelEMS Medical Direction Board. 
5 BOLIM’s statute is 32 M.R.S. § 3270-E https://legislaturemaine.gov/statutes/32/title32sec327()-E.html. BOL’s 
statute is 32 M.R.S. § 2594-E https://legislaturemaine.gov/statutes/32/title32sec2594-E.html.
4
X). I I 5‘ 7"’ 
"1" "-'“”;l"l.' .-L. 
Physician Delegation Language: 
Assistants; delegating authority 
This chapter may not be construed as prohibiting a physician or surgeon ﬁom delegating to the 
physician's or surgeon's employees or support staﬂ’ certain activities relating to medical care and 
treatment carried out by custom and usage when the activities are under the control of the physician or 
surgeon, the activities being delegated do not — unless otherwise provided by law — require a State 
license. registration or certiﬁcation to perform. the physician has the appropriate training or experience 
to perform the activities being delegated, the physician ensures that the person being delegated the 
activities has the appropriate training, education. or experience to perform the delegated activities. and the physician ensures that the person to whom the activities are delegated performs them competently 
and safely. The physician delegating these activities to employees or support staﬁf to program graduates 
or to participants in an approved training program is legally liable for the activities of those individuals, 
and any individual in this relationship is considered the physician's agent. This section may not be 
construed to applyrtoregistered nurses acting pursuant to chapter 3] and licensed physician assistants 
acting pursuant to this chapter and chapter 36. 
When the delegated activities are part of the practice of optometry as defined in chapter 34~A, then the 
individual to whom these activities are delegated must possess a valid license to practice optometry in 
Maine, or otherwise may peiform only as a technician within the established oﬁice of a physician, and 
otherwise acting solely on the order of and under the responsibility of a physician skilled in the 
treatment of eyes as designated by the proper professional board, and without assuming evaluation or 
interpretation of examination findings by prescribing corrective procedures to preserve, restore or 
improve vision. 
Physician Assistant Delegation Language: 
Delegation by physician assistant. A physician assistant may delegate to the physician assistantis 
employees or support staﬂor members of a health care team, including medical assistants, certain 
activities relating to medical care and treatment carried out by custom and usage when the activities are 
under the control o[_th_e physician assistant, the activities being delegated do not — unless otherwise 
provided by law — require a State license, registration or certiﬁcation to perform, the person being 
delegated the activities has the appropriate training, education or experience to perform the delegated 
activities, and the physician assistant ensures that the person to whom the activities are delegated 
performs them competently and safely. The physician assistant who delegates an activity permitted under 
this subsection is legally liable for the activity performed by an employee, a medical assistant, support 
staﬁ’ or a member of a health care team. 
-m ii/w»Qs_ 4 I C_,Z:.,,\l~ ')9'3‘Q]' 
,_ 7’ . /B , , 
@4444, _/@x7'-6 
Maroulla S. Gleaton, M.D., Chair Melissa Michaud, PA-C, Chair 
Board of Licensure in Medicine Board of Osteopathic Licensure 
F-1<
5
