 
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY  
MAINE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
152 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  04333  
  
 
JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
 MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK  
COMMISSIONER  
  J. SAM HURLEY  
DIRECTOR  
 
● Excellence  ● Support  ● Collaboration  ● Integrity  ● 
 
PHONE:  (207) 626 -3860   
TTY:  (207) 287 -3659   
FAX:  (207) 287 -6251  
 
With offices located at the Central Maine Commerce Center, 45 Commerce Drive, Suite 1, Augusta, ME  04330  
 
Testimony of J. Sam Hurley, MPH, EMPS, NRP  
Director, Maine Bureau of Emergency Medical Services (Maine EMS)  
Department of Public Safety  
In Opposition of  LD 1396 
“An Act to Clarify the Laws Regarding Delegating Authority for Services Performed by 
Emergency Medical Services Personnel or Others as a Medical Assistant ” 
Presented by  Senator Bail ey of York  
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH COVERAGE, INSURANCE 
AND FINANCIAL SERVICES  
Public Hearing: April 2 5, 2023, at 1:00 P M 
 
Senator B ailey, Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance, and F inancial Services : 
 
My name is Sam Hurley , and I am the Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services, Maine 
EMS, within the Department of Public Safety. I am testifying  on behalf of Maine Department of 
Public Safety and Maine EMS  in opposition of  LD 1396, "An Act to Clarify the Laws Regarding 
Delegating Authority for Servi ces Performed by Emergency Medical Services Personnel or 
Others as a Medical Assistant ” as written.  
 The Board of Li censure in Medicine (BOLIM) and B OL (Board of Osteopath ic Licensure) 
submitted a re port as directed under LD 1858 from the 130
th Legis lature . Maine EMS ’ 
understanding is that the two boards held several meetings; h owever, Maine EMS was only able 
to participate in a sing le meeting  and none of the comments provided  by the EMS Board were 
incorporated into  the final recommendations submitted to this  Committee. The Mai ne EMS 
Page 2 of 3  
 Board Chair, Chief Brent L ibby, shared with this  committee a letter that was communicated to 
the two medical boards that outlined our concerns  on February 9, 2023.  
 
The Board is supportive of explicit language stating that an individual cannot act simultaneously 
as a licensed  healthcare professional and as a medical assistant under delegation.  However, 
Maine EMS is concerned that the proposed language singles out EMS clinicians versus answering a larger question a bout the delegation authority of physician and physic ian assist ants. 
Members of the Maine EMS Board and Maine EMS are supportive of  physicians ’ and physician 
assistant s’ authority to delegate  clinical care to medical assistants and others that falls within 
their training, education, and experience. However , physicians and physician assistants should 
not delegate medical interventions to persons, including EMS clinicians, that exceed the scope of 
practice, as defined by the ir respective licensure board , in situations where they are not 
immediately  available to manage any complications that may ensue. Maine EMS recommends 
that the Committee consider requiring that when physicians and physician assistants are 
delegating to persons beyond their scope of practice that they be present and available to provide 
direct  oversight over the skills that are delegated. This is in no way intended to minimize or 
imped e physicians ’ and physician assistants ’ authority to provide any medical order, with direct 
or indirect control, that falls within the receiving licensee ’s scope of practice. However, when 
those orders exceed the scope  of practice, as  defined by the licensee’ s respe ctive Board, it is 
imperative that the delegating physician or someone equally trained be rea dily available to 
provide support, guidance, and care if there is an unexpected complication or difficul ty.  
 
Lastly,  Maine EMS would like to recommend to the Committee to consider the long- term 
sustainability of the  EMS profession. Instead of having specific carve outs in the Maine EMS 
statutes regarding delegation and defined areas where the EMS Board does not have regulatory 
authority, should we c onsider removing those limitatio ns where a paramedic is a paramedic, no 
matter where they are working within  the S tate of Maine. This would align t he Maine EMS  
Board’s authority with that of the Board of Nur sing, Board of M edicine, and the other healthcare 
professional licensing Boards. It shouldn’ t matter if the EMS professional is working in the back 
of an ambulance or working in an emergency department, they  should remain under the authority 
of the Maine Board of EMS.   
Page 3 of 3  
 Please don ’t hesitate to contact us if you have any additional questions, comments, or concerns 
that we may be able to address. We appreciate the opportunity to present to the committee.  
 
Thank you.  
