482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101    207-347-8638    info@educatemaine.orgThe Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Testimony from Jason Judd, Executive Director, Educate Maine
In Support Of
L.D. 447: “An Act to Support Higher Education in Maine by Providing Funds to Maine’s 
Community Colleges”
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, I am Jason Judd, the Executive Director of Educate Maine, a 
business-led education advocacy organization. In addition, we are one of the founders of the 
MaineSpark Coalition, the state attainment coalition focused on increasing adult education 
attainment to 60% by 2025 to address the needs of our economy. In order to reach this goal, we 
must make sure our learners are not only able to access and afford postsecondary education but 
are also able to complete their credentials of value or degrees. 
This bill will help students who attend Maine’s Community Colleges to finish their degrees and 
be prepared to enter the Maine workforce. Although Maine has invested significantly in helping 
students enroll in community college programs, we must do more to help make sure students 
have the supports to persist from semester to semester and finish their degrees. These supports 
include high quality advising, tutoring, career guidance, and other necessary supports. 
Great Schools Partnership recently released their 2022 Common Data Project report which 
includes essential indicators for high school and postsecondary education across New England. 
In Maine, the percent of students who attend postsecondary education in the fall directly after 
their high school graduation is 52.7% which is a 10% decline over the last five years. This rate is 
also 6% points below the New England average. We need to change this trend since the majority 
of jobs here in Maine require a credential of value or a degree. Unfortunately, the college 
persistence rates for Maine students are usually from 60% to 70%. These rates are usually lower 
for students in community college because of the incredible barriers these students face each day. 
This rate also means we are losing thousands of students each year from higher education who 
do not complete their first credential of value nor college degree. These students are not as 
prepared for the workforce as they could if they were able to finish their degrees or credentials of 
value. This bill could significantly help students in community college persist in their programs 
by providing much needed supports. 
Although we completely support this particular investment in Maine’s Community Colleges, it is 
important to note how essential it is to invest in student supports for Maine’s other higher 
education institutions because they also face the same barriers with their students. I encourage 
the committee to not only support this bill but also discuss how we can expand support for 
students across our higher education community. 
Thank you for your time. I am available for any questions. 
