Good afternoon— 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Liz Oken. I ama 
resident of Auburn. I am here to provide testimony in support of LD 447, An Act 
to Support Higher Education in Maine by Providing Funds to Maine's Community 
Colleges. 
lam also a 20-year employee of the Maine Community College System, serving at 
Central l\/laine Community College as Director_of Placement and Transfer Services. 
To appropriate a famous line from the movie Field of Dreams- 
If you build it, they will come... 
This phrase is apt when describing the meteoric rise of the l\/laine Community 
College System to its rightful place in l\/laine ’s higher education landscape since 
becoming a community college system on July 1, 2003. 
Since then, our technical programs have expanded to support the changing 
technical needs of our state. Our transfer degrees have been established as 
viable pathways to baccalaureate degrees and beyond. The vast expansion of 
Workforce and Professional Development initiatives have provided free training in 
response to the skills needed to grow i\/|aine ’s economy. 
Thanks in large part to past support from the legislature, we have upgraded 
programs, facilities, and instructional technologies. 
Guess what...? We've built lt...and they've come. 
The System is on target to surpass last year's enrollment figures (currently 16,791 
students) and at Cl\/ICC, our applications are up 42.8% compared to this time last 
year. 
Elizabeth (Liz) Oken 
Director of Placement and Transfer Services 
Central Maine Community College 
(207)755-5239 or eoken@cmcc.edu it
l 
y 
iii
lt is clear that additional resources in staffing are needed to help our students 
complete programs, to support the future of our state. With additional 
navigators, tutors, peer mentors, and librarians, we can provide the academic 
support needed to keep pace with our student growth, for students like George, 
who's returned to school after 51 years to re-enter the job market. He attends 
math tutoring each weekday in addition to working with a tutor in math class. 
Additionally, he relies on support and encouragement from two academic 
advisors. 
For students who are struggling, additional disability coordinators, mental health 
support, and scholarships are greatly needed. Professional development for staff 
to identify students with difficulties will help meet the personal needs of our most 
challenged students. 
For our students to be real players in lVlaine's economy, with unprecedented low 
unemployment, an unsustainable situation, we need this additional funding. 
If you build it, they will come... 
Thank you for building the Maine Community College System into all it is today. 
Your enthusiastic support of LD 447 will build the Maine Community College 
System into what we need tomorrow. Thank you. 
Elizabeth (Liz) Oken 
Director of Placement and Transfer Services 
Central Maine Community College 
(207) 755-5239 or eoken@cmcc.edu
