1
  131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 23 
Senator Mattie Daughtry
Assistant Majority Leader
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Mattie Daughtry introducing
LD 447, An Act to Support Higher Education in Maine by Providing Funds to 
Maine’s Community Colleges
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
March 6, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Mattie Daughtry, and I proudly 
represent Senate District 23, which includes Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, 
Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth. Today I am pleased to introduce my bill LD 447, “An 
Act to Support Higher Education in Maine by Providing Funds to Maine’s Community 
Colleges.”
As you know, the Governor allocated funding for a 4.5% increase and additional funds to 
continue the free community college initiative to include the Maine high school graduating 
classes of 2024 and 2025. During the public hearing for the Maine Community College System 
portion of the biennial budget, President Daigler expressed support for the 4.5% and the free 
community college initiative. He also requested an additional $5 million to support student 
success.
To paraphrase President Daigler, this funding would be “crucial” for MCCS to “meet the 
increased emotional, academic, and financial needs of [its] students.” He also explained how 
MCCS’ “non-traditional” students are older, receive some form of grant aid, and are more likely 
to be first-generation college students. In other words, they have many obligations and 
responsibilities, including caring for their children (or finding and affording child care), looking 
after their aging parents (which is something I’m personally starting to do), paying increasing 
rent, and figuring how much gas they can use or groceries they can buy each week. Just standing 
here and listing all these things, I can understand how these students could feel overwhelmed and 
need some extra support.
That’s why I’m presenting this bill to the Committee. LD 447 would provide the $5 million in 
ongoing funding to support student learning and completion at Maine’s Community Colleges. 
More specifically, this initiative would provide funding to support learning and completion for 
students whose education was disrupted by the pandemic and resulted in gaps in learning or 
learning loss. 
2For the $5 million, the Maine Community College System has a detailed, specific funding plan:
$2.1 million would fund 20 additional navigator positions across the system focused on 
student success, career services, and retention.
$1 million would expand tutor positions and peer mentor support at all community 
colleges, specifically in the subjects of math and English.
$280,000 would add four positions in the learning commons to assist with research and 
library needs.
$520,000 would provide six and a half disability coordinator positions to assist students 
who have learning disabilities. It would also support community advocacy resource 
centers on multiple campuses to help students identify needs to be successful and connect 
them to both internal and external resources.
$600,000 would finance better student technology and course materials, renovate study 
and collaboration spaces, expand on-campus housing support, and provide professional 
development for staff focused on how to identify students who are struggling and 
determine barriers to success.
Although the mask mandates and the shutdowns are over, students who went to school during the 
pandemic are still recovering from the very real disruptions to and interruptions in their learning, 
whether it was elementary school or community college. 
Maine lawmakers know what this was like: During the height of the pandemic, we conducted all 
our committee work over Zoom. It was hard sitting in front of a computer screen for hours and 
hours. It was hard not seeing our colleagues and friends in person. It was hard setting up home 
work stations where we could tune into hearings and meetings without any distractions or 
technological glitches. For these students, it was hard – and it continues to be hard. On top of 
that, their learning is vitally important for developing Maine’s workforce. These financial 
investments in MCCS, and the students who enroll in one of its colleges, will literally help 
determine Maine’s future, whether it’s dimmer or brighter. Let’s give these students – these 
future nurses, teachers, and workers – the extra support that they need and deserve. 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
Mattie Daughtry
Assistant Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 23
Brunswick, Freeport, Harpswell, Pownal, Chebeague Island, and part of Yarmouth
