May 4th 2023 
 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair  
Representative Anne Perry, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
 
RE: LD # 303 
Our state has many challenges in healthcare. The largest challenge, the ongoing and pervasive staff 
shortages caused by a corporate healthcare model placing dollars over quality at every turn. My Primary 
Care provider left for Boston after two years, and so did the two that preceded him. I’m on my 7th in 20 
years. Look no further than last year’s Anthem – Maine Health media war. Residents, employees, 
seniors, those on low incomes, continue to be the pawns of their finger pointing exercise. Many feared 
losing providers during their media turf war. Many states have regulatory agency oversight of healthcare 
operations – we do not. While the Bureau of Insurance could exercise their authority over Anthem’s 
Marker Conduct, no agency authority exists for Maine Health.  
This bill assumes a seamless transition of employees who leave or change employment – less than half 
our state’s population; what happens to all the rest? What’s their trigger to move? Allowing numerous 
stakeholders to determine a uniform cost of care – while our current system lacks oversight of the same 
stakeholders.  
How will it handle access to the internationally acclaimed providers in the greater Boston market? 
Germany’s premier provider groups are within their borders, not the case in our state. And how about 
international claims during foreign travel. Do we need to re-invent the system or better regulate the one 
we have? 
The elimination of for-profit Medicare, a program whose outcomes exceed traditional Medicare, is 
literally throwing the baby out with the bath water. Numerous reports, presented in the last several 
years, are readily available from trusted sources such as, American Journal of Managed Care, 
Commonwealth Fund, National Institute of Health, Health Affairs Alliance, JAMA Network, Better 
Medicare Alliance, all support Private Medicare over the public option. Yes, the Feds need to tweak that 
system.  
This state is still reeling and healing from the last administrations’ desire to “fix” healthcare following 
their party’s agenda. I suggest we continue the healing process before literally blowing up the entire 
system and starting again from scratch. Maybe some operational oversight of our corporations 
dominating Maine’s healthcare skyline? 
This should be an OUGHT NOT TO PASS. 
Respectfully,  
Alan Minthorn, Agency Owner 
Maine Senior Insurance, LLC 
207-590-6521 or owner@maineseniorinsurance.com 
Alan Minthorn
ME SR INS LLC
LD 303
Committee Chairs and Members:
Please accept the attached document regarding LD 303. 
