MAINE Assocmrion , 
OF HEALTH Pmus 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 5/9/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 303 
An Act to Provide Health Insurance, Reduce Administrative 
Burdens, Reduce Costs and Improve Health Outcomes 
Senator "Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-profit insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
Our member plans are private and non~profit companies that Work With consumers, employers, 
brokers, policymakers, and other healthcare stakeholders to design insurance products that are 
responsive to the marketplace and adhere to state and federal regulations. 
This collaboration and the competition among the carriers that exist in our private markets are 
centered on providing affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare that improves the health of 
Maine people. 
LD 303 presents a committee with a concept that could only be considered in the context of 
national healthcare reform. It is unworkable at the state level. It would create taxes unique to 
Maine, stifle investment in our insurance markets, and force carriers to abandon the state. 
More than half of Mainers with private insurance — 55.7% according to the Kaiser Family 
Foundation ‘ — and 135 million total Americans are enrolled in self-insured health plans subject to 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act preemption. The Supreme Court has found that, 
through ERISA, Congress acted to federalize plan administration, “to minimize the 
administrative and financial burden of complying with conflicting directives among States or 
between States and the Federal Government. ”2 
1 https:[/www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/share-of-private-sector-e nrollees-enrolled-in-self —insured-plans-20181 
2 https://crsre DO|'tS.CO|'12I'ESS.EOV[_p roductLpdf/LSB/LSB10587 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
The single-state concept proposed by LD 303 would conﬂict directly with Congressional intent and Supreme Court findings. 
Even if we could get the federal changes needed to proceed, the concept should not be pursued at the state level. The federal government sets the uniform contribution rate in Germany, an amount equal to 14.6% of gross income, setting a standard for Germany’s 16 federal states?‘ 
A German-style system implemented at the state level would create a one-of-a-kind income tax regime for Maine workers and employers that would increase the costs of doing business in Maine and put every enterprise operating in our state at a competitive disadvantage. LD 303 would replace employers ’ single largest tax break (health care premiums paid on behalfof employees) with a significant new tax. 
Finally, passing this bill would put Maine on a path toward elirninating private, fully insured markets in Maine and the competition that leads to investment and innovation. Passing LD 303 would immediately create a disincentive for long-term health plan planning in Maine. 
Eventually, private carriers with their expertise and resources would be forced to abandon Maine’s fully insured markets. 
We urge a vote of ought not to pass on LD 303. Thank you. 
3 
hrtps:1/eurohealthobservatorvwho.,int/cgmtries/germany, "Health Systems in Transition, ” p. 88 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
