,, , HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES to 
; 
1»,5 4 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Jane P. Pringle TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
3 Great Falls Road 
Windham, ME 04062 
Phone: (207) 712-2419 
Jane oringle@legislature.maine.gov 
Testimony of Rep. Jane Pringle introducing 
LD 303, An Act to Provide Health Insurance, Reduce Administrative 
Burdens, Reduce Costs and Improve Health Outcomes 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and honorable colleagues on the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee, I am Representative Jane Pringle and I live in and 
represent District 107, part of Windham. I am here to present LD 303, An Act to Provide Health 
Insurance, Reduce Administrative Burdens, Reduce Costs and Improve Health Outcomes. 
We have all heard presentations to this committee about the failings of the U.S. healthcare 
system. We spend almost 20% of our GDP on healthcare and we consistently rank last or near 
last in access, equity, and administrative efﬁciency and health outcomes. 
We are losing healthcare providers to burn out from the administrative burdens which have 
grown exponentially over the past 2 decades. Our hospitals are ﬁnding it harder to be paid for the 
care they provide and patients are facing bankruptcy from healthcare debt. The cost of care and 
the failure to keep our people healthy is a drag on our economy. 
Our belief over the past century that the marketplace and competition is the best way to produce 
the best healthcare has been proven wrong. It is time to recognize that healthcare is a common 
good and that we as a community can ﬁnd a way to solve this problem. 
This bill is a concept draft proposing a path to creating a health insurance system for the state of 
Maine which is equitable, covers everyone, is non-proﬁt and invests in primary care and allows 
patient choice of providers. 
It proposes that we build on the current system of employer based insurance and public 
programs, but it changes the coverage by standardizing the coverage and payments throughout 
the system and makes coverage seamless from employer to employer or when someone is not in 
the workforce. This is the system used in Germany and is referred to as the Bismarck model. 
(See T.R. Reid’s The Healing of America.) 
District I07: Windham (Part)
Maine has already begun to build a system with the ACA marketplace and Clear Choice Design 
Health Plans but these efforts have not been able to eliminate the complexity of contracts 
between various health insurers. Efforts at transparency fail because anti-trust laws keep insurers 
and hospitals from publishing the rates they negotiate with each other. 
I am proposing that we could take the approach used to bring stakeholders together to ﬁnd ways 
to solve the problems we are having with EMS services. 
The bill lists the various stakeholders involved in healthcare in Maine. I believe that this group 
should be able to reach a consensus on the charges for all healthcare services that will enable us 
to develop the uniform “charge master” . I assume that we would need to ask Medicare for 
approval to pilot this Maine health plan. I hope that those with experience in health policy and 
the interplay of Federal and State law can help determine how to transition from for proﬁt health 
plans to a non-proﬁt health plan. 
I believe that it is time for a fundamental change in our approach to health care. It will not be 
easy but it will be lifesaving. 
Thank you for your consideration and I am happy to answer any questions. 
District I07: Windham (Part)
