May 9, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Representative Anne Perry_ 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services;" 
Thank you for the opportunity to share feedback regarding LD 303. I appreciate the intent ofthis bill and 
its goal of providing accessible and equitable health care to all Maine people. l do, however, oppose the 
bill due to concerns about the feasibility of implementing a program as envisioned in the summary 
provided by the sponsor. 
The description of the proposed legislation indicates that it would direct the State to submit a request to 
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Sen/ices (CMS) to approve a statewide health coverage program. 
CMS’s authority to provide waivers to federal law, however, is statutorily limited, and does not extend 
to broad waivers of Medicare law or the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). The 
summary also does not appear to contemplate financing of such a program. In the absence of state 
funding to subsidize coverage, or significant price controls to lower the cost of care for the program, it is 
unlikely that a public option program could produce meaningfully lower premiums or out of pocket 
costs relative to the commercial market, which is subject to a medical loss ratio requirement that limits 
the share of total premiums spent on expenses other than medical claims. 
Last year, the Legislature enacted P.L. 2021 Ch. 518, which directs the Office of Affordable Health Care 
to provide a report to the legislature analyzing several policy options, including the introduction ofa 
public option plan, to this committee by January 1, 2024. I would welcome engaging with the sponsor 
and members of the committee through that process to analyze both the opportunity and challenges 
presented by a public option plan. 
Since rely, 
<-/14?/[,L,.a¢'%4_ 
Meg Garratt-Reed 
Executive Director, Office of Affordable Health Care
