MASS CENTRAL RAIL TRAIL —  
BOSTON TO NORTHAMPTON —104 MILES  
62 Chestnut St. Florence, MA  01062   ׀   CraigDP413@Gmail.com   ׀   413 575 2277   May 13, 2023  
       My name is  Craig Della Penna, I live in Florence, MA and I am writing today in 
support of LD 404 to allow the Mountain Division corridor to become a trail and LD 
1450 to help fund the building of the trail. The best use for the state -owned Mountain 
Division corridor is a wide, paved trail for walkers, bikers, and runners, which will be 
accessible to people of all ages and abilities. This trail extension will connect to the 
existing, nine miles of Mountain Division rail -trail in Fryeburg, Gorham and Windham.   
       Though you are likely to get quite a few other letters of support for these bills, I 
approach this from an entirely different stand point.  
       Early in my professional career, I marketed rail freight and planned the start -up 
and managed the operations of several, large -scale, contemporary transloading facili-
ties.  One of those facilities —over a mile long —was one of the largest in the north-
east.  I actually know how to make a railroad work. However, beyond that, I have a 
background in railroad history and have written a series of books about old rail -lines 
and their conversions to rail trails.  
       Around the turn of the century, I left the railroad industry and worked several 
years for Rails -to-Trails Conservancy as a field representative assisting states and 
communities work through the complicated issues surrounding these conversions.  
Especially the issue of rail vs trail. “Should we remove the rail and make a trail in-
stead? ” That is usually the easiest of the issues to solve. “Does it make economic 
sense to have a RR where it is going to lose money? ”   
       You been wrestling with this for a while now. In fact, about 18 month ago, I spoke 
about this very issue before your task force. My take on the situation hasn ’t changed.  
It really does need to become a trail.  About 20 years ago, Vermont was going 
through the same hand -wringing, stressful community conversation about a 96 mile 
railroad corridor across the rural top of the state. The St. Johnsbury and Lamoille 
County Railroad —ST&LC. That was actually the western end of your Mt. Division 
Railroad.  
       Back then in 2003, I was watching the back and forth letters in newspapers in VT 
over this.  Lots of passion on both sides for sure, but the rail proponents were not on-
ly especially passionate about keeping the rail line,  but they also had some basic 
facts wrong about how a railroad actually worked —financially.  
       I wrote a lengthy op ed piece about the history of why the railroad was there and 
why it didn ’t make sense anymore to operate as a railroad. It had been operating as a 
’pretend ’ railroad for 20 years.  That is to say a railroad that no private entity wanted 
to operate without substantial public participation.   Here ’s a link to the essay.                                       
https://www.norevisionisthistory.org/stj -lc   
        That essay for the Vermont end of this railroad still applies to this day, to your 
end in Maine.  Except for the fact that today, we have much more data on the impact 
of a trail on communities than we had 20 years ago.  Very compelling data.  
 
 
 
              -2- 
 
       All this talk about long trails is very interesting. And the people in the trail world know that this is 
a compelling story, but until now, there hasn ’t been a good, highly credentialed report on what the 
likely experience of a long, finished trail in New England will mean in terms of economic impact.    
And just this past week, our consultants finished a report that provides an answer to the question 
here that has never asked —until now.  “What would a completed Mass Central Rail Trail mean to 
the Commonwealth —and the communities along the way? ”   
         We (Norwottuck Network) then put out a Request for Proposals (RFP) to find a consultant who 
could write a report that would answer the underlying question. Here ’s the RFP that went out last 
summer. https://www.nnnetwork.net/rfp  .  
       We hired a nationally recognized consultant and their work was completed just last week. The 
metrics that have been discovered are compelling.  The MCRT will intersect with 18 other shared -
use paths. There will be 4 -5 million users a year. 960K just in the most rural county — Worcester 
County.  400K overnight visitors will be coming.  It will mean $200 million a year to the Common-
wealth and the communities along the way.  
       Here ’s the link to the report. https://www.nnnetwork.net/the -report  
 
Thanks for the opportunity to weigh -in and good luck in your process.  
 
 
 
 
Craig Della Penna  
Board Chair  

