Doug Smith
Windham
LD 404
William Douglas Smith
Windham Resident for 20 years
LD 404 and LD1405
I write today to ask you to vote OUGHT TO PASS for both LD 404 and LD1405.  
I have been a resident of South Windham for 20 years and live ½ a mile from the 
Mountain Division Trail.  As the trail was built and paved, I have come to use the trail
more and more for walking, biking, and X-country skiing in the winter.  From Spring 
until late Fall my wife and I are on the trail 3+ times a week.  We are not alone.  
There are many other walkers, runners, cyclists, skateboarders, snowmobilers, and 
families with children, baby carriages, and dogs.  It is  a wonderful asset for 
Windham, Gorham, and the region and has become a place to exercise and see 
familiar faces.
This bill effectively extends this trail (connecting existing sections paved in Fryeburg 
and Windham/Gorham/Standish) from South Windham to Fryeburg and into NH.  I 
am totally in favor of having a paved, trail until rail for this 31-mile section.  The idea
that residents of Standish, Steep Falls, Baldwin, Hiram, Brownfield, and Fryeburg 
will experience what we have enjoyed and benefited for over 15 years by having a 
trail instead of dormant, unused and unusable (in its present state) rails is tremendous.
Frankly speaking, building a trail until rail makes sense for many reasons starting 
with: 
•The tracks no longer serve a purpose and, after being studied several times over the
last 15 years by consultants retained by the MaineDOT, show no prospects for being 
revitalized and economically viable in the near and middle term.
•This is the most expedient way to build the trail.
•This is by far the least expensive way to build the trail.  According to the Mountain
Division RUAC Summary and Recommendations report (May, 2022) the cost of 
constructing a paved Trail until Rail is estimated at $ 20.1 million and a rail with a 
trail was at $ 145.8 million over 7x the cost.  
Please vote Ought to Pass for LD404 and LD1450 so Mainers can utilize this precious
resource.
Sincerely,
Doug Smith

