May 18 Testimony by Edward Hanscom of Gardiner to the Joint Transportation Committee against LD 
404: Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendations of the 
Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council 
Legislation over the years in Maine has consistently recognized that the highest and best use of railroad 
corridors is for rail transportation. They were designed and built to provide a uniquely efficient mode of 
transportation for people and goods, a purpose for which they continue to serve and will serve far into 
the future. The Maine Legislature has called on MaineDOT to preserve these lines for future rail use. 
However, the removal of track from any rail corridor, as a practical matter, is the permanent destruction 
of the rail corridor. No Maine rail corridor converted to non-rail use in this way has ever been restored 
to rail service. The history of rail line preservation in Maine has shown that the only effective way to 
preserve lines for future rail use is to leave existing tracks in place. 
The Mountain Division was built to connect the Portland area to New Hampshire, Vermont, and on to 
Montreal, as an interstate transportation corridor in an interstate transportation network. As such, the 
future of the Mountain Division should be a collaborative effort of all three states. Othenivise, 
shortsighted actions by one state or local entity could destroy the potential for future rail uses. The 
New Hampshire portion is operated by the Conway Scenic Railroad. 
So, what has changed in favor of rail service restoration on the Mountain Division in Maine? One is the 
success of the Downeaster passenger rail service. Portland is a growing passenger rail destination, and 
passenger service, seasonal to Conway or year-round for the Greater Portland region is a natural 
complement to existing services that could reduce highway traffic congestion on several inland routes 
radiating from Portland. Another is the fact that Maine is experiencing one of the most sweeping 
changes of ownership and opportunity in the history of New England railroading --- the purchase of Pan 
Am Railways by CSX, the third largest freight railroad in North America. Until 2022, New England was 
largely the domain of regional railroads with very limited geographic reach or financial resources. Now 
that CSX has acquired Pan Am, the single-railroad reach for former Pan Am markets such as Portland 
now extends beyond New England to the entire East Coast, the Midwest, the Mississippi River basin, the 
Gulf Coast, and everything in between. The time and cost efficiencies gained by single-railroad access to 
half of the United States means expanded markets and business opportunities by creating economically 
competitive possibilities that never existed before. The same is true for the Mountain Division. With 
Portland as a CSX hub in Maine, rail freight generated on the Mountain Division could have much 
expanded market potential and benefit the local economy in lasting and meaningful ways --- such as 
new businesses with year-round jobs. The opportunity to capitalize on this transformation of the New 
England railroad landscape should not be missed. Maine's new State Rail Plan forecasts a tripling of rail 
freight traffic in Maine, and presence of CSX will be a major reason. The future of rail in Maine is bright. 
lt’s no time to rip up the tracks on the Mountain Division. 
Conversion of this corridor to a trail will have negligible value for commuting and other everyday travel 
purposes. The distances involved are just too long. National statistics indicate that the average walk 
trip is well under a mile and the average bicycle trip is less than 3 miles. Biking or walking to work along 
this corridor is impractical for all but the most committed cyclists, and any trail that people are driving 
their ca rs and trucks to use is not doing anything to reduce vehicle-miles or fight climate change. 
Reject LD 404. Instead, support LD 406, which recognizes the value of the Mountain Division.
