Hank Walther
Rail Ventures / CVRTC
LD 404
Hank Walther
Silver Lake, NH
LD 404 
Honorable memebers
I strongly urge you to not rip this rail line with the blind short sightness so many other
rail trails have done!
Have you ever considered railbike tours?  There are over 30 very profitable operations
all over our great United States including 2 in New Hampshire and 2 already in your 
own state of Maine! I am in the process of starting my own railbike tour location right
here in Silver Lake, NH and there are many sections along the Mountain Division that
would benefit from such an operation and NO MONEY would need to be spent to 
utilize  any part of the corridor for railbikes.  There are at least 3 locations you could 
have railbike tours that would draw many tourists and tourist dollars in your area 
economy.  Just do some research and look at the dollar numbers other railbike are 
generating!!
I am also a rail car hobbyist and personally bought a home in the area so I would have
access to tracks both the Mountain Div in Maine and the few tracks we can ride here 
in Eastern NH.
The Mountain Division remains one of few places private railcar owners can ride our 
antique railcars, we have worked for years cooperatively with the State on clean up 
efforts and keeping the line open. Snowmobile, ATV,Bikes and walkers have 
THOUSANDS of miles of trail to use. While us tax paying and tourism dollar paying 
railcar owners only have 17 miles in New Hampshire and 28 miles in Maine. Our 
railcar groups , myself included come from out of state and when we visit with our 
machines to the ride the mountain division we buy rooms at your hotels, buy food in 
your restaurants and gas in your gas stations, all in these small towns. Bicycles do not 
bring in this revenue. People can ride bikes and walk at home. The now infamous 
“WoW trail” is a great example of the this failed economic pipe dream in Laconia I 
will personally testify even in the height of summer has no one one i t in certain 
sections other than homeless and drug users. Tourists will not flock there to walk this.
Us railcar users do because it is a unique and historic piece of railroad that we ride. It 
costs NOTHING to keep the rails, in Fryeburg and Westbrook the rail already 
coexists with the trail . There is NO reason to remove them, the rights of way are 
plenty wide enough to put a trail next to the tracks. You can easily make the few 
small bridges passible to both rail and bike traffic. We have been doing this without 
issue on the Wolfeboro line in New Hampshire for 30+ years. In fact we just did a TV
segment on Channel 5 Boston about how successful this has been for all involved. 
Railcars aside, the mountain division serves as an important link for future railroad 
use. Railroads serve tax paying industry and a operator would not have to do much to 
get that line back inservice. In age of rising fuel costs and uncertain energy future we 
May certainly rue the day the legislature used such short term thinking that cost a 
viable corridor its economic and useful life. If the Covid pandemic showed quicker 
than anything its that economies based on tourism and retirees are quick to falter and 
fail. The mountain division should be kept for the very reason of helping spur 
economic development along that line and benefit the economic development for your
citizens.  
