 
 
n  
May 18, 2023  
  
Testimony in Support of   
LD 404 “Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council”  and 
LD 1450 “An Act to Fund the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use 
Advisory Council”  
  
Greetings Chairs Chipman and Williams, and other distinguished members of the Transportation 
Committee. I am Jean Sideris, Executive Director for the Bic ycle Coalition of Maine. On behalf of 
our more than 20,000 members and supporters, I am submitting testimony in support of both LD 
404 “Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendations of 
the Mountain Division Rail Use A dvisory Council” and LD 1450 “An Act to Fund the 
Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council”  and recommends that the 
committee issue an “ought to pass” report on this bill.  
  
The Bicycle Coalition of Maine supports these bills, whic h directs the MaineDOT to follow the 
legislatively formulated Rail Use Advisory Council (RUAC) Process outlined in Title 23, Chapter 
3, §75. Rail Use Advisory Councils are formed to assess the various possible uses of fallow railroad 
corridors, including r estoring rail or creating multi -use trails.    
 
LD 404 explicitly directs the MaineDOT to implement the trail recommendation of the Mountain 
Division RUAC, and LD 1450 provides a one time funding mechanism to construct the 
recommended trail. The BCM suppor ts immediate action to begin conversion to an interim trail as 
the best and highest -impact use of this public resource. A 31 mile trail along this corridor would 
provide a safe, off -road option for recreation and transportation. The conversion of rail corr idors to 
interim trail use is generally the least expensive option available to the state with enormous public 
health and active transportation benefits. The creation of multi -use paths is a proven economic and 
tourism driver, as demonstrated by the Easter n Trail and Downeast Sunrise Trail.  
 
We urge the committee to honor the RUAC process, and to support the findings of these 
hardworking committees, by issuing an Ought to Pass report on these bills.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in su pport of LD 404 and 1450.   
  
On behalf of the Bicycle Coalition of Maine, sincerely,     
   
Jean Sideris  
 
 
 
Executive Director  
 

