Jesse Mazzie
Danvers Massachusetts 
LD 404
Honorable memebers
I strongly urge you to not rip this rail line with the blind short sightness so many other
rail trails have done.   The Mountain Division remains one of few places rail car 
owners can ride our antique railcars, we have worked for years cooperatively with the 
State on clean up efforts and keeping the line open.  Snowmobile, ATV,Bikes and 
walkers have THOUSANDS of miles of trail to use.  While us tax paying and tourism
dollar paying railcar owners only have 17 miles in New Hampshire and 28 miles here 
in Maine.  Our railcar groups , myself included come from out of state and when we 
visit with our machines to the ride the mountain division we buy rooms at your hotels,
buy food in your restaurants and gas in your gas stations, all in these small towns. 
Bicycles do not bring in this revenue. People can ride bikes and walk at home. The 
now infamous “WoW trail” is a great example of the this failed economic pipe dream 
in Laconia I will personally testify even in the height of summer has no one one it in 
certain sections other than homeless and drug users.  Tourists will not flock there to 
walk this.  Us railcar users do because it is a unique and historic piece of railroad that 
we ride.  It costs NOTHING to keep the rails, in Fryeburg and Westbrook the rail 
already coexists with the trail .  There is NO reason to remove them, the rights of way
are plenty wide enough to put a trail next to the tracks. You can easily make the few 
small bridges passible to both rail and bike traffic.  We have been doing this without 
issue on the Wolfeboro line  in New Hampshire for 30+ years.   In fact we just did a 
TV segment on Channel 5 Boston about how successful this has been for all involved.
Railcars aside, the mountain division serves as an important link for future railroad 
use.  Railroads serve tax paying industry and a operator would not have to do much to
get that line back inservice.  In age of rising fuel costs and uncertain energy future we 
May certainly rue the day the legislature used such short term thinking that cost a 
viable corridor its economic and useful life.   If the Covid pandemic showed quicker 
than anything its that economies based on tourism and retirees are quick to falter and 
fail.  The mountain division should be kept for the very reason of helping spur 
economic development along that line and benefit the economic development for your
citizens.    
