Testimony in Favor LD 404, Transitioning the Mountain Division Corridor to a Trail 
and 
1450 Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to implement the Recommendation of 
the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council 
Good Afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and other members of this distinguished 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation, 
My name is Jon Kachmar and I am the Executive Director of the Eastern Trail located in Southern 
Maine. lam providing testimony on behalf of the Eastern Trail Alliance and the Eastern Trail 
+_Qmd 
Management District. I am here with strong support for Both LD 404 and 1450 that would authorize a 
rail trail from Standish to Fryeburg- —also known as the Mountain Division Trail—which would connect 
to the northern terminus of the Eastern Trail in Portland. The Eastern Trail, which currently offers 23 
miles of off-road trail from South Portland to Kennebunk is built on the defunct Eastern Rail Line, as 
well as an additional 42 miles of on-road trail. The vision of the Eastern Trail is a 65-mile off-road 
alternative transportation and recreation corridor from South Portland to Kittery that would help 
complete the Florida to Maine East Coast Greenway. 
LD's 404 and 1450 are a fair and reasonable approach to using rail for alternative transportation and 
recreation. Like freight and passenger rail, trail corridors can have significant economic and social 
impacts at the local, regional and state levels. in 2021, we know that the off~road portion of the 
Eastern Trail had over 250,000 users and this increased closer to 300,000 in 2022. Additionally, this 
annual trail activity resulted in $44.6M dollars of local investment in lodging, food, and other items 
such as bicycle equipment and related expenses, with$12.5M from earnings and $32.1M from sales. 
The Maine Rail-Trail Plan 2020-2030 calls for continuing preservation and maintenance of a separate 
and active rail corridor for freight and passenger service that can be used to extend future rail from 
Boston and more populated communities in Southern Maine, and the Eastern Trail agrees that rail is 
important and critical to the state's future. However, we feel the best use of this long-underutilized 
corridor between Standish and Fryburg is a rail trail that supports alternative forms of transportation 
other than trains or cars. The Department of Transportation has studied this corridor and supports 
the trail expansion.~
y 
In addition to being good for the economy, trails provide alternative transportation options for work 
commuters, opportunities for recreation and healthy exercise that is free to access and available to 
all, and opportunities to connect communities to other open spaces such as municipal and nonprofit 
land trust properties along the trail. lhave personally heard from many individuals who are eager to 
commute to work on their bikes or run the off-road trail between Portland and the communities to 
the south located along the Eastern Trail, and an increasing number of people are already commuting 
this way including myself.' 
l respectfully urge the Committee to vote "Ought to Pass" on LD 209. Thank you.
