Mountain Division Rail Trail 
 
My name is Margaret Zack and I live in Porter, Maine. I am writing in support of LD 404 
to allow the Mountain Division corridor to become a trail and LD 1450 to help fund the 
building of the trail. The best use of the state-owned Mountain Division corridor is a wide 
paved trail for walkers, bikers and runners, which will be accessible to people of all ages 
and abilities. This trail extension will connect to the nine miles of Mountain Division rail-
trail that already exists in Fryeburg and in Gorham and Windham. 
 
I have frequently taken my bicycle to travel on the existing trail. I am supporting these 
two bills in the hope that a trail will be created closer to my home and will also cover 
more miles, thus allowing for a longer ride. I am so appreciative of bike trails because 
they provide a safe, fun and healthy way to get exercise and to enjoy the out-of-doors. I 
am 75 years old and I can’t emphasize enough how important bike trails are in providing 
a safe place to walk or bicycle where you do not have to worry about traffic. In addition 
at my age I appreciate a trail that is flat and easily traveled, such that I have no fear of 
falling or over extending myself on hills and winding trails.  
 
I have invited friends to bicycle with me. A few have become so excited about this 
opportunity for safe outdoor exercise that they have purchased their own bike after 
borrowing my daughter’s old one.  
 
My husband and I have traveled in other states and brought our bicycles with us to 
experience the rail trails they offer. We have met interesting people on the bike trails that 
we have found. We have visited areas that we would not have sought out except for the 
fact that there is a rail trail in the area. Rail trails create community and are economic 
drivers, bringing people to an area and thus developing a tourism industry. 
 
I strongly urge the committee members to pass LD404 and LD 1450. 
 
Thank you, 
Margaret Zack 
Margaret Zack
Porter
LD 404
My name is Margaret Zack and I live in Porter, Maine. I am writing in support of LD 
404 to allow the Mountain Division corridor to become a trail and LD 1450 to help 
fund the building of the trail. The best use of the state-owned Mountain Division 
corridor is a wide paved trail for walkers, bikers and runners, which will be accessible
to people of all ages and abilities. This trail extension will connect to the nine miles of
Mountain Division rail-trail that already exists in Fryeburg and in Gorham and 
Windham.
I have frequently taken my bicycle to travel on the existing trail. I am supporting 
these two bills in the hope that a trail will be created closer to my home and will also 
cover more miles, thus allowing for a longer ride. I am so appreciative of bike trails 
because they provide a safe, fun and healthy way to get exercise and to enjoy the 
out-of-doors. I am 75 years old and I can’t emphasize enough how important bike 
trails are in providing a safe place to walk or bicycle where you do not have to worry 
about traffic. In addition at my age I appreciate a trail that is flat and easily traveled, 
such that I have no fear of falling or over extending myself on hills and winding trails.
I have invited friends to bicycle with me. A few have become so excited about this 
opportunity for safe outdoor exercise that they have purchased their own bike after 
borrowing my daughter’s old one. 
My husband and I have traveled in other states and brought our bicycles with us to 
experience the rail trails they offer. We have met interesting people on the bike trails 
that we have found. We have visited areas that we would not have sought out except 
for the fact that there is a rail trail in the area. Rail trails create community and are 
economic drivers, bringing people to an area and thus developing a tourism industry.
I strongly urge the committee members to pass LD404 and LD 1450.
Thank you,
Margaret Zack

