\ 
$ STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or TRANSPORTATION 
16 STATE HOUSE STATION -.e 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0016 
‘”“‘ Janet T. Mills Bruce A. Van Note 
GOVERNQR COMMISSIONER 
May 1s, 2023 
Testimony of Meghan Russo 
Maine Department of Transportation 
Before the 131*‘ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Support of LD 404 
Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendations of 
the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation, I am Meghan Russo, Manager of Legislative and Constituent Services at 
MaineDOT. MaineDOT supports this Resolve and is pleased to have brought it before you. 
LD 404 directs MaineDOT to implement the recommendations of the Rail Use Advisory Council 
(RUAC) and remove 31 miles of state-ovvned inactive railroad track between the towns of 
Standish and Fryeburg and replace it with an interim bike/ped trail. This process is subject to 
available funding resources, permitting and municipal agreements. 
This legislation is the result of the recommendation of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory 
Council which was officially formed in September 2021. After a 7- month review of potential 
rail and non-rail uses for the Mountain Division rail corridor from Standish to Fryeburg, the 12- 
member Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council voted ll-l in favor of the interim 
conversion of 31 miles of the existing railroad track to a 10-foot-wide paved bicycle and 
pedestrian trail. The RUAC process was established last session during the 130"‘ Legislature and 
can be found in 23 MRSA §75 (attached). It gives the Commissioner of the Maine Department 
of Transportation the authority to establish a Rail Use Advisory Council, upon the petition of one 
or more govermnental entities. 
The purpose of this council is to facilitate discussion, gather information, and provide advice to 
the commissioner regarding the future use of a rail corridor identiﬁed in the petition. These 
recommendations must include the beneﬁts and costs of potential uses of the rail corridor, 
including rail and trail use, with the understanding that any non-rail use of the corridor is 
considered interim in nature. K 
THE MAINE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION IS AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER 
PHONE: (Z07) 624-3000 TT\ USERS CALL MAINE RELA\ 7l1 FAX: (Z07) 624 3001
The 12-member Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council was composed of representatives 
from each town along the section of rail corridor under consideration: Standish, Baldwin, Hiram, 
Brownﬁeld, and F ryeburg. In addition, members included representatives from state agencies, 
regional plamiing organizations, the Portland Water District, and trail and rail advocates. A 
public hearing was held on March 31, 2022, in which over 150 individuals submitted Written 
public comment for consideration. Generally, the trail use option had the most support from 
those who submitted comments. 
As part of the RUAC process prescribed in law, Commissioner Van Note has reviewed the 
recommendation from the Council and have put forth this Resolve for your review. He is in 
agreement with the 11-members of the RUAC and hopes this project can move forward. 
Should the legislature proceed with this resolve, the project would be dependent upon available 
resources. Funding options for the trail completion would need to be discussed among all2 
interested parties. Any state funding contributions would be identiﬁed through our Three-Year 
Work Plan process. The estimated cost of completing this project is $20.1 million. Completion 
would only occur once appropriate funding was identiﬁed and secured and is likely to span 
multiple years. 
Thank you for your consideration. As always, we are more than happy to answer any questions 
you may have. 
### 
"rm; MAINE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION IS AN AF!-‘lRMA'l‘l\’E AQTION - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLO\ER 
PH0NE= (207) 624-3000 TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 FAX; (207) 6243
Title 23: TRANSPORTATION 
Part 1: STATE HIGHWAY LAW 
Chapter 32 OFFICIALS AND THEIR DUTIES 
Subchapter 1: DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
§75. Rail corridor use advisory councils 
1. Purpose. Upon petition by one or more governmental entities that represent communities along a state- 
owned rail corridor in which the department controls the right-of~way requesting the department to reviewa 
nonrail recreational or nonrecreational transportation use of that rail corridor, the Commissioner of 
Transportation, for each petition received, shall notify the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 
jurisdiction over transportation matters and may establish a rail corridor use advisory council, referred to in this 
section as "a council," to facilitate discussion, gather information and provide advice to the commissioner regarding 
future use of the rail corridor identified in the petition. The council shall review and make recommendations on the 
likelihood, benefits and costs of potential uses of the rail corridor, including, but not limited to, rail use, trail use or 
bikeways. Any nonrail use of a rail corridor must be considered by a council to be interim in nature, and all such rail 
corridors must be preserved for future rail use as provided in chapter 615 (../Z3/title23ch615sec0.html). 
[PL 2021, c. 239, §2 (NEW) .1 
2. Membership. The Commissioner of Transportation shall invite at least 9 and no more than 15 persons to 
serve on a council. Membership may include: 
A. The Commissioner of Transportation or the commissioner's designee; [PL 2021, c. 23 9, §2 (NEW) .1 
B. The Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry or the commissioner's designee; [PL 2021, 
c. 239, §2 (NEW) .1 
C. The Commissioner of Economic and Community Development or the commissioner's designee; [PL 2021, 
c. 239, §2 (NEW) .1 
D. The Commissioner of Health and Human Services or the commissioner's designee; [PL 2021, c. 239, 
§2 (NEW) .1 
E. One or more members representing other state agencies; {PL 2021 , c. 239, §2 (NEW) .1 
F. One member representing a statewide tourism organization or a regional tourism organization of the 
geographic area containing the rail corridor; [PL 2021, c. 239, §2 (NEW) .1 
G. One member representing a chamber of commerce or other regional or local economic development entity 
of the geographic area containing the rail corridor; [PL 2021 , c. 23 9 , §2 (NEW) .1 
H. One member representing an organization advocating for rail use or preservation; [PL 2021 , c. 239, 
§2 (NEW)-l
I. One member representing an organization advocating for recreational trail use or advocating for bicyclist or 
pedestrian interests; and [PL 2021, c. 239, §2 (NEW) .} 
J. One or more municipal officials or staff from municipalities located on the rail corridor. [PL 2021, c. 
239, §2 (NEW) .] 
[PL 2021, c. 239, §2 (NEW) .1 
3. Meetings; chair. The Commissioner of Transportation shall designate the chair of a council. The 
department shall provide staff support to the council. The council may adopt bylaws and other policies to effectively 
govern its proceedings. The council shall meet at the call of the chair and shall hold a minimum of one public 
hearing located in the geographic area along the rail corridor for which the council was formed. 
[PL 2021, c. 239, §2 (NEW).] 
4. Report. Within 9 months of convening its first meeting, a council shall submit a report to the 
Commissioner of Transportation on its findings and recommendations regarding the use of the rail corridor, 
including majority and minority reports if necessary. Upon conclusion of the council's work, the Commissioner of 
Transportation shall disband that council. 
[PL 2021, c. 239, §2 (NEW).] 
SECTION HISTORY 
PL 2021, C. 239, §2 (NEW). 
The Revisor's Office cannot provide legal advice or interpretation of Maine law to the public. 
lf you need legal advice, please consult a qualified attorney. 
Ofﬁce of the Revisor of Statutes (mailtonnebmaster_ros@ggislature.maine.g9_y) - 
7 State House Station ~ 
State House Room 108 - 
Augusta, Maine 043330007 
Datafnrtliispageextracledon9I28/20220827144.
Mountain Division Rail Use 
Advisory Council 
Summary and Recommendations 
May 2022
Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council 
Summary and Recommendations 
Executive Summary 
After a 7-month review of potential rail and non-rail uses for the Mountain Division rail corridor 
from Standish to Fryeburg, the 12-member Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council voted 
11-1 to recommend the interim conversion of 31 miles of the existing railroad track to an 
interim 10'-wide paved bicycle and pedestrian trail. The committee further recommends that 
snowmobiles should remain an allowable use, under annual agreement with MaineDOT, within 
the corridor. The committee did not support expanding allowable uses to include ATVs or other 
motorized recreational vehicles. 
l. Background 
In June of 2021, two bills were signed into law that established a new process for reviewing a 
non-rail recreational or nonrecreational transportation use along state-owned rail corridors. 
Public Law 21, Chapter 239 gave the Maine Department of Transportation (MaineDOT) 
Commissioner the authority to establish a Rail Use Advisory Council, upon the petition of one or 
more governmental entities. The purpose of these councils is to facilitate discussion, gather 
information, and provide advice to the commissioner regarding the future use of a rail corridor 
identified in the petition. These recommendations will include the benefits and costs of 
potential uses of the rail corridor, including rail and trail use, with the understanding that any 
non-rail use of the corridor is considered interim in nature. Resolve, Chogter 52 specifically 
directed the department to establish an advisory council for the Mountain Division line 
between Standish and Fryeburg. The Joint Standing Committee on Transportation received 200 
submissions of written testimony during public hearings. 
MaineDOT received letters of support from all communities along the rail corridor requesting 
the formation of a Rail Corridor Council and that the future use of the 31 miles of state-owned, 
inactive rail-line be studied and reviewed. The Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council was 
formed in August of 2021 and the initial meeting of the council occurred in September of 2021. 
The 12-member Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council was composed of representatives 
from each town along the section of rail corridor under consideration: Standish, Baldwin, 
Hiram, Brownfield, and Fryeburg. ln addition, members included representatives from state 
agencies, regional planning organizations, the Portland Water District, and trail and rail 
advocates:
Paul Schumacher, Council Chair Dwight Warren 
Executive Director, Southern Maine Planning Selectman 
and Development Commission Town of Baldwin 
Terry Egan Zach Mosher 
Brownfield Comprehensive Planning Committee Planning Director 
Town of Standish 
David Kinsman Paul Hunt 
President, Mountain Division Alliance Environmental Services Manager 
Portland Water District 
Katie Haley Carolann Ouellette 
Town Manager Director, Maine Office of Outdoor Recreation 
Town of Fryeburg Maine Department of Economic and Community 
Development 
Daniel A. Hester Christopher Chop 
Chairperson, Hiram Conservation Committee Transportation Director, Greater Portland Council of 
Member, Saco River Corridor Commission G0‘/e""me"t5 (GPCOG) 
Jack Sutton/Russ Barber Douglas S. Beck 
Maine Rail Group Outdoor Recreation Supervisor, DACF, Bureau of 
Parks & Lands , 
The following MaineDOT Staff provided technical support and administration for the council: 
o Nate Moulton, Director, Office of Freight and Passenger Services 
- Nathan Howard, Director, Rail Program 
o Meghan Russo, Manager of Legislative and Constituent Services 
ll. Location 
The section of the Mountain Division under consideration included approximately 31 miles of 
railroad between the Sebago to the Sea Trail near the Standish/Gorham town line and 
Mountain Division Trail parking area at Route 113 in Fryeburg. The section corresponds to 
railroad mile point 15.7 to 46.82.
_“ 
/.,/~ 
\ iiii* » '‘~ 
, ~ ~' 
t 
- em»; us, ‘i 
i \;' 
‘/%{H?-ii-.5]K ‘ K ’\ 
. 
> 5* 
,~ 
1,, \                                                     
\ 
|\ \ ___m;1= .. 
fun] 
-» K\ 
Biimifieid S- 
I- 
__' 
-3 llllitc-ac" 
it xi--"""" [iiiii 
k‘ __ 
J1 ~c.,_ ...._.. l» -M“ 
" 
1N 
\ /4'_ 
\‘\ 
. T 
/ Hiiam ._____ "‘w 
_i 
t 
k ll! / *~ »- 
. T ~ “ 
Q ’ “\ ,->”"" 4“ \ 2 , 
i /4' £\- \r ,Q 
3 '\f_ '_ibrQ'i ‘MIi:.h 
. Baldwin L“ 
.-.»»"*'~1"ili1$ ‘1%‘-»»"*=~<_' 
/\ .“M' 
»' ‘" 
W/-v‘ , ,» ~ \~».,c_.~f ‘sf~ 
'2’, ‘g Sunﬁsh: 
r '\.
II
l 
PJi2e"‘} '
s 
I l_=?l Tomi 
_,s: mi 
Mountain Division 
RailITrail Study           
<_’< , ~~ /’ \ c ma 
“mu lip; \L/\V/ \ 0m 
T T 
\ ll?- ll 
Legend 
—i» Proposed Mountain Division ‘Trail " 
2” 
__+ Existing Mountain Division Rail ‘ l [- 
Line N J‘ 
‘.- 
, \/ 
Htltsﬂnﬁ fl \“‘~.-’/ 
''
J 
0 2.5 5 10 Miles 
A‘ ci 
l_i_i_i_gi_i_i_| 
lll. Rail Use Advisory Council Process 
The Mountain Rail Use Advisory Council met 9 times from September 2021 to April 2022. The 
Council was Chaired by Paul Schumacher from the Southern Maine Planning and Development 
Commissi . M ' ' ' 
on aineDOT staff provided technical support and administration. The civil 
engineering consulting firm, HNTB, provided engineering services and prepared the Feasibility 
study report (Section lV). 
The Council reviewed the approximately 31-mile-long section of the Mountain Division Line 
from the Standish town line (where the current rail-trail ends) to Fryeburg (where the rail-trail 
begins) for potential rail and non-rail uses. At these meetings, HNTB presented the feasibility 
stud f f ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
y or uture rail, rail with trail and interim trail/bikeway use options and an economic 
benefits study. The Council also heard presentations on various rail and trail related topics from 
guest speakers, council members and MaineDOT staff.
Over the course of seven months the Council considered three primary uses of the railroad 
corridor: 
1. 
2 Rail Use. This option includes the restoration of freight or passenger service (or both) 
on the Mountain Division line. Rail use also includes the ”status quo” or ”do nothing" 
scenario as MaineDOT will continue to maintain and preserve the corridor for future rail 
use as required by the State Rail Preservation Act. 
The council reviewed engineering estimates to upgrade the Mountain Division to either 
FRA Class 1 (10 MPH) or Class 2 (25 MPH) standards. These two classes allow for the 
operating speeds necessary for efficient freight rail service. This level of service is 
consistent with most other active freight railroad corridors in the State of Maine and can 
be achieved without a complete reconstruction of the tracks. Passenger service, 
comparable to the Amtrack Downeaster service, would likely require a complete 
replacement of the existing tracks to achieve FRA Class 3 (60 miles-per-hour maximum). 
Additionally, railroad signal protection systems would be required to achieve operating 
speeds over 59 miles-per-hour. 
Additionally, Jack Sutton, from the Maine Rail Group, proposed a seasonal passenger rail 
service, termed the Crown of New England, between Portland, Maine and St. Johnsbury, 
VT. Details of the proposal are contained in Section V. 
Trail Use (Trail until rail). This option includes the removal of the existing track 
materials and replacement with a 10'-wide trail surfaced with either pavement or stone 
dust on the existing rail bed. The conversion of the Mountain Division railroad to a trail 
is considered an interim non~rail use under the Rail Preservation Act requiring legislative 
approval. 
The proposed 31-mile trail would begin near Route 35 in Standish, Maine and end at 
Route 113 in Fryeburg, Maine. improvements to the existing one-mile section of trail 
from Otter Ponds to Route 35 in Standish (the "Jeep Trail") was also included in this 
option. 
MaineDOT holds an easement for rail purposes only for approximately 3 miles of the 
corridor from a point just west of Route 35 (Chadbourne Road) to a pointjust east of 
Smith Mill Road in Standish. The Portland Water District (PWD) owns the underlying rail 
corridor. Through agreements signed in December 2002 between MaineDOT and PWD, 
the parties agreed that a trail cannot be constructed at the location of the current rail 
track. At this time, an alternative trail route through this section has not been 
determined. However, a majority of the PWD Board indicated a willingness to explore 
alternative trail locations on PWD property, away from the rail corridor and the 
shoreline.
3. Rail with Trail Use. This option includes the rail uses outlined in Option 1 and the 
construction of a 10'-wide trail surfaced with either pavement or stone dust adjacent to 
the railroad. The near edge of the trail will be a minimum of 15 feet from the near rail, 
in accordance with MaineDOT standards for Development of "Trail with Rail" . However, 
this setback may be reduced to 10.5 feet if a fence meeting MaineDOT standards is 
installed at the edge of trail shoulder between the trail and rail. 
This option would also require consideration of alternative trail locations within the 
PWD property as outlined in Option 2. 
A public hearing was held on March 31$‘ , 2022 in which over 150 individuals submitted written 
public comment for consideration. Generally, the trail use option had the most support from 
those who submitted comments. However, a majority of the commentors who supported trail 
use did not distinguish whether they supported trail until rail (Option 2) or rail with trail (Option 
3). 
IV. Summary of Feasibility Study 
Cost Estimates 
The three uses for the corridor and their associated cost estimates were subdivided based on 
options for FRA class of track (Class 1 or Class 2) and trail surface (paved or stone dust).A 
conceptual cost estimate summary of each option for use of the Mountain Division Corridor is 
shown in Table 1-1. The least expensive option is the Trail Only option with a stone dust surface 
($16.9 million) and the most expensive option is the Rail with Trail option with Class 2 track and 
a paved trail surface ($145.8 million). 
I . . . 
2 . v v—
( 
Rail (Class 1) withT
i
, l
Economic Benefits: Summary 
The economic analysis presented in the feasibility study (Table 6-1) shows the expected 
economic activities that the construction of the various alternatives is expected to create. 
Results indicate that, for the lowest cost alternative (Trail Use — Stone Dust), over 200 jobs, over 
$10.2 million in labor income, over $12.2 million in value added (gross regional product, or 
GRP), and over $31.5 million in output (revenue) may be created and/or supported by the 
construction of the proposed trail. For the highest cost alternative (Rail with Trail-Paved), over 
1,000jobs, almost $55.5 million in labor income, $65 million in value added, and over S168 
million in output may be created and/or supported.                                       
Drrcct 
Induced 
Indirect 
Direct 
Q‘-nu 
“NWT ,. 
Direct 
....... VA
.      
Tl I040 
6.2.! for further details. $5,910,000 
$2,7l7.000 
Use $1 857,000 
$4,861 000 
$2,995,000 ( $4,942,000 
$10 Z32 000 
326,4 ):,000 
I3 (J00 
$15,368,000 
506,0 031 | , 
f ssz, 00 
~'ié;l;;5i¢§;.§é;{i ‘»?§ii};;";é,§}5;§E{ ‘iii'5B;LI5i ‘5?éia§E;"m time $l7, I 93.000 $17,694,000 
$8,504,000 
$37,? l4,0U0 
W"Si1iIs ’0§,lJ00’” it 0 0H 
$9,630,000 
0,000 
$3 1.565.000 
5,000 
,000 
9 000 l ,' 
1s§,000"""" “" 
000 I4‘ 
$62,199,000 
§ $i'6T.'9 ’iT."000“W4)" 
:e;§i‘§E§i~}{r§l}) Edi‘ 5¢;;;\;.;.;-.;i. ‘,‘;;i;§. liém :6 $70,055,000 (((((((((((((((( 
$w,~Ji0Iiiii0 ''''''''''' 00 
ii if it 'l
l
l
i
1
l 
Overall, the expansion of Mountain Division Trail system as proposed for either trail use or rail 
with trail options is likely to result in positive economic benefits for those living near the trail, 
communities, and those traveling to the area for recreational purposes using the trail. Potential 
economic benefits include one-time construction impacts, potential property value impacts, 
economic impacts associated with increased visitation, and direct use and health benefits that 
accrue to the users of the trail.
Potential economic benefits of rail use on the Mountain Division include: 
0 Jobs created and additional spending associated with new rail development 
including rehabilitation of the 50-mile Mountain Division and construction of additional 
infrastructure expansion such as switching yards, maintenance facilities, etc. 
~ Increased local economic activities related to the ongoing maintenance of the railroad. 
~ Jobs created from direct employment at the railroad, support industries, and at shippers 
utilizing rail access. 
~ Lower transportation costs and expanded market opportunities for shippers 
~ Improved safety on public roads through reduced heavy truck traffic and reduction of 
highway maintenance expenditures. 
~ Potential for reduced air emissions from truck traffic 
V. Council Recommendations to the MaineDOT Commissioner 
Majority Recommendation: Option ll, Trail Until Rail 
The Rail Use Advisory Council recommends Option 2 —conversion of 31 miles of the existing 
railroad track to an interim 10’-wide paved bicycle and pedestrian trail. The recommendation 
was made by eleven out of twelve council members. Two members of the council were unable 
to attend the final Council meeting on April 14"‘ , 2022 and voted in absentia. 
This non-rail use recommendation by the Council for the rail corridor is considered interim in 
nature, because all such rail corridors must be preserved for future rail use as provided in the 
State Rail Preservation Act. 
The Council felt that, such change in use will complement and add value to the existing 
segments of trail/bikeway on the corridor -— 
specifically, the 4 miles of trail next to the rail in 
Fryeburg and the 5 miles of trail next to the rail in Windham, Gorham and Standish. With the 
realization of the Council's trail recommendation, a continuous, 40~mile trail/bikeway will be 
available for public benefit on the Mountain Division Corridor, from Windham to the New 
Hampshire State Line. This will bring an exceptional opportunity for economic development, 
public health, and outdoor recreation to an area of rural Maine in need of such investments. 
Majority Recommendation: Trail surface materials 
A second round of voting was conducted to determine whether the proposed interim trail 
should be surfaced with pavement or stone dust. The majority (7 of 12) members voted fora 
paved trail surface. Four (4) members indicated no preference. One (1) member voted for stone 
dust. 
Majority Recommendation: ATVs and Snowmobile Use 
A third round of voting was conducted to solicit council opinions on motorized uses. The 
majority (10 of 12) members voted to allow snowmobile access in the winter and to prohibit 
ATVs on the proposed interim trail.
Minority Recommendation: Option III, Rail with Trail (with caveats) 
A single member of the council voted for Option 3 (Rail with Trail) in locations where both uses 
can safely co-exist. Further, Jack Sutton recommended that MaineDOT partner with New 
Hampshire and Vermont to explore local freight and passenger rail opportunities along the 
entire length of the Mountain Division. The entire minority report can be found in Appendix A
Appendix A. 
Mountain Division Advisory Council 
Minority Report, April 18, 2022 
My name is John T. Sutton (Jack) of Belgrade Maine, a member ofthe Mountain Division Advisory 
Council and of the MRG, inc. (Maine Rail Group) board of directors. I submit this report in 
disagreement with the Council's decision of April 14, 2022 to recommend conversion of Maine's 
portion of the Mountain Division railroad to a paved recreational trail. 
The Mountain Division railroad operated to connect the seaport of Portland via other railroads 
at St. Johnsbury, Vermont for east-west freight and passenger rail traffic through Maine and 
Canada. Today it is owned separately by the States of Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont. A 
segment operates privately in the Portland area and another as the Conway Scenic Railroad in 
New Hampshire. Although other parts in Maine and Vermont are out of service, the Mountain 
Division corridor represents the last significant potential east-west railroad link through northern 
New England. At St. Johnsbury the corridor connects with active railroads running south through 
White River Junction, Vermont and northward to Montreal, PQ. 
A decision by any of the three state owners to convert a portion of the corridor to non-rail use 
could effectively destroy the corridor as a potential rail link to other railroads. For example, 
Amtrak’s Downeaster would be impossible if Maine's view ended at the New Hampshire border 
at Rollinsford, NH. The Advisory Council overlooks the true strategic/economic value of the 
Mountain Division as a continuous railroad corridor to the tri-state region by assessing its 
potential largely based on comparative costs of trail construction vs. rail restoration in Maine 
alone. 
These tri-state initiatives, and possibly others should be explored jointly by Maine, New 
Hampshire and Vermont before any unilateral decision is taken to sever the corridor. Each one 
aims to enhance economic development in the tri-state region from tourism marketed 
throughout the national Amtrak system, including greater ridership on Amtrak’s Downeaster and 
Vermonter trains. . 
v A seasonal ”Crown of New England" passenger link between the Amtrak-served stations 
at Portland and White River Junction, VT via Conway Scenic Railroad in NH and St. 
Johnsbury, VT, with stops at important tourist destinations throughout the route.A 
former Maine DOT initiative called for tourists to ”Come to Maine Without Their Cars”. 
0 Consider the existing rail link from Hazen (near Whitefield, NH) to Groveton, NH to 
connect with the operating St. Lawrence & Atlantic Railroad to Montreal. This route via 
Maine's Mountain Division segment and Conway Scenic Railroad would attract passenger 
rail traffic between Portland and Quebec through some of the most scenic railroad
territory in New England. It would not exclude consideration of the above route between 
Portland and White River Junction. 
0 Emphasizing the economic importance of Canadian visitors to the region, and that the 
Saint Lawrence & Atlantic line no longer serves downtown Portland, the Mountain 
Division route through the Conway Scenic Railroad via Groveton, NH or via the Amtrak 
Vermonter at White River Junction, VT could become a passenger rail route between 
Montreal and Portland, ME. 
Local freight and commuter services can be accommodated within these visions. However, long 
distance or overhead freight is not considered here because of competing operational freight 
lines already operating through Massachusetts to the south and west, and to Canadian railroads 
to the north and west. 
Parallel recreational trails are welcome wherever the two modes can safely co-exist with mutual 
non-interference. 
ln summary, the State of Maine is advised to conduct full joint exploration with New Hampshire 
and Vermont of the Mountain Division's potential as a continuous railroad corridor, including 
transportation and tourism interests, before allowing it to be unilaterally severed by a paved trail. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Jack Sutton, April 18, 2022
