 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 18, 2023  
 
Senator  Ben Chipman , Chair  
Representative  Lynne A. Williams , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 404 - Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory Council  
 
Dear Senator  Chipman , Representative  Williams , and Members of the  Committee  on 
Transportation : 
 
This letter is to express Maine CDC’s support for LD 404, Resolve, to Direct the Department of 
Transportation to Implement the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use Advisory 
Council and  provide information on  the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
This resolve directs the Department of Transportation, subject to available funding resources, 
permitting and municipal agreements, to remove 31 miles of state -owned inactive existing 
railroad track in the Town of Standish and the Town of Fryeburg and replace the track with an 
interim 10 -foot-wide bicycle and pedestrian trail, surfaced with either pavement or stone dust on 
the existing rail bed.  We further understand that the MDOT is currently working with the 
Portl and Water District (PWD) to relocate a section of trail to a location further from Sebago 
Lake, the primary drinking water source for the PWD who serves drinking water to over 200,000 
people in 11 Maine communities.   
 
The 1986 amendments to the Federal Sa fe Drinking Water Act provided for the establishment of 
state source water protection programs to protect public drinking water supplies from 
contamination. Source water protection, a proactive approach to protecting water quality, 
quantity , and security at  the drinking water source, is a highly efficient and cost -effective way to 
help ensure a safe and reliable drinking water supply.  
 
Studies in Maine and nation -wide have shown the costs of prevention and planning to be 
significantly lower than remediation a nd/or finding a new drinking water supply. Source 
protection also reduces risk to the supplier and customer. Drinking water sources are vulnerable 
to contamination and other threats from land -based activities near the drinking water source. A 
basic tenet o f source protection is to keep potential sources of contamination and other threats 
away from the drinking water source.   
 
The section of trail that is proposed to be relocated under the MDOT and PWD collaboration lies 
along the Sebago Lake shoreline near  the drinking water intake, and within the two -mile “no 
 
 bodily contact zone” which was established as part of the PWD charter authority by the Maine 
Legislature to protect the drinking water source.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC supports the PWD -MDOT collabo ration to relocate this section of 
trail to help keep sources of contamination and other potential threats further from the drinking 
water source and intake  and respectfully recommends this bill  ought to pass.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this ma tter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

