 
225 Douglass Street,  PO B ox 3553,  Portland, Maine 04104  | 207.774.5961 | www.pwd.org  
  
TESTIMONY OF THE PORTLAND WATER DISTRICT IN SUPPORT OF  
LD 404 – Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use  Advisory Council  
 
 
Chair Senator  Chipman , Co-Chair Represen tative Willia ms and Mem bers of the Committee on 
Transportation , my name is  Seth Gar rison, and I a m the General Manager of the Portland Water 
District. I p rovide this testimony neither for nor against  LD 404.  
 
The Portland Water District was created  by the State Legislature  in 19 08 to provide drinking 
water to people in greater Port land. Today , PWD provides drinking water to over 200,000 people 
in 11 communities, and wastewater treatment services to si x of those communities. The affairs of 
PWD  are managed b y a Board of  Trustees composed of 11 m embers, all popularly  elected  by a 
plurality of the voters from the communities  they represent.  
 
Sebago Lake has been the water supply for greater Portland since 1869. The people of the region  
are fortunate  to have an incredible s ource of drinking water.  The water quality is so outstanding , 
it is one of about 50 (out of roughly  13,000 ) surface water supplies in the country that don’t 
require filtration . Less water treatment is good  for the environment  and provides a big financial  
benefit. If Sebago Lake declines in quality and requires filtration , it would add million s in annual 
operations  costs  and require a new $1 50+ million treatment facility. Filtration  would inc rease 
monthly bills by about 67% . Maintaining  Sebago La ke water qual ity helps us  provide ex cellent  
quality water , affordably  to customers of all income levels . 
 
Portland Water District  was fortunate  to be represented on the Mountain Division Rail -Trail 
Council by our Environmental  Service s Manager , Paul Hunt . The Mountain Division Rail -Trail 
Council produced a report with recommenda tions  to the Commissioner of the Department of 
Transportation that you are consid ering  implementing  with this legislation.  
 
The Mountain Division  rail line being proposed  for trail pu rposes passe s through very sensitive  
Sebago Lake wate rshed land along the shore line, very close to the water i ntake for our treatment 
facility . This property has been carefully m anaged  for over 100 years to secure  the region ’s 
drinking  water . The lake in t his area is so sensitive  that it is protected with a No  Bodily Contact 
zone , established by a Private and Special Law passed by the M aine Legislature in 1913 . 
Included with our testimony is a map showing the location  of the existing rail corridor through 
the sensitive  area.  
 
The Mountain Division Rail -Trail Council stated in its recommendations  that the section of the 
proposed  trail running through  this sensitive  watershed land  directly adj acent to the highly 
protected sectio n of Sebago  Lake should  be reloc ated. 
 
The i mportance of Sebago  Lake water quality and this sensitive  waters hed area w as recognized 
in an agreement between the Portland Water District and the Department of Transportation , 
which  was signed in 2002. In that agreement, the Dep artment surren dered all trail rig hts through 
this portion of the rail right -of-way in return for the conveyance of rights for the placement  of a 
trail on other lands owned by Portland Water District . That trail has been heavily used for two 
decades  without any ad verse impact on the  water supply.  
 
The District owns wooded land that is set further back from the water that is likely  suitable for 
the proposed trail. Our governing Board  of Trustees agreed to allow a trail through this property . 
If and when a trail project rea ches the des ign stage, we will work diligently with planners to find 
the most suitable r oute. This win -win solution satisfies our concerns about ensuring that Sebago 
Lake remains protected and our drinking  water is high quality, while also providing a valu able 
recreat ional resource for the people of Maine .  
 
We are testifying “neither for nor against” because we are in the business of providing clean 
drinking water , not trail advocacy . In our experien ce, when use and protection  are balanced, 
Sebago Lake and its watersh ed lands  can serve both as the water supply and as a recreational 
resource . 
 
Thank you for your consideration . 
 
 
Seth Garrison,  
General Manager  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maine GeoLibrary
Legend
Water Intakes
Railroad
Sebago Lake
No Bodily Contact Zone
PWD-Owned Property     No Bodily
Contact Zone
Inset 
Photo
Water
Intakes
