Susy Kist
Portland
LD 404
Susy Kist
134 Neal St.
Portland ME 04102
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee:
My name is Susy Kist and I am a resident of Portland. I am writing to testify in strong
support all the bills being heard today. I am in support of LD 209, which would allow 
the Department of Transportation to permit an interim bicycle and pedestrian trail on 
26.5 miles of the inactive Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor, while preserving the 
corridor for future rail. 
I am also in support of LD 404 to allow the Mountain Division corridor to become a 
trail & LD 1450 to help fund the building of the Mountain Division trail.
Having these rail trails through and near my community would be an incredible 
resource for me, my family, and my community. I believe the best use for these 
state-owned corridors is a trail and I support funding for trail systems such as these. 
Connected trails such as these will connect people to each other and to our natural 
places, providing a car-free alternative to get active outdoors and to get where we 
need to go.
I have used existing parts of these trails numerous times and they have SO many 
benefits to the Maine community. I'll list a couple here:
Provide alternative to commuting, getting to see friends, and enjoy natural areas by 
bike, skis, walking, roller blading, e-bike, you name it!
Re-use already developed and cleared land and access way.
Promote exercise in beautiful public corridor
Allow families to spend time outdoors in nature together
When I first visited the Mountain Division trail in Windham area I couldn't believe 
how peaceful and safe it was -- also the sense of community there was so positive. 
Living in Portland it is so close by, so so many others in Maine's most population 
dense area also will have the benefit of the continuation of this recreational resource. 
It is very exciting.
On a serious note, I feel it is absolutely critical that we immediately act on access 
ways, trails, paths that offer option to vehicular traffic. We absolutely have to reduce 
our use of fossil fuel burning vehicles and this is a tremendous way to do that.
Thank You for your service and for supporting this legislation.
Thank you,
Susy Kist
