TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: February 28, 2023 
LD 533 — “An Act to Exempt Overtime Pay from Individual Income Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 5 3 3 , “An Act to Exempt 
Overtime Pay from Individual Income Tax.” 
LD 533 proposes to exempt overtime compensation required to be paid by 
an employer to an employee under 26 M.R.S. § 664(3) from Maine individual 
income tax beginning on or after January l, 2024. Except for certain exemptions,- 
26 M.R.S. § 664(3) requires employers to pay 1.5 times the regular hourly rate for 
all hours worked by the employee in excess of 40 hours in a week. The regular 
hourly rate includes all earnings, bonuses, commissions, and other compensation 
that is paid or due based on actual work performed. Overtime compensation is 
included in federal adjusted gross income to the extent that it is currently subject to 
Maine individual income tax. 
Historically, overtime pay has been treated like any other traditional form of 
wage income for tax purposes - it’s not clear what the policy justification is for 
exempting overtime pay from income tax.
1
Additionally, while the bill exempts overtime pay required by 26 M.R.S.§ 
664(3), it fails to exempt overtime pay required by other labor laws, including 
those in other states. This raises constitutional concerns. 
The administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
0 The bill does not limit the deduction to the income that is included in 
federal adjusted gross income. 
¢ The bill is not clear as to whether the exemption is for all 
compensation received for hours worked in excess of 40 hours a week 
or if only the amount above the employee ’s normal wage is exempt. 
0 The bill does not directly address compensatory time agreements used 
to satisfy the State’s overtime pay requirement applicable to executive 
or judicial employees under 26 M.R.S. § 664(4). 
If enacted, the Administration recommends that the bill be amended to 
establish reporting requirements for affected employers to notify employees of the 
amount of eligible overtime paid to them during the year. This could be done on 
the employee ’s annual Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, which would ease the 
reporting requirement for affected taxpayers. 
LD 533 is preliminary estimated to result in a revenue loss of $70 million 
per year, assuming that all overtime pay is exempt, including the base hourly rate 
plus the extra 50% hourly rate. 
Estimated administrative costs are $104,918 beginning in ﬁscal year 2025. 
A new Tax Examiner position, effective October 1, 2024, will be required to 
process the affected income tax returns and perform desk audits on a portion of 
those returns to validate authenticity of overtime deductions claimed. One-time 
administrative costs for computer programming include adding a new line to the
2
individual income tax return, updating check stub messages and notices, making 
federal tape changes, and performing systems testing. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
