FEKNIE FINANCE AUTHORITY OF MAINE 
Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 654 
Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to 
Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units 
April 11, 2023 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am here to 
testify Neither For Nor Against L.D. 654, Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of 
Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to Encourage the Development of Accessory 
Dwelling Units. 
This resolve directs the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME) to establish a two- 
year pilot program to encourage the development of accessory dwelling units in the state. 
The program must buy down interest rates to levels below market rates for up to 100 
community bank loans for accessory dwelling units until the program ends. FAME also 
would be required to submit annual reports to the joint standing (select?) committee of 
the Legislature having jurisdiction over housing matters regarding the usage of the 
program, the first such report to be made no later than November 6, 2024. 
As some of you may know, FAME does not engage in financing housing in this 
state. Our duties are related to business and higher education finance for the most part, as 
well as administration of Maine’s Section 529 education savings plan, NextGen 529®. It 
would be a novel and potentially costly challenge if we were to be charged with the 
responsibilities set forth in the resolve. We may need to hire additional staff with 
expertise in housing loan finance, which is a heavily regulated industry. Additionally, a 
significant appropriation would obviously be required to seed the program in order to 
allow for the goals of the resolve to be met. We thus respectfully request that we be 
removed from this task and that a more appropriate home be found for the concept. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments. I will be happy to answer any 
questions you have.
