ST A T E  O F  MA I N E
  
GO V E R N O R ’S OF F I C E  O F  PO L I C Y  IN N O V A T I O N  A N D  T H E  FU T U R E  
1 81  ST A T E  HO U S E  ST A T I O N  
AU G U S T A , MA I N E  
0 4333 -0 181  
  
Testimony Neither For, Nor Against  
L.D. 654, Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to 
Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units  
 
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and distinguished members of the Joint Select Committee 
on Housing , my name is Greg Payne and I serve as  the Senior Advisor on Housing  Policy  in the 
Governo r’s Office o f Policy Innovation and the Future. I am here today to offer testimony 
neither for, nor against  L.D. 654, Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to 
Establish a Pilot Program to Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units.  
 
The Mills Adm inistration is committed to addressing the housing crunch caused by growing 
demand and limited supply. L.D. 2003 passed last year with bipartisan support in both legislative 
chambers and  was signed into law by Governor Mills . The law  provides homeowners across the 
state, within reasonable limits, the right to create accessory dwelling units on their property . 
However, we recognize that creating such a right is only one part of the equation. Most Mainers 
also need to be able to access financing in order to turn this new opportunity  into reality. L.D. 
654 seeks to address potential barriers to obtaining that financing.  
 
Those seeking loans will, at times, face challenges with getting approved for a loan due to their 
debt-to-income (DTI) ratio.  According to Total Mortgage, construction lenders look for a DTI 
under 45 percent and a down payment of at least 20 percent. As of April 7, Bath Savings offered 
a 30-year construction loan  at a 6.25% interest rate. However, m any lending institutions  do not 
allow for potential rental income from the ADU to be considered when determining loan 
eligibility , further constrain ing the DTI ratio . Other financing options  include , but are not limited 
to, cash-out refinancing, home equity lines of credit, and home improvement loans . However , 
financing for an ADU is not as commonplace as the traditional 30 -year home mortgage , and can 
present major obstacle s for Mainers who want to add an ADU  for an aging parent or simply to 
add a new  income source  that could  help the m pay their bills.   
 
The Mills Administration understands that the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME) does not 
want to be responsible for a housing -related loan product. We offer testimony neither for, nor 
against this proposal for that reason. However, we wish to work with the sponsor , this 
committee , and interested stakeholders  to identify a way forward that would make financing an 
ADU more accessible to more Maine  homeowners .  
 
We thank you for your diligent consideration of this initiative . I would be happy to answer any 
questions you  may have . 
 
