 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 654 (“Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of 
Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to Encourage the Development of Accessory 
Dwelling Units ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere  and members of the Joint Select  Committee  on 
Housing , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both r esidential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Associa tion 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 654. The bill is a complement to  the 
landmark legislation sponsored by former Speaker Fecteau last session ( Public Law Chapter 
672, “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing 
Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”) . That bill encouraged 
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) development by requiring all municipalities to allow t hem – 
thus encouraging homeowner s to help create more housing by developing an ADU on their 
property.  
 
LD 654  would financially incentivize the construction of ADUs. The bill  would create a 2-year 
pilot program at  the Finance Authority of Maine  that would provide low interest rates for the 
construction of ADUs , thus making the development more affordable and attainable for many 
who otherwise may not be financially able. Public and private sector housing initiatives tha t 
encourage and incentivize development of housing should be encouraged and supported. 
We commend this innovative concept and respectfully urge your support for the bill.  
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 654 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
