Maine Center for 
Economic Policy ﬂiiiziiz 
Testimony in support of LD 654 
Josie Phillips, Policy Fellow 
4/11/2023 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Gere and Pierce, and all members of the Housing Committee. My 
name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am testifying 
in favor of LD 654, a “Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot 
Program to Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units.” By making accessory 
dwelling unit-related loans more accessible, LD 654 would put our state on a better path to meet 
housing production goals and extend equitable opportunities to build wealth and financial 
security to more Mainers. 
Accessory dwelling units, or ADUs, are a win-win for their owners and the broader economy. 
Owners benefit from receiving an additional source of income, helping them to meet their 
immediate needs or build savings that make them more resilient to sudden losses of income. 
The economy benefits from the increased stock of housing, in particular affordable housing, as 
ADUs are more likely to be rented at rates affordable to households earning below the area 
median income.‘ Increasing the stock of affordable housing would extend housing security to 
more Mainers and relieve some of the pressure renters experience in Maine's particularly tight 
rental housing market.“ This security forms the bedrock of our economy, as people experiencing 
housing insecurity are substantially more likely to lose their jobs. ‘" Greater access to housing 
would also incentivize more people to move to Maine, as they are more likely to find the housing 
they need near their workplaces. 
A substantial barrier to ADUs’ ability to provide these benefits to individual households and the 
broader economy is that financing for accessory dwelling units is frequently insufficient to meet 
the needs of households with low or moderate incomes. “ if someone wishing to add an ADU 
onto their property does not have cash on hand or significant equity in their property, they 
frequently have to rely on home renovation loans. Renovation loans typically have higher 
interest rates, greater chances of denial, and add difficulty to finding contractors to work on the 
unit. This likely contributes to the fact that ADUs tend to be built in higher-income and more 
predominantly white neighborhoods. V If the barriers to financing were removed — such as by 
providing low-cost loans — then more Mainers would be likely to construct ADUs, and the 
benefits of their construction would be more equitably distributed. 
LD 654 would explore the possibility of removing these barriers by providing below market rate 
loans to finance ADU development. While the program would be modest at first — covering only 
100 loans — it could potentially be scaled up if the pilot is found to be successful. If the program 
is successful, it could very well prove to be a cost-effective way to improve the financial security 
of Mainers and meet the state’s housing production goals. Because of the significant potential 
that incentivizing ADU development has in addressing the shortage of affordable housing while 
improving economic equity and stability in Maine, I encourage this committee to vote yes on LD 
654 
Board of Directors 
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lucy Van Hook 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
‘U.C. Berkeley Terner Center for Housing innovation, ”ADU Construction Financing: Opportunities to expand access 
for homeowners." https://ternercenter.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/ADU-Paper-FINAL-July-7th.pdf 
“ U.S. Census Bureau, ”Housing Vacancies and Homeownership (CPS/HVS). ” 
https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/data/rates.html 
“‘ Desmond, Matthew and Gershenson, Carl, "Housing and Employment Insecurity among the Working Poor.” 
https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/mdesmond/fiIes/desmondgershenson.sp2016.pdf 
“’ Urban Institute, ”To Unleash Housing Supply, Allow and Finance Accessory Dwelling Units.” 
https2//www.urban.org/urban-wire/unleash-housing-supply-allow-and-finance-accessory-dwelling-units 
" U.C. Berkeley Terner Center for Housing Innovation, ”ADU Construction Financing: Opportunities to expand 
access for homeowners." https://ternercenter.berkeley.edu/wp-content/upIoads/2022/07/ADU-Paper-FINAL~July- 
7th.pdf
