 
Neither for Nor Against LD 654  
Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to 
Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units  
Committee on Housing  
April 11, 2023  
Good Afternoon, Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and distinguished members of t he Housing Committee,  
My name is Krista Simonis, and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit Union League. The 
Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine’s 50 credit unions and over 725,000 members 
statewide. We res pectfully submit the following testimony neither for nor against LD 654 . 
It is undeniable that Maine is currently in a housing crisis. The lack of affordable, safe housing affects Mainers 
across the state from every background and income level. Encouraging  the building of Accessory Dwelling Units 
could help provide desperately needed housing.  
We care about serving our communities, which means ensuring people have safe, affordable places to live. While 
we strongly support the idea behind LD 654, we would ur ge the committee to consider if FAME is the appropriate 
actor for this project, given that their portfolio does not currently include residential lending.  
As currently written, the bill only includes community banks, and we would ask that credit unions be  included. 
Credit unions are community -based financial -cooperatives with a vested interest in serving their communities. Two 
of our credit union CEOs currently serve on the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME) board.  We have experience 
with residential lendin g and could help administer these loans.  
We believe there are creative solutions to addressing Maine’s housing crisis and encouraging the construction of 
Accessory Dwelling Units could be one. We look forward to the committee’s thoughtful work on this top ic ask to 
be included in any such solution.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony, we hope to be able to serve as a resource for the committee 
during deliberations on this bill.  
Krista Simonis
Maine Credit Union League
LD 654
Good Afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of 
the Housing Committee, 
My name is Krista Simonis, and I am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the 
Maine Credit Union League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association 
for Maine’s 50 credit unions and over 725,000 members statewide. We respectfully 
submit the following testimony neither for nor against LD 654.
It is undeniable that Maine is currently in a housing crisis. The lack of affordable, safe
housing affects Mainers across the state from every background and income level. 
Encouraging the building of Accessory Dwelling Units could help provide 
desperately needed housing. 
We care about serving our communities, which means ensuring people have safe, 
affordable places to live. While we strongly support the idea behind LD 654, we 
would urge the committee to consider if FAME is the appropriate actor for this 
project, given that their portfolio does not currently include residential lending. 
As currently written, the bill only includes community banks, and we would ask that 
credit unions be included. Credit unions are community-based financial-cooperatives 
with a vested interest in serving their communities. Two of our credit union CEOs 
currently serve on the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME) board. We have 
experience with residential lending and could help administer these loans. 
We believe there are creative solutions to addressing Maine’s housing crisis and 
encouraging the construction of Accessory Dwelling Units could be one. We look 
forward to the committee’s thoughtful work on this topic ask to be included in any 
such solution. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony, we hope to be able to serve as a 
resource for the committee during deliberations on this bill. 
