H\AlNE AFFQRDABLE 
HOUSING contmon 
131" Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Laura Mitcheii, Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition on Aprii ll, 2023 
in favor of LD654 - Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to Encourage the 
Development of Accessory Dwelling Units 
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing. l\/ly 
name is Laura Mitchell, I serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Affordable Housing Coaltion. We are a nonprofit 
membership organization representing over 140 Maine development, engineering, design, construction, and housing 
services organizations. l\/lAHC's mission is the advocate for the creation and preservation of affordable housing so all 
Maine people have a home. 
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to you in favor of LD654 a Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to 
Establish a Pilot Program to Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units sponsored by Senator Pouliot. 
This resolve directs the Finance Authority of lvlaine to establish a 2-year pilot program to encourage the development of 
accessory dwelling units in the State. The program must buy down interest rates to levels below market rates for up to 
100 community bank loans for accessory dwelling units until the program ends. The authority must submit annual 
reports on the outcomes of this pilot to this committee. 
This is a critical pilot program that levels the playing field for individual land owners to build desperately needed housing 
in l\/laine, while earning income. We are lacking 20,000 plus units of housing for those who need it most. 
This bill helps people create an accessory dwelling unit on their property for an aging parent, a child just starting out in 
work and life, or others in need of affordable housing. Creating these rental units expands entrepreneurship 
opportunities for property owners to become landlords, creates small construction jobs throughout the state, can be 
critical income for seniors trying to stay in their home, and helps preserve old homes or farmhouses by creating an 
income stream to pay for maintenance. 
This isn't possible in the current high interest market and this pilot program provides a much need opportunity for low 
interest loans. 
FAME is the right partner for this work as they have the relationships with banks, provide excellent customer service, 
and can leverage others for any potential housing expertise that might be needed. 
lam testifying today in favor of LD 654 and urge you to support this resolve that levels the playing field so all Maine 
property owners can participate in addressing our housing crisis, while earning an income. Thank you. 
mainehousingcoalition.org lnfo@mainehousinqcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, lVlE 04101
