Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Melody Seymour, and Matthew MacMillan was my 
son. Matthew passed away tragically on May 4, 2018, in a motorcycle accident in Freeport, 
Maine. This accident occurred just beyond the overpass we are requesting to have changed to 
memorialize his name. 
Matthew was 24 years old when this accident occurred. That day, I lost a son, my children losta 
brother, his work lost a valuable employee, and many others lost a friend but the most signiﬁcant 
loss suffered was by Matthew who lost his life. 
Matthew never got the opportunity to buy a house, get married, have children, coach a team, 
climb another mountain or toss one more football - Matthew never got the chance to say 
goodbye. It's very difficult to not focus on all that will never be but, Mathew would not want us 
to live our lives that way. 
Matthew lived 24 short years but 24 of the best years making each moment count. As a young 
boy, Matthew began his love of football, and this passion continued into high school where he 
became a star varsity football player and was also chosen to compete in the Shriners Bowl. He 
developed many other interests as he grew into adulthood including politics, body building, 
kayaking, mountain climbing and wood working. Matthew was also was very enthusiastic about 
his position with Johnson and Jordan and his upcoming opportunity to complete his journeyman 
in plumbing. 
His future held boundless opportunities. Although many of those opportunities were never able 
to come to fruition, he was able to accomplish one of the most meaningful accomplishments in 
life and that was the relationships and bonds he forged Within our family. He was a role model 
for his younger brother Mike. He was a co-conspirator and conﬁdante with his sister 
Rebecca. With his older brother Shane he enjoyed a shared passion of nature and riding on two 
wheels. He ﬁlled his father with pride and joy; and, for me, he was laughter and happiness, 
a voice of reason, and my saving grace. 
Since Matthew’s passing, we have honored his life by having motorcycle ‘runs’ and promoting 
motorcycle safety awareness. Each event raised funds for others in need. The recipients of these 
funds were Midcoast Humane Society and Freeport Fire and Rescue, and last year's event was 
hosted for a veteran in need. 
As I come to a close with this testimony, I would like to thank everyone who has helped us to 
propose this bill and showed support in having it pass, especially Senator Mattie Daughtry and 
her legislative aide Samuel Baker who have been instrumental in guiding us through the 
appropriate steps and channels. 
To rename the Desert Road Overpass is important to our family as this is Where he lost his life. 
Where others now see a trafﬁc light we see a place where life was forever changed. This bridge 
is in a location where many residents of F reeport including classmates, coaches, teachers, 
friends, teammates, and family would see his name and remember Matthew and all the good he
1
brought into the lives of others. l am hopeful that this testimony gives you all insight into the 
importance of having this renamed in Matthew’s honor. 
Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely, 
Melody Seymour 
Lisbon, ME
