 
May 31, 2023  
 
 
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski  
Representative Joe Perry  
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: Opposition to LD 1946  
 
To the Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation:  
 
Please accept this letter on behalf of the members of the American Car 
Rental Association (ACRA) in opposition to LD 1946.  If passed by the 
legislature and signed into law, LD 1946 would place the State of Maine 
outside of the mainstream of eve ry other state and unduly harm individual 
consumers, as well as small and medium size businesses.  ACRA 
respectfully requests you reject this legislation.  
 
ACRA is the national association for over 98% of our nation’s car rental 
industry. Our membership i s comprised of over 300 car rental companies, 
including all of the brands you would recognize such as Alamo, Avis, 
Budget, Dollar, Enterprise, Fox, Hertz, National, Sixt and Thrifty.  ACRA 
members also include many system licensees and franchisees, mid -size, 
regional and independent car rental companies as well as smaller, “mom 
& pop” operators.  ACRA members have over 1.7 million registered 
vehicles in service in the United States, with fleets ranging in size from one 
million cars to ten cars.  
 
LD 1946 proposes to increase the state rental car tax from 10% to 15%.  This 
would create the single highest state vehicle rental tax in the country.  
Worse yet, this increased tax burden would be borne primarily by Maine 
residents.  Your constituents rent  vehicles for emergency needs from body 
shops, auto dealerships, and insurance companies should their primary 
vehicle need repair work.  Additionally, your constituents may not own a 
vehicle, but rent one for necessary trips or perhaps want to rent a lower  
emission vehicle – such as an electric vehicle – for environmental 
purposes.   
 
 
Ultimately, this higher tax will not be limited to “tourists”.  A significant 
percentage of rentals in Maine come from Maine residents. For one ACRA 
member, 60% of its rental are from Maine residents.  Therefore, ACRA 
strongly opposes increasing the state rental tax.  
 
Section 1 of LD 1946 also would be devastating to the industry and would 
harm the small and medium size businesses who operate in Maine.  This 
provision would re move a “sale for resale” tax exemption for rental car 
companies that purchase vehicles for the exclusive purpose of renting 
those vehicles in Maine.  This statutory language is in no way unique to our 
industry.  All retailers that purchase goods for the pu rpose of reselling or 
renting them as part of a taxable sale or rental do not pay tax on their 
initial purchase.  The tax is collected at the point of sale.  Removing this 
language would be unduly burdensome for our members and would likely 
inhibit their a bility to operate efficiently in Maine, much less grow and 
expand here.  There is no state that requires rental car companies – or any 
retailer – to pay tax on goods for resale.  Maine would be an outlier.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this let ter in strong opposition to LD 
1946.  For the reasons stated above, the bill’s provisions would bring great 
harm to your constituents and to those in the rental car industry who work 
to serve them every day.   
 
Should your committee have any further questi ons, please do not hesitate 
to contact me.   
 
Once again, thank you for your consideration.   
 
 
 
Sharon Faulkner , Executive Director  
American Car Rental Association  
 
 
 
 
 

