1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 5/17/23 
  
LD 1717 – An Act to Provide a Property Tax Exemption for All Veterans over 62 
Years of Age 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 1717 – 
An Act to Provide a Property Tax Exemption for All Veterans over 62 Years of Age 
Current law provides a $6,000 exemption from property taxes to veterans 
who served in the Armed Forces of the United States during a federally recognized 
war period once they reach the age of 62 years or are receiving a pension or 
compensation from the Federal Government for total disability as a veteran. 
Current law also provides that a veteran who is disabled by injury or disease 
incurred during active military service is eligible for the $6,000 exemption, 
regardless of when that service was performed. 
This bill removes the requirement that the military service be performed 
during a federally recognized war period, allowing a veteran who is at least 62 
years of age, regardless of when the military service was performed, to be eligible 
for the $6,000 exemption. A veteran who is receiving a pension or compensation 
from the Federal Government for a service-connected disability continues to be 
eligible for the $6,000 exemption, regardless of age or time of service.  
2 
 This bill simplifies the veteran’s exemption and therefore is a positive 
change. However, changes to the veteran’s exemption should be made within the 
context of a review of all property tax relief programs to ensure consistent policy 
and affordability. 
The Administration would also like to note that the expansion of the 
exemption in this bill will be subject to the constitutional reimbursements of 50% 
for revenue lost (article IV, section 23) and 90% mandated administrative costs 
(article IX, section 21). And the removal of the requirement, under this bill, for a 
veteran to have served during a war period is not extended to veterans eligible for 
the adaptive housing exemption under 36 M.R.S. § 653(1)(D-1). 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
