PO BOX 7860 
Portland, IVIE 04112 
(207) 774-A 5444 
www.ac|umaine org 
AMERICAN GIVII. LIBERTIES IINIUN 
Mame
I 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
Ought Not To Pass 
LD 1196 — An Act to Require Public Schools to Allow Parents and 
Guardians to Opt Out Their Children With Respect to Portions of the 
‘ 
Curriculum A 
-and- 
LD 1518 - An Act Regarding the Rights of Parents to Withdraw TheirI 
Children from Public School Classes or Activities That Include Certain 
Controversial Viewpoints 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
- 
May 11, 2023" 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, greetings. name is 
Meagan Sway, and I am Policy Director for the American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil 
liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of the ACLU of 
Maine, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders,» EqualityMaine, MaineTransNet and 
OUT Maine, I am here to testify against LDs 1196 and 1518. 
LD 1196 would establish a right for a parent to remove their child from class if the 
parent believes that the activity is in conﬂict with the parent’s religious or moral 
beliefs,1 or if the parent “considers that the class or school activity espouses, 
promotes, advances or compels the parent's child to adopt a viewpoint that conflicts 
with the viewpoint of the parent.” 
LD 1518 would do the same as LD 1196, but describes a list of “controversial 
viewpoints ” that parents can opt their children out of learning about. Although the 
list of controversial topics listed in LD 1518 are not being taught by teachers in 
Maine schools, the list does suggest that discussions of race, sex, color and national 
origin are controversial topics. To be clear: race, sex, gender, sexual orientation, 
1 Maine law already addresses conﬂicts between curriculum and a family’s sincerely-held religious 
beliefs. See 20-A MRS §6209 (“The commissioner shall develop accommodation provisions for 
instances where course content conﬂicts with sincerely held religious beliefs and practices ofa 
student's parent or guardian ”)_'
disability, and national origin are not in and of themselves controversial, any more 
than any other issue that students learn about in school. 
We oppose both bills because they would censor what children learn and would 
leave Maine students ill-prepared for life in a complex, multicultural democracy, 
and ill-equipped for interacting with people in other countries and other cultures. 
Schools are a central place where children learn the skills they need to be engaged 
citizens: how to form an opinion, how to back up that opinion with supporting 
evidence, how to communicate, and how to have disagreements. These are but a few 
of the skills that children learn in school that help them participate in democracy as 
they grow older. 
These bills would deprive public school children of learning those skills, by allowing 
parents to take their kids out of class whenever the parent believed the material 
taught was in conﬂict with the parent’s beliefs. While the list of “controversial 
viewpoints ” in LD 1518 is not being taught in Maine’s schools, students do havea 
right to an accurate education that includes a factual analysis of our state and 
country’s history and present. Without education about those topics, students are at 
a disadvantage to understand and navigate today’s complex world.
| 
Bills of this sort also raise legal questions about impermissible vagueness because 
they do not provide fair notice or clarity to teachers about what the law requires. 
The Federal District Court in New Hampshire recently allowed a vagueness 
challenge to proceed against state officials as to a “divisive concepts ” law there that 
contains some of the same “concepts ” listed in both bills here. The Court found the 
concepts themselves “do not give either teachers or enforcers the guidance they need 
to find the line between What the amendments prohibit and What they permit.” 
This is so especially because the amendments allow teachers to be sanctioned for 
speech that advocates a banned concept only by implication. ” Local 287, AF T-NH, 
AFL-CIO et al. v Edelblut, 2023 U.S. Dist LEXIS 4493, *42 (Jan. 12, 2023). 
Students have a First Amendment right to receive information in school, and that 
includes learning about complex topics. Parents have a right to impart their morals' 
and raise their children according to the parents’ sincerely held beliefs. These bills 
would upset this balance, and we urge you to vote ought not to pass.
