~ - . ,_ z_ 
MMNE 
SCHOOL 
. BOARDS 
PUBLIC EDUCATION ADVOCATE5 
OFFICERS 
PRESIDENT 
Peggy Lembo-Splaine 
Boothbay-Boothbay Harbor 
CSD 
PRESIDENT-ELECT 
Jane Osborne 
Deer Isle-Stonington CSD 
VICE PRESIDENT 
Faye Anderson 
RSU 22 
IMMEDIATE PAST 
PRESIDENT 
Lucy Richard 
MSAD1 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Steven W. Bailey 
MAINE COUNCIL OF 
SCHOOL BOARD 
ATTORNEYS 
Michael Buescher, Esq., Chair TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1196——-AN ACT TO REQUIRE PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO ALLOW 
PARENTS AND GUARDIANS TO OPT OUT THEIR CHILDREN WITH 
RESPECT TO PORTIONS OF THE CURRICULUM 
A 
AND 
L.D. l5l8———AN ACT REGARDING THE RIGHTS OF PARENTS TO 
WITHDRAW THEIR CHILDREN FROM PUBLIC SCHOOL CLASSES OR 
ACTIVITIES THAT INCLUDE CERTAIN CONTROVERSIAL VIEWPOINTS 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cul- 
tural Affairs Committee. I am Steven Bailey, executive director of the Maine 
School Boards Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative committee of the 
Maine School Boards Association, in opposition to L.D. 1196 and L.D. 1518. 
The MSBA Legislative Committee voted to oppose each of these bills. Parents 
have these rights already, as seen in the following policies already in place: Policy 
IMBB, Exemption from Required Instruction, and Policy IMB, Teaching About 
Controversial/Sensitive Issues. I am aware of multiple instances when these poli- 
cies have been utilized to provide parents and students altematives to what has 
been prepared as the curriculum opportunities for students within these 
schools. Teachers and administrators work with students to utilize the aforemen- 
tioned policies to make these provisions. 
Given this information, the MSBA Legislative Committee does not see the need 
for this statute that already is being implemented through policies within the 
schools. 
MSBA urges the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to vote 
ONTP on each of L.D. 1196 and L.D. 1518. 
49 COMMUNITY DRIVE - AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330 
Phone: 207-622-3473 - 
800-660-8484 ' 
Fax: 207-626-2968 ' 
Website: www.msmaweb.com
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: IMBB 
EXEMPTION FROM REQUIRED INSTRUCTION 
The curriculum of the school unit is designed to reﬂect the learning expectations for all 
students in all content areas of the system of Learning Results, as well as other statutory 
and regulatory requirements and content areas speciﬁed by the Board. 
The Board acknowledges that from time to time individual students may be exposed to 
some ideas and materials with which they or their parent(s)/legal guardian disagree. 
Students and their parent(s)/legal guardian cannot be required to adopt ideas with which 
they disagree, but such disagreement alone is not a sufﬁcient basis to exempt a student 
from the prescribed curriculum. Exemptions from the required curriculum should be 
minimized because they can detract from the overall instruction provided to the class asa 
Whole and the educational objectives sought to be achieved by the curriculum. 
The Board recognizes, however, that there could be topics in the curriculum which may be objectionable to individual students and/or parent(s)/legal guardian based on their 
particular sincerely held religious, moral or philosophical beliefs. Exemption from 
instruction which infringes on such beliefs may be requested by the parent(s)/legal 
guardian. 
Requests for exemption from instruction must be made in writing to the building 
Principal and are subject to the approval of the Principal. The Principal shall notify the 
Superintendent as soon as practicable of any request for exemption from instruction and 
of his/her decision. If the Principal denies an exemption request, the parent(s)/legal 
guardian may appeal to the Superintendent. 
In considering requests for exemption, factors that the Principal should consider may include: 
A. The alignment of the curriculum with the system of Learning Results; 
B. Whether the course or content area is required by state law or Board policy; 
C. The educational importance of the material or instruction from which 
exemption is requested; 
D. Evidence regarding the sincerity of the belief on which the request is based; 
E. Whether the school has a legal obligation to accommodate the exemption 
request; 
Page 1 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IMBB 
F. The effect of exemption or accommodation on the validity of the local 
assessment system; and 
G. Other factors that bear upon the particular request. 
Exemption from required instruction does not excuse the student from meeting the 
requirements of the Learning Results or from total credit hours or other requirements for 
graduation, or from performing alternative work. 
When the Principal determines that the curriculum that has been aligned with the system 
of Learning Results conﬂicts with sincerely held religious beliefs of a student or his/her 
parent or legal guardian, reasonable accommodation in the curriculum shall be made for 
the student, within the scope of existing resources. Alternative instruction may be 
provided by the school or through approved independent study. Any alternative 
instruction shall be approved in advance by the Principal in consultation with appropriate 
instructional staff and shall meet the standards and objectives of the part of the 
curriculum that is being replaced. When requests for exemption from required 
curriculum are made for religious reasons, a parent] guardian who is dissatis ﬁed with the 
Principal ’s decision may appeal to the Superintendent. If the accommodation in the 
curriculum that is requested is so great that the validity of the local assessment system is 
compromised, the Superintendent will determine how to address the situation, subject to 
the approval of the Commissioner. 
When a student is exempted from any portion of the regular curriculum for other than 
religious reasons (exemption based on sincere philosophical or moral beliefs), the staff 
will make reasonable efforts, within the scope of existing resources, to accommodate 
alternative instruction for the student. Alternative instruction may be provided by the 
school or through approved independent study. Any alternative instruction shall be 
approved in advance by the Principal in consultation with the classroom teacher, and 
shall meet the standards and objectives of the part of the curriculum that is being 
replaced. When requests for exemption are made for philosophical or moral reasons, a 
parent/guardian who is dissatis ﬁed with the Principal ’s decision may appeal to the 
Superintendent, whose decision shall be ﬁnal. [OPTIONAL ADDITIONAL STEP: 
Local boards may wish to consider adding an appeal to the Board in the event thata 
parent/guardian is dissatis ﬁed with the Superintendent ’s decisi0n.] 
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA § 6209 
LD 1536, Chap. 51 Resolves 
Ch. 127 § 3.07 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules) 
Ch. 131 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules) 
Page 2 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IMBB 
Cross Reference: ADF — School District Commitment to Learning Results 
IJJ - Instructional and Library Material Selection 
IMB — Teaching About Controversial/Sensitive Issues 
IMBAA ~— Alternatives to Biological Dissection 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board's policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and 
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 3 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATIQN
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: IMB 
TEACHING ABOUT CONTROVERSIAL/SENSITIVE ISSUES 
American academic tradition stresses the free contest of ideas as a vital element both in 
the development of curriculum and in classroom teaching. 
Teaching Controversial Issues 
Training in reﬂective and responsive thinking, may be incorporated in course 
offerings at all grade levels. This training is impossible, or at least severely 
hampered, if the community does not respect the principles of freedom and 
recognize that dissent does not necessarily mean disloyalty. However, one form of 
dissent which is incompatible with freedom is that which attempts to end freedom. 
Irrational fears do just this, and thereby may block the school in its efforts to 
handle controversial issues in an atmosphere of freedom and thoroughness. 
A. It is the responsibility of the schools to make provision for the study of 
controversial issues. 
1. The policy on controversial issues should be deﬁned in terms of the 
rights of students rather than in terms of the rights of teachers. 
2. The study should be emphasized in the high school, when most 
students are mature enough to study the signiﬁcant controversial 
issues facing our society. 
3. The study should be objective and scholarly with a minimum 
emphasis on opinion and a maximum emphasis on facts and critical 
thinking. 
B. In the study of controversial issues the students have the following rights: 
1. The right to study any controversial issue which has political, 
economic, or social significance and concerning which (at the 
appropriate level) he/she should begin to have an opinion; 
2. The right to have free access to all relevant information; 
3. The right to form and express opinions on controversial issues 
without thereby jeopardizing relations with the teacher or the school; 
and 
Page 1 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION 
NEPN/N SBA Code: IMB
4. The right to study under competent instruction in an atmosphere free 
from bias and prejudice. 
C. The teacher employs the same methods in handling controversial issues as 
characterize the best teaching at any time. 
1. The teacher, in selecting both the content and the method of 
instruction, is mindful of the maturity level of the students. 
2. The teacher has assured him/herself that the controversial subject to 
be discussed belongs within the framework of the curriculum to be 
covered, that the subject is signiﬁcant as well as meaningful for the 
students, and that through the discussion, students will have the 
opportunity to grow. 
3. The teacher handles the classroom presentation in ways that will 
ensure a wide range of information and interpretation for the 
students ’ consideration and strives to present a balance among many 
points of view. 
4. The teacher does not use the classroom as a personal forum. He/she 
does not employ the techniques of the demagogue or the 
propagandist for attention, for control, or simply for color. The 
teacher has the right to identify and express his/her own point of 
view in the classroom as long as he/she indicates clearly that it is 
his/her own. 
5. The teacher emphasizes keeping an open mind, basing one’s 
judgment on known facts, looking closely at facts to evaluate them 
in terms of the subject under discussion, and being ready to change 
one’s opinion should new facts come into light. 
6. The emphasis always is on the method of forming an opinion as 
much as on the opinion formed.A 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reﬂect official Association policy. They are 
not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used as a starting point for a board's policy development on 
speciﬁc topics. Rarely does one board's policy serve exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA 
recommends a careful analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and suitability 
to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and are not intended asa 
substitute for the advice of a board's own legal counsel. 
Page 2 of2 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
