, HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Anne-Marie Mastraccio TTYi MAINE RELAY 711 
23 Lebanon Street 
Sanford, ME 04073 
Phone: (207) 432-1453 
Anne-MarieMastraccio@legislaturemaine. gov 
May 2, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Anne-Marie Mastraccio introducing 
LD 1370, An Act to Simplify the School Budget Validation Process 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I am Anne-Marie Mastraccio, Representing House 
District 142, parts of the City of Sanford and the Village of Springvale. I am here today to 
present LD 1370, An Act to Simplify the School Budget Validation Process. 
In 2007, the Maine legislature enacted a law mandating school district consolidation. The goal 
was ostensibly to improve educational opportunities for Maine students and reduce the cost of 
providing education by increasing efﬁciencies in educational delivery. I am not before you today 
to debate the merits or consequences of that legislation but one particular piece that does not 
work in my community. 
One remnant of that law is a state mandated vote on the school budget that occurs in every 
community, big or small, unless the community votes to suspend that requirement. They have the 
opportunity to do this every three years. 
My original version of this bill would have tweaked the process to ensure that school budget 
votes would require a sufﬁcient tumout at the polls to be valid. However, I believe it is time to 
revisit the decision the Legislature made in 2007 and repeal this mandate. 
Most communities begin their school budget deliberations early in the ﬁscal year and havea 
multi layered process that includes public discussion and input and culminates in the local 
elected body (i.e. city council, select board, Town meeting,) arriving at the ﬁnal budget to be 
implemented. At that point, the state takes over and says, now you must have a public vote to 
validate all that work. 
In the 15 years Sanford has been required to hold a vote to validate the school budget, turn out 
has never been higher than 22% and that occurred in 2018; a highly contested gubernatorial 
primary that featured a popular Sanford resident. Turnout usually hovers between 3-5%, when 
nothing else is on the ballot or 13-15% when there are local or state referenda appearing along 
with party primaries. 
District 142: Sanford (part) and Springvale (part)
The cost to my municipality is now around $6,000. That cost in 2021, when 584 voters went to 
the polls, translated to more than $10 per vote. 
My amendment proposes to repeal the mandate and allow a municipality to hold a referendum on 
the school budget, should they choose to do so. A suggested “opt-in” vote process is detailed in 
the amendment. 
The state would never require or mandate a local municipal budget referendum-why are school 
budgets treated differently? This is simply a local control issue that needs to be returned to the 
cities and towns of Maine. 
I urge you to repeal this mandate and allow community choice.
Proposed Amendment to LD 1370 
Committee: EDU 
Date: 5-2-23 
LD 1370 — An Act to Simplify the School Budget Validation Process 
Amend the bill by striking out everything after the enacting clause and before the summary 
and inserting the following: 
‘Sec. 1. 20-A MRSA §1486 is amended to read: 
§1486. Budget validation referendum opt in 
After January 31, 2008, the procedure for approval of the annual budget of a regional 
school unit must be in accordance with this section and section 1485. [PL 2007, C. 240, Pt. 
XXXX, §13 (NEW).] 
After January 31, 2024 the provisions of this section are no longer required as part of the 
annual budget approval of a regional school unit. A regional school unit may continue to use 
the budget validation process outline in this section if approved by an affirmative vote of 
eligible voters at a November general election as outlined in section l. 
1. Regional School Unit Opt-in vote 
An article to consider continued use of the budget validation referendum process may be 
placed on a warrant for a referendum vote by either a man ority vote of the regional school 
unit board or a written petition ﬁled with the regional school unit board by at least 10% of the 
number of voters voting in the last gubernatorial election in the municipalities in the school 
administrative unit. 
The question shall ask voters if they wish to use the budget validation process that is no 
longer required by the state. 
For the results of an opt-in vote to be considered valid, the number of voters who 
participate in the budget validation referendum opt-in must be equal to or greater than 25% 
ofﬂthe total number of voters who participated in the last gubernatorial election. If an 
insufficient number of voters participate in the opt-in referendum the regional school unit 
will not use the budget validation process in this section. 
2. Budget validation. Following development of the annual regional school unit budget 
and approval at a regional school unit budget meeting as provided in section 1485,a 
referendum must be held in the regional school unit as provided in this section to allow the 
voters to validate or reject the total budget adopted at the regional school unit budget 
meeting. 
Every 3 years, the voters in a regional school unit that has opted to use the budget validation 
process shall consider continued use of the budget validation referendum process. The 
warrant at the budget validation referendum in the 3rd year following adoption or
Proposed Amendment to LD 1370 
continuation of the referendum process must include an article by which the voters of the 
school administrative unit may indicate whether they wish to continue the process for another 
3 years. The warrant for the referendum to validate the ﬁscal year 2010-11 budget is deemed 
the 3rd-year warrant. A vote to continue retains the process for 3 additional years. A vote to 
discontinue the process ends its use beginning with the following budget year and prohibits 
its reconsideration for at least 3 years. 
An article to consider reinstatement of the budget validation referendum process may be 
placed on a warrant for a referendum vote by either a majority vote of the regional school 
unit board or a written petition ﬁled with the regional school unit board by at least 10% of the 
number of voters voting in the last gubematorial election in the municipalities in the school 
administrative unit. The regional school unit board shall place the article on the next 
scheduled warrant or an earlier one if determined appropriate by the regional school unit 
board. If adopted by the voters, the budget validation referendum process takes effect 
beginning in the next budget year or the following budget year if the adoption occurs less 
than 90 days before the start of the next budget year. Once approved by the voters, the 
budget validation referendum process may not be changed for 3 years. 
[PL 2011, c. 171, §3 (AMD).] 
3. Validation referendum procedures. The budget validation referendum must be held 
on or before the 30th calendar day following the scheduled date of the regional school unit 
budget meeting. The referendum may not be held on a Sunday or legal holiday. The vote at 
referendum is for the purpose of approving or rejecting the total regional school unit budget 
approved at the regional school unit budget meeting. The regional school unit board shall 
provide printed information to be displayed at polling places to assist voters in voting. That 
information is limited to the total amounts proposed by the regional school unit board for 
each cost center summary budget category article, the amount approved at the regional 
school unit budget meeting, a summary of the total authorized expenditures and, if applicable 
because of action on an article under section 15690, subsection 3, paragraph A, a statement 
that the amount approved at the regional school unit budget meeting includes locally raised 
funds that exceed the maximum state and local spending target pursuant to section 15671-A, 
subsection 5. If the legislative body of the regional school unit at the regional school unit 
budget meeting approves an article pursuant to section 1485, subsection 5, the substance of 
the article must be included in the printed information displayed at polling places for the 
budget validation referendum. 
[PL 2015, C. 463, §2 (AMD).] 
4. Budget validation referendum voting. The method of calling and voting at a budget 
validation referendum is as provided in sections 1502 and 1503, except as otherwise provided 
in this subsection or as is inconsistent with other requirements of this section. 
A. A public hearing is not required before the vote. [PL 2007, C. 240, Pt. XXXX, §13 
(NEW).] 
B. [PL 2007, c. 668, §20 (RP).]
Proposed Amendment to LD 1370 
C. The warrant and absentee ballots must be delivered to the municipal clerk no later 
than the day after the date of the regional school unit budget meeting. [PL 2007, C. 668, 
§20 (AMD).] 
D. Absentee ballots received by the municipal clerk may not be processed or counted 
unless received on the day after the conclusion of the regional school unit budget meeting 
and before the close of the polls. [PL 2007, C. 668, §20 (AMD).] 
E. All envelopes containing absentee ballots received before the day after the conclusion 
of the regional school unit budget meeting or after the close of the polls must be marked 
"rejected" by the municipal clerk. [PL 2007, c. 668, §2O (AMD).] 
F. The article to be voted on must be in the following form: 
(1) "Do you favor approving the (name of regional school unit) budget for the 
upcoming school year that was adopted at the latest (name of regional school unit) 
budget meeting? 
Yes No" [PL 2009, C. 415, Pt. B, §7 (RPR).] 
o. [PL 2009, C. 415, Pt. B, §s (RP).] 
[PL 2009, c. 571, Pt. E, §4 (AMD).] 
5. Failure to approve budget. If the voters do not validate the budget approved in the 
regional school unit budget meeting at the budget validation referendum vote, the regional 
school unit board shall hold another regional school unit budget meeting in accordance with 
this section and section 1485 at least 10 days but no longer than 45 days after the referendum 
to vote on a budget approved by the regional school unit board. The budget approved at the 
regional school unit budget meeting must be submitted to the voters for validation at 
referendum in accordance with this section. The process must be repeated until a budget is 
approved at a regional school unit budget meeting and validated at referendum. If a budget is 
not approved and validated before July lst of each year, section 1487 applies. 
[PL 2011, c. 678, Pt. B, §1 (AMD).]
