MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Office & Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In Support Of 
LD 708 An Act to Establish a Sales Tax Holiday Weekend 
March 7, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. I am testifying in support of LD 708. The Maine Tourism Association is 
the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kitteiy to Calais, and annually produces the state’s ofﬁcial travel planner, Maine Invites 
You. 
The publicity from a sales tax holiday will provide Maine with great tourism marketing. This will 
certainly attract visitors not just for the weekend, but longer. Visitors will come who otherwise wouldn’t 
have planned a trip to Maine. They also are likely to return in the future. They know they are saving 
money in taxes and therefore will spend more once here. The increased business and proﬁts to our 
attractions, tour operators, museums, lodging, restaurants, and retail will help these businesses 
tremendously. 
\Vhat we know from operating the seven State Visitor Information Centers is that when people talk toa 
travel counselor, they are at least three times more likely to stay longer and spend more. This is because a 
counselor shows the visitors places and experiences they otherwise would not have considered. Similarly, 
when visitors have this extra enticement to come to Maine, they won’t merely purchase retail goods— 
they will go to restaurants, visit a museum, take a tour, stay at a bed and breakfast — taking part in 
activities and spending money in Maine which they otherwise might not have done without the tax 
holiday incentive. 
This also would have a ripple effect, benefiting other Maine businesses. The economic activity generated 
by a sales tax holiday can lead tourism businesses to invest in their operations (e. g. maintenance, 
improvements, expansions) that they may have deferred over the past few years due to the pandemic. 
This, in turn, helps other Mainers working in these ancillary occupations. 
Tourism is one of Maine’s largest private industries, sustaining 1 out of every 5 jobs (over 143,000 in 
2021) and contributing hundreds of millions of dollars to the Maine economy (tourists spent nearly $7.9 
billion in 2021). MTA has no position on the exact dates or length of the sales tax holiday but we strongly 
believe Maine should join the l8 other states who have some type of tax holiday. 
I respectfully ask that you to vote in favor of LD 708. Thank you for your consideration. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, 
Maine Invites You (since 1933).
