Maine Grocers & 
Food Producers 
Association 
fkjiji‘ PO BOX 5234 Tuesday, March 7, 2023 
Augusta, ME 04332 
207.622.4461 
"‘*5“““*i'!‘L info@mgfpa.org 
IN SUPPORT - LD 708 ‘An Act to Establish a Sales Tax Holiday Weekend’ 
Dear Senator Grohoski - Chair, Representative Perry - Chair, and Members of the Committee on Taxation, 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association (MGFPA). 
The Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association is a business trade association representing Maine's food community; Main 
Street businesses, including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, food and beverage 
producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service companies. 
We are testifying in support of LD 708 which would allow for a 4-day sales tax free holiday weekend. Maine businesses, 
residents and tourists could all mutually benefit from this annual event. This has the ability to generate an uptick in sales, 
resulting in savings for a weekend worth of purchases. 
We have seen a sales tax holiday proposed previously and we suggest that this bill's text is amended to exclude tobacco 
products, recreational marijuana, motor vehicles and boats (and purchases above $2,500). The sales tax holiday ideally would 
be universally applied across both tangible, physical goods as well as experiential and service-related spends such as dining and 
lodging. This approach is reasonable while also stretching across sectors for a wide-ranging benefit to many of Maine's 
businesses. 
According to the Maine Tourism 5-Year Strategic Plan (2019 — 2023), "Phocuswright data suggests that more than 60% of 
travelers would consider an impulse trip based on a good deal on a flight or hotel." The data and plan also suggest that DMOs 
(Destination Management Organizations), ”need to consider strategies that disrupt traditional trip planning cycles.” The 
spontaneity of a sales-tax free weekend that encompasses shopping, experiences, room rentals and meals would be the perfect 
ticket to entice those impulsively looking to get away to Maine. This also supports the strategic plan's recommendation to align 
work between chambers of commerce, convention & visitors bureaus and individual tourism businesses. A sales tax-free 
campaign could easily be promoted collectively across the state with a strong "single unifying ” message for efficiency. 
We are encouraged by this opportunity, especially for members who border both New Hampshire as they have expressed the 
challenges of competing with our tax-free neighbors. This would give these merchants an even playing field, even just fora 
weekend against their neighbors. it's encouraging to think that the financial well-being of Maine's state funds could serve 
Maine's tax-payers with a small relief while spurring future purchases to further stimulate the economy. 
We support the opportunity to provide us all with this economic relief and look forward to learning more about what the 
economic impact of a sales tax-free holiday event would mean for Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. 
Christine Cummings 
Executive Director 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association | PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME 04332 I 207.622.4461 I info@mgfpa.org
