TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Tuesday, March 7, 2023 
LD 708 — “An Act to Establish a Sales Tax Holiday Weekend’ 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee - good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against LD 708, “An Act 
to Establish a Sales Tax Holiday Wee/cend. ” 
This bill would create an annual four-day sales tax holiday, beginning on the 
third Friday before Labor Day; this year, the ﬁrst day would be August 18. Unlike 
prior proposals in earlier Legislatures, which would have exempted only certain 
deﬁned items, this proposal would exempt all sales of any tangible personal 
property during the holiday period —~ including motor vehicles, watercraft, prepared 
food, cigarettes and tobacco products, cannabis, and alcohol. Without additional 
limitations, the preliminary revenue loss would be more than $30 million annually. 
From a policy perspective, numerous studies have concluded that sales tax 
holidays have a limited impact on a state’s economy and have not been shown to 
promote economic growth. Instead, customers shift the timing of their purchases 
to coincide with the stated period. Sales tax holidays also primarily beneﬁt 
consumers who can afford to make large or bulk purchases; consumers without the 
means to make large or bulk purchases during a single weekend will not adjust 
their spending patterns to receive the beneﬁt of not paying tax. In addition, sales
1
tax holidays are generally burdensome on businesses, increasing compliance costs 
Finally, much of the beneﬁt of a sales tax holiday occurring in the middle of 
August will go to nonresidents. 
While this bill is emergency legislation; depending on the amount of time 
available between enactment and the stated ﬁrst day of the holiday, there may not 
be enough time for Maine Revenue Services to prepare required notices and other 
guidance material in advance of the holiday. 
The Administration looks forward to Working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
