March 13, 2023  
 
Chairman Hickman, Chairwoman Supica, and Distinguished Members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee:  
 
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis, and I live in Orono. I am testifying in favor of LD 886.  
 
My wife , Cecilia,  and I have two adult children, one of whom has a significant disability. Cecilia 
came home after unsuccessfully trying to cast an absentee ballot a few years ago because it 
was too close to Election Day. Under current Maine law, people with a physical disa bility —but 
not any other kind of disability —can request late absentee ballots  (after the 3rd business day 
before Election Day) , but people who care for someone with a disability can’t.  Because our 
son’s need for support had recently spiked, it wasn’t clear  whether we’d be able to leave home 
on Election Day long enough to vote.  
 
Cecilia said the law needed to change. She was right.  
 
People with disabilities —all kinds of disabilities —have documented challenges with 
transportation and experience other barriers  to voting. And Maine’s  system of services and 
support for children and adults with disabilities is so brittle that it frequently breaks, leaving 
people with disabilities and the people who support them —including parents and informal 
caregivers —having to s cramble at the last minute. When we can’t request a late absentee 
ballot, it means one more barrier to casting a ballot at all. This is wrong.  
 
I understand that there are a number of voting bills under consideration this session. 
Regardless of whether you  choose to recommend that the full Legislature pass those bills, 
please vote Ought To Pass on LD 886. For the present —and for the future, when future 
Legislatures may consider other changes in voting laws —there needs to be a record of an 
affirmative vote b y this Legislature that voting shouldn’t be so hard for people with 
disabilities —all kinds of disabilities —and for parents and other informal caregivers who support 
them.  
 
Thank you. I’d be happy to take any questions you may have.  
 
