March 13, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Committee on Veterans and 
Legal Affairs, my name is Alysia Melnick and I am submitting this testimony today on 
behalf of Mainers for Modern Elections in support of LD 886. 
Mainers for Modern Elections is a coalition committed to ensuring our right to vote 
safely transcends politics and partisanship. We advocate for safe, secure, modern 
elections. Our coalition is committed to securing access to the ballot for every eligible 
Maine voter.  LD 886 would forward this mission. 
Coalition members include the ACLU of Maine, AARP of Maine, the Center for Secure 
and Modern Elections, Common Cause, Defend Our Health, Gateway Community 
Services, the League of Women Voters of Maine, the Maine AFL-CIO, Maine Citizens 
for Clean Elections,
Maine Conservation Voters, Maine Education Association, Maine Equal Justice, Maine 
Immigrant Rights Coalition, Maine People's Alliance, Maine Service Employees 
Association-SEIU Local 1989, Maine Women's Lobby, Maine Youth Power, Planned 
Parenthood of Northern New England, and Represent Us.
LD 886 makes commonsense adjustments to special circumstance absentee ballot 
eligibility which will allow more Mainers who may have challenges voting on Election 
Day cast their ballots. Expanding access for voters with disabilities and voters assisting 
those with disabilities, LD 886 takes an important step forward in reducing obstacles to 
voting. 
With a right as fundamental to our democracy as voting, it's not our place to question 
the motives of those who aren't able to vote in-person on Election Day. Instead, we 
must do everything possible to reduce barriers to voting. Expanding the special 
circumstance absentee ballot eligibility, as this bill proposes, would do so.
We believe that both categories of voter added in this bill for special circumstance 
eligibility are important. Clearly, the distinction of whether a voter’s disability is physical 
should not determine whether they are able to apply for a special circumstance 
absentee ballot. Voters with disabilities should have every opportunity possible to cast 
their ballots.
We also believe it is important to ensure that informal caregivers have access to special 
circumstance absentee ballots. Caregivers for voters with disabilities may face 
unplanned difficulties in casting their ballots on Election Day, and allowing these 
caregivers the ability to cast a special circumstance absentee ballot will help ensure 
they are not prevented from being able to participate in our democracy. 
Expanding the special circumstances absentee ballot to these categories of voters will 
further Maine’s commitment to ensuring all eligible voters have the opportunity to 
exercise their right to vote. We urge the committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 886.
