March 13, 2023  Chairman Hickman, Chairwoman Supica, and Distinguished Members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee:  My name is Cecilia Cobo-Lewis, and I live in Orono. I am testifying in favor of LD 886. Thank you to Representative Osher for sponsoring it.  I have two adult children, one of whom has a significant disability. In 2017, when my children were teenagers, my son with a disability started having significant behavior challenges as Election Day was about to happen. I was worried whether I’d be able to get to the polls on Election Day, I had conflicts during the school day, and it wasn’t clear whether he’d be able to be without me after school when I wanted to go vote. So I stopped intp my town office to request and fill out an absentee ballot shortly before the weekend before Election Day.  When I got there, the woman in line ahead of me told the town clerk that she and her husband had decided to take a vacation, so she’d like an absentee ballot. That qualified as being unexpectedly out of town. So she got to vote, right there in the town office.  When my turn came, I explained my situation. The clerk felt bad, but she showed me the list of valid legal reasons for a late absentee ballot and said I didn’t have one of those reasons. She said she didn’t want to send me away without calling Augusta, so I waited while she called the Secretary of State’s office. She came back and told me it had to be one of those specific reasons, and was there any possible way for me to meet one of those reasons. But there wasn’t. And because I wasn’t prepared to lie to get a ballot, I left without a ballot. The only honest thing I could do was risk not voting.  I am fortunate that, by the time Election Day came, my son’s behavior had calmed to the point where I was able to get to the polls. But I never should have been put into that situation.  Please pass LD 886. Parents and other informal caregivers of children with disabilities, adults with disabilities, and elders requiring significant care have a hard enough time as it. Please stop making it hard for them to vote.  Thank you, I would be happy to take any questions you might have.   
