 
 
 
 
March 13, 2023  
 
Sen. Craig Hickman , Chair  
Rep. Laura Supica , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 886 An Act to Allow Clerks to Issue Absentee Ballots After the 3rd Business Day Before Election 
Day to Voters Who Have a Nonphysical Disability and Voters Who Support a Person with a Disability  
Chair Hickman , Chair Supica , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs : My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director  for RepresentUs , the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti -corruption organization.  RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in support of  LD 
886. Our organization believes this bill will improve access to the ballot for persons with disabilities and 
their caregivers and should therefore be supported.  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government  
should be representative of and a ccountable to the people. It advocates for policies to  
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring  
meaningful change. Regarding the electoral process, we work to  pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand vo ter access , make elections more representative,  and enhance  election  security.   
LD 886 would expand the list of persons who may receive an absentee ballot after the 3rd business day 
before election day to include persons with any disability, rather than pe rsons with a physical disability 
as current law provides, and to include persons providing volunteer or uncompensated care to a person 
with a disability.  
All Americans have the right to vote, regardless of ability. People with disabilities and caregivers 
frequently face unforeseen obstacles to voting on Election Day. According to the National Alliance for 
Caregiving and AARP, more than  1 and 5 American adults serve as caregivers.1 Mainers shouldn't have to 
choose between their responsibilities as caregive rs and their responsibilities as citizens.  LD 886 will give 
Mainers with disabilities and their caregivers added flexibility to make certain they can exercise their 
right to vote.  
For these reasons, we urge the committee to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 886.  
 
1 "Caregiving in the U.S. 2020," National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP (2020), available 
at https://www.caregiving.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/08/AARP1316_ExecSum_CaregivingintheUS_508.pdf  

