Laurie Osher, PhD
13 Mayo Street 
Orono, ME 04473 
Phone:  (207) 944-6743 
Laurie.Osher@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
March 23, 2023
Testimony of Representative Laurie Osher in support of
LD 886 An Act to Allow Clerks to Issue Absentee Ballots
After  the 3rd Business Day
Befor e Election Day to Voters Who Have a Non-physical Disability and Voters Who
Support a Person with a Disability
Before the Joint Standing Committee on V eterans and Legal Affairs
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Veterans and Legal
Affairs Committee. I am Laurie Osher and I represent District 25, the majority of Orono. Thank
you for providing me the opportunity to express my support for
LD 886 An Act to Allow Clerks
to Issue Absentee Ballots After  the 3rd Business Day Befor e Election Day to Voters Who
Have a Non-physical Disability and Voters Who Support a Person with a Disability
.
Current Maine law has a “blackout period” that doesn’ t allow a voter to obtain an absentee ballot
after the 3rd business day before election day (usually Thu, Fri, or Mon before election day),
with just a few exceptions.  One exception is that a person with a physical disability- and only a
physical disability- is allowed to obtain an absentee ballot even during this “blackout period”.
There is no exception for a person with any other kind of disability to obtain an absentee ballot
and vote.  This can make it hard to vote for people who have a non-physical disability . It can also
make it hard to vote for people who support a person with a disability , especially parents of
children with disabilities when their paid support falls through at the last minute.
This bill was brought to me by a constituent who is the parent of a person with a disability .  I
have had the privilege of knowing her and her husband for over two decades.  She and I were
pregnant at the same time, and we are both moms of twin boys. We have raised our children
while being engaged citizens and regular voters, but her challenges to voting are much greater
than mine. Her son, especially when he was younger , needed the care of a paid support
professional or a parent at all times.  When the paid support professional is unable to take their

shift on election day- and because of staf fing challenges the agency has no staf f to replace them,
the parent cannot vote on election day .
It is her life experience that informs us, the policy makers, that a sudden lack of support
professionals for her son or for any others needing support, means that she and any other parent
or guardian of a person with a disability would be unable to cast their vote.
LD 886 would change the law to allow anyone with
any
kind
of disability to obtain an absentee
ballot even during the blackout period. LD 886 would also change the law to allow informal
caregivers or parents or guardians providing direct support to a person with a disability to also
obtain an absentee ballot during the blackout period.
I urge this committee to support the passage of
LD
886 An Act to Allow Clerks to Issue
Absentee Ballots After  the 3rd Business Day Befor e Election Day to Voters Who Have a
Non-physical Disability and Voters Who Support a Person with a Disability
.
