Department of the Secretary of State 
Bureau of Corporations, Electrons and Commzsszons 
. 
‘DUI 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of State 
_ _ Julie L. Flynn 
Deputy Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March I3, 2023 
Testifying In Support of 
L.D. 886, “An Act to Allow Clerks to Issue Absentee Ballots After the 3rd Business Day Before 
Election Day to Voters Who Have a Nonphysical Disability and Voters Who Support a Person witha 
Disability" 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
ofﬁcer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 886. 
Title 21-A allows voters to request an absentee ballot through several different methods and sets 
speciﬁc procedures for each approved method. The current deadline to request an absentee ballot— 
except for those voters with special circumstances, as deﬁned in the law — is the close of business on 
the 3rd business days before election day. The law currently includes voters with a “physical 
disability ” in those exceptions. 
L.D. 886 would clarify that any voter with a disability is included in this exception. All voters who 
have a disability could request _a special circumstances ballot simply by self-certifying that they have a- 
disability on the absentee ballot application. Municipal clerks should not have to decide if the voter’s 
disability is of a nature or degree that qualiﬁes that voter for the ballot. We suggest that line 10 of the 
bill be amended to read: “(2) Self-certi ﬁes as a voter with a disability; ” rather than just adding the 
phrase “or other.” Additionally, L.D. 886 also would allow for informal or volunteer caregivers ofa 
person with a disability to qualify for a special circumstances absentee ballot. We are also in support of 
that provision of the bill as our department believes these two groups of people face challenges many 
of us will never know and therefore, require appropriate accommodations to ensure their right to vote 
is unobstructed. 
If this bill is passed, the department would need to revise our special circumstances application to 
reﬂect the changes and provide training and documentation to municipal election ofﬁcials to ensure no 
voter is refused an absentee ballot for which the voter is qualiﬁed. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions that the 
committee may have. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7 736
