 
 
 
  
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition to  
LD 1758, An Act to Require a Municipality to Pay a Homeless Shelter on a Per Capita Basis for Persons 
Released or Delivered by the Municipality to the Shelter  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local Government 
Committee. My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting written testimony in opposition to LD 1758 on 
behalf of the 70 municipal leaders who were elected by their pe ers to serve on the Association’s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
From the perspective  of local leaders , requiring municipalities to pay organizations $100 per day 
for providing servic es to those in need is troubling to say the least.  These entities are specifically 
organized to shelter unhoused populations, often receive state revenues for their operations, and to the 
extent they own property, are exempt from taxation.   Furthermore, the statutes gui ding the administration 
of the General Assistance laws  provides that individuals residing  in emergency shelters are eligible for 
assistance , and describe s the length of time  a community is required to fund the assistance provided. In a 
nutshell, communities are already supporting these vulnerable populations.   
Additionally, municipal officials question  the standards that would be in place to determine if a 
community had “released or delivered” a ho meless person to a shelter.  It is sometimes the case that 
communities are made awar e only after the fac t that an individual is housed in a shelter.   
Finally, LD 1758 is an unfunded mandate and will need to be amend ed to either requir e the state 
to reimburse municipalities for 90% of the costs associated with the shelter payment requirement  or 
include a mandate preamble requiring support from two -thirds of the members of the House and Senate 
for enactment.  As provided in statute , the failure to do so makes providing the reimbursement voluntary 
on behalf of the municipality.   To put a finer point on the burden this pro posed mandate  would place on 
property taxpayers, in a January 25, 2022  Point In Time Count, MaineHousing reported that 3,291  people 
were housed in shelters.  Depending on how the provisions of LD 1758 are applied, on that one night 
only, communities could  have been on the hook for $ 329,100 in reimbursement s.   
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  If you have any questions 
about the Association’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at kdufour@memun.org  
or 1-800-452-8786.  
 
          

