, I HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES is , 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 2237-1400 
Adam Lee TTY: MAINE RELAY 71I 
87 Western Promenade 
Auburn, ME 04210 
Residence: (207) 312-4057 - 
Adﬁlﬁ.L€€l2@l€£{lSl&iLlY €.ITl3lI1 €.9_OV 
April 27, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Adam Lee presenting 
LD 1674, An Act to Require and Encourage Safe and Interconnected 
Transportation Construction Projects 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Adam Lee, I represent House District 89, which isa 
part of Auburn. I am here before you today to present LD 1674, An Act to Require and 
Encourage Safe and Interconnected Transportation Construction Projects. 
Auburn was once a bustling downtown, unfortunately and tragically destroyed in the urban 
renewal of the 60s and 70s. Our downtown was divided by an arterial highway and saw many of 
its traditional downtown buildings demolished in favor of suburban-style development and 
modes of transportation that privilege vehicular travel over all other modes of transportation. Our 
four-lane Court Street discourages pedestrian and bicycle travel, so people who would walk in 
Portland, Boston or virtually any other city instead choose to drive. Our prime real estate, which 
should garner outdoor cafes, mixed retail and badly-needed safe and affordable housing, instead 
serves as unsightly drive-thru ATMS, chain restaurants and unused, unneeded parking lots. 
We know this form of transportation and development makes us less safe. Pedestrian 
fatalities are on the rise‘ and two weeks ago, in my own community, Alexandre Patterson was 
struck and killed walking his bike across Minot Avenue in the middle of the aftemoon. Further 
it makes us less healthy. In 1969, 49% of children walked or biked to school. Today that 
number is around 10%? It deprives us of value. Complete streets increase employment, new 
business, property values and private sector investment? Ultimately harms our environment — 
replacing a 20-mile round-trip car commute with public transit can reduce annual CO2 emissions 
by 4,800 pounds per year, equal to a 10 % reduction in all greenhouse gases produced by an 
average two-adult, two-car household. Imagine if we also cut down on the half a mile drive and 
1 www.ghsa.org/sites/default/ ﬁles/2022-04/Pedestrian%20Traf ﬁc%20Fatalities%20by%2OState%20January%20- 
%20June%20202l%20Preliminary%20Data_0.pdf 
1 www.activetrans.org/sites/ ﬁles/cs.pdf 
3 Smartgrowthamerica.org/wp~content/uploads/20 l 6/08/Safer-Streets»stronger~economiespdf 
District 89: Part of Auburn
replace it with walking or cycling.4 We can do better. This bill seeks to do that. It is modeled 
after legislation from Washington but has been tailored to Maine. For MDOT construction 
projects over $500k, this bill: 
Requires MDOT to identify incomplete state highways, identify those areas with an 
absence of bicycle facilities and bike lanes, identify areas where multiple uses are 
anticipated with excessive speed limits and ﬁnally, identify those areas where design 
impedes the ability of motorists to see crossing pedestrians or bicyclists; 
Requires MDOT to consult with municipalities in which the project is being constructed 
to conﬁrm planned connections with transportation infrastructure, identify connections to 
existing or planned public transportation, identify public transportation facilities and 
consider speed management techniques to minimize crash exposure and severity. 
Requires MDOT to make adjustments to make such roadways safer and provides context- 
sensitive solutions to ensure comiectivity and safety for all modes of transportation, not 
just vehicle trafﬁc. 
The bill also takes the important step of prioritizing state DOT funding for those projects 
that provide for multi-modal transportation, encourage mixed land use, encourage inﬁll 
development, facilitate dense housing, provide walkable neighborhoods, preserve open 
space, Wetlands, parks, farms and woodlands, and encourage community and public 
participation. 
MDOT will offer testimony that this legislation is somehow simultaneously duplicative of the 
work it already does AND that it somehow will preclude it from doing its work. Both of those 
things can’t be true. This bill requests MDOT make its rhetoric regarding complete streets and 
multi-modal transportation a reality. I trust that MDOT shares the values articulated in this bill.I 
look forward to working with them to create a bill or series of bills that provide accountability to 
those values. 
This bill seeks to make a modest and important impact on the safety, health, economic strength 
and environment of the city I love. It seeks to improve the safety, health, economic strength and 
enviromnent of the state we all love. 
I hope you vote ‘ought to pass.’ I look forward to answering any questions you have and 
contributing anything you need for the work session. 
4 atpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/20 16/04/O6_Environmental-Bene ﬁts.pdf 
District 89: Part of Auburn
