 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1674, An Act to Require and Encourage Safe and 
Interconnected Transportation Construction Projects  
 
To the Committee on Transportation  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
April 27, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Committee on Transportation, 
my name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine  (NRCM) . NRCM has been working for more than  60 years 
to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify in support of LD 1674, An Act to Require and Encourage 
Safe and Interconnected Transportation Construction Projects.  
 
Maine’s bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure is behind the curve. The 2022 Bicycle Friendly 
State Report Card gave Maine’s bike and pedestrian infrastructure a C - rating, ranking Maine 
10th out of 11 states in the Eastern region.1 2021 was the most dangerous year on record for 
pedestrians in Maine despite reduced traffic rates from the pandemic, pointing to a system that 
prioritizes cars over people’s safety.2 Despite our history of not adequately investing in 
infrastructure for p eople who walk, bike, or roll, 2023 has the potential to be an inflection point 
for Maine. An unprecedented amount of funding is available from the federal government for 
improving bike and pedestrian infrastructure, and the creation of the first ever Main e Statewide 
Active Transportation Plan earlier this year shows promise for a more connected, safe, and 
environmentally friendly system for Maine pedestrians. LD 1674 represents an opportunity to 
continue on this recent trajectory and improve safety for pe ople who bike and walk  all across the 
state. 
 
In addition t o directly improv ing the safety of Maine’s pedestrians and bicyclists , LD 1674 
would also improve transparency in the Maine Department of Transportatio n’s (MDOT)  project 
prioritization process and would encourage coordination bet ween MDOT and local governments.  
The prioritization criteria outlined in this bill would make sure that MDOT pursues projects that 
would provide safety and access for all users, not just c ars and trucks. This bill would also 
advance smart development more broadly by prioritizing projects that contribute to walkable 
neighborhoods, infill development, and land preservation, amplifying the impact of this 
legislation beyond immediate pedestrian infrastructure needs.  
 
1 https://bikeleague.org/sites/default/files/BFS_Report_Card_2022_Maine.pdf  
2 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2022/04/15/news/pedestrian -deaths -increased -in-maine -last-year -joam40zk0w/  

 
A sustainable transportation future for Maine features safe, affordable, and accessible 
alternatives to driving – including walking and biking infrastructure throu ghout the state. 
Maine’s bipartisan Climate Action Plan identifies reducing emissions from the transportation 
sector as “Plan A,” citing that 54 percent of greenhouse gas emissions come from cars and trucks 
in Maine.3 The Clean Transportation Roadmap, commissioned in 2021 to establish a pathway for 
reducing emissions from the transportation sector, identifies improving bicycle and pedestrian 
infrastructure as a key recommendation to reduce vehicle miles traveled and di versify Maine’s 
transportation system.4  
 
People will not use alternative modes of transportation unless we build convenient, safe, and 
reliable  infrastructure for them to do so. This investment in bike and pedestrian planning  and 
infrastructure  for all new transportation projects will result in long -term dividends for our state 
from an economic, public safety, and environmental vantage. Ensuring that this infrastructure is 
included in the design for all new transportation proj ects costing  more than  $500,000 will put 
pedestrian safety at the forefront and reduce costs associated with retrofitting unsafe sites that 
were not built to accommodate people not in cars safely in the first place.  
 
Safe biking and walking infrastructure is a key facet of our s tatewide transportation system, for 
which MDOT has primary responsibility. We would like to see this effort around safe biking and 
walking infrastructure for all new projects  incorporated  into the implementation of the MDOT 
Statewide Active Transportation Plan developed earlier this year.  
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on this important legislation.  
Thanks, and I would be happy to answer any questions that you have.  
 
 
 
 
3 https://www.maine.gov/climateplan/the -plan  
4 https://www.maine.gov/future/initiatives/climate/cleantransportation  
