227 Water Street, Suite 208  
Augusta, ME 04330  
207 -250 -0220  
www.growsmartmaine.org  
 
 
Testimony of Nancy Smith, Executive Director of GrowSmart Maine  
In support of LD 1674 "An Act to Require and Encourage Safe and 
Interconnected Transportation Construction Projects"  
 
April 27, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee  on Transportation  
 
My name is Nancy Smith, I live in Ellsworth, and  I am the CEO of GrowSmart Maine. 
We are a statewide non -partisan non -profit organization h elping communities navigate 
change in alignment with smart growth.  We advocate for comprehensive policies and 
funding for smart growth practices and outcomes.  
 
We have partnered with Build Maine to guide a transparent crowdsourcing  of policy 
proposals t hat began a year ago, and has drawn together over a hundred people from 
across Maine and beyond. Policy Action 2023  has resulted in sixteen proposals from 
eight working groups, all addressing the shared goal, “to address barriers to and create 
incentives for equitable, sustainable growth and development that strengthens 
downtowns and villages of all sizes while pulling development pressure away from 
productive and open natural areas. We do so acknowledging that  Maine has urban, 
rural, and suburban settings for which any solution may or may not be a fit and a variety 
of people who deserve to be welcomed to their communities.”  
 
GrowSmart and Build Maine are in support of LD 1674 because it aligns with several of 
the transportation bills that are a part of Policy Action 2023. This bill focuses on 
context -sensitive design approaches for road projects of over $500,000, to shift 
transportation planning to a more interdisciplinary activity that puts safety for all 
roadw ay users at the forefront and  contemplates land use and economic value as a 
fundamental aspect of street design.  
 
By evaluating transportation investments in this way, Maine can prioritize funding 
projects that create economic value, promote housing, and  preserve open spaces.  These 
considerations are critical to ensuring that the state is investing in projects that address 
multiple problems at once, and reduce unintended consequences that have long -term 
costs associated with them.  
 
GrowSmart and Build M aine will assist the committee in any way that is helpful as you 
consider the variety of interrelated bills this session, because these issues have 
significant impact across Maine.  
 
 
 2023  
Board of Directors  
 
Rebecca Casey  
                           Chair 
Ethan Boxer -Macomber  
  Vice -Chair 
Jean Claveau  
 Treasurer  
Maggie Fleming  
 Secretary  
  
Kirsten Brewer  
Jon Boyton  
Elizabeth Frazier  
Philip Hussey  
Jeff Levine  
Zoe Miller  
Carol Morris  
Lynne Seeley  
Ben Smith  
Sally Stockwell  
Galen Weibley  
 
Mark C. Wiesendanger  
MaineHousing  
Ex-officio  
Rhiannon Hampson  
USDA: Rural Development  
  Ex-officio  
 
Daniel Hildreth  
Emeritus  
Evan Richert  
Emeritus  
Anna Marie Thron  
Emeritus  
