*“ HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES
5 
, 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
Sophie Warren 
P.O. Boxl 
Scarborough, ME 04O?0 
Phone: (207) 450-0765 
Sopl}ig,_\f\_/a1 ‘ren@legiSIature.maine.go\;j 
May 16, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Sophie Warren Presenting 
LD 1885, RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine to Improve Representation by Simplifying Legislative Redistricting for 
the Maine House of Representatives 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Good afternoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the State and 
Local Govermnent Committee. My name is Sophie Warren, and I represent House district 124, 
which includes coastal Scarborough. 
At the request of a constituent - whom you’ll hear from in a moment - and the League of Women 
Voters of Maine, I am pleased to present LD 1885 - RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment 
to the Constitution of Maine to Improve Representation by Simplifying Legislative Redistricting 
for the Maine House of Representatives. 
As you are aware, Maine currently has a 151-seat House of Representatives and a 35-seat Senate. 
151 divided by 35 is 4.3, and with 4.3 House districts per Senate district, the district boundaries 
can’t possibly line up. There are slivers of people across the state who share a House Rep with 
one set of their neighbors and a Senator with another. For example, most of the residents of my 
Scarborough district are in Sen. Brenner’s Senate District 30, but those on the coastal edge of my 
district are in Sen. Carney’s Senate District 29. Most of my constituents can work together to 
bring issues to the attention of both Sen. Brenner and myself, but a very few would need to 
address Sen. Carney instead. This pattern is repeated across the state, resulting in uneven citizen 
experiences in coordinating interactions with their legislators. 
The proposed amendment adjusts only the language related to the number of Representatives, as 
the Maine State Constitution already provides the redistricting commission with the ﬂexibility to 
establish 31 Senate districts, reading - and I quote here from Article Four, Part Second - “The 
Senate shall consist of an odd number of Senators, not less than 31 nor more than 35” . While 
recent redistricting commissions have brought forward 35-district Senate maps, the constitution 
permits a Senate map with 31, 33, or 35 districts. The resulting map must then be approved bya 
2/3 vote in both the Senate and the House, leaving the ﬁnal decision on the number of Senate 
districts in the hands of the Legislature. 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
The proposed amendment brings this ﬂexibility to the section of Article Four describing the 
House of Representatives. Where the constitution currently reads “l 51 members, ” we propose 
instead “an odd number of Representatives, not less than 151 nor more than 155,” mirroring 
exactly the language used in the description of the Senate. The current maps, with 151 House 
districts, remain constitutional and the next redistricting commission has the option of choosing a 
155-seat House, which paired with the option of a 31-seat Senate would allow them to drawa 
map in which each Senate district is divided into exactly ﬁve nested House districts, with no 
offset boundaries. To summarize, this amendment would permit — but not require — the next 
redistricting commission to establish 31 Senate districts, each with exactly 5 nested House 
districts for a total of 155 Representatives, essentially shifting 4 seats from the Senate to the 
House with no change in the total number of Maine State Legislators. 
You’ll notice that there is nothing in this amendment to reguire the redistricting commission to 
draw nested districts, and this is intentional. We believe that this change will make the 
redistricting comrnission ’s task easier, but we recognize that they will always need to Weigha 
variety of considerations, with particular attention to partisan fairness. A requirement to nest 
districts may have unintended consequences, and we do not want to tie their hands. That said, 
the League of Women Voters has an exceptionally long institutional memory, and if this 
amendment passes the legislature and then the citizenry, the League can be counted on to join 
those of us in the current legislature in ensuring that the next redistricting commission 
understands that that this modiﬁcation to the constitution is intended to allow for nested districts. 
I am excited by the potential to develop a delegation model of state governance. House and 
Senate candidates could more easily coordinate campaign activities. Representatives and 
Senators could more easily coordinate constituent meetings on issues relevant to their region. 
These opportunities for coordination can perhaps strengthen the lines of communication between 
the House and Senate, making our Legislative activities more efficient and productive. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
Sophie Warren 
District 124: Part of Scarborough
