State of Maine       STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION  Testimony of Fern Desjardins, Chair of the State Board of Education   In Support of: L.D. 193: An Act to Provide Excess General Fund Revenue to the School Revolving Renovation Fund and the Education Stabilization Fund.  Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs Sponsored by: Senator Pierce  Date: April 24, 2023  Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs:  My name is Fern Desjardins, Chair of the Maine State Board of Education. I am submitting this testimony on behalf of the State Board in support of L.D. 193: An Act to Provide Excess General Fund Revenue to the School Revolving Renovation Fund and the Education Stabilization Fund.  Chapter 64: Maine School Facilities Program and School Revolving Renovation Fund is a joint rule of the Maine Department of Education and the Maine Municipal Bond Bank. The State Board of Education (SBE) is not involved in any aspect of the application or approval process for projects to be considered through the School Revolving Renovation Fund.  However, the Maine Department of Education put the SBE in touch with regional presidents of the Maine School Superintendents Association last fall for discussions surrounding both Major Capital School Construction Projects and the School Revolving Renovation Fund.  Meetings ensued to discuss needs, limitations with the current cap on revolving renovations funding, projects that fall above the renovation caps but below Major Capitol School Construction Projects, etc. As Chair of the SBE School Construction Committee, I was also contacted by individual superintendents and listened to their specific needs for renovations.   Maine does not currently have an inventory and assessment of its PK-12 public school facilities to provide all stakeholders with critical infrastructure data to inform decision making and resource allocation. The SBE gratefully recognizes the Facilities Team at the DOE for applying and receiving a federal grant to begin work this summer on gathering data for a basic inventory of the more than 600 public schools across Maine, but more funds would be needed for an assessment of the facilities to take place. We currently depend on the Facilities Team and superintendents to inform us about the condition of public schools. There appears to be consensus that the need for school renovations far outweighs the resources we currently have to meet those needs.  The State Board of Education’s 5-Year Strategic Plan 2022-2026 includes a goal that we will advocate for funding to support the School Revolving Renovation Fund.  We hold to our strategic plan and it is without reservation that we are in support of L.D. 193 for its part in distributing 20% of the General Fund unappropriated surplus at the close of the fiscal year to the School Revolving Renovation Fund.   Thank you for this opportunity to comment. 
