Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 193: An Act to Provide Excess General Fund Revenue to the School Re volving R enovation 
Fund and the Education Stabilization F und 
 
LD 118 5: An Act to  Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Recapital ize the School Revol ving 
Reno vation Fu nd  
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee  
April  24, 2023  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and other esteemed members of the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs Committee,  
 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him ), and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations 
for the Maine Education Association (MEA).  The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of 
Maine, including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state an d faculty 
and other professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems.  
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support  of LD 193, An Act to Provide Excess General 
Fund Revenue to the School Revolving Renovation Fund and t he Education Stabilization Fund  and in 
support  of LD 1185, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Recapitalize the School 
Revolving Renovation Fund .   
 
Our public schools have capital needs.  As you are no doubt aware, the state currently operates  a school 
construction program that provides funding for schools on a cycle dependent upon the statutory debt 
service limit.  Every cycle, when the school construction process opens, typically 70 or 80 schools apply 
for funding but only a small number are approved.  In the last cycle (2017/2018), 74 schools applied but 
only 7 projects received funding.  This alone is evidence of the growing capital needs of public schools.   
When it comes to capital needs, our public schools need state support.  The only ot her option is to ask 
local taxpayers to foot the bill and when we rely on property taxes for major capital projects the result is 
unsurprisingly higher property taxes for local residents.  What’s more, relying on property taxes for 
capital projects crowds out funding in local school budgets for other key priorities such as raising 
teacher salaries or wages for ed techs and bus drivers , or potentially programs for students.    
 
The School Revolving Renovation Fund, as established in Title 30 -A, §6006 -F. School  Revolving 
Renovation Fund , provides no interest loans to schools via the Maine Municipal Bond Bank with 
specified criteria for qualifying.  Priority 1 status projects include fixing a roof, renovations to ensure   
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
compliance with the American with Disabilit ies Act, mitigating lead in school drinking water, and 
improving air quality in schools.  
 
These funds are not to be used to build the next Taj Mahal.  Instead, they are dedicated specifically to 
the basic infrastructure schools, students and educators need and deserve.  
 
LD 193 proposes to add the School Revolving Renovation Fund and the Education Stabilization Fund to 
the “cascade.”  We support this entirely.  Diverting unspent funds at the end of the fiscal year into these 
two funds will set aside funding to  help schools with basic capital needs while also storing money away 
for schools for the inevitable “rainy day.”  The Education Stabilization Fund was created last session and 
is intended to provide resources and financial stability for public schools whenever the state’s revenues 
take a turn f or the worse.   
 
LD 1185 proposes a $100 million bond measure to replenish funding in the School Revolving 
Renovation Fund.  This bond will help address the backlog of key capital needs of schools.  It can help 
schools address new air quality requirements f or schools passed last session.  It can help fix issues of 
lead in school drinking water, again a new and necessary requirement for public schools.  Should the 
Legislature move this issue forward, and we hope you will, we stand ready to make the case to vo ters 
about the need for this critical bond measure.   
 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine.  I will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have.   
 
 
 
