 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 193 
 
AN ACT TO PROVIDE EXCESS GENERAL FUND REVENUE TO THE SCHOOL REVOLVING 
RENOVATION FUND AND THE EDUCATION STABILIZATION FUND  
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Committee on Appropriations and Fin ancial 
Affairs . I am Victoria Wallack , director of communication s and government liaison  of Maine School 
Management Association testifying  on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards 
Association and Maine School Superintendents  Assoc iation , in support of L.D. 193.  
 
Maine school building s are getting old, and the waiting list for construction  funds is long. The last time 
applications were accepted, 74 schools applied, but less than a handful made the list.  These were new 
construction p rojects. Repairs to buildings awaiting replacement could be addressed if there was additional 
funding in the School Revolving Renovation Fund.  
 
The Education  Stabilization Fund  supports the state share of Essential Programs and Services. By continuing 
to add to this fund the focus of continued support of 55% by the state for the cost of education can be 
maintained.  
 
L.D. 193 recognizes the need to address  our aging schools , through renovations , and the shortcomings in how 
we fund schools . It raises the pe rcent share that would go into the renovation fund and better supports school 
funding for EPS.  Where the stabilization fund (rainy day fund) is at a level never seen before, t his bill 
acknowledges there are funds that can be used in significant ways to sup port revitalization of aging schools 
and seeks to provide a way for the state to consistently provide its support for the cost of education. We urge 
its passage.  
