A 
Moine Curriculum Leaders Association 
Chanzpiorzing Policies And Practices That Enhance Teaching And Learning 
Testimony of Debra Mclntyre, Executive Director, on behalf of the members of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association, testifying in opposition to LD 156 An Act to Require 
Outdoor Recess Time for Students from Grade 6 to Grade 8. 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Debra Mclntyre, and I am the Executive Director of the 
Maine Curriculum Leaders Association. On behalf of the members of MCLA, l offer testimony in 
opposition to LD 156 An Act to Require Outdoor Recess Time for Students from Grade 6 to 
Grade 8. 
lt is much appreciated that the intent of this bill is to give value to the role of recess to middle 
school students. We support the spirit and intention of this bill and understand the many 
benefits of providing recess as noted by the CDC, such as increasing students ‘ level of physical 
activity, improving memory, attention, and concentration and possibly reducing disruptive 
behaviors in the classroom. However, this is a mandate that MCLA can not support. Local 
school districts need to be able to develop their own schedules based on their student needs 
and other factors, such as upholding contractual obligations. By mandating recess for grades6 
- 8, school districts would be required to provide adequate staff to supervise students during 
recess. With current staff shortages and a variety of contractual obligations this may be 
impossible for many districts. Most districts already provide alternative opportunities for meeting 
the goal of increased physical activity through outdoor learning, physical education classes, 
frequent breaks and extracurricular activities. l believe that there are no other mandates for 
recess for any grade level. ln the 128th Legislative session, there was a similar bill for grades 
K-5 and resulted in a ONTP vote. 
We all agree that there are great benefits to outdoor activities, unstructured and structured time 
to play, however, this needs to be left to local school districts to decide how best to provide 
these opportunities for all students. Therefore, we oppose LD 156. 
Thank you for your time.
