Farhan  Gedow
Portland
LD 156
Testimony of Farhan, King Middle School
In Support of LD 156 
   Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Farhan Gedow. I am a resident of 
Portland and a grade 7 student at King Middle School. 
      
        Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 156, “An Act to Require Outdoor 
Recess Time For Students From Grade 6 To Grade 8”. 
    This is an important thing that would help a lot of students. I personally am a really
energetic person that needs to let my energy out or I won’t be able to focus. But I am 
not the only one like that. During covid I didn't have recess, I had to earn it. It was 
frustrating and I never really got to talk to my friends unless it was about work. But 
now that  King Middle School has started something new called “Midday Break” I 
can spend time with friends and even make new friends.
     Another reason for this is kids our age need to be social for our brain to develop.  
There are students that can get fidgety or can’t focus if they have too much energy 
and need to move. Because of this students need to go out and run and let out all that 
stored energy. You might be thinking that some people don’t have friends or others 
don’t like to run or play. But if they are outside with classmates they can make friends
by talking. This will help isolated kids feel more comfortable and open. This will help
our brain develop and with more friends, kids will feel more comfortable in 
classrooms and when it’s time to partner up they will have someone to partner with.
     In conclusion, we want the committee to sign this bill so kids can make more 
friends, feel less isolated, and let their energy out. Thank you for hearing us out and 
thank you for your commitment to Maine’s kids. If you have any questions there is an
email below. 
Farhan Gedow
Portland, Maine
My teacher’s email address, if you have questions: masont@portlandschools.org

