Kaya  Teret
King middle school Portland Maine
LD 156
Testimony of Kaya A. Teret, King Middle School
In Support of LD 156 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Kaya Teret. I am
a resident of Portland Maine and a grade 7 student at King Middle School. 
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 156, “An Act to Require Outdoor 
Recess Time For Students From Grade 6 To Grade 8”. 
I go to school at King Middle school in Portland Maine. We luckily have recess outside every 
day. School starts at 8:20 and it ends at 3:00. That's 6 hours and 40 minutes. I like school but 
sitting in the classroom for that long is so hard.If I had to sit in a classroom without a break all 
day every day it would make me learn MUCH LESS! I would get antsy and it would make it 
much harder to focus.Also I don't have classes with all of my friends and during midday break
I get to hang out with those friends. This is important because it helps me get a better 
relationship with my friends. An important part of school is learning social skills and how to 
communicate and hang out with other people. Midday break really helps us learn how to do 
this. 
This bill is important to my community because I think it’s important for children to learn and I 
think it's the school's responsibility to do their best to make this happen. 
Recess works very well at King. It’s a fun way for us to get fresh air and move around, get our
energy out and hang out with friends in the middle of the day. Most of the kids at King love it 
and it’s really important to us that we get to move around in the middle of the day. 
I really want you to support this bill because it will help children learn so much better.  Thank 
you legislators and the committee for your time and commitment to Maine’s children and I'm 
happy to answer any questions you have.
Kaya Assata Teret 
Portland Maine
My teacher’s email address, if you have questions: masont@portlandschools.org

