,, HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
§.%“;§ 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
7 V 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333~0002* 
- (207) 2237-1400 
Margaret Craven TTY: Maine Relay 711 
41 Russell Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
(207) 783-1397 
Margaret.Craven@legislature.maine.gov 
February 9, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Margaret Craven introducing 
LD 156, An Act to Require Outdoor Recess Time for Students from Grade 6 to8 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
Sen. Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Honorable Members of Education and Cultural 
Affairs, my name is Margaret Craven, and I represent House District 93, which is part of 
Lewiston. I am here today, to present LD 156, An Act to Require Outdoor Recess Time for 
Students from Grade 6 to 8. 
Most middle school students are at school for over 7 ‘/2 hours. It is essential for them to have 
some freedom to do what they'd like to do, to get some fresh air, to have some down time to 
reduce stress, or organize their thoughts. 
Children are more attentive and productive in the classroom after recess, according to the 
American Academy of Pediatrics policy statement on "The Crucial Role of Recess in School." 
The results seem to be the same, no matter how their free time was spent. The age group we 
are referencing here ﬁnd it difﬁcult to stay seated for hours at a time, and going outdoors 
would help release some pent-up energy. 
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics: 
“While the time spent at recess is shorter in middle school, the recess provides 
unstructured time for students to socialize. Since the play is child-led, the children 
practice negotiation in setting the rules for play, cooperation, sharing and problem 
solving. The social arena changes in middle school as children go through puberty and 
deal with feelings of self-consciousness and a greater need for peer acceptance. Recess 
gives young adolescents extra time to work out social issues with friends and enemies. 
Periodic breaks have the same optimizing effects on the brain.” 
Here today we have experts that will tell you what children need in order to do well in school. I 
am so proud of the students that took the time to write testimony and come to Augusta to 
exercise their rights to have input in their government and their education. 
Thank you for your attention, and I would be happy to answer any questions but would rather 
leave it to the experts and professionals coming behind me.
