122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association in Support of : 
LD 156: An Act to Require Outdoor Recess Time for Students from Grade 6 to Grade 8  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Room 208, Cross State Office Building  
Thursday, February 9, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty , Representative Brenner , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the stat e. The mission of MPHA is to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on crit ical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means w e are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously. 
 This bill would require schools to provide at least 20 minutes of outdoor re cess for students in grades 6- 8, no 
fewer than 3 days per week. MPHA is in support of this bill.  
 Data show that being physically active is important for healthy growth and development. Physical activity  
during childhood is associated with numerous physical and mental health benefits, including obesity prevention, and improved bone health, self -worth , and social engagement. 
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention , engaging in physical activity  may also help improve students’ academic performance, 
such as  academic achievement and grades , academic behavior (e.g., time on task ), and other f actors that 
influence academic achievement  (e.g., concentration , memory, and attentiveness in the classroom ). 
 The Physica l Activity Guidelines for Americans recommend that school -age children engage in 60  minutes of 
moderate- to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) per day; 30 minutes  of which  should be achieved during the 
school day (Institute of Medicine) . The school -based  recommendation is based in part on the role that schools 
play in health promotion for our children. In Maine, s chools are uniquely situated to influence  the health of 
thousands of youth, across races , ethnicit ies, age s, gender s, and weight status es. Resources, such as 
playgrounds, sporting equipment , and safe spaces to run and play are not available to all children during their 
out-of-school time. Accordingly, schools’ physical activity  programs and policies create opportunit ies that 
provide equitabl e reach of physical activity , regardless of children’s demographic factors . 
 
Physical in activity is a key determinant of childhood obesity and health disparities throughout the life -course. 
Standardized testing requirements and budget cuts may contribute to declines in school -based physical act ivity 
opportunities. It is due to these challenges , that the Institut e of Medicine recommend s a “whole -of-school” 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  approach in which recess, in- class act ivity breaks, and integration of physical activity  with the classroom 
curriculum are highlighted as action areas to increase time spent in MVPA.  
 
We are supportive of efforts to increase physical activity opportunit ies for scho olchildren throughout the school 
day, and respect fully request  you to vote LD 152 “ Ought to Pass.”  Thank you for considering our  testimony.  
