 
 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony in Support  of LD 871  – “An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum’s 
Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education Programs Throughout the 
State”  
April 24, 2023 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee . My name is Anne Krieg , Bangor ’s Director of Community and Economic Development , 
and I’m providing testimony on behalf of the Bangor City C ouncil in support of LD  871, “An Act to Provide 
Support for the Maine Discovery Museum’s Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
Education Programs Through out the State.”  
Bangor is extremely fortunate to have the Maine Discovery Museum in our city.  The programs they 
provide to people of all ages to discover the world around them through creative exploration and science 
are truly invaluable.  Their three flo ors of interactive exhibits and robust science programming benefit 
Bangor residents and visitors alike.  In fact, 60,000 people visit the Maine Discovery Museum each year,  
and another 15,000 people take advantage of the museum’s outreach programming.   Their programs and 
mission align with the City’s recently completed Econom ic Development Strategy which highlights  our 
citizens ’ belief that we have the potential to become an educational hub.  Our proximity to two major 
universities, the quality of the Bangor School Department , and our location position  us to become a region 
known for world -leading scientist s accomplishing groundbreaking work .  This will help Bangor and the 
State as it seeks to target young professionals  to help enhance both a vibrant and  diverse culture.  
The Maine Discovery Museum is a tremendous asset not only to Bangor, but to the State of Maine as a 
whole.  It is a hub of informal STEM education and reaches rural and underserved communities 
throughout the year.  It provides rich scienc e content that many children and adults cannot get anywhere 
else and, for some, it is t he only exposure they receive . 
LD 871 will provide state funding to support two Maine Discovery Museum programs that are available to 
Mainers free of charge.  The first is the Maine Invention Convention, a statewide competition for middle 
school students that is part of the national network of invention conventions run by the Henry Ford 
Museum in Michigan. This program provides students with the opportunity to explore, design, and invent 
creative solutions to problems in their own world.  Past Maine students have competed on the national 
level and have done very well, returning to their communities with a sense of accomplishment and the 
underpinnings of a career in Maine’s  innovation economy.   
The second program LD 871 will support is the Maine Science Festival, the museum’s largest program and 
the only science festival north of Cambridge, MA.  This exciting event is a celebration and exploration of 

 
 
Maine science by the pe ople who do it.  The festival is held in March of each year and has served more 
than 65,000 people since its inception in 2015.  
Our business community has noted the disconnect between the types of jobs available and the types of 
jobs people are seeking, an d a strengthened Maine Discovery Museum can begin to bridge this disconnect. 
This proposed funding would be transformative not only to the Maine Discovery Museum but to Maine 
public science education and the Maine economy . For this reason, and with the full support of the Bangor 
City Council, I urge you to pass LD 871 as a means to bolster i nformal science, technology, engineering,  
and mathematics education programs throughout the state.  
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Anne Krieg , Director of Economic and Community Development, anne.krieg@bangormaine.gov  
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
