 
 
The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony from Brian Harris, Co -Founder & CEO of MedRhythms  
 
In Support Of  
 
L.D. 1389  
An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics Education Programs Throughout the State  
 
23 April 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Brian Harris, Co -Founder & CEO at MedRhythms . 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 871, An Act to Provide Support for 
Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
Education Throughout the State.  
 
General background:  
To introduce myself, I am Brian Harris, the Co -Founder and CEO of MedRhythms, a company 
based in Portland, Maine, that is building innovative products at the intersection of neuroscience, 
technology, and music, with the vision to revolutionize medicine and  bring important care to 
people across Maine and around the world.  I am writing in support of this bill as I believe that 
the Maine Discovery Museum (MDM) is critical to setting the seed for science in Maine, which 
is important not only for Maine’s youth, but also for the future of the economy and companies 
like ours at MedRhythms.  
 
Currently , MDM receives no federal, state, or local government  support outside of what we earn 
via competitive grants  and as such would be  transformative not just to MDM, but to  Maine 
public science education. MDM  is a critical player in helping Mainers (from all over the  
state) learn, especially in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM).  As someone who 
grew up in rural Maine (West Enfield), access to this education i s crucial and r esearch has shown 
that 95% of the population learns about science outside of the classroo m (Falk, J. H. , Dierking, 
L. D., 2010, American Scientist, vol. 98). For the great majority of  people, this is accomplished 
through informal learning se ttings such as museums, science  centers, and programs like those 
provided by MDM  – making it even more critical, especially for rural communities  like mine . 
 
I have been a delighted and honored contributor to the Maine Science Festival, one of 
inspirationa l and impactful programs coordinated by the MDM and can say firsthand , that our 
state needs more of this.  A dditionally , as an entrepreneur who was  born and raised in Maine (as 
is our other Co -Founder), we were excited to move MedRhythms  back to Maine after starting in 
Boston, as we were passionate about the state, the economy, and wanted to be a part of changing 
the narrative around the economy and the state of science in  Maine.  We wanted to build an 
iconic global company and believed t hat we could do it from Maine,  with Maine people  and we 
still do  – but, we also need more STEM employees here .  This money helps to plant the seeds 
early on that it is possible to be successful in STEM  in Maine and that there are opportunities for 
them  HERE, an important  notion that could influence the trajectory of their lives.  
 
  
When paired with the recent development  of the Roux Institute (an example of STEM education 
at the highest level), it creates a culture in which Maine is poised to be leader in ST EM 
education, which ultimately impacts the lives of the individuals, the economy, and eventually 
people across the entire state through its impact.   It is for all these reasons that I whole -heartedly 
support. LD871.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Brian Harris  
Co-Founder & CEO  
MedRhythms, Inc.  
 
 

