 
 The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from DONNA OXLEY, CPA, BBSC, CPAs and  
MAINE DISCOVERY MUSEUM BOARD MEMBER 
 
In Support Of 
 
L.D. 871 
An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics Education Programs Throughout the State 
 
20 April 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is DONNA OXLEY, CPA at BBSC, CPAs, Brewer, 
Maine 04412. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 871, An Act to Provide 
Support for Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics Education Throughout the State. 
 
General background: 
I have served on the Maine Discovery Museum’s Finance Committee and Board of Directors 
since 2002, and 2004, respectively. This Museum helps people of all ages to discover the world 
around them through creative exploration and science.  I have seen firsthand how critical the 
museum has been to dedicating programming to science, technology, innovation, and 
engineering within our community and state.  In addition to the programming at the museum and 
outreach within our Maine schools, the annual Maine Science Festival attracts thousands of 
attendees statewide and showcases national and world-leading science topics to inspire the next 
generation of scientists and engineers.  Knowledge of science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM) plays an important role in developing and keeping informed citizens within 
our state.  By increasing an understanding in these areas, we can only hope this introduction will 
keep the next generation living and working in our beautiful state.  Furthermore, careers in 
STEM-related fields are some of the highest wage, highest growth areas in Maine.  The 
continuation of offering two statewide programs at no charge to participants and sustainability 
for the programs can only be possible by receiving financial support from the State of Maine.   
 
Sincerely, 
 
Donna Oxley, CPA 
Maine Discovery Museum Board Member 
 
 
