</”“‘\ 
‘ it 
. 
r ~ it
' 
. nl 
' 
et 
aYa'n,fe\ 
Joseph Baldacci THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 9 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Joe Baldacci introducing 
LD 871, “An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum's 
Infonnal Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education 
Programs Throughout the State” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 24, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. I am Senator Joe Baldacci, and I represent Senate 
District 9, which is made up of Bangor and Hermon. I am here today to present LD 871, “An Act to 
Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics Education Programs Throughout the State.” 
This bill would provide state funding support for MDM’s two programs that are available to Mainers free 
of charge: The Maine Invention Convention, which is a statewide competition for middle school students 
that is part of the national network of invention conventions run by the Henry Ford Museum in Michigan; 
and the Maine Science Festival, which is a ﬁve-day celebration and exploration of Maine science by the 
people who do it. 
MDM is critical in helping countless Mainers learn about the fields of science, technology, engineering 
and mathematics (STEM), and has been serving as Maine’s hub of informal STEM education. The 
programs reach rural and underserved communities all year long, proving their dedication to education 
and inspiring Mainers to pursue careers in the STEM ﬁeld. The work that the museum and its staff have 
done has been incredible to witness. MDM serves 60,000 Mainers inside the museum alone, and another 
15,000 through outreach programming. These two programs have been very successful. 
MDM’s largest program is, the Maine Science Festival — the ﬁrst one in Maine and only science festival 
north of Cambridge MA. It is a celebration and exploration of Maine science by the people who do it. The 
MSF is held in March every year and has served more than 65,000 people since launching in 2015. Maine 
Invention Convention introduces middle school students to entrepreneurship and provides Maine students 
with the opportunity to explore, design, and invent creative solutions to problems in their own world. The 
skills learned through the invention process are lifelong skills that students can carry with them 
throughout their lives. These programs are invaluable, and are worth investing so that they can be 
experienced by generations to come. 
I thank you all for your time and consideration, I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Chair, Health and Human Services Committee * State and Local Government Committee 
State House: (207) 2874515 * Fax: (207) 287_j585 * Toll Free: ]-800-423-6900 * TTY: 7H 
Joe. Baldacci@legisluture. maine, gov * legislature. maine.g0v/senate
An Act to Provide Support for Maine Discovery Museum's Informal 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education 
Throughout the State 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
To help ensure that Maine uses all resources and educational routes available to reach 
its workforce and educational goals. the State of Maine will provide fiscal support to the Maine 
Discovery Museum in the amount of $150,000 per year. for the operations of the Maine 
Science Festival, their all-aqes, statewide science, technology, enqineerinq, and math 
(STEM) outreach program. as well as Maine Invention Convention, a statewide competition 
for middle school students that is part of the national network of invention conventions run by 
the Henrv Ford Museum in Michigan. 
SUMMARY 
This bill ensures Maine Discovery Museum, a critical player in helping Mainers in science, 
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education, will continue to complement and 
enhance formal STEM education for pre-K-12, and foster the continuing STEM education of 
Mainers during and beyond pre-K-12 age with the Maine Science Festival and the Maine 
invention Convention.
Proposed amendment to LD 871, An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum’s Informal Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education Programs Throughout the State 
Amendment proposed by sponsor, Senator Baldacci 
Sec. 1 Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are made. 
EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF 
School Finance and Operations Z078 
Initiative: Provides ongoing funds to the Maine Discovery Museum to support the Maine Science Festival, the Maine 
Invention Convention and its statewide science, technology, engineering and math outreach program. 
2023-24 
$ 150,000 GENERAL FUND 
All Other 2024-25 
$150,000 
GENERAL FUND TOTAL $150,000 
EDUCATION, DEPARTMENT OF 
DEPARTMENT TOTALS 2023-24 
GENERAL FUND $150,000 
DEPARTMENT TOTAL - ALL FUNDS $150,000 
LRl331(02) - App-Alloc Part Sec. 0 - Page 1 ofl $150,000 
2024- 
25 
$150,000 
$150,000
