DISCVERY 
Ya» MAIN STREET, BANGOR, MAENE 014140? l {Z97} 262—720‘3 
lNFD@MAiNEDESCO ‘/ERVMUSEUM.ORG l W\/*N\l.lWi\INEDESCO\lERYMUSEUM.ORG 
\ I I I I 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Kate Dickerson and I’m the Executive Director of the Maine Discovery 
Museum. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 871, An Act to Provide Support for 
Maine Discovery Museum’s Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education 
Throughout the State. 
The Maine Discovery Museum (MDM) is a regional and state resource with a 20+ year history of serving 
our community. MDM helps people of all ages to discover the world around them through creative 
exploration and science. 
In the last ten years we’ve expanded to serve all of Maine, especially in the areas of science, technology, 
engineering, and math (STEM), through educational outreach and programming, with much of it 
incorporated in to STEAM programming. This includes not just our vacation camps and daily 
programming, but also our programs that happen outside of our museum. Some of these programs are part 
of a nationwide network and others are home grown. With these programs we reach rural and unclerserved 
communities all year long and provide rich science content that they cannot get anywhere else in Maine. 
This is the only exposure to these topics that many of them get. I’ve provided a fuller explanation of some 
of our programs in a handout and at the end of this testimony. 
We welcome 60,000 people/year through our doors and reach another 12,000-15,000 with these outside 
programs. It is two of these programs, reaching a statewide audience, that we’re asking for support for 
today: Maine Invention Convention and the Maine Science Festival, both of which align with several 
goals in Governor Mills’ “Maine Jobs & Recovery Plan” as well as the State’s new strategic plan in the 
realms of education, science, economic development, and tourism. 
Maine Invention Convention introduces Maine middle school students to entrepreneurship and provides 
them with the opportunity to explore, design, and invent creative solutions that solve real world problems. 
MDM provides support to teachers and schools who have Invention Convention programs at their school 
(either within the school day or as an extracurricular activity), and we host the state championship at the 
Maine Science Festival every year. 
Winners of the state championship go on to compete at the National Invention Convention in June at the 
Henry Ford Museum, and past Maine winners have done well at Nationals, winning in their categories. 
All students who’ve gone to Nationals have come back to Maine with not just a sense of accomplishment, 
but also an understanding that they can compete with students on a national level. These successes help 
grow Maine's innovation ecosystem. 
programs oF 
MAINE MUSEUM 
rescues acnnernv ., 3-12;“.w
Maine Invention Convention, like virtually every other program for students, was deeply impacted by the 
pandemic, and we are working to rebuild it so that more students from all over the state have the 
opportunity to participate. 
The Maine Science Festival is a five day celebration and exploration of Maine science by the people who 
do it. It is like an arts festival or music festival, but all about science. The MSF is the only science festival 
north of Cambridge, MA — and is held in March every year (so Mainers know it’s a festival for us). 
We’ve served more than 65,000 people since launching in 2015, and have grown from 2.5 days to 5 days 
with more than 70 events and activities provided at no charge to festival goers. Included in the MSF isa 
Field Trip Day for 7th and 8th graders around the state, where we work to connect the dots to what they 
are leaming in school with education and career paths that are ahead of them, covering everything from 
CTE to post-graduate work. 
Why are programs like these so important to Maine? Research has shown that 95% of the population 
learns about science outside of the classroom (Falk, J. H., & Dierking, L. D., 2010, American Scientist, 
vol. 98). And when you look at school-aged kids, more than half a child’s waking hours are spent outside 
of formal school environments (National Science Teacher Association; Learning Science in Informal 
Environments, 2012). Informal education like that provided by MDM — both in our building and through 
our outreach programming — are vital for both kids’ education and to continue science leaming beyond 
school. 
Like virtually every other nonprofit in Maine, MDM receives no federal, state, or local government 
support outside of what we earn via competitive grants. While we have been fortunate to find support to 
provide these programs at no charge, it does require us to hope that we can provide these programs every 
year - as long as we can find funding — as opposed to actually knowing we can. While we’ve been 
successful thus far, and are grateful to all of our sponsors who have helped, it is difficult to continue to 
grow and expand these programs when so much time and effort has to be spent raising funds year over 
year. Support provided by the state of Maine for two programs that are important to fostering science 
learning for all ages, would provide us with foundational funding to ensure that we can continue to 
provide these public science education programs at no charge to Mainers. 
I’d be delighted to answer any questions you may have. 
1%” 
Dickerson, LD 871 p.2
Other MDM STEM programming: 
GSK Science in the Summer, offered in partnership with the Franklin Institute, this program aims 
to increase children ’s value of and confidence in doing science and pursing STEM careers, 
especially for children from underrepresented backgrounds in STEM fields. As one of 50 
program programs leads nationwide, we reach more than 800 2nd-8th grade students from diverse 
communities each summer. In 2021 the Fl told MDM that our program is the most successful in 
the network, consistently exceeding our enrollment goals while delivering hands-on STEM 
enrichment Maine-wide. 
Mission2Mars. Another partnership with the Franklin Institute, we are one of five partners in this 
cohort of a nationwide program. Mission2Mars catalyzes community partnership between 
museums, amateur astronomers, and community based organization to deliver astronomy and 
space exploration activities to youth and family, with the primary subject content covering 
NASA’s upcoming Artemis missions, returning humans to the moon by 2028. 
Learning Ecosystems Northeast (LENE). MDM is one of eleven science center partners working 
with the Gulf of Maine Research Institute through a NASA grant who are developing ways to 
engage science center visitors in data-rich investigations of changing ecosystems using locally 
relevant examples. 
Connected Learning Ecosystems (CLE) focused on building partnerships and pathways that 
provide youth with opportunities to engage in locally relevant climate connected learning 
experiences. MDM is creating a Bangor region CLE as part of our work in the LENE project. 
With this program expansion, MDM is working in three different areas of this NASA I GMRI 
project: working on our own exhibits/projects; anchoring a CLE in the Bangor area; and beinga 
state—wide resource for all the CLEs around the state. 
Science Around ME (https1f/ ‘wwwsciencearourrdme.org/ ‘) helps users find science, technology, 
engineering, and math (STEM) events, projects, and programs happening/available in Maine, 
both in person and online. 
Maine Science Podcast (https:/fwww.mainesciencefestivalorg/podcast). Each episode isa 
conversation with a Mainer working in science, engineering, technology, and innovation. MSP 
invites listeners to discover a wide range of science happening in Maine and how scientists ‘ life 
and career paths lead them to their field. 
Discovery Kits. Born out of the pandemic, these kits were designed as a “families doing science 
together ” model. Kits were shipped as far away as Colorado, and we also provided hundreds of 
Kits to underserved neighborhoods, rural libraries, food pantries, and a local network that 
provides support for families affected by cancer. The Bangor School District ordered 600 kits to 
be delivered to summer STEM programs at six of the most underserved schools in the district. 
Science Teacher Academy (httpsz!/ ‘ww_w.scienceteacheracademvorg/). The STA is being 
developed to address the gap in professional development opportunities available for elementary 
school teachers to more effectively and confidently teach science. The STA will partner with 
teachers, administrators, schools of education, museums, and other informal science organizations 
to greatly expand the science taught in Maine schools and better prepare those teachers in science 
teaching. James H. Page, Chancellor Emeritus of The University of Maine System, has noted: 
DIC/(QFSOH, LD 871 p.3
Dickerson, LD 871 This Academy is one of the most exciting, groundbreaking educational initiatives I have 
encountered in years. It represents an unprecedented opportunity for Maine educators at 
all levels to share and be trained in the best and most timely innovations on an ongoing 
basis. That the Academy would be run by the Museum means that it can take best 
advantage of the Museum's established network and, as an autonomous nexus, the 
Academy can work independently of any particular educational institution's approach or 
budget. The Museum is the right institution to lead this effort. 
p.4
