 
 
 
 
 
The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Testimony from Husson University, Bangor, Maine  
In Support Of  
 
L.D. 871 
An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics Education Programs throughout the State  
 
20 April 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Lynne Coy -Ogan, Senior Vice president for Academic Affairs and Provost at Husson 
University . Thank you for the opportunity to te stify in support of L.D. 871, An Act to Provide Support for Maine 
Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education throughout the State.  
 
Husson University ’s mission is to inspire and prepare students for professional careers in current and emerging 
fields through programs informed by the sciences and humanities. We are writing to provide our enthusiastic 
endorsement of Maine Discovery Museum’s request for financial support for two programs which it provides free 
of cha rge to Maine citizens, namely, the Maine Invention Convention and the Maine Science Festival.   
 
Maine has national and world -leading research in a wide variety of sec tors in science and engineering and we 
know that innovation and advances in Maine are not  yet reaching their full potential. Th e Maine Invention 
Convention and the Maine Science Festival engage people from all ages and throughout the State in learning and 
thinking creatively about science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). By participa ting in the Science 
Festival, Husson University faculty members and students have first -hand experience of the enthusiasm that 
program generates.  We are grateful for the Maine Discovery Museum and pleased to collaborate with them in 
fostering interest and opportunities in STEM for the citizens of Maine.  
 
Programs such as the Maine Invention Convention and the Maine Science Festival are critical to the long -term 
viability and sustainability of our State  which seeks to increase  economic opportunities in the professional fields 
associated with STEM .  The web of collaboration and support we provide to the Maine Discovery Museum help 
retain and attract talented youth to our wonderful State. Efforts to augment  enthusiasm and innovat ion in STEM 
fields will help us generate future economic growth  and also meet the needs of our aging population. Your 
support will promote a vibrant community actively responding  to emerging opportunities in STEM related fields.  
 
Thank you for considering  this letter of support for the Maine Discovery Museum . We hope that it provides a 
higher education context of the importance of the Maine Invention Convention and the Maine Science Festival . 
 
Best regards,  
 
 
 
Lynne Coy -Ogan, Ed.D.  
Senior Vice President of  Academic Affairs and Provost  
Husson University  

Lynne Coy-Ogan
Husson University
LD 871

