 
The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Melissa Maginnis, Associate Professor of Microbiology, The University of 
Maine 
 
 
In Support Of 
 
L.D. 1389 
An Act to Provide Support for the Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics Education Programs Throughout the State 
 
21 April 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Melisa Maginnis, Associate Professor at The University 
of Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 871, An Act to Provide 
Support for Maine Discovery Museum's Informal Science, Technology, Engineering and 
Mathematics Education Throughout the State. 
 
General background: 
The University of Maine is committed to supporting the state in efforts of education, research, 
and service.  
 
Science education at the K-12 level is lacking in the state of Maine, and students need early and 
consistent exposure to the sciences in order to build awareness and confidence in order to pursue 
the sciences at the educational and career level. Without early and consistent exposure, students’ 
interests in pursuing science-related careers in health care, science, technology, and mathematics 
will have an impact on the state workforce, biomedical infrastructure, and the economy. The 
biomedical and health sciences sector is the largest and fast-growing sector in the state, and thus 
the state must invest in the future of our workforce to build opportunities within the state for our 
residents. 
 
Implementing these programs will build a foundation for continued growth of science education 
programs in the state of Maine. The Maine Science Festival has been a huge success in the state, 
serving ~10,000 each year since 2015. I have been honored to be associated with the Maine 
Science Festival, as a speaker, as an attendee with my own children, and as an advocate 
spreading the word to my UMaine students. The central location in Maine of the Maine 
Discovery Museum and the Maine Science Festival provides access to students in rural parts of 
the state that may not otherwise have exposure to careers in the sciences and also supports those 
in the local areas seeking science enrichment. Supporting science education is critical also for a 
knowledgeable, informed community members to make important decisions regarding public Department of Molecular                 5735 Hitchner Hall 
  Orono, Maine 04469-5735 
and Biomedical Sciences 
                 Tel: 207-581-2810 
                       207-581-2815 
               Fax: 207-581-2801 
      https://umaine.edu/biomed/ 
                   
health and safety, as highlighted by the recent COVID-19 pandemic and other public health 
threat such as PFAS in the environment.  
 
I provide my utmost support for this bill, and I hope you will give it your full consideration.  
 
 
With gratitude,  
 
 
 
 
Melissa Maginnis, Ph.D.  
Associate Professor of Microbiology 
Department of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences 
University of Maine  
5735 Hitchner Hall Room 320 
Orono, ME 04469-5735 
(207) 581-2806 
melissa.maginnis@maine.edu  
 
