1TESTIMONY OF
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation
Hearing Date: March 23, 2023
LD 843 – “An Act to Improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top 
Individual Income Tax Rate”
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 843, “An Act to Improve 
Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top Individual Income Tax Rate.”
This bill proposes a significant income tax increase that would result in 
Maine having among the highest individual income tax rates in the country.  Maine 
currently has the 10th highest individual top marginal tax rate.  A 11.15% top 
marginal rate, as proposed by LD 843, would rank Maine 2nd highest, behind only 
California.  And for certain income ranges, it would leave Maine with the highest 
marginal tax rate in the country.  
As seen in California, a top marginal tax rate of this magnitude could 
incentivize high-income taxpayers to change their residency to other states with 
lower or no income tax.  Additionally, most businesses in Maine are small pass-
through businesses that have their business income taxed on the business owner’s 
individual income tax return and so they too would be subject to the 2nd highest 
marginal tax rate in the country – a rate higher than that Maine imposes on 
corporations.  Finally, this bill would increase the volatility of the individual 
income tax. 
2It’s the Administration’s view that the strong revenue projections from the 
Revenue Forecasting Committee will provide the resources necessary for Maine to 
sustain important state programs while avoiding tax increases, such as this one, 
that would put a drag on Maine’s economy.
The Administration notes that there are significant mathematical, technical, 
and other issues with this bill affecting all income tax brackets, and that applying 
the bill to tax year 2023, which is already underway, raises serious administrative 
and compliance concerns.
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is an increase in tax year liability of 
approximately $362.5 million in fiscal year 2023, $373.8 million in fiscal year 
2024, $388.9 million in fiscal year 2025, $414.3 million in fiscal year 2026, and 
$436.2 million in fiscal year 2027.  
If the bill is amended to apply to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 
2024, based upon the inflation adjusted tax rate brackets applicable to tax years 
beginning in 2023, the estimated administrative costs would be nominal and could 
be absorbed by the Bureau.  However, the Bureau would incur administrative costs 
if the bill is not amended; those administrative costs have not yet been determined.
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.
