Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation: my name is Patricia Kidder and I ama 
resident of Spri-ngvale, part of the city of Sanford. l am here today to testify in 
favor of LD 843 and LD 667. 
Over thelast year, l have watched my friends, family and neighbors suffer. We 
are suffering from under-employment, housing insecurity, hunger, stress and 
health issues. We are unable to pay forour basic living expenses let alonea 
major expense or car repair. We are suffering the effects of the pandemic and 
chronic poverty on our mental, physical and financial health.
l 
We need Maine to invest more in affordable housing, health care, our public 
schools, and our infrastructure. We need more rent and mortgage relief and 
affordable access to the internet. We need more access to public transportation 
and affordable addiction treatment centers. We need our state to invest more in 
our cities and towns to help their budgets recover. Our low income workers need 
even more refundable ElC funds to be able to buy the big ticket items their 
families need. We need to invest more in our Care Giving economy, more 
affordable child care and preschools. We need more services for our seniors 
and the disabled. We need to invest more in mental health services and homes 
for the unhoused. And we need to create more living-wage jobs while protecting 
our state's environment and working on our CO2 emission reduction goals. 
Maine has a lot of needs right now and for the foreseeable future. LD 843: An 
Act to improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top individual 
Income Tax Rate and LD 667: An Act to Impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain 
incomes will help us pay for those needed services. l am asking you to please 
support LD 843 and LD 667 because now is time to ask our wealthiest citizens 
to help us rebuild Maine for all of us.
Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, thank you for 
your time. 
Patricia E. Kidder 
4 Carpenter Street 
Springvaie, ME 04083-1109 
pattvkidderd19@gmail.oom 
1-207-977-3325 (call or text)
