Renee Fortin
Lewiston
LD 843
Sen. Grohoski, Rep. Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation,  
I am writing to inform you of my concern on two Bills, 
(L.D. 667) Bill "An Act to Impose a Tax Surcharge on Certain Incomes" (HP0436) 
(L.D. 843) Bill "An Act to Improve Income Tax Progressivity by Establishing a New Top 
Individual Income Tax Rate" (HP0532)
     I am not an economist but I suggest that the goal in raising taxes is not about 
stimulating the economy, or helping Maine families, but about crushing the hard 
working people, of Maine, i.e. most of those in the tax brackets your bills suggest. 
Increasing taxes leads to destroying our economy, and lowering taxes does the 
opposite.  So what is your goal? Maine ranks in at 3rd highest tax burden IN THE 
NATION. Our neighbor, New Hampshire, clocks in at 46th.  Maine is already taxed 
too high!
     If I understand correctly, the majority of our tax money goes to education, is that 
correct?  Recently Edu. Commissioner Makin said, “Academic Learning, takes a 
backseat to social, emotional, gender and race,” “reading, writing and math should be 
a lower priority in Maine schools than SEL, and programs on race and gender.”  I am 
willing to guarantee that the people you want to increase taxes on, would never 
approve of higher taxes, to include funding this type of education. 
     Next, I want to address our tax dollars being increased to fund welfare for non 
citizens, and being overly taxed to fund Maine Care, for them. I am fully aware that 
many among you would prefer I use the term “new Mainer,” however I want to be 
clear, that many of the non-citizens this welfare applies to are not legally in the 
United States. That means they are law breakers! Should we work, and ourselves be 
punished for working, and pay extra taxes, (this is theft) to care for people who have 
committed a crime? NO, absolutely not, the State budget, paid for by our tax dollars is
way over sized. What about working harder to shrink the budget instead of squeezing 
Maine workers dry? How many Maine families are waiting to be added to 
Maine-care, that are struggling to pay for food, shelter, heat, and electricity?  Maine 
lawmakers need to stop prioritizing a globalist agenda, and the needs of illegals, at the
expense of our most vulnerable citizens and our Maine taxpayers. 
     The math does not add up, but falls severely short, and hard working Mainers will 
lose every time! NO MORE NEW TAXES!  I urge a no vote on LD’s 667 and 843, 
they are too “progressive”!
Sincerely,
Mrs. Renee Fortin
