To Senator Grohsky, Representative Perry and the members of the Joint Standing committee on Taxation,
People don't really like paying taxes. 
It cuts into their income. No matter how direct or indirect the method is that is used, its still collected somehow, and it's always still just money out of their pocket. Simple as that. 
Only those making $12,950 or less a year are free from the burden of taxes. We all deal with loss of income in the form of taxes everyday.
We may not like it, but taxes are fundamental to government and serving peoples needs. They're what allow the world around us to function in the way that it does. Whether it's for roads, bridges, parks, or social services -- you need taxes. It's quite simple, really. To provide services, you need resources. We all deal with this burden together, to service each other, on services and infrastructure made possible by our votes.
There is a reason we don't tax the ﬁrst ten or so thousand dollars of income though. Taxes do not burden us all equally. Loss of income is often perceived as detrimental, and in some cases it very well may be. 
Imagine for a moment, a new tax system. A 'fair' tax. Everyone pays the same amount into the system. What number would that be? The US government collected 4.90 trillion dollars in 2022. We have 331 million people. That brings us to 14,803 dollars split evenly. 
Can you imagine a single person out on the street that would willingly pay that much in taxes? 
Median income is about $31,000, so that's almost half of your income right there. At $13.80 minimum wage, working full-time 40hrs, 52 weeks a year you're at $28,704 before taxes. That $14,803 out from taxes is actually more than half your income at that rate. You'd be left with $16,197, or $13,901 respectively for median income and full-time yearly maine minimum wage
With home and food prices what they are, you might have trouble scraping by with even a middle of the road median salary. Half the population make less than that. To put it lightly, that's not good. 
Looking online, a generous average rent price is around 850 a month, and average amount spent on food for a single person annually is $3,653. That leaves us with $13,853 on food and housing expenses. Take that out of our ﬁgures from before and the median income earner is left with $2,344 and our minimum wage earner is left with $48.
That has to cover everything else. Electricity, clothes, car repairs, gasoline. Everything. Even our median wage earner would be struggling. They'd certainly not have anything left over to put away into savings. 
What I've been describing is an equal tax system, but I would hardly call it anything close to 'fair'. It would harm people, either with signiﬁcantly reduced service, maintenance, etc. If taxes were reduced, or it would leave many too poor to live functional, healthy, and happy lives.
Compare this to someone with even $100,000, and that $28,656 deduction of income from average rent, food, and taxes seems a lot less bad. You'd certainly still be able to live comfortably, have enough to put into savings, and maybe even have a few luxuries. 

People with more money can simply pay more taxes without detrimentally harming their own physical wellbeing, security, and livelihood. It is what it is. 
If we want to continue to provide the services we use today and help further develop and foster a nation worth living in, we need taxes. It just makes sense to collect from those with the greatest ability to do so. To me, it's common sense.
This is why we have the progressive tax bracket and percentage system we have today. This fundamental truth is already recognized as normal. Anything else is greed. The real battle is in all the nitty gritty percentages. 
Where that balance of who pays exactly how much stands I know is a tricky line to draw in the sand, but ask yourself, what is it like for the median earner? What is it like for the minimum wage earner? Cause, half of the population will be in a worse situation than the median, and full time minimum wage isn't too far oﬀ. Some can't take a hit without tumbling. Others can take one without a ﬂinch. Which do you think is more fair? 
Thank you for your time.
-Riley
