Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
Neither For Nor Against
LD 28 - An Act to Streamline Rulemaking for Revisions to Screening Levels for the Solid Waste Beneficial 
Use Program
January 30, 2023
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony neither for nor against 
LD 28, An Act to Streamline Rulemaking for Revisions to Screening Levels for the Solid Waste Beneficial 
Use Programs, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal 
government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member 
Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities 
in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.
While officials support the monitoring of contaminants in all municipal systems, it is beneficial 
for the committee to understand  the historic impacts associated with  sudden rule changes seeking to 
drastically reduce contaminant designations below federally recognized limits.  These changes have 
shifted expensive midbudget cycle burdens onto communities without an alternate plan for municipal 
operations. 
In 2018 and early 2019, rapid changes in contamination testing and screening levels for the 
beneficial use of solid waste that previously were unnecessary, or used recommended federal levels as 
indicators, cost communities enormous amounts of unexpected expense not proportional to their ability to 
stop the flow of the contaminants in question and without alternative plans for managing the waste in 
place. Some of those communities have taken significant loans for the beneficial use of the material at the 
encouragement of and through a Department of Environmental Protection program, expecting they would 
be able to use the beneficial use to pay off those expenses and be able to close their landfills. 
As the new state level was significantly lower than the federal standard, and contaminant testing 
of soils and solids for level for perfluoroalkyl substances (commonly referred to as PFOA and PFAS) was 
not yet approved and lacked abundant laboratory providers, communities faced unanticipated 
expenditures midbudget cycle in the tens of thousands of dollars to divert beneficial solid waste to 
landfills while material from septic systems continued to be used in the same “beneficial” ways, untested, 
or further added to solid waste management material. 
As challenging as major and substantive rulemaking is, officials hope the shift to routine and 
technical rules will not again allow the diversion of public funds away from possible solutions locally, to 
expensive movement of contaminated material in large quantities to other communities unfortunate 
enough to have landfill capacity. Municipalities now have guidance provided by the department which 
includes training and testing relief for Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for effluent, however 
that just went into effect in 2022, three years after communities were scrambling to develop alternative 
solutions without a plan. While effluent discharge levels are the department’s priority, there is benefit to 
thinking “upstream” and how the department can play a stronger role or support the collection of 
information that will aid not only in determining appropriate levels but inform activities that stop the 
inflow.
Officials understand that LD 28, only moves the amended screening levels for beneficial use 
solids to routine and technical rulemaking when those screening levels are driven by the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency risk protocols. Part of those recommendations include stakeholder 
involvement in those determinations, and rulemaking allows for comments but removes the legislative 
review of the impacts that expand or create municipal duty without the commitment of state support for 
those impacts. It is important for the committee to make sure doing so will not encourage historic impacts 
of statewide importance on local operations without a plan for addressing or financially supporting 
changes resulting from a flow of material municipalities and POTW operators are unable to stop. 
