131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 30 
Senator Stacy Brenner
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
(207) 287-1515
Stacy.Brenner@legislature.maine.gov
Fax: (207) 287-1585 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Website: www.mainesenate.orgTestimony in support of LD 28 “An Act to Streamline Rulemaking for Revisions to 
Screening Levels for the Solid Waste Beneficial Use Program”
Representative Gramlich and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee of 
Environment and Natural Resources, I am Senator Stacy Brenner. I represent Senate District 30 
which includes Gorham and most of Scarborough. 
I am pleased to introduce LD 28, “An Act to Streamline Rulemaking for Revisions to Screening 
Levels for the Solid Waste Beneficial Use Program” on behalf of the Department of 
Environmental Protection. This legislation will shift the rulemaking process from major 
substantive to routine technical for updating Appendix A, Screening Levels for Beneficial Use, 
which falls under the Department’s Rule Chapter 418, Beneficial Use of Solid Wastes. 
Historically these screening levels were derived in Maine through consultation with the Maine 
CDC, which took significant time and effort to develop. In recent years, however, the US EPA 
began providing regional screening levels for contaminants in order to save states the time and 
burden of developing these screening levels themselves, while also promoting a unified approach 
in all EPA regions. The EPA provides the latest toxicity values to states in the spring and fall. 
Maine CDC toxicologists have vetted and approved the use of these EPA protocols.
The use of these EPA protocols has significantly streamlined the process for updating the 
Department’s screening levels. However, updating Appendix A through the major substantive 
rulemaking process slows the process down. As of now, the updates to Appendix A cannot keep 
up with the changes to screening levels which are based on the latest scientific knowledge. If 
Appendix A screening levels are going to reflect the most recent scientific information for 
chemicals such as PFAS, the process to update the screening levels must be less time and 
resource intensive.  
Changing Appendix A to a routine technical process allows for screening values to be updated 
routinely, ensuring that waste used for beneficial use will not contain concentrations of PFAS 
that may be harmful to public health or the environment.  Switching to routine technical updating 
is the next logical step to ensure these systems are more protective of our environment.
I urge you to vote ‘ought to pass’ on LD 28. Thank you for your thoughtful consideration. Please 
direct your questions to Susanne Miller from the Department of Environmental Protection. 
