State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Bear Shea, Mental Health Specialist and Ofﬁce of School and Student Support 
Team Coordinator 
In Support of: L.D. 393 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 33: Rules Goveming Physical 
Restraint and Seclusion. a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Education 
(EMERGENCY) . 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Rep. Brennan 
Date: April 6, 2023' 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Bear Shea, and I am here today representing the Department of Education speaking in 
support of L.D. 393, Resolve. Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 33: Rules 
Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion. a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of 
Education U-EMERGENCY), 
As a result of Public Law 2021, Chapter 453, statutory changes were made regarding the use of 
seclusion, chemical restraint, mechanical restraint, and certain physical restraint of children by 
schools and other entities. The Department of Education was directed to develop a performance 
review system to define and monitor the use of restraint by school administrative units (SAUs) and 
special purpose programs and to undertake the rule making process to bring the Chapter 33 rule 
into alignment with the new statute. 
Through analysis of feedback from state professional organizations and education professionals 
and under the authority of state statute 20-A §40l4, the Maine Department of Education engaged 
in rulemaking on Chapter 33. The amended sections include updated deﬁnitions, a prohibition on 
restraint and seclusion, reporting obligations, a performance review system, and technical 
assistance provided by the Department of Education. The updated sections provide clarity and real- 
world experience to the existing rule. 
Stemming from feedback from the ﬁeld during the initial public comment period, several 
substantial changes were made to the proposed rule. The addition or modiﬁcation of terms such as 
“voluntary, ” “serious physical injury,” and “protective physical interventions ” were included. A 
second, targeted public comment period did not result in the need for additional substantial 
changes. The ﬁnal, provisionally adopted language in the nlle reﬂects the dynamicsynthesis of 
practical public, stakeholder and expert feedback to meet the legal alignment of statute. 
The proposed rule will have a positive impact for professional school staff by providing a clear 
outline for the complex and high-stake decision making that results when considering the use of
1
restraint and seclusion. The approval of the proposed rule allows the Department to create much 
anticipated guidance for the ﬁeld, as school administrative units have so far had to navigate the 
statute change without it. 
The Department of Education believes in a Whole student approach to education that develops and 
prepares students for the challenges and opportunities of today and tomorrow by addressing their 
comprehensive needs through a shared responsibility of students, families, schools, and 
communities. One of the tenets of Maine’s Whole Student Approach is supporting healthy and 
safe schools. LD 393 helps us achieve this goal by supporting safe physical settings for our students 
through investments in the systems and practices. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is in support of L.D. 393, Resolve, Regarding 
Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 33: Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, 
a Maj or Substantive Rule of the Department of Education (EMERGENCY). I am happy to answer 
any questions the Committee may have, and I will be available for Work sessions on this bill.
'
2
