 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Augusta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
April 6, 2023   
Submitted Electronically  
  Senator Joseph Rafferty , Chair  
Representative Michael Brennan , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural  Affairs  
c/o Legislative Information  Office  
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333  
  
Re:  Support for LD 393, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of 
Chapter 33: Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Education  
 Dear Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee 
On Education and Cultural Affairs : 
 My name is Ben Jones  and I am a Managing Attorney at Disability Rights Maine, Maine’s  
protection and advocacy agency for individuals with disabilities.  On behalf of DRM, thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 393, Resolve, Regarding Legislative 
Review of Portions of Chapter 33: Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Education.  The Maine Department of Education’s (MDOE) proposed amendments to Chapter 33 in this Resolve align with the enabling statute, Sec.1. 20 -A MRSA §4014, which resulted from the 
legislative bill LD 1373 of the 130th Maine Legislature.  Section 4014 went into effect in October 2021 and provides important restrictions o n the use of restraint and seclusion in Maine 
schools , particularly for students with disabilities .  The R esolve  seek s to ensure that Chapter 33 
comports with Section 4014.  For background, i n 2019, MDOE reported over 22,000 uses of 
restraint an d seclusion on students, the highest to date  (MDOE, 
https://www.maine.gov/doe/data -
reporting/reporting/warehouse/behavior ).  And according to the U .S. Department of Educa tion, 
80% of restraint s and 77% of  seclusion s are used on students with disabilities  (US DOE,  
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
April 6, 2023 
Page 2  
  https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/restraint- and-seclusion.pdf
).  Section 4014 and 
Chapter 33 are critical to protecting Maine students  from the inappropriate use of these 
emergency interventions.  
 Though we support the Resolve as written, w e provide here  two comments for the Committee to 
consider.   
 First, MDOE’s proposed Chapter 33 S ection 2(23) defines  “serious physical i njury ” as “any 
impairment of the physical condition of a person, whether self‐inflicted or inflicted by someone else, that is beyond the care of routine first aid, and should require a medical practitioner to 
evaluate and/or to treat the victim. ”  We are concerned that this  definition is overly  subjective 
and may lead to the inappropriate use of restraint or seclusion.  Both ‘beyond the care of routine first aid’ and ‘should require a medical practitioner to evaluate and/or to treat the victim’ are discretionary  terms that could be misapplied  to include less than serious injuries.  
 And second, a lthough MDOE’s proposed Chapter 33, Section 9, Subsection 2.A -B are 
essentially unchanged from the original Chapter 33 language, we recommend the Committee consider an update to these sections to better support students  and staff .  Chapter 33, Section 9 , 
Subsection 2 is titled ‘Multiple Inciden ts of Physical Restraint and Seclusion’ and speaks to 
when a team must meet to review the repeat use of restraint and seclusion on a student.  It only 
requires a team meeting after the third incident  of restraint or seclusion in a school year.  We 
hear from families with students who endure dozens of restraints and seclusions where the third incident  meetin g occurs  very early  in the school year  and the n the  red flags continue to raise .  
We recommend the Co mmittee consider updating the meeting requirement to every three 
incidents  to support the staff, students, and family involved so they can effectively address these 
red flags.    
 Here is how Chapter 33, Section 9 , Subsection 2 could be updated:  
 
2. Multipl e Incidents of Physical Restraint and Seclusion  
 
A. Special Education/504 Students after Third  Every Three Incident s. After the 
third  every three incident s of physical restraint or seclusion in a school year of 
a student who has been found eligible for special education or has a Section 504 plan:, 
1)   tThe student’s IEP or 504 team shall meet within 10 school days of the 
third  every three incident s to discuss the incident s and consider the need to 
conduct an FBA and/or develop a BIP or amend an existing one. 
B.  For all other students after Third  Every Three Incident s. For students not 
described in Paragraph A, a team shall meet within ten school days of the 
third  every three incident s in a school year to discuss the incidents. 
1)   The team shall consist of the parent, an administrator or designee, a 
teacher for the student, a staff member involved in the incident (if not the  
 
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs  
April 6, 2023 Page 3  
 teacher or administrator al ready invited), and other appropriate staff members. 
2)   The team shall consider the appropriateness of a referral to special education and, regardless of whether a referral to special education is to be made, the need to conduct an FBA, and/or develop a BIP.  
C.  Nothing in this section is meant to prevent the completion of an FBA or BIP 
for any student who might benefit from these measures but who has had fewer than three restraints or seclusions. 
  Thank you for your time and consideration – we are unable to present testimony in person today, but welcome any follow up questions from the Committee for the work session.    Sincerely , 
   Ben Jones Managing Attorney Disability Rights Maine  

