 
 
A Professional Association
107 Congress Street    Portland, Maine 04101    (207) 772-7426   millerphalon.com
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Chair 
Representative Michael Brennan, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
 
April 6, 2023  
Sent electronically 
 
Re: Support for LD 393, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 33: 
Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Education 
 
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
On Education and Cultural Affairs: 
 
My name is Deb Davis, and I am a Non-Attorney Education Advocate at Miller & Phalon (M&P). 
For background, my son has multiple disabilities and has had special education since special 
purpose pre-k. He was physically restrained on the playground when he started public 
kindergarten in 2009. He was subsequently restrained and secluded numerous times. After my 
advocacy for my son, I was invited to be on the stakeholder team that revised Chapter 33, which 
was passed in 2013. Those traumatic experiences set me on a course of advocacy, starting with 
my own business in 2013 and then proudly landing my most recent job working with M&P. Their 
website for reference is https://www.millerphalon.com/  
 
On behalf of M&P, I greatly thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of 
LD 393, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 33: Rules 
Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department 
of Education. 
 
The Maine Department of Education’s (MDOE) proposed amendments to Chapter 33 in this 
Resolve to align with the enabling statute, Sec.1. 20-A MRSA §4014, which resulted from the 
legislative bill LD 1373 of the 130th Maine Legislature. Section 4014 went into effect in October 
2021 and provides important restrictions on the use of restraint and seclusion in Maine schools, 
particularly for students with disabilities. The Resolve seeks to ensure that Chapter 33 comports 
with Section 4014. Section 4014 and Chapter 33 are critical to protecting Maine students from 
the inappropriate use of these emergency interventions. 
 
Though I 100% support the Resolve as written, here are two comments for the Committee to 
consider.  
 
First, MDOE’s proposed Chapter 33 Section 2(23) defines “serious physical injury” as “any 
impairment of the physical condition of a person, whether self‐inflicted or inflicted by someone 
else, that is beyond the care of routine first aid, and should require a medical practitioner to Amber R. Miller miller@millerphalon.com 
Amy Phalon phalon@millerphalon.com 
Of Counsel:  
Edwin P. Chester chester@millerphalon.com 
Barbara A. Vestal vestal@millerphalon.com 
Non-Attorney Education Advocate: 
Deb Davis davis@millerphalon.com 
2 
 evaluate and/or to treat the victim.” I am concerned that this definition is overly subjective and 
may lead to the inappropriate use of restraint or seclusion. Both ‘beyond the care of routine first 
aid’ and ‘should require a medical practitioner to evaluate and/or to treat the victim’ are 
discretionary terms that could be misapplied to include less than serious injuries. 
 
And second, although MDOE’s proposed Chapter 33, Section 9, Subsection 2. A-B is 
essentially unchanged from the original Chapter 33 language, I recommend the Committee 
considers an update to these sections to support students and staff better.  
 
Chapter 33, Section 9, Subsection 2 is titled ‘Multiple Incidents of Physical Restraint and 
Seclusion’ and speaks to when a team must meet to review the repeated use of restraint and 
seclusion on a student. It only requires a team meeting after the third incident of restraint or 
seclusion in a school year. I also hear from families with students who endure dozens of 
restraints and seclusions where the third incident meeting occurs very early in the school year, 
but there are numerous additional incidents. I recommend the Committee consider updating the 
meeting requirement to every three incidents to support the staff, students, and family involved 
so they can effectively address these red flags. 
 
Here is how Chapter 33, Section 9, Subsection 2 could be updated to read: 
 
2. Multiple Incidents of Physical Restraint and Seclusion 
 
A. Special Education/504 Students after Every Three Incidents. After every three incidents of 
physical restraint or seclusion in a school year of a student who has been found eligible for 
special education or has a Section 504 plan: 
1) the student’s IEP or 504 team shall meet within 10 school days of every three incidents to 
discuss the incidents and consider the need to conduct an FBA and/or develop a BIP or amend 
an existing one. 
B. For all other students after Every Three Incidents. For students not described in Paragraph 
A, a team shall meet within ten school days of every three incidents in a school year to 
discuss the incidents.  
1) The team shall consist of the parent, an administrator or designee, a teacher for the student, 
a staff member involved in the incident (if not the teacher or administrator already invited), and 
other appropriate staff members.  
2) The team shall consider the appropriateness of a referral to special education and, 
regardless of whether a referral to special education is to be made, the need to conduct an FBA, 
and/or develop a BIP. 
C. Nothing in this section is meant to prevent the completion of an FBA or BIP 
for any student who might benefit from these measures but who has had fewer 
than three restraints or seclusions. 
 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration – I am unable to present testimony in person today. 
 
Deb Davis 
 
Non-Attorney Education Advocate 
Miller & Phalon, PA 
107 Congress Street 
Portland, Maine 04101 
Cell phone: (207) 233-3392 
Office phone: (207) 772-7426 
Website: millerphalon.com  
