526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
  
 
April 1 2, 2023  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 393, Resolve , Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 
33:  Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantives  Rule of the 
Department of Education . 
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan  and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affa irs: 
 
My name is Nancy Cronin , and I am the Executive Director  of the Maine Developmental 
Disabilities (DD) Council.1    This reso lve aligns Chapter 33 with the enabling statute, Sec.1. 20 -A 
MRSA §4014, which resulted from the legislative bill LD 1373 of the 130th Maine Legislature.   
Maine DD Council f ully supports this resolve with a couple of suggested amendments.   
 
Maine DD  Council recommend s that  the Committee consider amending Chapter 33, Section 9, 
Subsection 2 “Multiple Incidents of Physical Restraint and Seclusion .”  This section requires a 
team to convene  after the third time  a student was secluded or restrained in any given school  
year.  While we completely agree that a meeting is warranted , meeting after the th ird incident 
only might not be adequate for the students needs .  Consider  the following scenario .  A child 
that has a rough patch and experiences three restraints in Septembe r.  The team meets and 
puts into place a plan to assist the child.  Things go  well until February w hen the child 
exper iences dysregulation  and it is necessary to place the student  in restrain ts additional  times  
in order to keep them safe .  The way the rule is written no additional meetings are necessary, 
the one conducted in September should be enough  even though the reason the student is 
 
1 Councils on Developmental Disabilities were created through the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
of Rights Act (DD Act) in 1970.  Maine’s DD Council has been advocating with and for individuals with 
developmental disabilities for over 50 year s.  The DD Council is a federally funded, independent organization with 
members from across the state, including persons with disabilities, family members, and representatives of public 
and private agencies which provide services and/or funding for service s for individuals with developmental 
disabilities.  As required in federal law, we are involved in advocacy, capacity building and systemic change 
activities, with the goal that individuals with developmental and other disabilities of all ages are fully in cluded, 
integrated, and involved in their communities and the decisions impacting their lives.   
Maine Developmental Disabilities Council  
526 Western Avenue, Unit 2, Augusta, Maine 04330     207 -480-1478      833-713-2618     www.maineddc.org  
 
 
 dysreg ulated may have changed.    We recommend the Committee consider updating the 
meeting requirement to every  three incidents to support the staff, students, and family 
involved so they can effectively address these red flags  instead of only once per  year.  
 
Maine DD Council recommen ds replacing  the proposed defi nition of “serious bodily injury ” with 
the defin ition that is in the current ver sion of Chapter 33  because it is clearer and mor e 
consistent  with other statutor y language .  The proposed “serious bodily in jury” is defined  as 
“any impairment of the physical co ndition of a person, whether self‐inflicted or inflicted by 
someone else, that is beyond the care of routine first aid, and should require a medical 
practitioner to evaluate and/or to treat the victim.”   Maine ’s criminal code defi nes “serious 
bodily injury ” as meaning “a bodily injury which creates a substantial risk of death or whic h 
causes serious, permanent disfigurement or loss or substantial impairment of the function of 
any bodily member or organ, or extended convalescence necessary for recovery of physical 
health. ” (MRSA 17 -A Part 1, Chapter 1§2 -23)2  This definition is consistent with the current 
Chapter 33 which defines  “Serious Bodily Injury ” as “ bodily injury that  involves — 
A. A substantial risk of death;  
B. Extreme ph ysical pain;  
C. Protracted and obvious disfigurement; or  
D. Protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or 
mental faculty. ”3 
Maine DD Council is concerned that if the proposed definition of “serious bodily injury ” is 
adopted their may be con fusion about what the te rm means and create doubt as to when  these 
emer gency techniques ar e allowed to b e used.  
 
Thank  you for this opportunity to provide input  and I will make myself available for the work 
session.  
.  
 
 
 
22 https://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/17 -A/title17 -
Asec2.html#:~:text=%22Serious%20bodily%20injury%22%20means%20a,for%20recovery%20of%20physical%20
health . 
 
3 https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/rules/05/071/071c033.doc  
 

