 
March 28, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Support of LD # 393 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of 
Chapter 33: Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantive Rule of 
the Department of Education 
My name is Regina Bowie and I live in Presque Isle. I am a self-advocate meaning I am a person who 
lives with a disability. I am part of Speaking Up For Us, Maine’s Self-Advocacy Network, and I am 
currently the Chair of the Board of Directors.    
 
A lot of us forget the importance of remembering and reviewing. It is important to educate how to 
manage behavior without making people feel like they are being secluded or restrained.  The person 
needs to do it without making them feel like they are a prisoner.  People have habits that make them 
do awful things and it’s good to review all that stuff and do things a little differently if needed and 
according to each person. 
 
A lot of bad things happen because people act on impulse instead of thinking.  Training should 
include how to act quickly but responsibly and be delivered in all formats so that everyone can 
understand. 
 
Personally, I don’t want to go into how people mistreated me, but I felt restrained.  It was not good at 
all and because I wasn’t diagnosed properly, they didn’t know how to treat me better.  They should 
have treated me with respect.  I was too scared to talk back because I didn’t want to make the people 
feel scared of me and become more resistant so there is a need for balance.   
 
Knowing that people have a greater understanding of how to responsibly restrain and try not to 
negatively isolate people.  People will talk with a respectful tone that they deserve even if we don’t 
agree, even if there is anger.  People can learn to control that even if they are the person the 
behavior is focused on. 
 
The party that misbehaves or the one that is trying to help them at least they have the tools and the 
understanding about how to manage behavior without it becoming an extreme situation.  In the worst-
case scenarios, the toughest things do have to happen and there must be a balance where all parties 
agree it will be a lot better for everybody.  If the person involved refuses to take the education or listen 
because they just don’t know how to do it otherwise.  It will be hurtful to others if people choose not to 
pay attention to the bill. 
 
What is important here is balance, education, training in all formats, and acting quickly but 
responsibly. I ask you to vote in favor of LD 393. Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Regina Bowie 
Presque Isle 
reginabowie@myfairpoint.net  
 
