April 5, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Support of LD # 393 Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of 
Chapter 33: Rules Governing Physical Restraint and Seclusion, a Major Substantive Rule of 
the Department of Education 
My name is Rosana Belanger and I live in Presque Isle. I am a self-advocate meaning I am a person 
who lives with a disability. I am a member of SUFU where I am on the Board of Directors.   I agree 
that parts of this bill should be reviewed. I support LD 393 because I believe that other testimonies 
from other people may help them understand and seclusion and restraint should be stopped.  
 
This bill is important to me because I know people who have been restrained, and I do not agree with 
them being restrained and I think that it could have been handled differently.  I haven't been 
restrained before, but I have been in a situation in what is called Kids Peace. There was a room that 
was for someone to be restrained or secluded from other people and that scared me to know that this 
was an option and their way of handling children.   
 
‘I do not agree with restraining or putting someone in seclusion. And I think that getting rid of 
seclusion and restraint will be our best option. This way no one gets hurt and there are no incidents 
where a child or a teenager, in some cases, will end up being hurt. This bill is important to me 
because I have friends and other self-advocates who have gone through this. I would be terrified If I 
had a child who had a disability and was in school because I don't know if that they would be 
restrained or secluded with possible injuries, which would be terrifying.  
 
I know that I would be terrified if I were in a situation where a child had to be restrained, whether it 
was with me or not. I'd be terrified the child would get hurt as well as the fear a child may have of the 
adults who are restraining a child.  
 
If this bill is not investigated, then it will put me, personally, In fear for any kid, anywhere, to be 
restrained or secluded when not necessary. They could deal with it and handle it differently. This 
would be a benefit versus a downfall by putting people as part of the solution instead of part of the 
problem. I think that whoever is looking at this bill should put themselves in a position where they are 
the parent of a child who is being restrained and thinks about what they would do if their child got 
frustrated and then hurt.  
 
I hope that the adults can look at this and see how important it is to look over the restraints and 
seclusion rules, and hopefully put themselves in a parent’s position. To know that their child could be 
restrained or secluded and up and end up getting hurt.  
 
I ask you to vote in favor of LD 393. I will be available to answer questions by phone or by e-mail. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Rosana Belanger 
Presque Isle 
rose_32_1990b@icloud.com  
 
