TESTIMONY OF 
CHASE HEWITT, STAFF ATTORNEY, OFFICE OT TAX POLICY 
MAINE REVENUE SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 3, 2023, at I ."30pm 
LD I 231 — “An Act to Bring Fairness in Income Taxes to Maine Families by 
Aafusting the Tax Brackets ” 
LD I434 — “An Act to Abolish the Maine Income Tax and Establish a Zero- 
based Budget” 
LD I638 ~ “An Act to Lower the State's Individual Income Tax” 
LD I 65 I ~ “An Act to Reduce the State Income Tax” 
LD I 6 71 — “An Act to Reduce the Income Tax to 4.5 Percent on the Lowest 
Tax Bracket and Remove Low-income Families ﬁrom Taxation” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD I 23 I— 
“An Act to Bring Fairness in Income Taxes to Maine Families by Adjusting the 
Tax Brackets; ” and LD I 65 I ~ “An Act to Reduce the State Income Tax; and 
Against LD I434 — “An Act to Abolish the Maine Income Tax and Establish a 
Zero-based Budget,” LD I 638 — “An Act to Lower the State's Individual Income 
Tax; ” and LD I 6 71 — “An Act to Reduce the Income Tax to 4.5 Percent on the 
Lowest Tax Bracket and Remove Low-income Families from T axation.” 
The Administration opposes these bills because they propose signiﬁcant 
reductions in income tax, some even proposing to abolish the income tax 
altogether, without consideration of the impact of those cuts on the services offered 
by the State of Maine and the people who rely on those services.
1
The individual and corporate income taxes are an important part of Maine’s 
tax structure. They prevent overreliance on revenue from property and sales and 
use taxes, add progressivity to the overall State tax system, and serve as a delivery 
mechanism for many important refundable credits, including the Earned Income 
Tax Credit, the Property Tax Fairness Credit, the Sales Tax Fairness Credit, and 
the Dependent Care Tax Credit. 
Turning now to more technical concerns with the speciﬁc bills, starting with 
LD 1434, the Administration notes that clariﬁcation is needed regarding the 
applicability of this proposal to the franchise tax, the date which the report would 
be due, whether refundable tax credits continue to apply, and whether taxpayers 
with no tax liability continue to be required to ﬁle income tax returns. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of over $2.5 
billion annually. The estimated administrative costs are nominal and can be 
absorbed by the Bureau. However, any reduction in the Agency’s budget, as 
required by the bill, would signiﬁcantly impair the ability of the Division to timely 
process income tax returns and issue applicable refunds. 
LD 1638 and 1671 contain significant technical concerns relating to the 
calculation of the tax due and the application of inﬂation adjustments, and 
administrative and compliance concerns regarding the application of the tax 
changes to tax year 2023. 
If the bills are amended to apply to tax years beginning on or after January 1 
2024, the estimated administrative costs would be nominal and could be absorbed
2
by the Bureau. However, the Bureau would incur signiﬁcant administrative costs 
if the bills are not amended; those administrative costs have not yet been 
determined. The revenue impact of LD 1638 is not available at this time. LD 1671 
would result in a revenue loss of approximately $200 million per year. 
Due to LD 1231 and 1651 being concept drafts, the Administration would 
need time to review any proposed language before offering additional testimony. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
