 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 774 (“An Act to Require the Maine State Housing 
Authority to Report to the Legislature on the Housing Opportunities for Maine 
Fund”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
May 9, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Housing , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both r esidential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Associa tion 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 774. The bill would require Maine State 
Housing Authority to provide an annual accounting , and for the last ten years, of how the 
Housing Opportunities for Maine ( HOME ) Fund has been spent  to build new or repurposed 
affordable housing. This information is essential to help improve the program  for the future , 
especially because in the past, some of the funds have been swept to the General Fund.  
 
The Maine State Housing Authority is the entrusted steward of the HOME Fund and 
maximizes its leverage in conjunction with other funding sources . We believe that t he HOME 
fund should be  used to help increase housing supply , and this bill would provide a reasonable 
accounting  to guide policy makers and encourage housing development toward additional 
permanent solutions to address Maine’s housing needs.   
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 774 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought To Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
