Alissa  Wade
Hampden
LD 1581
Testimony of Alissa Wade, IPDH, Prevention Works Dental Hygiene Care speaking 
in favor of LD 1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienist and Dental Therapists.
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Alissa Wade. I have 
been practicing dental hygienist for 27 years, the owner and operator of Prevention 
Works Dental Hygiene since 2012, (traveling to thirty schools providing care to 
students) expanded in 2014 to include a private dental hygiene office for people of all 
ages. I am testifying today to encourage you to support LD 1581 regarding dental 
hygienist and dental therapists.              
The changes that are proposed are not things that we have not been trained to do. 
These are things that we were educated on in college. They were things that we 
educated to do (state and national board examinations) to be able to obtain a dental 
hygiene license. In dental hygiene school we were educated to take and read 
radiographs. Since 2014, I have had to find a dentist to interpret them for me. I have 
had four dentists so far and I am going to have to find another before the end of this 
calendar year. This is an obstacle for me, my colleagues, and my patients. As it is, we 
have a shortage of providers. Let us do what we are trained to do. If I see anything 
suspicious, or if a patient has symptoms, I am referring to a dentist before, not after 
my radiographs are interpreted.
One of the first things we were taught in hygiene school was to take medical history, 
perform an oral assessment and dental hygiene diagnose. These are things I have done
for 27 years. Dental hygienists do not only perform “cleanings,” but every patient is 
also having an assessment, oral cancer screening, documenting, planning for future 
service and a hygiene diagnosis. This is what we do, we are preventive providers. We 
should be able to utilize our skills to the fullest without barriers to our patients. These 
changes are necessary to provide adequate oral health care.
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony,
Alissa Wade IPDH
