Ashley Rideout
Dover-Foxcroft
LD 1581
Testimony of Ashley Rideout  RDH speaking in favor of LD 1581:  An Act 
Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists.  
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services,
My name is Ashley Rideout I’m a practicing independent Dental Hygienist, owner of 
Rideout preventative Dental in Dover Foxcroft. I’m testifying today to encourage you 
to support LD 1581 regarding dental hygienists and dental therapists. 
I have been a registered dental hygienist for 6 years. I have been practicing 
independently for almost 2 of those and prior to that I was a dental assistant for 3 
years for 2 specialists. 
I chose this path to increase access to care. I am currently struggling to find a dentist 
to read the radiographs. The dentists that I have been in touch with have expressed 
concerns about the liability. As an independent dental hygienist I have liability 
insurance of my own. We are LICENSED dental radiographers through the state of 
Maine.  As an independent hygienist we are knowledgeable and capable to refer 
patients when necessary. Having to have a dentist read the radiographs versus sending
them to the patients dentist just wastes a lot of time and effort on all ends. There is no 
need to take three steps when just one can be taken.
Regarding local anesthesia, we are well trained, well educated and fully licensed to 
administer local anesthesia. Continuing education courses covering medical 
emergencies is required, there shouldn't be a worry about a doctor needing to be on 
site when we are knowledgable is avoiding such scenario and well trained on what 
steps to take if one does occur.  With the expansion of the Mainecare program to 
adults I am currently seeing many patients who haven’t had dental cleanings in years. 
Local anesthesia would be a much welcome tool to make patients more comfortable. 
Thank you for your time and consideration to allow us to practice at our full potential.
Ashley Rideout, RDH
