Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Testimony in Support 
May 4, 2023 LD 1581 An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists 
Good Afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. 
My name is Bonnie Vaughan IPDH, MEd, MBA. My experience includes more than 30 years in dental 
hygiene education, private practice and many years in dental public health ALL in Maine. I live in 
Cumberland and travel to Augusta everyday to be the Executive Director ofa nonprofit center called 
Kennebec Valley Family Dentistry. 
I'm one of 1400 hygienists who have worked with the Maine Legislature to advance the scope of 
practice for dental hygienists. This has included in 1995 working with the legislature to created Public 
Heath Hygienist and in 2008 Independent Practice Dental Hygienists. Over the years the MDHA has 
worked to streamline and improve the dental hygiene scope. LD 1581 is an effort to review 17-Chapters 
of the Dental Practice Act and make some positive changes to RDH, PHS, IPDH & DT’s scope of practice. 
These are some of the efficiencies: 
Incorporate some of the RDH competencies from the American Dental Education Association and the 
Commission on Dental Accreditation. These entities believe that Dental Hygienists provide evidence- 
based, person-centered care through assessment, diagnosis, treatment planning, implementation, 
evaluation and documentation. In Maine the dental hygiene scope of practice has worked in 
collaboration with other professionals in a variety of settings to recognize the oral systemic connections 
for improvement of oral health, general health and well-being of individuals, communities and 
populations. 
In some of the testimony you have received from IPDH & PHS they have suggested removing the 21 day 
review of x-rays. This effort doesn't function because Dentists do not have time to review IPDH & PHS x- 
rays. RDH's are qualified to educate the patients on the values of the x-rays and refer patients on for 
treatment. 
Dental Therapists can be a very important team member in a nonprofit dental team. The majority of 
services needed in the community based dental centers are diagnostic, restorative, preventive and 
emergency care. These services make up 93% of our services.. 
Most of our MC patients are looking for these services. Dental therapists are specially trained to do 
these services. They are under the supervision of the dentist and can provide basic restorative and 
preventive care, leaving the more extensive treatment for the dentists. Dental Therapists would be an 
important team member to help us balance our budgets. They are very cost effective when working with 
MC reimbursement. Thank you for your time and interest. l'm happy to answer any questions and will 
attend your work session. Bonnie VaughanlPDH, MEd, MBA bssvaughan@msn.com
