l firstly would like to thank the committee for allowing me to speak today in support of 
LD1581. My name is Brooklynn Johnke and I am currently licensed as a Provisional Dental 
Therapist and Dental Hygienist at Penobscot Community Health Care in Bangor. At this point in 
time, I am the only Provisional Dental Therapist practicing full time in Maine. 
It is my understanding that the goal for Maine's Dental Therapy model is to follow the 
model that was established by the state of Minnesota in 2009. As it stands in Minnesota, initial 
licensure as a Dental Therapist allows for the dental therapist to practice under the direct 
supervision of a supervising dentist. After 2000 hours of clinical practice, the dental therapist is 
allowed to apply for their Advanced Dental Therapist certification, at which point the level of 
supervision changes from direct to general. General supervision allows for the Advanced Dental 
Therapist to practice without a dentist present in the building, so long as the treatment has 
been approved by the dentist beforehand. 
At this point in time, Maine has established similar authorities for Dental Therapists. 
Initial authority for Dental Therapists in Maine is considered "Provisional," and all treatment by 
the Provisional Dental Therapist must be done under the direct supervision of a supervising 
dentist. After 2,000 hours of practice, the provisional dental therapist is allowed to apply for 
what is considered the full Dental Therapy authority and is no longer considered provisional. 
This has been a goal of mine since I began practicing as a Provisional Dental Therapist in Maine. 
If I were to apply for my Dental Therapy authority in Maine, my supervision level, as it is 
currently written into law, will not change and I will still be under the direct supervision ofa 
dentist. It is my opinion that in order for Dental Therapy to succeed as a profession in Maine, it 
is necessary that the supervision level of full-authority Dental Therapists be changed to general. 
I would also like to emphasize that LD1581, from my understanding, does not change the 
supervision ofthe Provisional Dental Therapist, which will still require 2000 hours of direct 
supervision under a supervising dentist. 
I have seen colleagues in Minnesota with their Advanced certification be utilized in 
settings aside from their home office, such as schools, satellite clinics, and mobile bus clinics. 
They are able to mobilize and provide treatment to patients that would otherwise go without 
treatment due to cost or distance from their dental provider. My colleagues would be unable to 
increase access to care in these settings if not for the general supervision of a dentist with 
whom they've entered a collaborative agreement. These Advanced dental therapists seek to 
increase access to care by providing services only within their scope of practice. From what I've 
seen in my time at PCHC, access to dental care is a huge barrier for the people of Maine, andI 
strongly believe that allowing Dental Therapists to practice at the level of general supervision 
will only help to break some of the barriers faced by citizens of Maine. 
I again would like to stress my support of LD 1581, not for me as a Provisional Dental 
Therapist, but for the people of Maine seeking dental care and the future of Dental Therapy in 
this state. Thank you for your time and for allowing me to speak on this issue.
