Testimony of Courtney Vannah, Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives, MCD Global Health 
neither for nor against  LD 1581: An Act  Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists  
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Public Hearing: Thursday, May 2,  2023 
 
Dear Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and esteemed  members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services , I am pleased to offer testimony neither for nor 
against L D1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists. I am the Program 
Manager of Oral Health Initiatives at MCD Global Health , a dental hygienist, and a former 
faculty member in the Dental Hygiene Program at the University of New England. I am 
submitt ing testimony to encourage the Committee  to support many aspects of this bill and  to 
share my concern about one  piece.  
This is a very comprehensive bill, but I would like to address a few specific pieces, first being 
striking the requirement of direct supervision for dental hygienists to provide local anesthesia. 
After teaching the lab for this course for several  years, an d also hearing so many dentists say 
“wow, I can’t believe dental hygienists get so much instruction in local anesthesia, this is way 
more than we had”, I believe that direct supervision by a dentist for a dental hygienist to provide 
local anesthesia is unn ecessary. In fact, t he last dentist I worked for p referred that I administer 
the local anesthesia  for the patients in his office, because in his opinion, I was better at it  than 
him. I share this  to articulate that dental hygienists are trained to a competency level in this skill 
that, by the opinion  of some, supersedes  that a of a dentist , therefore rendering dentist 
supervision for this procedure  by a dental hygienist  moot. Dental hygiene students at the 
University  of New England t ake a 14-week  course exclusively devoted to the administration of 
pain management , primarily focused on administration of local anesthesia . I am told by my 
dentist colleagues that their training time in this skill was a mere  percentage of that . As such, I 
fully support removal of the requirement for direct dentist supervision for local anesthesia 
administered by a dental hygienist.  
Second, I would like to share my full support for removal of the requirement for radiographs to 
be reviewed by a dentist within 21 days when exposed by a public health supervision dental 
hygienist or independent practice dental hygien ist. Like local anesthesia, I can attest from my 
experience teaching the radiolo gy course to dental hyg iene students  for many years , that dental 
hygiene students receive education that is more than adequate for review of dental radiographs.  
Upon successful passage of their Board Exam, which includes radiography review, they are 
deemed qualified to review radiographs , incl uding review ing radiographs  in order to evaluate  
whether  the patient has needs which extend beyond the dental hygiene scope. Dental hygienists 
are required by law to refer to a dentist for any treatment that is beyond the dental hygiene 
scope . As such, patients will a lready  be referred to a dentist at which time radiographs would be 
evaluate d by a dentist. This 21-day requirement  does little more than present  a barrier  to care for 
many patient s because man y dental hygienists  are not able to secure a dentist committed to  
review of their radiographs and therefor patients  served by these dental hygienists go without 
this standard -of-care, basic evaluation  service. I strongly suggest the committee  support 
removal of the 21-day review  on radiograph s taken by a public health supervision or 
independent practice dental hygienist.   
Third, I implore the committee to remove the requirement of direct supervision from the dental 
therapist’s scope.  The purpose of the dental therapist i s to inc rease access to basic restorative 
care, something Maine desperately needs. By including “direct” supervision as a condition of 
this work, the capacity of the dental therapist to increase access to care is hindered by requiring  
a dentist to be present whe re care is provided. Simply removing this one word: “direct”, greatly 
expands access to care by this very valued dental health care team member in Maine. I fully 
support removal of direct supervision from the dental therapist statute.  
Finally, I would like to express my concern regarding the removal of a written practice 
agreement between dentists and public health supervision dental hygienist. Without this written 
agreement , an important piece of public health “SUPERVISION” status is removed ---the 
supervisi on. I find this very concerning  and would ask the Committee to consider leaving the 
written agreement requirement in place  for public health supervision practice of dental hygiene .  
I thank you for your review of my testimony on these important issues.  
Sincerely,  
Courtney E. Vannah, IPDH, MS, MPH  
Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives  
MCD Global Health  
