Daniele West
Mint Preventative Dental Spa Berwick, ME
LD 1581
Testimony of Daniele West, IPDH of Berwick, ME speaking in favor of LD 1581:  
An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists.  
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, My name is Daniele West, and I 
am an independent dental hygienist in Southern Maine. I have been a dental hygienist 
for 14 years working in a busy general practice until recently co-opening an 
independent hygiene office. I’m testifying today to encourage you to support LD 1581
regarding dental hygienists and dental therapists.
As dental hygienists we are trained to recognize the signs/symptoms of all stages of 
periodontal disease and then properly treat and provide therapy for aforementioned 
along with being trained to recognize decay and disease on radiographs. In my 14 
years of experience, the dentists I have worked with have heavily relied on myself and
other hygienists to co-diagnose health/disease clinically and radiographically and then
request us to bring forth any concerns on behalf of the patient and our findings. We 
are then tasked with the preparation of a treatment plan as the dentist is usually 
limited on time with each patient during routine visits. As hygienists we have been 
diagnosing and treating for periodontal disease and identifying and calling attention to
concerns of decay, disease and abnormalities since dental hygiene school, despite not 
technically being allowed to “diagnose”. Because of our education and training, we 
are more than capable to bring forth to our patients our concerns for decay, disease, 
and abnormalities and review our own X-rays for such, then making referrals when 
necessary for further evaluation or treatment.
Please allow us to care for our patients to the full extent that we have been trained as 
we have the knowledge and skills to better the oral health of our communities.
I would also like to support adding 2 more dental hygienists to the MBDP for more 
fair representation of dental hygienists across the state. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony and I look forward to your support 
of LD 1581. 
