retiah . 
Daniel W. Walker 
dwa|ker@preli.com 
TESTIMONY OF DANIEL WALKER 
ON BEHALF OF THE MAINE ASSOCIATION OF DENTAL HYGENISTS , 
In support of 
LD 1581, An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Dan Walker. I am an attorney at Preti Flaheity, 
and I am here today on behalf of the Maine Dental Hygienists ’ Association (MDHA) to testify in 
support of LD 1581 and the proposed amendment by Representative Mastraccio. 
MDHA represents over 1,300 dental hygienists across the state of Maine providing safe, 
effective, quality care for patients. MDHA is aligned with the American Dental Hygienists ’ 
Association whose vision is to have “dental hygienists integrated into the health care delivery 
system as essential primary care providers to expand access to oral health care” and they work to 
0 Ensure access to quality oral health care. 
0 Increase awareness of the cost-effective beneﬁts of prevention. 
0 Promote the highest standards of dental hygiene education, licensure, practice and 
research. 
0 Represent and promote the interests of dental hygienists. 
There will be a number of people who will testify after me in support of this effort who are 
trained in this ﬁeld and will be positively impacted by the important changes in this bill. 
However, I want to make sure the committee knows three initial things. 
First, these changes were not done lightly. Although it might seem like there are a lot of 
components, MDHA has worked hard over the past few months making sure that the changes to 
the scope of practice and supervision were in line with the hygienist or therapist training and 
expertise. This has been a collaborative process and we have consulted with the Executive 
Director of the Dental Board along the way. 
Second, I wanted to touch on the two potential points of dissent that you might hear today. The 
ﬁrst point of dissent is that a dental therapist will be able to practice under general supervision. 
This was done to align Maine the practices in other States, and we do not feel like a dental 
therapist would be unprepared for the responsibilities this would entail. A dental therapist has to 
ﬁrst become a provisional dental therapist in which they need to obtain 2,000 hours of 
experience. The language in the LD 1581 does not state that a provisional dental therapist can 
practice under general supervision — it only states that a dental therapist can practice under 
general supervision. But we would be happy to amend the language to make that distinction 
clearer. 
204163501
Preti 'i 
Daniel W. Walker 
dwa|ker@preti.c0m 
The second point of dissent is the addition of two dental hygienists to the Board of Dental 
Practice. This change was the result of the dental hygienist subcommittee of the Dental Board 
being eliminated during the budget process this Session. This was an unwelcome change. Over 
the years, there have been many efforts to change the composition of the Board, and the 
subcommittees ended up being the best compromise to ensuring that there was proper 
representation on the Board. These two new positions can be held by someone who has multiple 
roles so that voice of the dental therapist practitioner and the expanded function dental assistant 
pracitioners can be heard. Any Board run by the State of Maine should encompass fairly all 
perspectives of the ﬁeld, and we think that this accomplishes that. 
Finally, l would encourage you all to read the testimony that was provided online. Many people 
wanted to be here to testify in person or via zoom but could not take the time off of work. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today and thank you to Representative Mastraccio for 
sponsoring this and being an incredible advocate for dental hygienists. As you are all aware, 
Maine has a grave problem with access to all health care, including oral health care, and we need 
to collaborate with each other to ensure that our well-educated professionals are being utilized to 
their fullest capacity so they can care for the people of Maine. LD 1581 does just that and so we 
would encourage the Committee to listen to the many experts who will testify alter me or have 
provided written testimony to support this effort. 
### 
204163504
