Derrick Robertson
Bucksport
LD 1581
Good afternoon distinguished members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurances and Financial Services. My name is Derrick Robertson and I am an 
Independent Practice Dental Hygienist. First , thank you for giving me the 
opportunity to give testimony on a subject that is so crucial to the profession I love so 
much. I have been a practicing dental hygienist for over 20 years, 10 of which I have 
been doing so independently. I, along with my wife Anna Robertson own Fort View 
Dental Hygiene in Bucksport Maine. We have recently hired on a 4th dental hygienist
and have a practice that is growing rapidly. Although my business model differs from 
other Dental Hygiene practices, we still face the same complications. In my practice 
we have 2 Dentist that rent space from us and see all of our patients on a referral 
basis. We are able to fill their schedules as much as they would like to keep them very
busy. Although I have licensed Dentists in our building, we are still not able to 
perform all of the duties we were trained for to due to restrictions in our practice act. 
A dental hygienist cannot provide injectable local anesthetics for hygiene purposes 
due to the fact that we are not under the employ of a dentist, thus not being under 
direct supervision. Independent Hygienists as well as traditional dental hygienists, in 
large part, work under general supervision of a dentist. In the past 10 years as an 
independent we have worked countless hours without a dentist in the building due to 
the dentist have days off, vacations etc. Never at any point in time have I been 
concerned about having to handle a medical emergency. We as practitioners are 
trained and constantly re-certified to handle any event that may arise. In my office we 
have an emergency kit as well as oxygen in the event of any emergency as do all other
offices to my knowledge. We are required to take emergency medical courses 
annually as explained in chapter 12 of the Rules of Dental Practice Act. Biannually 
we are required by law to take CPR re-certification. I have had 2 medical emergencies
in my office, neither related to local anesthesia, that were handled promptly, 
efficiently and effectively. You can rest assured that we have received and continue to
receive training on handling emergencies. As a profession what we hope to gain from 
this piece of legislation is simple. We only want to be able to perform all of the duties 
we were so adequately trained for. Local anesthesia is an entire semester course 
taught by top tier Dentists. Upon licensure we have both given and received an entire 
semesters worth of injections as well as the training on how to recognize and handle 
adverse reactions. Hygienists have nothing to gain financially from this, as a matter of
fact it will cost us a lot initially in outfitting our offices with the necessary supplies. It 
would however give us the opportunity to perform our jobs to the very best of our 
ability and with absolute patient comfort. In closing I hope this is passed that we may 
be able to maximize our education and experience in this field of practice we are so 
passionate about. Thank you for your time and consideration. Sincerely Derrick 
Robertson IPDH
