Testimony of Emily Scholl, DMD speaking in opposition of LD 1581: An 
Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists. 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Emily Scholl, D.M.D.  I am a board certified pediatric 
dentist who has been practicing in Maine for sixteen years currently practicing in Brunswick. 
 
In considering my position on this bill I reflected upon the stated goals and outcomes, their potential 
impact on Maine people, my experience as a pediatric dentist, my experience as a current member of 
the Maine Board of Dental Practice (MBDP), the Governor’s recent executive order dated 03/29/2023, 
“An Order Regarding Administrative Rule Making”, fiscal impact, as well as what is common practice in 
other states.  Today I am writing in my capacity as a pediatric patient advocate, Maine small business 
owner, employer of 19, and dentist.  I strongly oppose the current language in LD1581. 
 
The first concern is the proposal to change dental therapists from direct supervision to general 
supervision.  This change is of concern for several reasons: 
 
1. It seems premature to make this change when we do not yet have significant experience with 
dental therapists in Maine.  My understanding is that we currently have two licensed dental 
therapists with one currently actively practicing (0.15% of licensed dental hygienists). It seems 
prudent to develop more data and experience with Dental Therapists under direct supervision 
before changing the level of supervision required to general supervision.  This is still very new 
here and Maine is a unique state with unique needs. We should have a better understanding of 
our experience with dental therapists before making such a change. 
2. Governor Mills, in her Executive Order from 3/29/2023, “An Order Regarding Administrative 
Rulemaking), states that prior to adopting a final rule, a board shall “consider all relevant 
information available to it, including, but not limited to, economic, environmental, fiscal and 
social impact analyses”.  I don’t believe this proposed bill has adequately performed those 
analyses as I cannot find information publicly allowing us to determine the impacts this bill 
would have.  Similarly, if this is required of the MBDP, which functions to implement legislation, 
the same standards should be required prior to creating the legislation.  We are putting the cart 
before the horse in this bill.   
3. The executive order also states, “In conducting these environmental and social impact analyses, 
each agency and board shall prioritize the health safety and welfare of Maine people.” I don’t 
believe reducing the level of supervision prioritizes the health safety and welfare of Maine 
people.  I certainly don’t feel that our most vulnerable patients should be subjected to a tiered 
system of care with lesser supervision.  
 
 
The second item I am in opposition to is the proposed addition of two dental hygienists to the MBDP.  It 
is important to note that an addition like this would put dentists as less than half of the members of the 
MBPD.  This change is of concern for several reasons: 
 
1. The argument could be made that we license more hygienists than dentists so hygienists should 
have more representation on the board.   I would counter that by saying I have nine (9) licenses 
(six dental hygienists and three dental radiographers) under my license.  I am directly 
responsible for making sure each of those licensees acts within the boundaries of their scope of 
practice and my license can be directly impacted by each of those licensees.  For this reason 
alone, the board composition should have more dentists than any other member type 
combined.  It would not make sense for dentists (who are clinically responsible for the care 
provided in a dental setting by dental therapists, hygienists and radiographers) to comprise less 
than half of the members of the MBPD. 
2. In reviewing complaints against dental practitioners (including denturists, radiographers, and 
hygienists, as well as dentists), it would be problematic for more than half of the board to lack 
the qualifications under their scope of practice to allow them to review all aspects of the 
complaint.  For example, dentists are the only level of practitioner with the ability to interpret x-
rays, create diagnoses and evaluate specific clinical outcomes as they relate to things such as 
root canals, oral surgeries, crowns and similar.   
3. Structuring the MBDP as proposed would make Maine a significant outlier relative to the 
structure of dental boards in other states.   
4. If we put the structure of Maine’s dental board so far outside the norm it could significantly 
deter dentists from coming to Maine to practice. This would be in direct conflict with the 
executive order noted above, which states “In conducting these environmental and fiscal impact 
analyses, each agency and board shall consider…the rules impact on the ability of Maine 
employers to retain and attract a skilled workforce…”. If a dentist is aware that board 
complaints against them would be assessed and decided by a board where a majority of 
members cannot, for example, interpret an x-ray, they would likely have reservations about 
practicing here.  To a dentist, this would not be a board comprised of their peers or those with a 
higher level of education (like a specialist).  As an employer to two associate dentists, I can 
attest to the already high level of difficulty there is in attracting talent to this state.   
5. In reviewing the proposed change there appears to be no benefits to the health, safety and 
welfare of Maine people as required by the Governors recent executive order.  Our dental 
hygienists are highly competent and valued members of our dental provider community, but the 
health, safety, and welfare of our Maine people is best served when the board is primarily 
comprised of members with the highest levels of training and education available in the 
profession. 
6. It appears there are no cost savings involved in this change.  This bill is labeled as cost neutral, 
so the stated goal of saving money by eliminating the hygiene subcommittee seems to be moot. 
7. In my capacity as a board member, the hardest cases for us to resolve have been around 
complaints against dentists.  We rely heavily on our dentist board members and their respective 
specialties to educate the remainder of the board where applicable on these cases.  Each 
specialty on the board is uniquely suited to add their knowledge and perspective.  If any 
members should be added we should have more board-certified specialists from a variety of 
specialties such as an endodontist, periodontist, oral pathologist and orthodontist, which we 
currently do not have. 
8. With regard to fiscal matters, if a MBDP comprised as proposed should come to a stalemate in 
decisions, we will likely have to hire experts to help us make decisions. This would have a 
significant cost, one far greater than the fiscal impact of the hygiene subcommittee. 
9. In the event we had a complaint where we were to go to a hearing the costs of hiring expert 
witnesses for hearings would be high if we could not draw from our own board’s expertise.  I see 
the potential for MORE monies to be necessary, not less.   
10. The members of our dental community should be held accountable by those with the same level 
of training or higher.  Diluting the knowledge base of the board would not help with this in any 
way, and it certainly does nothing to “prioritize the health safety and welfare of Maine people” 
as our executive order asks us to.  I was told when I joined the board that every decision we 
make regarding a licensee was to be based on protecting the public and I know I and the other 
board members take this very seriously.  Shifting the makeup of the board as proposed and 
adding to the health safety and welfare of Maine people are incongruent. 
11. Lastly, board members essentially volunteer their time to be on the Maine Board of Dental 
Practice.  I see the future being grim for retaining and attracting new dentists to be part of a 
board with a composition as proposed.   
 
In summary, the above noted changes do not appear to be fiscally responsible, do not add to the health 
safety and welfare of Maine people, and puts us in untested waters, as an outlier compared to other 
states.  I would very much appreciate your opposition to this bill.  I would also be more than happy to 
meet with any or all of you to answer any questions or concerns you may have.   
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Emily B. Scholl, D.M.D. 
