Testimony related to Maine LD 1581 Proposed Sponsor’s Amendment for Public Hearing 
Proposed by Sponsor, Rep. Mastraccio, FOR HCIFS REVIEW, SPONSOR’S DRAFT COMMITTEE 
AMENDMENT: LD 1581, An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists 
 
Frank Catalanotto, DMD 
Professor, Department of Community Dentistry and Behavioral Science 
University of Florida College of Dentistry 
President, Floridians For Dental Access 
Vice-President, National Coalition of Dentists for Health Equity 
Leadership Team, National Partnership for Dental Therapy 
The opinions I offer are my own and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of any organization 
with which I am associated. 
 
Quality, safety, cost effectiveness and oral health outcomes- I must start out by pointing out that any 
discussion of dental therapy in the United States must start with a shared understanding of the facts 
related to implementation over the past 20+ years. When presented with opinions opposing dental 
therapy, I always say the following: “here are my conclusions based on this evidence; if you have other 
conclusions, let’s see your evidence.”  Opponents of dental therapy express their thoughts, opinions and 
feelings in opposition to dental therapy without citations, references or objective data. Opponents use 
phrases like “irreversible surgical procedures”, and anecdotes shared with legislators by specialists who 
provide dental care to medically fragile patients, ignoring the fact that most dentists are reluctant to 
treat such patients, and instead relying on myths and misrepresentation of existing data to argue against 
dental therapy. There is NO data that supports any concerns about dental therapy.  Proponents of 
Dental Therapy base their support on a long list of publications, reports and objective data (See 
Resources/Reading list at floridiansfordentalaccess.org) plus direct observations of the real-world 
successes we are seeing every day. 
 
Supervision - With respect to supervision levels, to me, the real power of dental therapists lies in 
general supervision with a collaborative practice management agreement with the supervising dentist. 
The ability to provide care in remote regions of Alaska or in school-based programs in Minnesota 
provide examples of safe, high quality and cost-effective care. Dental therapists in Maine can and should 
also work under general supervision.  There is absolutely no need to delay this so that Maine dentists 
can be more comfortable with dental therapists. Indeed, individual dentists who hire dental therapists 
can delay general supervision until they are personally comfortable with the therapists’ skill level.  
