To whom it may concern, 
 My name is Garrett Richardson IPDH, MSDH, EFDA. I have practiced full time in the State of 
Maine since 1998 and now I hold a position as an Assistant Clinical Professor at the University of New 
England’s Dental Hygiene Department. I am writing in support for LD 1581 because it is the most logical 
solution to date at improving the access to care issues that plague this state. If you are an individual with 
MaineCare it is nearly impossible to find a provider that will accept it. Therefor, essential preventive and 
restorative care is not achievable for individuals with state funded insurance.  
 Unfortunately, dentists are not required to accept patients with state funded insurance plans. 
This increases access to care issues substantially due to the supervision laws that govern dental 
hygienists. The vast majority of dental hygienists work for dentists and the vast majority of dentists due 
not accept state funded insurance plans. This leaves individuals with state funded insurance plans 
without access to not only restorative access, but access to dental hygienists.  
 Currently, I teach Community Health I and II. One of our service opportunities this Spring 
semester is providing preventive dental services and referrals to the 0-5-year-old clients of WIC on 
Lancaster St. in Portland. The students and I have witnessed first-hand the access to oral care disparages 
that exist for the socioeconomically disinclined and for our growing refugee population. As of now, we 
only have one avenue for establishing these individuals into a dental home and thank God for Maine-ly 
Teeth’s Amber Lombardi, a heroic Independent Practice Dental Hygienist hell bent on breaking down 
the barriers to oral care. Otherwise, I would not be able to provide these individuals with an option to 
establish a dental home. 
 LD 1581 will enable dental hygienists and dental therapists the capabilities necessary to start 
their own practices and have realistic treatment options for their patients such as administering local 
anesthetic and interpreting radiographs. ALL dental hygienists are qualified to interpret dental 
radiographs and are dually qualified to refer to the most appropriate avocation of the dental field for 
any potential issues identified. 
 The dental association will argue that the rules constraining the profession of dental hygiene are 
in place to “protect the public”. I would argue that they do nothing but protect the financial interests of 
dentists. The only ones that benefit from the supply and demand crisis in oral care access are dentists. 
“Heaven protect us from what men do in the name of good.” 
Herodius 
Garrett Richardson IPDH, MSDH, EFDA 
Assistant Clinical professor 
University of New England 
Westbrook College of Health Professions 
Dental Hygiene Department 
   
