 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
May 4 , 2023  
 
Supporting : 
LD 1581 , “An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Mastraccio  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Hannah Hudson , Policy and Communications Manager 
at the Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membersh ip organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
Oral health care access remains a priority for MPCA and the Community Health Center Network. We 
support LD 1581 and thank Representative Mastraccio and the cosponsors for bringing this bill forward . 
 
Maine is experiencing significant workforce shortages in many heath care professions, and dental 
providers are no exception. Rural areas  are experiencing critical challenges with access to care. As more 
adults have access to MaineCare’s  expanded dental benefits, the health centers’ patient population and 
the complexity of the patient needs have increased. CHCs are doing everything they can  to ensure that 
patients receive the quality treatment they deserve, but waitlists continue to be long across the state.  
Dental therapists are mid -level providers who  can perform restorative procedures and some extraction 
procedures . Their work in a dental practice can allevia te the many  demands on general dentist s, allowing 
them to focus on the more complex procedures . This leads  to each provider type working to the highest 
scope of their licensure.  This staffing model has become so  integral to one Maine CHC’s approach to 
providing dental care that the health center plans to only hire new general dentists who are supportive of 
working with dental therapists . 
Modifying the current supervision of dental therapy from direct supervision to general is an important 
adjustment  that would allow CHCs to continue utilizing these professionals in unique and innovative 
ways, while also improving access to dental services  for the populations being served.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate  to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Hannah Hudson, MA  
Policy and Commu nications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
