Testimony of Jeffrey Walawender DDS for LD 1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental 
Therapists
E 
flE.l.lIhE.[/f0l'?Ol'1»3g81l ‘iSi 
Good Afternoon Members of the Committee on health Coverage, insurance, and Financial services. My 
Name is Jeff Walawender and lam currently a front line dentist, chief of dental for VA Maine, chairman 
of the board for delta dental plan of Maine, a member of the Maine Board of dental practice, the sole 
dental consultant for the adult dental Medicaid benefit for the state, and the former executive director 
and chief dental officer for 7 non profit dental clinics here in our state. I am not coming asa 
representative of these entities, but as someone who has lived, breathed, and worked in our state, often 
side by side as a peer, colleague, and friend with the hygiene community to advocate for better care and 
access for our patients. 
lam here to only comment on one small aspect of the bill. lam not a Maine Dental Association member 
and l am speaking from my combined experiences from the positions I just listed. The board of dental 
practice is here to protect the public through the regulation of individuals practicing in the dental 
profession. They are there to examine and license qualified applicants, and to inspect dental practices 
and to investigate complaints against licensees and take appropriate disciplinary action. The vast 
majority of the work is performed by board staff under the general direction of the board. Changing the 
composition of the board in my opinion would be a misstep. Looking at the composition of every single 
dental board across the nation, there is not any that l know that do not have a majority of dentists on 
the board. I hope you can respect that there are reasons behind this. One of the most important 
aspects of the board is to weigh in and investigate complaints against licensees. It is vital that the board 
members weighing in on this have a strong working knowledge and understanding of what the 
procedure is, what the standard of care is, why an outcome may or may not have been as successful as 
intended, and if that outcome falls out of the usual risks associated with the procedure. The reason 
there are more dentists than non dentists on the board determining this is because the dentist performs 
all aspects or are responsible for all aspects of the treatment scope. I find it troublesome that the future 
of a patient complaint would be decided by a majority of board members who are not licensed to 
perform the procedure. This could be problematic for both sides, allowing a dentist to retain their 
license who is not meeting the standard of care because a lack of working board knowledge, or unfairly 
punishing a dentist because once again the standard of care is not as well understand. Over half the 
board needs to be able to evaluate and diagnose outcomes for complex procedures like root canals, 
crowns, and implants. l don't see how changing the composition of the board leads to additional 
protections of the public, and in fact can have that exact opposite effect. I will end there to keep this 
short as l'm sure you have plenty of other testimony, but I thank you for your time, and your service, 
and would be happy to answer any questions. 
Jeffrey Walawender 
Dentist 
South Portland
