May 4, 2023  
 
 
My name  is Jessica  Gellar -Cote  and I am speaking  in favor  of LD 1581:  An Act Regarding  
Dental  Hygienists  and Dental  Therapists.  
 
Senator  Bailey,  Representative  Perry  and esteemed  members  of the Committee  on Health  
Coverage,  Insurance  and Financial  Services,  as a practicing  dental  hygienist  with almost  twenty  
years  of experience  in all facets  of the dental  field (public,  private,  and educational  institutions),  I 
believe  that the changes  proposed  for the sponsored  LD 1581  bill would  significantly  benefit  the 
residents  of our state.  
 
Super vision  by a dentist  is a huge  barrier  for dental  hygienists  being  able to provide  the dental  
services  we have  been  trained  to provide  within  our scope  of practice.  By limiting  our ability  to 
provide  prevent ative  services  outside  of a dentist -owned  office , the dental  field cannot  grow  and 
meet the needs  of our state’s population.  Requiring  a dentist  to over-see, authorize,  and approve 
x-rays and local  anesthesia  is an antiquated  system  that dates  back  decades . Our training and 
education  give us the tools  to provide services  withi n our scope  of practice  safely  and 
competently . Dental  hygienists  are required  to graduate  from  an accredited  institution  with two 
years  of supervised  patient  care in a clinical  setting.  In order  to practi ce in the state of Maine,  we 
must  then sit for a clinical  examination , pass a local  anesthesia  examination,  a national  board  
exam,  and the state of Maine  jurisprudence  exam.  We are more  than quali fied to recognize  
decay,  provide  pain management,  and safely treat patients  in need.  
 
The dental  hygien e code  of ethics  states  that “we value justice and support the fair and equitable 
distribution of health care resources. We believe all people should have access to high -quality, 
affordable oral healthcare. ”1 How  are we able to meet  this core value  if we must  rely on our 
supervisi ng dentist  to determine  the patients  that can be seen and what  treatment  they should  
receive?  Updating  the supervision  laws will give our well-trained  dental  hygienists  the autonom y 
to treat the oral health  needs  of our citizens  and help with the on-going  health  crisis. 
 
Please  support  LD 1581 
 
Thank  you for your considerati on. 
 
 
 
 
Jessica Gellar -Cote RDH  
 
 
1 https://www.adha.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/01/ADHA_Bylaws_Code_of_Ethics_FY22.pdf  

