LD 1581    
Testimony of Jessica Alexander  IPDH, owner of Smile4ME De ntal Hygiene in Richmond . Speaking in favor 
of LD 1581: An Act Regarding De ntal Hygien ists and Dental Therapists. Sena tor Bail ey, Representative 
Perry and  esteemed members of the Committee  on Health Coverage, Insurance and  Financial Ser vices , 
my name is Jessica Al exander. I have been a registered  denta l hygienist in Maine for 16 ye ars. I have 
worked in private practice  all of that ti me and this year  I have ope ned an independent  practice.   
Working independently, I  am seeing pa tients who have not been afforded access to de ntal care  due to 
financial and insurance constraints.  Man y of these patients ha ve not seen a dental pro fessional for 
many ye ars, with some more than 30+ years.  I am se eing  patients wi th Mainecare insurance who are 
grateful  for the opportunity to  have appoin tments  for x-rays, to get their teeth cleaned and appreciat e 
getting much needed  referral s to a gen eral dent ist for neces sary restorative needs.  
The pr ocess of completing necessary  x-rays is the most stressful part of being an  independent hygi enist, 
in my opinion . Finding a dent ist who is willin g to interpret  x-rays is provin g difficult ; and current statut e 
requ ires a dentis t to interpret all x -rays withi n 21 days.   Reasons I am running into as far  as hesitation  
from the dentists are , not being covered  by their  malpractice  insurance  if they  misint erpret some thing 
on the x -ray without  having seen th e patient  physically  in the  chair and , compensation  for their time to 
interpret the ra diographs .  While I complete ly understand the dentist’s perspective , this statu te has 
created a roadblock .  The dentists I have corresponded  with are limiting their  willingness to interpret the 
x-rays of pa tients to those will transfer to their office, and as of this time I ha ve not been able to 
facilitate an agreement  with a de ntist , other than  free clin ics, for Mainecare patients  to complete 
restorative care.   Beyond this, if the pati ent does re quire r estorative treatment , I can make no 
guarantee  that the patient  will show for the appointment with a  dentist . If the pa tient no -shows o r 
cancels  with the de ntist I do not get my x -rays interpreted  and therefore the required findings form is 
not completed by the de ntist, which is a violation of the stat ute, of no fa ult of mine, but with potential 
consequence  none the less  and in reality the only ob jective is high quality  preventative hygiene care.   
For instance , recent ly I compl eted  x-rays on a patient and sent the x-rays t o the patients long standing 
dentist  along w ith a findings for m.  I received  an email back f rom the  dentist’s  office stating  the den tist 
would not review  the x -rays of this pa tient until the pa tient went to the ir office for another routine 
cleaning appointment  - even though  this pa tient is already  a patient of record at that office , and the 
patient would not be due for another cleaning for 6 months.  This p atient came to my offi ce because  
their office is booking  appointments  for cleanings  further than a t ypical 6 mont h recall  and because my 
office  is close r to them and offers more convenient access for appoin tments .  This situat ion puts me , as 
an independent  hygienist , in a bind because  the dentist of recor d will not review the x -rays and the 
other dentist s (I have spo ken to) will only review  the x -rays of pa tients w ho will transfe r to their o ffice. 
Taking x -rays is an importan t part of the complete assessment process which allo ws providers including 
hygienists to view the areas we cannot see or feel with  our instruments during the prophy .  It is 
dishearten ing to be forced  to avoid comp leting x-rays o n a pa tient  simply  to prevent the hardship  of 
finding someone to interpret them , especially considering the underserved population s who typically 
visit IPDH offices.  
Please consider remov ing the section  of the statute mandating x-rays be in terpre ted by a d entist within  
21 days of being taken.  Dental hygienists are  trained  to revi ew x-rays, we only want the best for our 
patients  and in recognizing an area of “suspicion ” will warrant  a referral  to a dentist for any poten tial 
restorative needs.   Thank you for your consi deration of my testimony.  
Jessica Alexander
Richmond
LD 1581
LD 1581 
Testimony of Jessica Alexander IPDH, owner of Smile4ME Dental Hygiene in 
Richmond. Speaking in favor of LD 1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and 
Dental Therapists. Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Jessica
Alexander. I have been a registered dental hygienist in Maine for 16 years. I have 
worked in private practice all of that time and this year I have opened an independent 
practice. 
Working independently, I am seeing patients who have not been afforded access to 
dental care due to financial and insurance constraints. Many of these patients have not
seen a dental professional for
many years, with some more than 30+ years. I am seeing patients with Mainecare 
insurance who are grateful for the opportunity to have appointments for x-rays, to get 
their teeth cleaned and appreciate
getting much needed referrals to a general dentist for necessary restorative needs. 
The process of completing necessary x-rays is the most stressful part of being an 
independent hygienist, in my opinion. Finding a dentist who is willing to interpret 
x-rays is proving difficult; and current statute requires a dentist to interpret all x-rays 
within 21 days. Reasons I am running into as far as hesitationfrom the dentists are, not
being covered by their malpractice insurance if they misinterpret something on the 
x-ray without having seen the patient physically in the chair and, compensation for 
their time to 
interpret the radiographs. While I completely understand the dentist’s perspective, this
statute has created a roadblock. The dentists I have corresponded with are limiting 
their willingness to interpret the 
x-rays of patients to those will transfer to their office, and as of this time I have not 
been able to facilitate an agreement with a dentist, other than free clinics, for 
Mainecare patients to complete restorative care. Beyond this, if the patient does 
require restorative treatment, I can make no guarantee that the patient will show for 
the appointment with a dentist. If the patient no-shows or cancels with the dentist I do 
not get my x-rays interpreted and therefore the required findings form is not 
completed by the dentist, which is a violation of the statute, of no fault of mine, but 
with potential consequence none the less and in reality the only objective is high 
quality preventative hygiene care. 
For instance, recently I completed x-rays on a patient and sent the x-rays to the 
patients long standing dentist along with a findings form. I received an email back 
from the dentist’s office stating the dentist would not review the x-rays of this patient 
until the patient went to their office for another routine cleaning appointment - even 
though this patient is already a patient of record at that office, and the patient would 
not be due for another cleaning for 6 months. This patient came to my office because 
their office is booking appointments for cleanings further than a typical 6 month recall
and because my 
office is closer to them and offers more convenient access for appointments. This 
situation puts me, as an independent hygienist, in a bind because the dentist of record 
will not review the x-rays and the other dentists (I have spoken to) will only review 
the x-rays of patients who will transfer to their office. 
Taking x-rays is an important part of the complete assessment process which allows 
providers including hygienists to view the areas we cannot see or feel with our 
instruments during the prophy. It is disheartening to be forced to avoid completing 
x-rays on a patient simply to prevent the hardship of 
finding someone to interpret them, especially considering the underserved populations
who typically visit IPDH offices. 
Please consider removing the section of the statute mandating x-rays be interpreted by
a dentist within 21 days of being taken. Dental hygienists are trained to review x-rays,
we only want the best for our patients and in recognizing an area of “suspicion” will 
warrant a referral to a dentist for any potential restorative needs. Thank you for your 
consideration of my testimony.
