 
Children’s Oral Health Network | Kalie Hess | kalie@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 
 1 Testimony of Kalie Hess, Associate Director 
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine 
LD 1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Public Hearing: April XX, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial 
Services, my name is Kalie Hess and I am the Associate Director of the Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine 
(COHN/Network). Our network includes providers of dental care and leaders in communities and educational 
institutions who work collaboratively to ensure that all children in Maine can grow up free from preventable 
dental disease. I am here on behalf of our Network to testify in support of LD 1581.  
 
Much of the work that we are doing is focused on changing how we deliver care in Maine. This includes bringing 
care right to children where they already are to make preventive care more available and accessible to all 
children. It also includes ensuring that those who can provide preventive dental care are supported to maximize 
their capacity and operate to the top of their license. This phrase is one that we use frequently in the health care 
sector, especially as we navigate exceptionally challenging workforce challenges in the oral health field. We 
receive emails and calls regularly from partners and community members who are desperate to find care for 
people who have been locked out of getting oral health care for myriad reasons. 
 
The Children’s Oral Health Network is working on a number of large initiatives that align with the changes 
outlined in this bill, including integrating hygienists into primary care practices, using community-based 
hygienists and teledentistry to bring oral health care to children in Head Start programs, expanding the Maine 
CDC School Oral Health Program so that all students across the state have the opportunity to benefit from it, 
and more. As we work with partners across the state to bring oral health care to children early and often to 
prevent disease and to fundamentally shift our system to one that prioritizes prevention, we need hygienists, 
dental therapists, and dental assistants to be able to work in a variety of settings to provide care within their 
scope of practice. These licensing and supervision changes would help ensure that this can happen. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
