May 4, 2023 
Testimony on LD 1581 - An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists 
Committee on Health Coverage, insurance, and Financial Services 
Senator Bailey, Representatives Perry and Morris, Members of the Committee, my name is Kate Perkins andl 
appear before you today to support LD-1581. ' 
Before l speak to the legislation, l need to make it clear that l am 
here on my own time offering my own opinion and my testimony does not represent any of the programs or 
agencies with which I have been or am presently associated. I have worked in public health in Maine for 30 
years and been involved with oral health for more than 15 years. 
As you know from the other written and oral testimony provided, access to oral health care in Maine continues 
to be far from adequate. There aren't enough providers and many of the providers we do have are not located 
in the rural areas that face some of the greatest needs. Over the past 20 years we have made great strides in 
Maine. The Legislature has been willing to be forward thinking and collaborate with oral health professionals to 
enact important policies and adjustments to scopes of practice. It is time to harvest what we sowed. 
With the passage of LD-1851 you will update and revise important aspects of dental practice in Maine, reflecting 
much of what we have learned in the past years and improving on prior legislation. I urge you to support the it. 
v I share the concern expressed by Courtney Vannah in her written testimony regarding the value of 
continuing to have written agreements between dentists and public health hygienists. 
v i would like to associate myself with the written testimony from Maine Primary Care Association - the 
changes put in place by this bill will enable providers to practice at the highest level of their training, and 
thus reduce the burden on dentists while increasing access to care. 
v Please make note of the written testimony from Dr. Stephen Mills, who years back opposed many 
aspects of Dental Therapist's scope of work but who now, having seen Dental Therapists at work, fully 
supports the profession, their scope of practice, and the shift from direct to general supervision bya 
dentist. 
Please let me tell you about Dr. Brian Hoops, a dentist practicing in Baileyville - which is north of Calais, for 
those of you not familiar with the area. He recently announced that he is closing his practice. The next day the 
closest community health center, 10 miles down the road in Princeton, received 12 calls from his patients. They 
don't have the capacity to absorb what are probably a couple thousand patients from Dr. Hoops. He’s been 
there for 20 years. Where are they all going to go? When l spoke to Dr. Hoops last week, he told me that he is 
referring his patients to dentists in Eastport. That's a 45-minute drive from Baileyville, on a good day...and the 
dentist in Eastport can only absorb so many patients, so Dr. Hoops is also referring to other dentists, who are 
even farther away. You and l both know that most people are not going to go that far out of their way to get 
their teeth cleaned. They'll probably wait until there is a major problem, and then maybe they'll go to the 
emergency department in Calais, it's closer. Heck, if you live up in Topsﬁeld or Vanceboro, you're already 
driving for an hour to get to Dr. Hoops in Baileyville and now they have to go to Eastport? 
The only way that we are going to be able to continue to have oral health services in places like Baileyville is if 
we can find dental therapists and independent practice dental hygienists willing to practice in rural areas, and 
dentists willing to accept the surgical referrals. The scope of practice changes in LD-1581 are essential. Please let 
people practice at the top of their license. Please make it easier for dentists by letting them have general rather 
than direct supervision relationships with these oral health professionals. Dental hygienists are the people who 
are educating patients, preventing cavities and other expensive and painful orai health conditions. They, along 
with the dental therapists, are essential to making oral health care available, particularly in rural areas. 
Failure to adopt LD-1851 would leave people such as Dr. Hoops patients without choices, often without care. 
Our rural neighbors are struggling as it is. The changes proposed in LD-1851 make sense, they are evidence- 
based, and where the evidence is not as strong there is experience, such as what Dr. Mills described. 
Please support LD-1581 and then make sure it passes both houses and becomes law. 
Thank you for the consideration. 
Kathleen E. Perkins 
Carrabassett Valley, ME
