Kayla Beal
Milbridge
LD 1581
Dear Representative Mastraccio, Senator Grohoski, and distinguished members of the
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committee,
My name is Kayla Beal,  I am a licensed Independent Practice Dental Hygienist 
(IPDH) and I own a Dental Hygiene office in Milbridge, which sits in Washington 
County. The office consists of two practicing IPDH and an office manager. I’m 
testifying today to encourage you to support LD 1581 regarding dental hygienists and 
dental therapists.
Myself and my colleagues are strong proponents for the proposed revisions to 
streamline the verbiage relating to the scope of practice for dental hygienists, 
independent practice dental hygienists, public health dental hygienists, and dental 
therapists, as well as the adjustment to supervision requirements, as this allows more 
opportunity for us to utilize our skills and provide more comprehensive care in our 
respective communities. 
According to the United States Census Bureau conducted in July of 2022, Washington
County has 31,437 people. There is an alarming concern for access to dental care with
five Dentist’s offices and one IPDH office in Washington County. Either these offices
are not accepting new patients or their next available appointment time can be 6-12 
months away.  As a health care provider in a rural setting, the opportunity to 
maximize our knowledge to the full capacity is critical to serving an underserved 
community. As dental professionals we have many years of education, training, and 
experience to help our communities achieve and maintain the highest possible level of
health. The scarcity of dental professionals is a concern; the long distances residents 
have to travel for care is also a concern. With the proposed change for dental 
therapists to change from direct supervision to general supervision I believe we can 
help close the access to care gap. Out of 14 states that now have the DT, Maine is the 
only one to have direct supervision. This limits patients the DT is trained to treat and 
limits access to care. The DT is designed to treat those patients who may not have 
access to the traditional dental practice.
As a practicing Independent Dental Hygienist there are a few other changes in this bill
that pertain closely to my dental hygiene office. The dental hygiene diagnosis and 
periodontal maintenance are both taught in our dental hygiene curriculum. They are a 
very important addition to our scope of practice which we have been trained to 
routinely provide in traditional dental settings.
Another important change in the bill is to remove the requirement for IPDH to have a 
dentist interpret radiographs within 21 days. I can speak from experience that in our 
office we have had extreme difficulty finding a dentist to review x-rays. We have 
been open for 2 years and I am on my 5th dentist that is evaluating my radiographs. 
The Dentist would only last a short time because they were too busy for such a large 
task as this can be time consuming. Now I am on to another dentist reviewing my 
dental x rays and I pay a fee per evaluation. For us to pay for these services is very 
costly on a very tight budget. From a provider point of view we have been trained to 
look for suspicious areas in our radiology curriculum and we have years of experience
doing so in traditional dental settings. Hygienists are taught to review radiographs and
are capable of referring to a dentist as necessary. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony.
Sincerely,
Kayla Beal RDH, IPDH, Owner of Prevention Is Key- Dental Hygiene Services

