Testimony of Linda Saulter, IPDH and owner of the Saulter Dental Hygiene Center. I am speaking in favor 
of LD 1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists. 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
insurance and Financial Services. My name is Linda Saulter and l have owned the Saulter Dental Hygiene 
Center since 2008. l'm testifying today to encourage you to support LD 1581 regarding dental hygienists 
and dental therapists. 
This year completes my 38th year as an RDH, and my 15th year as an IPDH. When I first opened my doors 
in 2008 l actually received hate mail and threats from a few local dentists. Things have changed 
considerably in this respect since then. I will often receive anywhere from S to 10 referrals from the local 
dentists on any given day. With Mainecare expanding to now covering adults for their routine care it has 
lent itself to an overwhelming problem. My friend Google tells me there are 106,509 people that are 
currently enrolled through MaineCare, with only a handful of dentists that are willing to accept this 
insurance. I would challenge you to make a few calls tomorrow and see if you can find someone that will 
treat you if you had Mainecare, and if they will, how long will you have to wait to be seen? Our office 
today is primarily seeing Mainecare Patients. This is why l am so passionate about this bill. When I first 
opened my practice the majority of my patients consisted of older adults that could no longer afford the 
high cost of routine care from their dentists. When they did need x-rays l would refer them back to their 
original dentist, however there are only a handful of dentists willing to take on Patients with Mainecare so 
we have no where to send them. l have not taken x-rays in my office. Remember the hate mail, it has 
been impossible to find a dentist that is willing to read my x-rays for patients that are not patients of 
their record. Fast forward to today. A normal day for me now is seeing anywhere from 6 to 10 Patients 
depending on their needs. My new adult patients are more often than not requiring a minimum of 4-5 
appointments to get them clean. Most haven't seen a dentist in over 20-40+ years , and many haven't 
seen a toothbrush in weeks. Without radiographs l am doing a lot of guesswork. Wondering if there is 
subgingival or interproximal decay, questioning possible abscesses, wondering if they have impacted 
wisdom teeth that need to be extracted .... ..the list goes on and on. Even if I could refer these patients to 
someone it would make most sense to be able to take radiographs right then with the patient chairside, 
therefore eliminating the increased run around that these patients are doing. Keep in mind many of these 
patients require KVCap for transportation, another increased expense for the state and just one more 
obstacle for these patients to deal with. Passing LD 1581 will not only aid IPDH to make proper dental 
hygiene diagnosis to give the proper referrals, but it will also help minimize the unnecessary trips and 
expense of emergency room visits. 
i am a licensed professional that was trained, tested on my boards, and then licensed in dental 
radiography. l have completed rigorous training both in exposing dental radiographs and diagnosing 
problems. Therefore I encourage you to support LD 1581. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony. 
Linda Saulter IPDH, RDH 
Linda Saulter IPDH, Saulter Dental Hygiene Center, 81 Western Ave, Waterville Maine 04901, 207-861-8080
l
