To Whom it May Concern,  
 
My name is Mark Zajkowski.  I am an oral and maxillofacial surgeon practicing in South Portland for 23 
years, and I have just stepped down from the Board of Dental Practice, most recently serving as Chair. 
While I left the BDP due to multiple professional obligations, one of the most draining and demoralizing 
aspects of serving on the Board was the constant assault on the body by the Maine Dental Hygienist 
Association.  The incredible staff of just three at the BDP works tirelessly in advancing the Board mission 
to protect the public.  
 Initiatives such as streamlining the licensure process, improving and modernizing the application and 
renewal process and adjudicating complaints from the public strain the meager resources available.  Add 
to that the untold number of legislative initiatives that require a formal response, testimony and 
diversion of valuable resources for bills that, while seemingly well intentioned, are often poorly thought 
out or half-baked, often in the name of "access to care" or "equity". 
LD 1581 is one of those half-baked, trojan horse bills that seems benign on the surface.  By proposing to 
add 2 more dental hygienists to the board, it creates yet more work and will make Maine the 
laughingstock of the professional community in the United States.  Currently, the Board is made up of 
five dentists, one denturist, one public member, and two hygienists.  The vast majority of complaints to 
the BDP are against dentists.  Adding two more hygienists as proposed will do nothing to make the 
Board more functional. Rather, it adds two “professionals” with limited experience, education and 
clinical acumen to decide complaints that they are not qualified to review.  In no other state does dental 
hygiene have a more proportional representation than in Maine.  To add two more members “to be fair, 
because there are more hygienists than dentists” is short sighted and frankly, ridiculous.  How can a 
hygienist judge a case regarding oral surgery, endodontics, restorative dentistry or anesthesia?  To be 
blunt, they cannot.   
The Maine Dental Hygienist Association is attempting to transform a regulatory body into an advocacy 
group to expand their scope of care.  While advocacy is the right of any group or individual, poisoning 
this board with constant legislative assaults and half-baked initiatives does nothing to advance the team 
model of dentistry…where the dentist is the most educated, knowledgeable and trained professional on 
the team.   
The amazing staff of three is now setting aside time needed for basic tasks such as addressing 
complaints, reviewing and renewing licenses and daily operations to deal with this utter nonsense.  They 
deserve better, and you as legislators are the last line of defense.  I beg you to vote this ill-conceived 
initiative down.  Passage of this bill will set back advances in dentist recruitment in Maine to the early 
1990’s, when the dental association had to bed students from Boston to even think about coming here 
to practice.  I beg you to consider the negative consequences this bill would deliver to the dental 
community.  We have worked too hard to see all of our legitimate efforts to bring care to the patients of 
Maine fall by the wayside. 
Respectfully submitted,  
Mark D Zajkowski, DDS, MD, FACS, MBA 
 
 
