 
 
Dental Center 
1048 Union Street, Bangor, Maine 04401 
207.992.2152   Fax 207.992.2154 
 
 
May 4, 2023 
 
Re: LD 1581, Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists 
 
Good afternoon members of the Healthcare Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee: 
 
Thank you for allowing me to testify today regarding LD 1581. I am Dr. Matthew Offman, the Executive Clinical 
Director for Dental at Penobscot Community Health Care. I am testifying today both in my capacity as a licensed 
dentist working in the state and as the executive leader responsible for this function at PCHC. 
 
PCHC is a non-profit, Federally Qualified Health Center that was founded in 1997. PCHC’s Dental Center has over 
43 dental operatories and offers a wide range of services which include basic dental restorations, extractions, 
endodontic procedures, routine hygiene maintenance, orthodontics, and walk in care services to the general public. 
Within the last 12 months alone, PCHC Dental Center has provided dental care to over 20,000 individuals.  
 
Over the last year, I have had the privilege to work alongside the very first and second Provisional Dental Therapists 
licensed in the state of Maine, Claire Roesler and Brooklynn Johnkee. The work we’re doing in Dental Therapy not 
only is important for the people accessing dental care at PCHC in the northern and central part of the state, but this 
Dental Therapy work has the ability to transform how Mainers access critical dental care. 
 
Over the past year since I have worked at PCHC, not only have I been able to witness the incredible work that these 
two Dental Therapists do, but I have gained a better understanding of dental therapy and its significance in the dental 
profession and to the people of the state of Maine. 
 
While introducing the construct of Dental Therapy in the state is a huge leap forward, there are still improvements to 
be made, improvements which continue to ensure safe practice and good patient outcomes, while also allowing the 
profession of dental therapy to align with other licensing standards already in place for Nurse Practitioners and 
Physician Assistants, for example, in how supervision works and to align our structure in Maine with what licensing 
standards in Minnesota look like, which is a model of best practice in this space. Modifying the supervision of dental 
therapy does not impact the existing requirement for dental therapists to deliver patient care which has already been 
evaluated and treatment planned by the supervising dentist, in which the dentist determines that the treatment plan 
falls within the dental therapy scope and within the ability of the dental therapist. 
 
Currently, Dental Therapists in Maine are permitted to work only under direct supervision of their supervising 
dentist. This supervision methodology can limit timely access to care which can negatively impact outcomes. By 
changing the level of supervision to general, this would allow additional access to dental care for patients. General 
supervision of dental therapy would increase access for care and expand opportunities for Mainers by reducing 
barriers currently preventing patients from receiving the care they need. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In 2011, the state of Minnesota graduated its first class of dental therapists and since that time dental therapists 
working in Minnesota have been integral to the profession and in ensuing Minnesotans have expanded access to care 
across the age and care continuum. Important to note is that Minnesota permits dental therapists to work under 
general supervision. Minnesota recognized that adjusting this supervision standard would translate into additional 
access to care, which has, in fact, been realized.   
 
Since moving here to Maine, I have seen firsthand how lack of access to care and missed opportunities to seek dental 
care can have a detrimental impact on a person’s oral health and overall health and wellbeing. Changing the 
supervision standard means removing a barrier that doesn’t serve a clear and compelling purpose. Both general and 
direct supervision provide appropriate clinical and practice safeguards for patients, but the direct supervision 
standard introduces an unnecessary barrier. The people of Maine need increased access to oral healthcare 
professionals and this amendment would help achieve that. When we change licensing standards like this, we ensure 
that people, and in particular children, can access care with greater ease, and better results. We know that early care, 
timely care, and ongoing preventive care ensure better outcomes across the care continuum. This simple change with 
the supervision of dental therapy will result in positive change for Mainers seeking dental care.   
 
I thank you all for considering my testimony today and I hope you will consider making the necessary changes to 
increase access of care for the people of Maine.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Matthew Offman, DDS 
Executive Clinical Director of Dental  
Penobscot Community Health Care 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
