 
 
 
Testimony of Michael Dowling, DMD  
In opposition to  
LD 1581: An Act Regarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists  
  
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services, I am Michael Dowling, a Board -Certified Pediatric Dentist.  I serve on the Board of 
Directors for the Maine Dental Association and chair the MDAs Council on Government Relations.  My 
practice, located in Yarmouth Maine, provides care to over 6000 patients, a large percentage of whom 
are covered by MaineCare.   I have practiced in Maine since 2009 and have treated tens of thousands of 
patien ts in Maine.  I apologize for not being able to provide this testimony in person.  By the time this 
hearing was scheduled, my own schedule was already full of patients, primarily covered by MaineCare.  
I view this piece of legislation as having three primary parts.   The first section of the bill makes changes 
to the supervision of dental hygienists and their scope of practice.   These are significant changes to the 
way that dentistry is delivered in the State of Maine.   I have been told these changes are in keeping with 
the education that dental hygienists now receive during their training and as much as we tend to not like 
change, I do not actually oppose this shift.   I certainly hope that the Maine Dental Hygiene Association 
makes clear to their members the potential liability this change to the Dental Practice Act could subject 
a dental hygienist to if they are rendering a diagnosis or independently interpreting radiographs.  
The second major section of LD 1581 makes major and substantive changes to the super vision of dental 
therapists in Maine.   When dental therapy was originally created in Maine, there were lengthy 
discussions on supervision requirements which ultimately required a dentist to be physically present 
when certain procedures were delivered by a dental therapist.   LD 1581 would allow a dentist located in 
Kittery to provide supervision to a dental therapist practicing in Fort Kent. Dental Therapy is a brand -
new practice model in Maine.   We currently have one practicing dental therapist.   This denta l therapist 
practices at an office with a dentist on staff.  Why the rush to change supervision requirements?   This 
change certainly would not allow for any significant change in the number of patients one dental therapist is able to treat nor does it remo ve barriers to practice.      
Dental therapy is simply too new to Maine for us to have any meaningful information on how dental 
therapists fit into oral healthcare delivery in Maine.   It seems grossly premature to make such major 
changes to dental care deli very in Maine .   
This Legislation would essentially allow a graduate from an out of state dental therapy program with no real- world experience to practice independently as their supervising dentist could potentially be 
hundreds of miles away.   Minnesota, t he basis for Maine’s dental therapy model, requires an extensive 
amount of experience to be able to practice with this level of autonomy, a level of experience which 
appears to be lacking in this legislation.    
The third section of the amended version of L D 1581 seeks to change the composition of the Maine 
Board of Dental Practice .   The primary and most significant role of Maine’s Board of Dental Practice is 
the protection of the public.  It is not advocacy of or for any profession.  The addition of two de ntal 
hygiene positions to the Board of Dental Practice does absolutely nothing to advance the protection of 
the public.  There is not a single state in the country where a dental board’s majority is not dentists.  
Dentists are trained in every aspect of de ntistry and thus are qualified to render opinions on every 
aspect of dentistry.  
Dental hygienists and denturists have a limited scope of practice in dentistry.  If this amendment is adopted, rules governing the practice of dentistry in the State of Maine w ould be made by non -dentists 
who are not qualified to practice in the areas they are governing.  
While there are in fact more dental hygienists in Maine than there are dentists, the same is true across 
the country.    But Dental Boards were not established to be representative of professional organizations 
- that is the role of the Maine Dental Hygiene Association, the Maine Dental Association, and 
unfortunately, in this instance, this committee.    
Maine’s Board of Nursing has nine members, seven of whom are nurses including an APN, two RN 
MSNs, an LPN and two members of the public.   The Board of Overse ers of the Bar has nine members, six 
of whom are attorneys.    
Not only would Maine’s Board of Dental Practice be an outlier in the country, but the Board would also be an outlier among other Boards with similar charges here in Maine.    
In closing, I urge t his committee to reject changes to Maine’s dental therapist practice model until we 
have further information and clarity.   Furthermore, I strongly believe that changing the composition of 
the Board of Dental Practice only serves to create a professional po litical organization in contradiction of 
the Board’s Legislative charge to protect the public and ask that you very carefully consider any changes made to this Section of the Dental Practice Act    
Thank you for your time and attention.  
 
Michael Dowling, DM D, CAGS  
Board Certified Pediatric Dentist  
Maine Dental Association, Chair of the Council on Government Relations  
