Testimony of Stephanie Swett, Independent Dental Hygienist and owner of Sweet Smiles Dental Hygiene 
in Ellsworth, Maine speaking in favor of LD 1581. An Act Regarding Dental Hygienist and Dental 
Therapists.  
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Stephanie Swett and I have been a registered dental 
hygienist for 23 years and an Independent dental hygienist for 11 years in the Hancock County area. 
Independent dental hygiene has opened opportunities in our community to increase access to 
preventative dental care. We are among the few dental providers who are accepting MaineCare 
insurance.  We know getting your teeth cleaned on a regular basis can help prevent several systemic 
diseases, gives confidence to smile proudly, and helps in overall health.  
I’m testifying today to encourage you to support LD 1581 regarding dental hygienist and dental 
therapists. 
I have been fortunate to work with and be supported by all surrounding dentists in my area. They 
appreciate and respect the services and the help we are providing to our community. However, with 
lack of staff in their own dental practices it has been harder and frustrating for dentists to review x-rays 
in the 21-day time requirement.  
X-rays are an important part of preventative dental care. They help us educate our patients on their 
periodontal status, we can show them bone levels and bone loss. X-rays also help in educating patients 
on suspicious decay present and why it’s important to have these areas restored before an infection 
occurs. This can impact patients who need to be seen ASAP.  Most general dental offices are booking out 
months or not accepting new patients but will see our patients on a referral basis. At this time, we can 
get patients in quicker than a traditional dental office and address their problems or concerns and get 
them referred for care needed. We are licensed to take x-rays and were taught to review them. We 
refer as needed and wanted by the patients. Patients have higher motivation to have restorative work 
done when they can see these areas of concern on x-rays.   
Removing the requirement for IPDH to have a dentist interpret radiographs within 21 days and modify 
to refer as needed would be greatly beneficial for all parties involved and benefit the overall health and 
well-being of our patients.  
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony.  
Steph Swett, IPDH 
 
