Written Testimony in Support of LD 1581 to the Health Coverage, Insurance  and Financial Services Committee From: Stephen C Mills, DDS FICD, FASD, DABPD                   May 4, 2023 16 Wildwood Lane Scarborough, ME 04074 To the members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee,
My name is Steve Mills and I have been a practicing Pediatric Dentist in Maine for 36 years.  I am writing today in support of LD 1581, An Act REgarding Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists.  I am speciﬁcally interested in the section 6 amended to 11(?) that states “A dental therapist may practice only under the direct general supervision of a dentist through a written practice agreement signed by both parties.”
I have an interesting history with this.  When the concept of bringing dental therapy to Maine ﬁrst appears about ten years ago, this was my major criticism.  There was no signiﬁcant history of dental therapy in the lower 48 states, the education programs were brand new and I believed that only with very very close scrutiny could I see utiliz-ing this untested model.   Therefore I almost demanded direct supervision from my point of view.
Things have changed and they have changed for the better.  I believe in the concept of the Dental Team being made up of qualiﬁed and professional team members doing what they have been trained to do.  I now wholeheartedly believe that dental therapists can be part of that team as they have, to my mind, proven that they are competent and valuable additions to the dental profession.  I feel that once an agreement has been completed between a therapist and dentist it assumes the total competency of that therapist.  There are many instances when a dentist cannot be physically present whether through illness or emergency or professional development, or any number of other things .  I feel that a qualiﬁed licensed dental therapist would be qualiﬁed to work under the condition fo general supervision.
As to the scope of practice I feel it is open enough to cover most things well except: Pediatric dentists now have the ability to create crowns for posterior teeth which are tooth colored whether zirconium or other wise and not just stainless steel crowns. I suggest substituting the words “ prepare and place full coverage posterior crowns such as stainless steel crowns or other materials and aesthetic anterior crowns for pri-mary teeth (exclude the word incisors as we can do this for canine teeth as well). I real-ize that it is not the purpose of this committee to designate scope of practice and keeping things general makes sense to me, but this last part might prove worrisome when the scope of practice is speciﬁcally stated.
I am always available for question dealing with the practice of dentistry for children.
Sincerely, Stephen C Mills, DDS, FICD, FASD, DABPD 
