Testimony of Tatyana O’Donnell, RDH, IPDH, MSDH speaking in favor of LD 1581: An Act Regarding 
Dental Hygienists and Dental Therapists. 
     Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Tatyana O’Donnell. I have worked in the dental field in 
private practice as a registered dental hygienist (RDH) for 8 years and have served on the Maine Dental 
Hygiene Association as their Vice President for the past year. For my Masters’ externship project, I 
worked with The Opportunity Alliance and the Kennebec Valley Dental Coalition for Phase II of their 
hybrid teledental pilot program providing mobile preventive dental hygiene services to Head Start 
children of Maine and helping them establish a dental home with local dental providing in the 
MaineCare network. Recently, I started my own professional LLC doing independent practice dental 
hygiene that provides preventive dental care services to the geriatric population in an independent and 
assisted living facility of southern Maine. I’m testifying today to encourage you to support LD 1581 
regarding dental hygienists and dental therapists. 
     First, let me preface this by saying, there is a lot going on in this bill! This bill aims to clean up the 
scope of practice of the dental hygienist and affiliated authorities and licensures. It does this by 
removing some line items that didn’t get removed with the Maine Board of Dental Practitioners changes 
that were completed a few years ago, as well as provides language regarding the practice of dental 
hygiene to the full extent of their education. In a nutshell, I am in support of all the changes that are 
being requested to be made through this bill. Today, I would like to elaborate on the justification of 
changing local anesthesia administration from direct supervision to general supervision.  
     Competence in the field of local anesthesia is regarded as a key skill of any dental care provider. 
Successful pain management can not only facilitate the treatment for both the patient and the dental 
professional, but it has also been suggested, that patients may choose their oral care provider based on 
his or her ability to provide a pain-free therapy and care. Anxiety and pain control can be defined as the 
application of various physical, chemical, and psychological modalities to the prevention and treatment 
of preoperative, operative, and postoperative patient anxiety and pain to allow dental treatment to 
occur in a safe and effective manner. It involves all disciplines of dentistry, including dental hygiene, and, 
as such, is one of the most important aspects of dental education.  
     Pain Management is an entire semester long course for both the dental hygienist student and dental 
student, however the dental hygienist spends much of the course deep diving into the use, application, 
and administration of local anesthesia, the use of topical anesthetics, and a decent amount of time 
learning about nitrous oxide, whereas dental students spend very little time on this clinically. It is my 
understanding, through multiple verbal discussions with recently graduated dentists, dental students do 
not spend as much time clinically practicing local anesthesia injections before they can provide it to live 
patients.  
     For the first semester senior dental hygiene students, pain management is a comprehensive course to 
learn the basic concepts of local anesthesia including pharmacology, administration, indications and 
contraindications, anatomical considerations, armamentaria and the management of complications and 
reactions. Students practice the actual techniques for safe, effective administration. The students also 
gain extensive experience in medical history intake and review, vital sign assessment, record keeping, 
patient management, assessment of legal issues and infection control techniques and proper disposal of 
sharps. The clinical component involves the administration of local anesthesia and nitrous oxide in a lab 
setting and on partners as an introductory exercise. The required 50 injections are administered in the 
clinical environment under the direct supervision of a skilled dentist and with the close clinical guidance 
of experienced UNE dental hygiene faculty.  
     For a second semester senior dental hygiene student to be granted the privilege to deliver local 
anesthesia the student will successfully complete the fall course DEN 456 Pain Management, complete 
the laboratory section of the Pain Management course and complete 50 injections on a partner student, 
and pass the CDCA Local Anesthesia Examination for Dental Hygienists scoring a 75% or better with a 
deadline of February 1st, of the spring semester. As per current state regulations, a senior dental 
hygiene student who successfully completes all these requirements must still have a dentist present on 
the clinic floor to provide local anesthesia to a patient for pain management.  
     There are now 11 states within the US (AK, AZ, CO, CT, ID, MN, MO, MT, NV, NM, & OR) that allow 
dental hygienist to provide local anesthesia under general or indirect supervision. While many of these 
states do require a certain amount of didactic and lab hours completed prior to L.A. licensure, many do 
not implement a required number of injections to be completed or even, in a few states, a 
state/regional board exam be completed once the course is completed to administration of L.A. to live 
patients. However, Maine requires 40 hours of didactic lecture, 18 clinical lab hours and a minimum of 
50 injections on a partner student prior to application for the regional written local anesthesia 
examination. Of all 50 states, Maine has one of the most rigorous local anesthesia licensure/course 
requirements for dental hygienist, however the requirements for a dentist/dental student are not nearly 
as thorough.  
     After verbally interviewing a few new graduate dentists (graduated within the past years), here are 
the commonalities I have found between dental schools and a summation of the requirements 
necessary to provide local anesthesia on live patients. Dental students are required to attend four hours 
of lecture/didactic sessions regarding local anesthesia. These lectures discuss the type of anesthetics, 
pharmacology aspect, armamentarium and basic injection technique, syringe assembly and safety, local 
anesthesia allergies, adverse effects, and risk categories. Like dental hygiene students, they are provided 
with videos to watch and handouts to use for reference. Dental students are scheduled three clinic lab 
sessions (60-90 mins per lab) to administer local anesthesia to student partners. The dental students are 
required to administer only one injection per injection type (infiltration, PSA, MSA, ASA, IANB, mental 
block, GP, and NP) to a student partner prior to the ability to provide injections to live clinical patients. 
There is no written examination necessary for a dental student to then begin providing local anesthesia 
to patients in clinic.  There are three to four dental faculty members, faculty dental hygienists included, 
overseeing the dental students initial partner injections, and providing feedback. Once they have 
completed the didactic and lab experience portion of the local anesthesia section of their pain 
management class, dental students are able to provide local anesthesia to clinic patients.  
     When interviewing the recent dental graduates, I reviewed the requirements necessary for a dental 
hygienist. The recent graduate student who I interviewed noted astonishment with the amount of 
education dental hygienists undertake regarding pain management and the administration of local 
anesthesia. They noted that looking back on their experience they are surprised that they only needed 
to prove one injection per injection type on a partner and they did not have to complete any type 
regional or state examination before they could start providing them to clinical patients, compared to 
what a hygienist must do.  
     Clearly dental hygiene students, and dental hygienists have a more extensive course and more 
experience in providing and administer local anesthesia for pain management. In addition, dental 
hygiene faculty, and/or the supervising dentist on the clinic floor, directly oversee and provide feedback 
and guidance for every injection given by a dental hygiene student throughout their senior year. This 
type of in-depth education and hands-on component, fosters dental hygienists who are well versed and 
educated in the safe administration of local anesthesia compared to that of their dental student 
counterparts.   
 Lastly, I just wanted to mention 2 situations I have been in. One, the dentist that oversaw the dental 
hygiene students, when I was a senior in DH school (2015), ONLY gave infiltrations to patients if we 
needed to have a patient “numbed up” for pain management. Mind you, this is prior to us completing 
the written examination that would allow us to provide injections on our own. This dentist stated that 
he “wasn’t good at giving blocks.” I hated having to have this dentist numb my patients as he would give 
an infiltration above every tooth, or every other tooth, for a half mouth scaling and root planning 
procedure. That’s at least 4 injections on the top and 4 on the bottom, if not more. A RDH would most 
likely choose to complete 3 injections total (PSA, MSA, IA/L), possibly a fourth if needed but not 
generally.  If I were the patient, I would have been furious to have at least 8 shots in my mouth. That’s 
more traumatic to me then just doing the deep cleaning without local anesthesia. Secondly, for the 
beginning of my dental hygiene career (post-graduation), I was hired as a dental assistant as there were 
no RDH jobs available at the time (2015). I had my RDH license and authorities to administer Local 
anesthesia. This was a big selling point for the dentist that I started with. Reason being, he could not 
successfully give a mandibular nerve block (IA/L) 8 out of 10 times. When I was hired, I provided many of 
his blocks because he noted “dental hygienists need to be better at blocks for scaling and root planning, 
I prefer to just give infiltrations for restorative work.” A dentist should be well versed and competent in 
their abilities to give all types of oral injections, not just infiltrations. They have just as many 
opportunities as dental hygienist to take continuing education on the topic and gain more competent 
skills.  
     It is with all said that, I suggest and agree that dental hygienists (including independent, and dental 
therapy) be granted the ability to provide local anesthesia under general supervision rather than direct 
supervision of a dentist throughout the state of Maine. We have more hands on experience, we are the 
ones that conduct the in-depth and thorough medical history reviews with each of our patients every 
visit with us, we have ample opportunities to administer in a school setting and beyond in the office 
setting, and ample of continuing education courses to strengthening our skills, professional growth 
within pain management choices, and mindset.  
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony. 
Tatyana O’Donnell, RDH, IPDH, MSDH 
