Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 5 , 2023  
 
Senator Joe Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 454 – An Act to Establish a 180 -day State Residency Requirement for Municipal General 
Assistance   
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to prov ide information regarding LD 454, An Act to Establish a 180 -day State Residency 
Requirement for Municipal General Assistance . The proposed legislation seeks to establish a 
requirement that any person who intends to apply for the municipal General Assistanc e program must 
first provide verification that that individual has resided in the State of Maine for a minimum period of 
180 days prior to making an application for General Assistance . 
 
The residency requirement that this bill would establish is unconstitu tional. There have been several 
court decisions that have defended an individual’s right to travel and relocate without forfeiting their 
rights to public assistance. A 1999 U.S. Supreme Court decision ( Saenz v. Roe, et. al ) struck down a 
California duratio nal residency requirement, stating that it is unconstitutional to impose such a 
requirement for basic subsistence benefits. The State of Pennsylvania instituted a residency 
requirement that was successfully challenged in the District Courts in 1997 ( Warric k vs. Synder , 2 F. 
Supp 2d 720). Because of the Court’s ruling, Pennsylvania was forced to remove the residency 
requirement from their policy.   
 
Establishing a durational residency requirement for the purpose of applying for General Assistance 
will violat e the 1969 Supreme Court Decision Shapiro v. Thompson . The court held that statutes 
established a fundamental "right to travel" in U.S. law and that imposing durational residency 
requirements for benefits were unconstitutional denials of equal protection.  
 
This change would also decrease access to General Assistance benefits and would likely bring a 
lawsuit from advocacy agencies which would result in significant legal costs for the state.  
 
For these r easons, the Department is strongly opposed to this bill. DHHS is committed to working with 
stakeholders to review and make recommendations for improving the General Assistance program. We 
wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this  bill going forward.
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  
 

