      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
May 5, 2023  
 
Re: LD 182, LD 183, LD 268, LD 364, and LD 454  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee,  
my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine (CHOM) .  
CHOM’s small staff  works  collaboratively to create housing enriched with services to help people 
overcome challenges .  I am a member of the Statewide Homeless Council , and chair the Maine 
Homeless Policy Committee and the Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors.   
 
My testimony  is in opposition to a number of bills, all of which would make substantive changes to the 
General Assistance  (GA)  program to the detriment of vulnerable people in Maine .  Changes to the safety 
net will have a mushrooming effect on homelessness in Maine.  I testify today in opposition to the 
following bills:   
• LD 182, An Act to Create a 9-month Time Limit on General Assistance Benefits for Able -
bodied Adults Without Dependents, and LD 183, An Act to Incorporate Time Limits on the 
Temporary Assistance for Ne edy Families Program into Municipal General Assistance 
Programs : 
o Both of the bills above would create time -limits for GA.  There does not appear to be a time 
limit on poverty.  Putting an arbitrary time limit on the safety net for people in poverty is dangerous to the few who need it, and particularly their children.  Most people receive GA for brief time periods; the vast maj ority of people utilizing GA need assistance for far less than the 
time limits that these bills would impose; only a small minority needs it for longer.  For those who need it for longer, there are good, valid reasons –  such as awaiting disability determin ation.  
People who access GA for longer periods of time are likely among those with complicated 
issues beyond poverty and are most in need of safety net resources.  This arbitrary cap will lead 
to more homelessness and hunger in Maine communities.  The sma ll subset of people who need 
assistance longer than this arbitrary limit are working toward self -sufficiency but will be forced 
out of stable housing and directly into homelessness once they meet this time limit.   
• LD 268, An Act to Establish a 45-day Muni cipal Residency Requirement for General 
Assistance Programs  and LD 454, An Act to Establish a 180-day State Residency Requirement 
for General Assistance Programs  
o The above bills would impose 45-day and 180- day residency requirements respectively .  
Imposing harsh, arbitrary State residency requirements for GA will not eliminate the need for people in poverty new to Maine to access safety net resources to meet their basic needs.  
Without the financial assistance GA provides, many people  would become homeless who 
otherwise never would.  Having insufficient money to make ends meet is the most common 
reason for circumstantial homelessness.  If these residency requirements were to be adopted for 
the GA program, people in need of minimal fina ncial assistance to attain and maintain stable 
housing will have no way to do so.  They will l ikely end up falling into  homelessness, which 
will cost the State far more.   
• LD 364, An Act to Prohibit the Use of General Assistance as a Replacement for Availab le 
Resources  
o The current law already requires people receiving General Assistance to apply for all other 
available resources to attain and maintain GA eligibility.  The law also already disqualifies 
people from receiving GA if they lose any other public be nefit without just cause, until they 
make a good faith effort to secure the resource.  The rules governing General Assistance can be 
confusing and it is possible for people to make errors.  This bill would add punitive provisions 
by disqualifying people fr om GA for 120 days, without consideration for good faith efforts 
made to retain the benefits.  Finding ways to further punish people in need of assistance is not 
consistent with the real work of helping people get on their feet.  Clarifying General Assista nce 
eligibility requirements seems much more prudent and would benefit the entire program.   
 
Please oppose these bills.  It helps none of us to keep people in poverty.  The safety net is there to keep people alive.  GA is Maine’s safety net of last resort .  It protects thousands of Mainers by keeping a roof 
over their heads and food when they have nowhere else to turn.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Sarah Derosier  
Asset  Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
