   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD  182, “An Act to Create a 9 -month Time Limit on General Assistance Benefits for Able -
bodied Adults Without Dependents ,” LD 183, “An Act to Incorporate Time Limits on the Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families Program into Municipal General Assistance Pro grams ,” LD 268, “An Act to Establish a 45 -day Municipal Residency 
Requirement for General Assistance Programs ,” LD 364, “An Act to Prohibit the Use of General Assistance as a 
Replacement for Available Resources , and LD 454, “An Act to Establish a 180 -day State Residency Requirement for 
Municipal General Assistance . 
May 5, 202 3 
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Baldacci, Representative  Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services. My name is James Myall, and I ’m a n Econo mic Policy Analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. 
I’m here to offer testimony in opposition to LDs 182, 183, 268, 364, and 454. Each  of these bills would create unnecessary 
additional barriers to assistance for  our stat e’s most vulnerable residents, and  as a result  cause harm to  individuals who 
already in de sperate circumstances  
 
 Residenc y Requirement (LDs 268, 454)  
 
“The epidemic of the past winter has been a fruitful source of poverty, and has entailed upon the city a largely increased 
expense …It is not, however, the wish of our people that any person should suffe r. The dictates of humanity, as well as 
law, demand that we should minister to all who are in need of clothing, food, medicine or shelter .”1 Those words were 
written by the Mayo r of Lewiston in 1892 , but they  are just as relevant to day. I include them in my testimony because  
they i llustrate that extending support to those who need it, regardless  of where they come from, is a long -held Maine 
value. In 1892, many of the individuals assisted by L ewiston ’s “poor dep artment ” were immigrants, especially those w ith 
Fren ch-Canadian or I rish backgrou nds. 
 
Today, Maine finds itself in a similar posi tion, in which those who need the most help hav e often come to us  from other  
countries, fleeing violence or perse cution , and seeking as ylum in the United States. LDs 268 and 454 would be massively 
harmful to th ese new arrivals. Most come with no resources to support them selves, and few possessions  other th an the 
clothes on their backs. They are ineligible  for most forms of federally -funded assistance, and are prohibited  from work ing. 
With no savings and no way to earn mone y, they are desperately in need of the basic level of help provided by the GA 
program. LDs 268 and 454 would take away that assistance  and leave them with nothing. The result would be a massive 
increase in  homelessnes s, hunger and crushing poverty a mong this population.  
 
While the GA program represents an invest ment in this population, it ’s an investment  that pays off over time. Maine ’s 
economic  devel opment pla n req uires us to find 75,000 additional workers over  the next  10 ye ars2 and explicitly calls for 
welcoming immigrants to Maine.3 If asylum -seekers are supported when they first arrive, they will go  on to become 
thriving members of our community, working and paying taxes back into the system. Immigrants alr eady contribute $441 
million in federal, state, and local ta xes in Maine , and those who re ceive G A today will add to that in the future.4 
 
 
 
 
Time Limits (L Ds 182, 183)  
 
The proposals  to impose time limi ts on the GA pro gram  are similar to actions taken by the LePage administration  which 
imposed a time limit on re cipients of Temporary Assistance for Needy Families in 20 12. A report by the then -Governor ’s 
own policy office revealed th at as a result of this change, hundred s of individuals found themselves with no public 
assistance whatso ever , and no earnings f rom employment.  In other words, for these Main ers, the end of the program  had 
not resulted in employment, as the administration  intended, but in destitution.5 This is consistent  with analysis of similar 
changes  in other states, where time limits o n wel fare programs only c reate additional  hardship and do not prom ote 
employment .6  
 
“Replacing Existing Resources ” (LD 364)  
 
LD 364 appears to be a solution in search of a problem. The GA pro gram already requires that participants have exhausted 
other forms of assistance before they apply. However, LD 364 would add an unnecessarily harsh penalty – denying access 
to the GA program for 120 days – if somebody has not use d an existing  available resource. Th at would include someone 
who is not awa re of an existing resource, or mistakenly thinks they are not eligible, or w ho was wrongly denied for the 
resource . It would also penalize  people for previously  “abandoning ” an available  resource – even if that applicant did not 
know the y would later need to apply for GA. These requirements all crea te additional pape rwork  and administrative 
burdens for applicants  that will prevent people who need it from getting assistance.  
 
Conclusion  
 
The General As sistance program fills a fundamental need in our society. It provides re sour ces for people who are in  
desperate  circumstance s and have no other  recourse.  As a society, we are strongest when everyone is supported an d 
given the opportunity  to get back on their feet. Th at’s true no matter whe re someone was  born or how long they have 
lived in this state. LDs 182, 183, 268, 364 and 454 would  impose harm on the most vulnerable in our society, an d make it 
harder for them to thrive in the future. In doing so, these bills would harm all of us . 
 
 
Notes  
 
1 “Twenty -Ninth  Annual Report of the Receipts and Expenditures of the City of Lewiston for the Fiscal Year Ending February 29, 1892 
Together with Other Annual Reports and Papers Relating to the Affairs of the City ,” p14.  
https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5784&context=towndocs   
2 “Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020 -2029 ,” Nov 15, 2019 , p11.  
https://www.maine.gov/decd/ sites/maine.gov.decd/files/inline -files/DECD_120919_sm.pdf  
3 Ibid p4, 27.  
4 “Immigrants in Maine ,” American Immigration Council . https://map.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/locations/maine/   
5 James M yall, “Governor’s Own Report Reveals the Human Cost of His War on the Poor .” Maine Center for Economic Policy . June 1, 
2017. https://www.mecep.org/blog/governors -own -report -reveals -the-human -cost-of-his-war-on-the-poor/   
6 Motaz Al -Chanati, Lucas Husted , “Cutoff From Support: The Effects of Losing Cash Welfare .” Nov 1, 2021. 
https://econ.columbia.edu/wp -content/uploads/sites/41/2021/09/husted_JMP_20211101.pdf   
