 
  
 
 
Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network 
PO Box 8 
Augusta, ME 
 04330 
www.muusan.org 
admin@muusan.org 
 
 
 
Written Testimony of Kathryn Vezina  
 To Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Opposition to LD 454, An Act to Establish a 180-Day State Residency Requirement for Municipal 
General Assistance 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, I am Kathryn Vezina, I live in Portland, and I bring to you today testimony in 
opposition to LD 454, An Act to Establish a 180-Day State Residency Requirement for Municipal 
General Assistance. I submit this testimony on behalf of the Maine Unitarian Universalist State 
Advocacy Network, also known as MUUSAN.  MUUSAN is statewide advocacy and public policy 
network anchored in Unitarian Universalist faith and animated by UU principles.  
  
By creating a new residency requirement of six months, LD 454 seems targeted to keep new 
immigrants and asylum seekers from other countries from coming to Maine.  We know that 
immigrants and asylum seekers are usually fleeing horrible and life-threatening conditions in their 
home countries—as most would not undertake the arduous and dangerous path to the United 
States without compelling reasons to leave their homes.  Maine can benefit from these newcomers 
who have the potential to fill some of the jobs that are now keeping our businesses from thriving.   
Legislation, like LD 454, that seeks to keep people from meeting their basic human needs, is sharply 
counter to our values and principles.   
 
Unitarian Universalism calls us to change oppressive policies and structures to those that recognize 
the inherent worth and dignity of each person and build justice, equity, and compassion in human 
relations.  We are speaking in opposition to LD 454 because it represents a step away from a more 
just society.   
 
On behalf of MUUSAN, we strongly urge a vote of Ought Not to Pass on LD 454.  Thank you. 
 
 
