Senator Carney, Representative Moonen. 
Honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, thank you for allowing me to testify today. My 
name is Aaron Dudley, i live in Marshfield, Maine. 
l oppose LD1619 and l am asking you to not pass this bill. 
"Trust the Science" is a phrase all too familiar to the citizens of Maine. In the last several years 
we have heard this phrase dozens of times from Governor Mills. l think its fair to say that this 
majority would have the citizens of Maine believe that Science weighs in heavily on your public 
policies. My question to you is, why does it seem different in this case? 
I am a Christian, l believe the Bible is true and because of this l believe that life begins at 
conception; however, I know that l live in a world where not everyone holds that conviction. As 
l understand, the current abortion law in Maine allows for an abortion up to 28 weeks and 
there is provision in this law for the extreme and rare case of the mother's life being in danger 
even after 28 weeks. 
The Science says a child can live independently from its mother after 20 weeks of development. 
So, according to the Science, the mother is no longer making choices, after 20 weeks of her 
pregnancy, that affect her body only, but the body of another human as well. 
You have challenged us for yea rs now "can we trust the Science" , my challenge to you is ”can 
we trust our leaders? ” We all heard Governor Mills say at the Gubernatorial Debate "I have no 
plans to change the current abortion laws in Maine.” 
LD1619 is too extreme for any state that believes in the God-given rights of Life, Liberty, and 
the Pursuit of Happiness. 
Regardless of the outcome, today will be remembered as an historic day at the State House. it 
will either be remembered as the day Maine citizens gathered here in record numbers and with 
one voice stopped a radical bill from being passed or it will be remembered as a day when the 
politicians that Represent us, defied the citizens of Maine, and passed this bill rendering a 
Government by the people useless.
