1 
Mabel 
Wadsworth 
Center 
Feminist. Local. Independent. 
Statement of Abbie Strout-Bentes, Director of Community Engagement, Mabel 
Wadsworth Center to the Joint Standing Committee of Judiciary 
May 1, 2023 
LD 1619 and LD 1343 
Ought to Pass 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the joint standing committee 
on Judiciary, thank you for hearing my testimony today. My name is Abbie 
Strout-Bentes, and I am here today as a representative of Mabel Wadsworth Center in 
Bangor. Mabel Wadsworth Center is a feminist sexual and reproductive health center 
that provides a wide range of services, including abortion care, prenatal care, STI testing 
and treatment, gender-affirming hormone therapy, mental health counseling, and 
primary care services. 
We are here to share our support of LD 1619 An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive 
Privacy Laws and LD 1343 An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People 
by Preempting the Field of Abortion Regulation. Both of these bills are important to 
ensure and protect access to pregnancy care for everyone in Maine. 
There any many components to these two bills and since you are hearing from a lot of 
people today on the different pieces, we decided to focus our testimony on the changes 
LD 1619 will make to the way abortion data is collected by the state and why it is needed. 
Our organization has been providing abortion care for almost three decades. . 
Throughout the years, advancements in the ﬁeld have led to changes in the care we 
offer, for example, the addition of medication abortion 23 years ago. Additionally, as an 
organization committed to providing person-centered, trauma-informed, and 
non-judgmental care, we are continuously making changes to the language we use and 
updating our medical history form to ensure we are not unintentionally causing harm or 
amplifying shame and only gathering the information we need to provide quality care.
The one thing that has not changed in these years is the way in which we’ve gathered 
data for the state of Maine. 
Gathering data is important for public health. However, it has been clear to us for many years that we need to update this law to ensure the data collected are not stigmatizing or 
harmful. Since the Dobbs decision overturning Roe, it has become urgent to ensure 
privacy. In the past year, we have seen an increase in politically motivated attacks on clinicians and patients in states with abortion bans and states where abortion is legal. At this moment, it is critical that any sensitive information is protected and that We are 
only collecting necessary information to protect patients and providers. 
The change made in this law prioritizes the protection of patient privacy While ensuring 
appropriate data is collected. 
Thank you for your time.
