Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, I'm Alivia 
Kennedy and I live in Portland. l’m here in support of LD 1343 and LD 1619. 
I have been in dangerous and unpredictable situations my entire life. I was around parties, 
drugs and domestic abuse from the time I was in the womb. I watched my mother struggle with 
intimate partner violence, substance use, and mental illness for most of my childhood before 
moving in with my father. Experiencing generational trauma has resulted in ongoing physical 
and mental health struggles, including birth defects, persistent pain, and symptoms of my 
mental illnesses. 
Throughout my youth I felt like the options to choose were often taken from me. I ran away 
many times in an effort to take back my control. I would often make risky and impulsive 
decisions, and trust people who did not have my best intentions at heart. I survived sex 
trafﬁcking, sexual abuse, and exploitation by the age of 14. 
At 17 I found myself locked into a cycle of unpredictable violence. I was pressured into havinga 
child by my partner at the time. He convinced me to not have an abortion. I did everything I 
could to create a safe environment for my son, and was able to secure an open adoption for him 
to keep him safe. I did not escape that relationship for almost 3 years, and survived a world 
where I was constantly fearing for my life with him. 
I traveled the country after leaving him, cycling between substance use, abusive relationships, 
and suicide attempts. I moved back to Maine when I was 20, to go to college for a degree. I had 
hopes to become a better activist for human rights, get my degree, and continue to travel again 
one day. I wanted to live close to my son in California, and develop a stronger bond with him 
and his family. I wanted to give myself another opportunity to create stability in my life that I had 
not yet had. 
In the dorms I used methamphetamine and heroin to help cope with my depression, and 
achieve academically. My stress responses, reactions and time management were 
unpredictable, as I was still dabbling in chaos. I became pregnant, and felt the similar social 
pressures from the time I was pregnant as a teenager. . 
I brieﬂy considered giving birth, because I felt like that was my fault for being pregnant. I felt that 
I needed to based on general societal beliefs. I knew that I could not mentally or emotionally 
provide a healthy, sustainable life for a child. I also just did not want to be a mother yet. I wanted 
to have my own apartment, abstinence from substances, discover mental wellness, and 
navigate my options for future careers. I knew my goals and responsibilities were meant to be 
fulﬁlled and that I was capable of being an excellent mother at a different time. I had the abortion 
with help from funding through Planned Parenthood. I did not have money, transportation, or 
resources besides a ride back to the dorm from a friend. My father was there to support me 
emotionally, which l am very grateful for.
. s-at 
M. g;;1.1;-;§;§ 1' 
7}* 
'»2' :.2*»':=~ I 1t 
3») +5 '. 
‘1 
“X 
Because I was able to postpone a major life change at that time, I was able to create a more sustainable life for myself. I was able to decide when I was ready to have a child after my abortion. I have the ability to provide a life for him, that I was not able to have myself growing up. My two children visit each other across the country annually. I am a caseworker now, working with folks who have experienced hardships like my own. I believe that it is everyone ’s right to have access to health care. Preventing people from having an abortion harms pregnant people and their families. 
Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1343 and LD 1619. Thank you.
