Honorable Committee Members, I, Amy Loring, a Windham resident, am here to testify in opposition to 
LD 1619 (and all pro-Abortion bills). 
lam mom to a baby in Heaven -— and a miracle 2-year-old on earth. After 7 years of infertility, l can tell 
you with certainty: life is not a guarantee! Just take 2 seconds to feel your own heartbeat. And recognize 
that life is an undeserved gift - even if your conception was “unplanned" (which, honestly, is likely most 
of us)! 
Women are competent, smart, powerful, ﬁerce, even. But who has not been afraid, anxious, or madea 
regrettable decision when feeling overwhelmed or alone? However, women do NOT want to make 
decisions out of FEAR; we want to make decisions out of FREEDOM and COURAGE - to choose and do 
the good, the right, the best thing for us and our families! 
Consider the following: 
1) For 3 years, l lived with homeless, pregnant women and their babies, post-delivery. These moms 
achieved goals of going to school, getting a job, obtaining childcare, etc. Several said their doctor 
recommended Abortion, multiple times. Daphne's told her to DEFINITELY get one, since her son 
would have Down Syndrome. Accepting that risk, she chose to deliver anyway, and he was born 
healthy with no disability at all! . 
2) Consider, also, my friend, L.C. — in and out of relationships in high school and beyond — who 
never wanted to have kids. She ended up experiencing the horror and tragedy of date rape and 
soon found herself to be pregnant. She also, carried her son, and says his life is one of the best 
things that has ever happened to her. 
In March, Maine celebrated its ”youngest premature baby" surviving at 22 weeks - an amazing medical 
feat - and yet, here we are looking to expand Abortion for babies who are even older than viability age. 
How can we say on the one hand that her life is a miracle — and others are not? 
It especially makes NO SENSE when birth rates are declining, and our state population is only aging. We 
should not be determining when/whether life matters — nor should any doctor who is knowledgeable, 
yet fallible; and supposed to protect and care for patients. Do we want Maine to be among a handful of 
states and countries with policies that treat human life as discardable and replaceable — among places 
like North Korea? Should we not be pouring MORE state resources into VALUING and SUPPORTING the 
lives of mamas and babies — rather than working to further extinguish them? 
I exhort you Maine citizens! Let us not look back and regret, but look forward to the future with hope!
