Dear Senators, dear Representatives,  I herewith submit my testimony regarding the newly proposed laws discussed tomorrow, May 1st, 2023.  Reasons, why you should vote NO to the proposed law LD1343:  • Abortion is already allowed in Maine up to the 24th week of pregnancy, abortion after that point means killing a baby, which would be able to survive outside the womb. • The word “necessity” in the law is not defined and gives providers the power to decide, if they will kill a newborn or refuse to care for a newborn, who needs medical help. • The bill eliminates criminal penalties for any provider of abortions including illegal providers. • This new bill can be used to abort for reasons of discrimination against any group including race, poverty, gender, disability, religion etc. • Late term abortion is not health care. The definition of health care is “efforts made to maintain or restore physical, mental, or emotional well-being by trained and licensed professionals”. Terminating a life due to sickness or disease or any reason is the opposite of health care.  • Late term abortion can be a serious health risk for the mother. • Decision over life and death is not a doctor’s job and overburdens him. • The true intention for this law is not revealed. How can we make sure that this law is not proposed out of reasons like making money with the fetus, discrimination against specific population groups, refusing to spend money to help mothers, fathers and families after the birth of a child, reducing population growth, hurting the multi-million-dollar business called abortion) • Late-term abortion not just involves women, but the unborn child, which can survive outside the womb and the father. It violates the rights of fathers. • If this law will be approved, pregnant mothers will need to fear that their loved child will be killed by the health professionals, if doctors or nurses think that the child should not live out of various reasons. There is a high risk that professionals will put pressure onto the mother while giving birth. How horrible is that? This is the opposite of caring for women. • Women cannot be sure anymore, if they will be cared for during pregnancy without danger to their health and they will not be sure, if an abortion provider will inform her about all consequences and side effects of an abortion provided by that provider. This is not helping women or a fight for the rights of women, but the opposite: Women (and fathers, babies) are treated like objects here, not like human beings.  I hope that you have an open heart and mind and will consider voting against law LD1343, which in my opinion will change main values, for which America so far has stood for.  Best regards,  Anja Haubs Saint George, Maine 
Anja Haubs
Saint George
LD 1343
Dear Senators, dear Representatives,
I herewith submit my testimony regarding the newly proposed laws discussed 
tomorrow, May 1st, 2023.
Reasons, why you should vote NO to the proposed law LD1343:
•Abortion is already allowed in Maine up to the 24th week of pregnancy, abortion 
after that point means killing a baby, which would be able to survive outside the 
womb.
•The word “necessity” in the law is not defined and gives providers the power to 
decide, if they will kill a newborn or refuse to care for a newborn, who needs medical 
help.
•The bill eliminates criminal penalties for any provider of abortions including 
illegal providers.
•This new bill can be used to abort for reasons of discrimination against any group 
including race, poverty, gender, disability, religion etc.
•Late term abortion is not health care. The definition of health care is “efforts made 
to maintain or restore physical, mental, or emotional well-being by trained and 
licensed professionals”. Terminating a life due to sickness or disease or any reason is 
the opposite of health care. 
•Late term abortion can be a serious health risk for the mother.
•Decision over life and death is not a doctor’s job and overburdens him.
•The true intention for this law is not revealed. How can we make sure that this law 
is not proposed out of reasons like making money with the fetus, discrimination 
against specific population groups, refusing to spend money to help mothers, fathers 
and families after the birth of a child, reducing population growth, hurting the 
multi-million-dollar business called abortion)
•Late-term abortion not just involves women, but the unborn child, which can 
survive outside the womb and the father. It violates the rights of fathers.
•If this law will be approved, pregnant mothers will need to fear that their loved 
child will be killed by the health professionals, if doctors or nurses think that the child
should not live out of various reasons. There is a high risk that professionals will put 
pressure onto the mother while giving birth. How horrible is that? This is the opposite
of caring for women.
•Women cannot be sure anymore, if they will be cared for during pregnancy without
danger to their health and they will not be sure, if an abortion provider will inform her
about all consequences and side effects of an abortion provided by that provider. This 
is not helping women or a fight for the rights of women, but the opposite: Women 
(and fathers, babies) are treated like objects here, not like human beings.
I hope that you have an open heart and mind and will consider voting against law 
LD1343, which in my opinion will change main values, for which America so far has 
stood for.
Best regards,
Anja Haubs
Saint George, Maine

