Pinette, Susan 
From: ‘ 
Ann-Marie Grenier <annmarieg618@gmail.com> 
Sent: Monday, April 24, 2023 5:50 PM 
To: Ann-Marie Grenier' 
Subject: LD 1619 "An Act to lmprove Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws" 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature.t
- 
Members of the Judiciary Committee:' 
My name is Ann Marie Grenier. I am a long-time Windham resident. 
l am writing to you today to urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 1619 "An Act 
to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws." 
1) First, the privacy provisions in LD 1619 is taken care of under HIPPA, making what is 
proposed as "new privacy laws" unnecessary. Additionally, health care workers are 
already subject to patient confidentiality laws with respect to maintaining. patients ‘ 
confidentiality above and beyond the HIPPA Rules. 
2) The section of LD 1619 quoted & underlined directly below seeks to remove all 
accountability for the termination of life of the unborn at any time by any unlicensed 
person. 
"Finally, this bill removes the criminal penalties for performing an abortion without being 
licensed as a physician,physician assistant or advanced practice registered nurse and for 
performing an abortion after viability of the fetus when it was not necessary for the 
preservation of the life or health of the mother." 
THIS IS INSANE. You mean to tell me, YOU are ok with the notion that anyone will 
be able to kill a preborn baby at any time during pregnancy without any 
consequences. Have you lost your mind, heart and soul?! 
3) Lastly, this bad bill LD 1619 is redundant to a Federal Law already in place. Perhaps 
you are unaware of Doe V Bolton. A quick wikipedia search will give you much 
info: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doe v. Bolton 
Notice the broad definition of "health" . 
Definition of health[edit] 
The Court's opinion in Doe v. Bo/ton stated that a woman may obtain an abortion 
after viability, if necessary to protect her health. The Court defined "health" as follows:
1
Whether, in the words of the Georgia statute, "an abortion is necessary" is a professional 
judgment that the Georgia physician will be called upon to make routinely. We agree with 
the District Court, 319 F. Supp., at 1058, that the medical judgment may be exercised in 
the light of all factors - physical, emotional, psychological, familial, and the woman's age- 
relevant to the well-being of the patient. All these factors may relate to health.[1] 
It is for all the above reasons and other that I did not even touch on, that I strongly 
urge anought not to pass on LD 1619 
Kind regards 
Ann Marie Grenier 
4 Juniper Dr 
Windham, ME 
04062 
207-671 -41 73
2
