Anna Gary 
200 Maple Ridge Road China, Maine 04358i' 
5/1/2023 
Good evening, members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Anna Gary, l'm 18 years old and live in China Maine. l’m testifying today in opposition to LD 
1619, An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy» Laws. 
This bill is too extreme and will allow for the murder of innocent human beings or persons. A number of 
people would say that an unborn child is not a person and that is false. l'm here to prove the fallacy of 
that claim.T 
A pro-choicer's argument would be that the size, level of development, environment and degree of 
dependency is what determines the personhood ofa human being as these are the only factors that 
differ a fetus from us. Let's debunk that. 
The ﬁrst difference between us and an unborn child is size. Some would argue that a fetus is too small to 
be considered a person but if size determines personhood then is a toddler less ofa person than an 
adult simply because they are smaller? 
What about the level of a human being's development? A fetus is much less developed thaw’ -I lam but 
also I am much less developed than many of you sitting before me at this present time. A common 
argument states rationality, consciousness, and desire is what constructs personhood. lf that was true 
than what about a born infant? They have not yet developed these qualities as well, does this give us the 
ability to murder them, too?A 
Ok, well another distinction between us and a fetus is the environment. We are outside the womb anda 
baby is within the womb. A persons location is always changing though. Why is the womb the only 
location that determines if we can kill someone or not? 
Lastly, the degree ofa person's dependency is called into question. We claim that a fetus is not worthy of 
life based on their level of dependency. They are dependent on their mother in order to survive. if 
dependency is what makes someone unworthy of life than what about infants, individuals with autism, 
and those with Alzheimers? These people are almost equally as dependent as the unborn. Should we be 
able to kill them as well? 
At the end of this we come up with three infallible truths. It's wrong to intentionally kill an innocent 
human being. All human beings are persons. Abortion intentionally kills a human being who is a person. 
ln conclusion, abortion is wrong. It is the murder of an innocent child and should not be a choice fora 
physician to make. Murder is wrong in all circumstances and we do not this bill which will expand these 
murders in Maine. Thank you.A
