Since LD 1619 removes abortion restrictions, I'm addressing standard reasons for expanding this profit- 
driven industry of killing the inconvenient and voiceless: rape and incest, the mother's health, and 
empowering women —- ”my body, my choice". 
Rape and incest count for less than half a percent nationally. Have we seriously discussed dis—incentivizing 
abuse of women, including not releasing violent criminals early? There would be no rape if surgical 
castration, life in prison, or the death penalty were standard. 
Just like you wouldn't tell victims, ”No justice, you were at the wrong place at the wrong time," it is nota 
solution to murder babies who are also at the wrong place at the wrong time. 
Regarding the mother's health, good prenatal care essentially eliminates dangers to a woman's life. LD 
1619 tacitly agrees, since "to preserve the life or health of the mother" has been removed. 
No penalties for non—approved abortion providers shows that abortion is more about generating 
maximum profits without restrictions than about women's health. Even the pro-abortion American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists warns against unlicensed providers. 
Fetal research at the University of Pittsburgh verifies that full-term aborted babies born alive command a 
nice price on the organs market. 
So, what about empowering women when 96% of abortions are elective? 
Choices alone don't automatically empower anyone. Bad choices always Qjgempower. 
it is disemgowering not to prevent pregnancy in the first place. 
It disemgowers not to know the physical, financial, and social supports available for keeping babies or 
giving them for adoption. 
lt is disemgowering to participate in killing babies in horrifying, torturous ways. Read women's regret 
stories at silentnomoreawareness.org. 
It is disemgowering that non-licensed abortion providers can make money off women's fear, without 
repercussions. 
It disemgowers women to deny reality about "my body, my choice" when the baby is clearly not her body. 
Her goals may be inhibited, but she created this defenseless, voiceless life, and it's not even threatening 
her life. No one has the right to murder someone whose mere existence inhibits one’s goals. 
What is emgowering is learning effective defense against physically stronger males. And knowing that 
society will hold them accountable. 
Choosing life and living without shame is emgowering. Choosing life is costly, yes. But more costly is 
regret, denial, and lies. 
Please reject LD 1619. 
Empower women by charging criminals appropriately, and protect women from a profit-driven culture of 
death based on murdering those with no defenses and no voice. 
Testimony of Anne Weston, Owls Head
