Affidavit in Opposition to H.P. 1044 House of Representatives, April 12, 2023 
An Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Anthony Levatino, MD, JD deposes and says: 
1) l am a board-certi ﬁed obstetrician gynecologist currently licensed ln New Mexico and Arizona with 
over 40 years of practice and teaching experience. 
2) I received my Medical Degree from Albany Medical School in Albany, NY in 1976. 
3) I completed a four-year residency in Obstetrics and Gynecology in 1980 and became board- 
certiﬁed in 1982. 
4) in the course of my residency training, and over several years of clinical practice, l 
performed over 1200 ﬁrst and second-trimester abortions. 
5) l currently serve on the faculty of Burrell College of Osteopathic Medicine as professor of 
Clinical Medicine. 
6) I have read H.P. 1044 in its entirety. 
7) It is my professional opinion, as both a physician and an attorney, that H.P. 1044 does not 
serve the citizens of Maine well. 
8) The ﬁrst and most important obligation of a state or nation is to protect its citizens from 
unwarranted and avoidable harm. 
9) Implementation of H.P. 1044, as written, would be potentially harmful to any person seeking 
an abortion in Maine. 
10) Section 2 changes existing law to essentially allow any abortion, at any time, for any reason 
up until the time of birth solely on the whim of an abortionlst with no overslte by medical or 
state authorities and no justification required of any kind in the medical record or in any 
other form. 
11) Simply stating that the "professional" judgment of a licensed physician is inadequate to 
ensure the safety of patients seeking abortions in the state of Maine. 
12) in my practice of abortions in New York, my partners and I were faced with a hospital whose 
governing board ruled that only "medically necessary" abortions would be performed at the 
hospital. Undeterred, we simply wrote on every medical record that, in our professional 
judgment, the abortion was medically necessary and then we proceeded. Problem solved. 
The same could easily happen in Maine. 
13) it is well established in the medical literature that complications from abortion become 
more likely as gestational age increases. 
14) H.P. 1044 opens the door to unregulated abortion practice, without justification after fetal 
viability by mid-level medical practitioners without adequate medical supervision bya 
physician who is trained and capable of caring for complications including potentially life- 
threatening infections, incomplete abortion or failed abortion.
15) While a physician is required by the proposed legislation to pass professional judgment on 
whether a post-viability abortion is iustiﬁed, Maine law allows physician assistants and 
advanced care registered nurses to perform these advanced procedures. 
16) These individuals are not trained nor have adequate experience to ensure the safety of 
patients they may treat in such circumstances. Allowing this could seriously jeopardize the 
health and well-being of those seeking abortions in Maine as well as encouraging 
"dumping" of patients suffering post-abortion complications into emergency rooms that 
may or may not themselves be capable of handling such complications adequately. 
17) Post-viability abortion is a specialized practice. ACGME and ACOG have both recognized this 
by recently instituting a new two-year fellowship in Advanced Family Planning to adequately 
train Ob/Gyns to perform these abortions. 
18) Allowing inadequately trained personnel to legally perform such procedures invites serious 
and avoidable morbidity and mortality in your patient population and shows a callous 
disregard for those seeking abortions in your state. 
19) Section 3 only compounds the error by removing any legal penalty from ANYONE who 
performs an abortion in your state. 
20) As one possibility, a non-licensed individual could procure Mifepristone by mail order over 
the internet and sell that drug to anyone in your state, including minors, without penalty. 
Such an unlicensed individual would do so illegally under section 3 as proposed but striking 
existing language in Section 3 removes any penalty for such action. 
21) One must assume that the drafters of this bill, and any legislator supporting it, are well 
aware that this would be the effect of this legislation. 
22) Section 2 explicitly states that, “It is also the public policy of the State that all abortions may 
be performed only by a health care professional ” . Having so stated, Section 3 then 
specifically removes any legal penalty for an unlicensed person who performs an abortion in 
Maine essentially decriminalizing a new form of "back alley" abortion. 
23) The Summary of the proposed legislation explicitly states, "Finally, this bill removes the 
criminal penalties for performing an abortion without being licensed as a physician, 
Dhvsician assistant or advanced practice registered nurse and for performing an abortion 
after viability of the fetus when it was not necessary for the preservation of the life or health 
of the mother." 
24) This callous disregard for the health and safety of persons seeking abortions is blatantly 
unethical on its face and should not, in my opinion, be passed or signed into law in Maine or 
anywhere else. 
§Lv\>§£4~I~Q ,ﬁ4»-¢»Q\ a=-BC-:ﬁ" _4~“%; oi 
Anthony Levatino, MD,JD
