Senator Carney and Representative Moonen & Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee, My name is Austin Turcotte and I am a resident of Woolwich. And I stand here 
today in opposition of bill LD 1619. 
I stand here as a dad to 4 little babies that were not long for this world. My wife and I have had 
four miscarriages in the little over 5-1/2 years we've been married. They did not make it past 
the 1st trimester before, for reasons only Jesus knows, He took them home with Him. They 
may have only been a handful of weeks along in their stage of life, but they had immense love 
shown toward them by my wife and I along with our families and church family. They may have 
been very early on in their development, but they had an INFINITE amount of value to us and in 
the eyes of our Creator. And I know there are many other couples who would loudly agree with 
me on what I have just shared. And I would even go so far as to say if you ask the majority of 
people who have had miscarriages early on, regardless of their political or religious affiliation, 
that they would tell you that baby had great value to them. 
The value of an unborn chiId’s life should not depend on whether they are wanted or not. Both 
babies that are planned and unplanned have the same right to life. We cannot show 
compassion to couples who experience miscarriages but then turn around and say that others 
can legally murder purely for reasons like inconvenience or not being ready to be a mother. This 
is hypocrisy. And if you want to bring up the very classic argument of the life of the mother, 
there are very few reasons that a baby in the third trimester, like is represented in this bill, 
cannot be safely delivered after viability and be given the necessary medical attention needed 
to save their life. 
Every human being that is conceived in our state has value. Whether they are wanted or not 
does not affect their value, and the circumstances surrounding their conception should not 
affect their value either. 
I along with 65% of Mainers urge you to also find value in all unborn babies lives and stand up 
for them who are the future of our state, and our country. 
I would urge you to not allow this unnecessary bill to pass in our state.
