My name is Becky Stephens. l am a lifelong Mainer now living in Waldoboro. 
l have worked virtually all of my adult life in Physical Therapy, and I have heard from 
countless women their own regrets from having made decisions to about their children 
for their own personal reasons. Regrets l wish they did not have. Regrets that cause 
them to shed tears years, in some cases decades, later. I cried with and for them. 
But today l want to talk to you about my own experience. You see my experience and 
similar experiences for many of my friends and family are the excuse being used to 
propose LD1619 in the first place. The excuse that those with medical needs cannot 
have those needs met in Maine. And typical of politicians with less than transparent 
intentions additional language is added to a bill. In this this case to remove viability. To 
remove risk to the mother's health. To remove medical necessity. To remove the 
doctor. 
You see, when l was 23, l found myself pregnant for the 4th time. l had a prior 
miscarriage and two healthy children. My miscarriage "spontaneous abortion" was sad. 
But what l was to go through with this 4th pregnancy was heart-wrenching. My baby 
died. Around 23 weeks gestation. l was given the option to wait for my body to go into 
labor or to seek induction. Some would have you believe without the passing of 
LD1619 what l was offered would be illegal. 
That is a fabrication designed to elicit sympathy for grieving parents who face 
unthinkable circumstances. Misplaced sympathy that will result in atrocities against the 
most vulnerable in our society. 
Not one person looked at my situation as anything but tragic. That is the same 
response for women who have had molar pregnancies and need a DNC or those withA 
ectopic pregnancies who need surgical intervention to save their life while ended the 
viability of a pregnancy. Those circumstances are unimaginable until you are in them. 
And medical advances mean l am alive, not dead from infection. My multiple friends 
who have had ectopic pregnancies are alive and not dead when their fallopian tube 
ruptured. 
LD1619 is not needed. l am alive. Those women are alive. They are here in Maine. 
Their procedures were done in Maine by caring Maine doctors. 
l ask you as a woman. As a mother. As a grandmother. As a healthcare provider. Do 
not sacrifice women and do not sacrifice viable children. 
LD1619 ought not to pass.
