My name is Bethany Pitcher, and I’m a resident of Livermore, Maine. I'm here to testify 
in opposition to LD 1619. 
When I was 17 years old, I graduated from high school a year early, moved out of my parents’ 
home, in with my boyfriend, and started cosmetology school. I had dreams that when I was 
finished with school I would move to New York City to be a makeup artist. Later that year I found 
out I was pregnant. 
I was 17, in an extremely toxic relationship, had absolutely no money, 
and the dreams of my future certainly didn't involve being a teenage 
mother, so according to our current law and the opinion of many people, 
including the first doctor I saw, this would have been a perfectly 
acceptable time to have an abortion. 
About 4 months into my pregnancy, my boyfriend, who already hada 
criminal past, was charged with another crime and we were kicked out 
of our apartment. So now I was pregnant, broke, and homeless. We 
bounced from couch to couch for a while but friends were dwindling as 
not everyone was lining up to be friends with the pregnant teen and her 
criminal boyfriend. Perhaps this would have been an acceptable time to 
have an abortion? After all, the baby was not viable and my situation 
was only getting worse. 
Eventually we found someone willing to rent us an old camper to live in. 
When I was 8.5 months pregnant, I sat in a courthouse, where my 
boyfriend was convicted of a felony and sentenced to jail. I was not 
working at this time, and was completely broke, so I was going to need 
to move out of our tiny camper with my newborn into my sister’s 
basement, alone. 
If this bill had been passed then, at that time I would have been able to decide that 
the terrible circumstances I was in—and they were terrible —was cause enough to 
abort my baby. Never mind thatjust 2 weeks later a healthy, seven pound, twelve 
ounce baby boy was born. A baby that no one would ever dream of harming! Or 
would they? ls that next? If we can abort minutes before we give birth then why not 
minutes after? What is the difference? Perhaps that you can see the baby? Hear 
it? 
That baby's name is Jackson and he is now eighteen-years-old. He is graduating 
from high school next month, he has been on 3 mission trips to Mexico, he is 
certified in welding, and he is running an already successful landscaping business, 
all before graduation. He is also the reason that when my boyfriend got out of jail, 
he committed to changing his life to be the father that Jackson and, later on, our 
second son desen/ed. We will have been married for eighteen years this July. 
Our lives are full of sacrifice and I have had more than my fair share, but not one of 
my sacrifices could hold a candle to the sacrifice that is being proposed —the 
sacrifice of a baby's life. Jackson's life is so incredibly valuable and it always was. 
Vote ought not to pass.
