Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Beth L. Churchill. I am a resident of Milo, Maine, and I am 
here to testify in opposition to LD1619. 
I want to speak to the harm LD1619 poses to women and our future citizens. 
As the summary of this document states,
“ ...this bill removes the criminal penalties for performing an abortion without being licensed asa 
physician, physician assistant or advanced practice registered nurse and for performing an 
abortion after viability of the fetus when it was not necessary for the preservation of the life or 
health of the mother.”' 
As a woman, I shudder to think how this legislation might be abused if it becomes law. 
Removing the consequences from unqualified performers of abortions will remove protections 
that Maine women deserve: to receive reproductive health sen/ices only from qualified health 
providers. 
Without fear of the penalty of the law, who can tell what kinds of harmful situations may arise for 
vulnerable women? Consider women, young or old, trapped in abusive conditions either in 
domestic violent relationships or in sex trafficking. Loosely regulated abortion services will 
provide an open door to allow their abusers to force them to receive procedures they may not 
wish to receive. What would be more convenient for these kinds of abusers than toeliminate the 
inconvenience of a pregnancy without running the risk of their victim coming in contact witha 
mandatory reporter? 
Secondly, LD1619 poses harm to our future citizens. Allowing the abortion of a fetus that has 
reached viability when it is not necessary for the presen/ation of the life of the mother opens the 
door to optional termination of human life. We run the risk of needlessly ending lives that will 
make valuable contributions to our society in the state of Maine. 
Current law in Maine already allows abortion for medical necessity in case of stillbirth and 
ectopic pregnancy. 
Please oppose this unnecessary, drastic bill. Thank you.
