53 >' Windsor Christian Fellowship 
9 Reed Rd. 
Windsor, ME 04363 
207-213-8845 
wcfmaineorg 
WCF 
Good afternoon, 
My name is Brandon Dyer, and I’m a husband, father of four, and pastor of Windsor 
Christian Fellowship i11 the town of Windsor. I’m here today to make clear that our 
congregation, a11d the congregations in our ecclesiastical associations, unreservedly say “no” 
in regard to this bill. 
LD-1619 furthers the unequitable treatment of preborn lives. The wombs of women have 
been turned from a chamber of creation to a chamber of desecration. There is no such thing 
as so-called “abortion care.” There is only murder. It is the intentional taking of life. What 
makes it worse is that it is murder for the sake of political advancement. This is nothing new 
biblically, of course, when you remember the people in power like the Pharaoh in the Old 
Testament and King Herod i11 the New Testament killed the baby boys for political 
purposes. 
The prayer of every true church and Christian is that we’ll one day look back——as a society, a 
state, a nation-and shriek with the horror as we consider the massacre of the preborn. All 
of this is cyclical. How many times are we going to look back with deep regret over what was 
unjustly done to groups of people? Is this not as simple as the famous maxim “those who 
don’t know history are doomed to repeat it?” 
The Germans were willing to decimate jews who were people exactly like them. In our own 
history, \ve’ve been willing to decimate or mistreat Native Americans a11d Africans. In many 
other countries, elected officials or otherwise have been willing to stand by while whole 
groups of people are killed. Abortion follows the simple cyclical pattern of the world: kill the 
people who are not like us. 
And here we are today, deciding whether or not a full-term babies are allowed to be killed. 
Full-term little Mainers. To use a word that has become increasingly popular this all smacks 
of “ageism” of the highest kind. You’re looking at a young life. You know you’re looking at 
young life. And if you think it is okay to destroy such a life, then you now experientially 
know the kind of thinking that led to great atrocities like the holocaust and trail of tears. 
We will all stand before the ]udge,]esus Christ, one day. I am before you today as one with 
the knowledge that I will be judged by Him, and I will be judged for my actions in this 
important moment. You will also be judged by Him. The Bible says he is the judge of the 
just and the unjust. 
Which leads to an important question: will we act justly or unjustly in this critical moment? 
Thank you for your time, and may Christ have mercy.
