Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Bridget Smarr and I am a resident of Houlton, Maine. I am here to express my 
opposition to the proposed bill LD 1619: “An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy 
Laws.” 
I believe there is a lot of deception and confusion surrounding this abortion debate. And the 
answers are not going to be found during a public hearing full of two minute speeches. However, 
I strongly encourage everyone listening to me right now to ask their own questions and do their 
own research about how abortions are done and why the abortion industry has become what it is 
today. As we know, LD 1619 allows for a woman to get an abortion up until the point of birth for 
non-medical reasons. This is vague, and opens the door further for unthinkable things to be done 
under the law. This is an extreme bill that is not necessary. What will it accomplish? It will result 
in the ending of many lives that are just beginning to be experienced. Lives of babies that havea 
heartbeat, and that move their arms and legs and ﬁngers. Babies that can suck their thumbs, and 
that are developing at insanely fast rates. Babies at this stage of a pregnancy are viable—which in 
plain terms is—they can live outside the womb. How then, does a 40 week old fetus differ froma 
newborn? Location. 
Whether or not babies can feel pain has long been debated. However, the science commonly 
points to the fact that babies can feel pain beyond 20-24 weeks of pregnancy. That is the stage of 
pregnancy we are talking about here. I hope we can at least all agree that it is inhumane to put an 
innocent being through this pain for the sake of “ending a pregnancy. ” For what cause are these 
lives ended? Convenience? Women’s rights‘? Future plans? Emotions? Scientiﬁc 
experimentation? Population control? Fewer single mothers? Society has come up with many 
reasons, but I am sorry; they will not convince me. And they should not convince you either. 
I ask you: please oppose this bill.
