Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Bruce Blakney, and I am a resident of Washbum, Maine. I am here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
I oppose LD 1619 because life is valuable. Life is too precious to throw away for any 
reason at any time. And when we cheapen life, society pays a high price. Every child in 
the womb has promise and potential and purpose. Who are we to take that away from 
them? 
I oppose LD 1619 because it is unthinkable. It is unthinkable that we would make 
abortion legal right up to the time of birth and for any reason. A mother may be having 
a really bad day, full of fear and doubts about having their child. They don’t need a way 
out, they need encouragement, reassurance and hope to give birth to their baby. 
Afterward, without exception, they are so glad they did. 
I oppose LD 1619 because it is wrong. It is just plain wrong to take the life of a viable 
human being, a life ﬁlled with potential and promise. To take that life away for any 
reason, at any time is just plain wrong. I have never testiﬁed for or against any bill 
before today, but LD 1619 is far too important, I could not keep silent. The lives of 
hundreds, even thousands of babies are at stake and I do not want their blood on my 
hands. That is why I am testifying today. 
It says in the Bible, in Deuteronomy 30:19, “I call heaven and earth as witnesses today 
against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore 
choose life, that both you and your descendants may live.” 
My wife’s grandmother was advised by her doctor to abort her ﬁrst baby in 1942. He 
said both she and her baby would certainly die in childbirth. But her grandmother 
refused and said I will take my chances. Because she chose life, my mother-in-law was 
born, and to her four children, and to them ten grandchildren, and to them eighteen 
great-grandchildren. And just this weekend one of those great- grandchildren was 
honored in Lewiston as Tech Student of the Year from Caribou High School, all 
because Sal1y’s grandmother chose life. 
I am asking you, please choose life. Please vote ought not to pass.
