April 28, 2023 
RE: Testimony in Opposition of LD1619 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Carla Caron, and I am a resident of Winslow. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LD1619. 
My family has experienced the devastating results of an abortion. Not only have I losta 
grandchild, I nearly lost my daughter. A month and a half after having an abortion, my daughter, believing it was her menstrual cycle, developed excruciating pain and severe 
bleeding. She was rushed to the hospital by ambulance and underwent a procedure to 
remove the tissue from an incomplete abortion. 
The truth is, a baby in utero is a living human being. From 24-40 weeks a child is viable, 
can hiccup and respond to touch and sound. It is reprehensible to me to think 
that anyone could thoughtfully take the life of this unborn child. 
Many times these decisions are being made under duress. Fear is a motivating factor in 
the choice to terminate a pregnancy. What is the quickest and easiest way out of this 
situation? Days, months, and years later, remorse will come. Accountability will 
befall these beautiful women. All human life is valuable. Whether we agree with 
the choices of others or not, this discussion is not about “my body, my choice.” 
At 24-40 weeks gestation, this is about the life of a tiny and beautiful human being. 
State—of-the-art medical advances now enable, in some cases, lifesaving 
intervention for both mother and baby in utero. Sometimes this intervention 
is covered under insurance. Why would such an effort be made to bring these 
advancements to fruition if a child is just a mass of tissue until delivered? How can one 
say that a baby that responds by kicking or turning to your reading, singing, or rubbing 
your belly is not alive? I’ve used my pregnant belly as a table for 
my tea cup and saucer and my unborn daughter kicked the saucer and it fell off. 
As members of the governing authority over the people of Maine, you are 
responsible for the bills introduced and made into law. What you allow to be 
voted on and made into law you become accountable to and for. It no longer 
rests solely on the individuals of our state and the choices they make, but upon 
the lawmakers who have brought the bill forward and passed these laws and 
made them acceptable. 
Please vote ought not to pass.
