Testimony for LD1619 
May 1, 2023 
Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Cathy Mullaney and l ama 
resident of Falmouth. l am here to testify in opposition to LD1619 and LD 776 and LD1343. 
Rhetorically speaking, l’m going to ask a few questions: 
Do you believe in science’? The facts of science are clear. Each human life begins at 
fertilization. What is being considered here today is unthinkable. We're talking about killing 
that human being inside the womb at any point within the 9 months. The womb should be the 
safest place for a baby. We know it’s a baby and you know it’s a baby or you wouldn’t be 
wanting to kill it. Do you want to be responsible for killing a baby? Your vote in favor of this bill 
would confirm this. With that fact, abortion is murder. Have you ever watched an abortion? I 
urge you to do your homework and watch an abortion. You will watch the baby try to move 
away from the pain. Have you ever listened to a woman that has had an abortion? l’m sure 
you would hear her grief that she lives with the rest of her life. 
Do you believe in laws? l would think so since your job is making laws. There is a law on the 
books that murder is punished by law. That should include a human being inside or outside 
the womb. 
Do you believe in God? God gave us only 10 Commandments to live in union with Him. He 
must have thought this one was important enough to make the top ten. You shall not murder. 
He meant no one could take the life of another. if you vote for this bill, you are allowing murder. 
God gave us Ten commandments so that no one could claim to be ignorant of right and wrong. 
l hope you will-listen to your conscience. You know it is wrong. K 
Let us defend and protect those who have a voice but cannot be heard, has limbs but cannot 
defend itself, has a beating heart but knows only love and knows enough to move away from 
the pain of the abortionists sharp tool. 
Do you believe in options? Many couples would love to adopt a newborn baby. This option is 
more humane, more reasonable. Let us live as Godly people and remember that life is sacred 
and killing is a violation of the order God intended. I pray that your heart and mind be infused 
with the truth. 
Thank you. 
Please vote ought not to pass.
