Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. 
My name is Christine Duffy, and I am a resident of Damariscotta. I am here to testify in 
opposition to LDl6l9. 
A number of years ago, Scott Peterson was found guilty of the murder of his pregnant wife, Lacy 
and their unborn child. He was convicted of a DOUBLE murder - the child, Conor, was 
considered a full human being. He too, was murdered. Murder is a punishable crime. 
lt is very easy to dismiss abortion as a simple solution to a difficult problem. It is not. 
Fifty years ago, when Roe vs. Wade was decided, we did not know the exact progression and 
development of the fetus. Now we do. What was once merely a blob on a screen now, 
thanks to technology, can be clearly seen as the awesome development of the growing fetus, at 
various stages of growth. After only a month or so, a child is almost fully formed and 
recognizable as a tiny human being. And it has been determined that even a young fetus 
recognizes its mothers voice, responds to outside stimuli, and feels pain. The infant FEELS 
pain. 
How in good conscience then, could we even consider Killing this young, beginning life? 
What has happened to us? How did we come to this awful place where killing an innocent 
child is acceptable? .S
. 
The ﬁrst thing physicians are taught in Medical School is "do no harm.” Do we ask our 
physicians to turn their backs on all they know in the name of an easy solution — which is 
neither easy nor a solution. Abortion causes irreparable harm as it is not natural to kill one’s 
own ﬂesh and blood. lt is not a solution. It is there forever; the guilt, the pain, the shame— 
sometimes later in life, but always there, always. 
Thou shalt not kill. Who gives us this right to kill? Our government when ﬁrst founded, was 
founded "under God” reﬂecting the Judeo/Christian values of the Ten Commandments — 
murder was not acceptable. 
And now in the state of Maine, we are asking our legislative body for the right to murder these 
defenseless little ones without penalty at any time during pregnancy. What has happened to 
us? Why do we not instead, consider restraint, adoption, or even, the morning after pill - but 
not outright murder. 
Please... do not vote for LD l6l9. Please vote ”ought not to pass."
