“Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Cyndy Brown 
and I am a resident of Bangor. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 
1619." Thank you for this opportunity. 
Laws regarding abortion have continually been evolving since 1973, 
when abortion first became legalized in the United Sates. I remember 
that particular January, 1973, because I was a freshman at the 
University of Maine. I found myself pregnant in March of that year, 
afraid to tell my parents and end my college aspirations, I decided to 
seek an abortion. 
I called to make an appointment at an abortion clinic in Brunswick. 
During the course of the conversation, I was told that caregivers would 
not perform an abortion after eight weeks of pregnancy because they 
believed fetal development had progressed too far to terminate the 
pregnancy. Many young women, including myself, believed that abortion 
was a viable option. That was then. This is now. 
As we all know since the 70's, knowledge about fetal development has 
grown exponentially revealing every stage very clearly for us, from 
inception to birth. This knowledge makes us more accountable about 
the decisions we make regarding the unborn. We have all heard the 
phrase, “If I had known then what I know now." 
Right or wrong, the law, as it stands right now, allows a woman to 
terminate her pregnancy for many reasons, including saving her life. 
That is her right. But LD 1619 legalizes an unacceptable radical 
extreme. With this law, an infant can go through all the stages of fetal 
development only to be euthanized when birth is imminent.There has to 
be a iimit, a standard, where we say enough is enough. This is wrong 
and legally allows the unthinkable to happen to a fully developed baby, 
who could survive outside the womb with help.
Please reconsider your stance on this bill. This is not what Mainers 
want. I have never testified before, but my heart tells me this is nota 
good decision to make for the state of Maine.
