Senate Chair, Anne Carney, House Chair Matt Moonen and Honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee. 
My name is Cynthia Dunphy, and I am here to testify against LD 1619, LD 776, and LD 1343. 
The Abortion Rights in Maine already provide abortion on demand, at any time, without a1 
medical reason until a baby reaches viability. Late term abortions can be performed if deemed 
medically necessary for the health of the mother. 
The Supreme Court decision overturning the landmark Roe v. Wade decision on June 24"‘, 
2022, has little to no impact on access to abortions in Maine. Women’s access to abortion was 
and is guaranteed by law that was already in place before this decision. 
Why does this bill make a change for an abortion to be performed after viability of an infant to 
when a licensed physician determines that it is necessary instead of when it is necessary to 
preserve the life or health of the mother? Doctors are not one hundred percent accurate in their 
diagnosis. I know of a mother who was told to abort her twins, or she would die. She would not 
\\o~9 his advice and her girls were born healthy, and she did not die. 
What has been proposed in LD l6l9 has expanded the termination of a baby’s life at any 
stage of development including birth. It simply creates a law that would strip babies of ALL 
protections in the womb. A baby has a chance of survival at 24 weeks if the pregnancy is 
terminated so what happens to these babies that are capable of life outside the womb? Are they 
disposed of like garbage‘? Are their bodies dissected and sold? These are tiny human beings 
whose rights were terminated. Their dignity, importance and humanity should not be ignored. 
One of reason for passing abortion laws were to protect women from seeking an abortion 
from unqualiﬁed abortion providers. But now the criminal penalties for performing an abortion 
without being licensed as a physician, physician assistant or advanced practice registered nurse 
will have no criminal penalties. An unlicensed abortion provider most likely will not have access 
to hospitals or medical clinics if something goes wrong. How is this looking out for the welfare 
of these women? 
Thank you for allowing me to testify. Please vote _l§lQ on these critical bills.
