lli°i !*.lmlir>ila .~’l\i;iox iiiori 
Testimony on LD1619 
“Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Dan Church and l am a resident of Lewiston. I am here to testify in opposition to LDl619. 
I believe that all people are made in the image of God and thus worthy of dignity, respect, life and love. This is 
the foundation for all universal human rights and so it is for the protection ofunborn baby boys and unborn 
baby girls. Abortion at any time for any reason is wrong because abortion is the deliberate murder of unborn 
babies and thus abortion should be outlawed entirely. 
Jesus said, do not hinder the children to come to me which of course referred to the children right there. But 
obviously, how much more does He say that to babies who are still in the womb? 
There is not one amendment to this bill that would make this bill better; unlike baby boys and baby girls who 
arekllled, this bill should be dead on arrival instead. Moreover, for a state and its political representatives to 
talk about the need to bring younger people to Maine for life and work, its a rather strange strategy to kill off 
the youngest of them all. But that is what you get when we abandon the love and truth of God and His word. 
Our society is a culture of death - looking to kill the most vulnerable - the unborn and the elderly - and you call 
it progress. 
In addition, by removing penalties for unlicensed abortionist, you add insult to injury by placing more mothers 
in danger. You once feared back alley abortions - now your legislation makes those all but certain. All fora 
vote, or for a future political opportunity or for the support from the likes of Planned Parenthood. This bill 
does not help moms and dads plan for parenthood - it kills the great blessing and responsibility of families. 
The Good news is that anyone who repents of supporting this legislation and/or taking part in abortion will be 
forgiven by God because of the death of His Son on the Cross and His resurrection. There is forgiveness to be 
had by placing yourtrust in Jesus as Lord and Savior. 
Please vote, “out Not to pass” on LD1619, thank you.
