Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee; my name is 
Dana Peirce and I live in Yannouth, Maine. 
On January 25th, 2019, I was 32 weeks pregnant with my son Cameron. That morning, my 
husband and I, along with our 3 year old daughter, went to what we expected to be a routine 
ultrasound in a normal pregnancy. The foremost thought in my mind was that I would get some 
new pictures of Cameron——the last had been from his anatomy scan at 20 weeks, which was 
normal. 
However, the scan that day showed that Cameron had lethal skeletal dysplasia, the result ofa 
random, rare genetic mutation. It is lethal because babies With this condition cannot breathe 
outside the womb—their rib cages are too small. He also had healed fractures throughout his 
body, and his femur was broken.- 
Cameron was suffering, and he faced death by suffocation if he survived delivery. I still cannot 
adequately express the intensity of anguish and grief that my husband and I felt in those 
moments. But I must emphasize that my strongest thoughts were that I would not let my son 
suffer any longer than he already had. 
Unfortunately, our grief was then compounded by Maine’s current law, which b8.I11'l6d my doctors 
from providing the care they recommended. My husband and I had to ﬂy across the country and 
pay $25,000 cash in order to end our son’s suffering, while also incurring the costs of travel, 
lodging, and missed work. The majority of Mainers do not have such ﬁnancial resources. 
Mine was a very sad situation made much worse by Maine’s current law. Today, you have an 
opportunity to make sure no other Maine families have to go through what mine did. 
Everyone deserves safe, legal, compassionate, affordable healthcare and support throughout 
pregnancy. Abortion for any reason is a deeply personal decision, one that should be left to 
pregnant people and their medical team.' 
There is no way to legislate every instance of every pregnancy and account for what each family 
needs. I’m sharing my story with you today because I want to reduce the harm and suffering our 
current laws force upon women who ﬁnd themselves in situations like I did. 
Please join me in trusting and empowering women to make ethical, loving decisions for their 
own bodies and lives. Please support both LD 1619 and LD 1343. Thank you.
