Darcy Good 
7 Rousseau Steet 
Winslow, ME 04901 
lightyourpathi 6@gmail.com 
Against LD 1619 
An Act To Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Darcy Good 
and l am a resident of Winslow. l oppose LD 1619. Thank you for the 
opportunity to address the committee. 
When we have the view that our fellow humans are disposable, we 
are not evolving, we’re devolving. Abortion has always been and will 
always be a Pandora’s Box. Every time we raise the limits, we lower 
the bar. For 50 years we’ve had limits on abortion, and now we want 
to lower the bar some more. l shudder to think about the 
consequences. 
Kermit Gosnell performed thousands of abortions, including illegal 
late-term abortions for 30 years while our government institutions 
looked the other way. The abortion laws set the bar low, and Gosnell 
violated many laws without repercussions. 
lf people truly understood the process of abortion, it is possible they 
would change their beliefs about abortion and especially late-term 
abortion. The jurors in the Gosnell trial listened to doctors who 
explained all aspects of the abortion process. They also saw 
photographs of the aborted babies. Sarah Glinski and Joe Carroll, 
two of the jurors, told ABC News that seeing the photographs of the 
babies was a turning point for them. “lt was disturbing because the 
babies were so big” , they said.
By the end of the Gosnell trial, prosecutors, several journalists, and 
even Gosnell’s own lawyer experienced changes of heart and mind. 
Not all of them ended up in the pro-life camp, but almost everyone 
emerged from the Gosnell trial more skeptical about abortion than 
when they started. This change was probably because for the first 
time they heard about the reality of abortion from experts under oath 
The witnesses may have been lobbyists or pundits or ideologues or 
all three, but they were not allowed to be such in court. They had to 
tell the truth, and they had to tell it in detail. 
How does this story apply to LD 1619? As the people in the 
courtroom of the Gosnell trial found out: abortion is a gruesome act, 
especially late-term. There is so much more to this story, and I fear if 
the bill becomes law the Gosnell atrocities will happen again but will 
be much worse. 
And last but not least, my sister had an abortion when she wasa 
teenager. She is 68 and has suffered life—long guilt over her abortion. 
Whether you know it or not, you come in contact with people 
everyday who have been negatively affected by abortion. 
Thank you for your consideration, and l urge this committee to vote 
ought not to pass on L.D. 1619. 
Source: Gosnell: The Untold Story of America’s Most Prolific Serial 
Killer , by Ann McElhinney and Phelim McAleer
