Senators, Representatives, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Deborah Gallant and I reside in Belfast. 
I am here to testify with respect to LD 1619 and urge you to deeply consider the morality and 
alarming graveness of such a reality and ask you to vote "Ought NOT to Pass”. 
Certainly, most women possess the innate knowledge and ability to make the righteous choice 
regarding the precious miracle of burgeoning life in their hands. 
And if not, should abortion truly be considered a form of birth control simply because 
pregnancy is not convenient? That said, I fully comprehend the exception of traumatic 
experiences involving rape, incest, and the like. 
I do not speak to any of this lightly. I express these thoughts because of my own lived 
experiences. At two different ages and stages of my life, 28 and more recently at age 46, I was 
pregnant, (married and not married respectively). Simply put, while facing seemingly 
insurmountable emotions, challenges, hardships and initial lack of support and resources, I 
chose life, despite the timing, ‘inconvenience ’ and the massive unknown. 
As it turned out, in both cases I raised my children as a working single parent. I'm STILL 
parenting in real-time, as my youngest daughter is 16 years old and I am now 62. The details 
regarding the involvement of my childrens' fathers are irrelevant as l make a point. My main 
point is that I took moral responsibility for my actions. And surely the option of adoption could 
have been the other choice, but not for me. 
Reflecting on the past 35 years of sobering reality, maturation, responsibility and doing the 
right thing, I have been immeasurably blessed and have deeply grown as a person. I am proud 
of the conscious human and parent that I have come to be. And I highly encourage all— 
pregnant women themselves, spouses, parents, grandparents, friends, sisters, brothers, aunts, 
uncles, strangers, and political representatives, to support and uplift pregnant women so that 
they can make informed choices, moral choices and seek the best outcomes for the support 
and enrichment of their unborn children. 
Additionally, I find the notion of expanded abortion in Maine to be utterly disgusting, immoral 
and nothing for the great State of Maine to be proud of.
