Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Dennis Arbour and I am a resident of China, Maine. l am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
There are numerous, valid reasons to vote NO on LD 1619. Here are some considerations with respect 
to choice and the unborn human being. 
About Choice:" 
Women have a right to choice, a choice to have sex and to become a mother. This is where the 
choice is made. 
Once pregnant, the woman is a mother whether she wants to be or not. The choice becomes if 
she will naturally take the baby to term or end its life. 
Once delivered, the woman can make the choice to keep the baby or give it up for adoption. 
Abortion itself is not personal or private since it involves the life of another person and becomes 
the concern of a decent society. 
The argument for abortion is based mostly on utility, that is, whatever brings momentary 
happiness or relief as the best action to take. Abortion is a dangerous approach to a society who 
seeks to be moral and just to the weak and needy. Especially late-term abortion. 
If choice is of critical importance, shouldn't a man have the choice to rape a woman if they want 
to, l mean, it’s his body to do as he pleases? But wait, don’t we have to account for the harm 
done to another human being? Of course, and the same goes for abortion. The reality is we 
have all sorts of laws that limit choice to do what we want with our bodies: exposing ourselves, 
public urination, prostitution, trespassing, etc to name a few. ln a civilized society we weigh what 
we can do with our bodies against the good or harm they bring to others or society. 
Are The Unborn Human? 
If it’s growing, it’s alive 
if it has human parents, it’s human 
Human beings like us are valuable, we have intrinsic value simply because we are human 
It may be small and not fully developed but still a living, growing human organism with its own 
DNA 
And if it's not human, I ask you what species is it? 
Unborn babies are human beings, there is no denying that. 
We can therefore logically and rightfully conclude that abortion is the killing of an innocent human 
life. 
Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason is too extreme for Maine. This bill would allow a baby that could 
survive outside the womb to be killed. Unborn babies (human beings) will become the most publicized 
and targeted species in the State for being killed. The young of far lesser species such as birds, reptiles 
and even bats are more valued and protected than humans. What does that say about our state of 
Maine?
Additional written testimony. 
o Humans are on a binary spectrum, as human, as a toddler, as a teenager, as a fetus. None are 
any more human than the other. 
0 (S) size How big does a toddler need to become to be human 
0 (L) level of development: brain development, are those with less brain development say <25 
years old less human? Or those with 
o (E) environment: where they reside doesn’t make them less human. In the womb is where they 
belong at their age. Don't lose the right to live because of where you reside. 
0 (D) dependence: born people dependent, elderly or disabled are not less human because of their 
dependence on others. 
Those of us testifying against this bill are people of good will. Despite how you seek to character 
assassinate us, you know who we are and what we stand for. This is a grave offense against us all as 
human beings. Our goal is to change hearts to that of love. Love for human life. Love for moms, dads 
and their babies. You underestimate the power of love, and God who is love, to love those babies 
regardless of the challenges they currently have, will have or challenges the moms and dads may face. 
You underestimate the power of prayer. Roe is no longer the law not because of all the politics, but 
because of the power of prayer. 
Maine would have one of the most extreme abortion laws in the entire country. This bill would stigmatize 
Maine residents as living in a pagan state. Late term abortion is barbaric, horrific, and unconscionable. lt 
is an ancient pagan practice used to hide illicit promiscuous relationships. This is not progressive but 
rather a perfect storm for pimps, prostitution, human traffickers and satanists. All of whom we want to rid 
our state of. 
There is much talk on other issues by Democrats about following the science. There is lots of science 
about the beginning of human life. FACT: It begins at conception. Abortion is the direct, intentional killing 
of a human being. lt’s not a rock, it‘s not a plant, it’s not a parasite. If left in its natural environment of the 
womb, the unborn baby will grow, just like my two-year-old granddaughter continues to grow in HER 
natural environment. Killing the innocent, unborn child is intrinsically evil on its face. There is no 
explanation or situation you can put forth to conclude taking innocent life is good. 
You know how horrified people are about mass shootings? We love the child of that horrible crime as 
much as we love the unborn child killed by abortion. We mourn the death of both where one is killed bya 
deranged stranger and the other is intentionally killed by his mother and her doctor. 
I challenge each of you to replace the word “abortion ” or “terminate a pregnancy ” with the words, “direct 
and intentional killing of the innocent human life" . Let’s all be bold, honest and call it what it is. lt 
becomes squarely offensive to human beings all if you see it as it is. Just as society would protect the life
of a mother (a human being) if someone tried to kill her, so society should protect the life of an unborn 
baby (human being) if someone tried to kill her. 
Those seeking this bill be passed see many who want to vote it down as extreme Christian zealots. We 
have foundational principles and at its heart is love. Love for all human beings created in the image and 
likeness of God who is Love. We love wildly. An extreme love. An agape love, selﬂess love. 
l ask that you vote NO on LD 1619 and associated bills with this hearing.
