Dorian March 1619 
l-lello my name Dorian l\/larch and l'm here to give my reasoning for why the 
statehouse should not pass LDt6’l9 
Abortion is already horrific act committed against the most vulnerable members of 
our society these are defenseless people who don't know why they are being 
killed. The latter it gets the worse it is, after 25 weeks a baby can feel pain and the 
baby developing rapidly at 29 weeks its about the size of butternut squash at 34 
weeks the baby is about the size of the cantaloupe. These children are much more 
formed than what you imagine. A popular form of late term abortion is quite 
literally dismemberment of the child what i am about to read is from a former 
practicer of this butchery Anthony Levtio describing the procedure to the US 
house of representatives 
[With suction complete, look for your Sopher clamp. This instrument is about 
thirteen inches long and made of stainless steel, At the business end are iocated 
jaws about 2 ’l/2 inches long and about 3/4 on an inch wide with rows of sharp 
ridges or teeth] 
...This instrument is for grasping and crushing tissue. When it gets hold of 
something, it does not let go. A second trimester D&E abortion is a blind 
procedure. The baby can be in any orientation or position inside the uterus. Picture 
yourself reaching in with the Sopher clamp and grasping anything you can. At 
twenty—four weeks gestation, the uterus is thin and soft so be careful not to 
perforate or puncture the walls. Once you ha\/e grasped something inside, 
squeeze on the clamp to set the jaws and pull hard - really hard. You feel 
something let go and out pops a fully formed leg about six inches long. Reach in 
again and grasp whatever you can. Set the jaw and pull really hard once again and 
out pops an arm about the same length. Reach in again and again with that clamp 
and tear out the spine, intestines, heart and lungs. 
This state is already practicing systemic genocide of our young I am urging us not 
to take this a step further and kill more children especially those who can feel the 
dismemberment being done to them thank you
