Testimony against LD 1619: 
From: 
Douglas Dodge 
577 Church Hill Road 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Hello everyone, and thank you for taking time to hear my heart on this 
proposed abortion law. 
My name is Doug Dodge. l’m the pastor of Centerpoint Community 
Church in Waterville. And this beautiful girl is my daughter Adaya Dodge. 
My wife and l have three birth children and four adopted children, all 
incredibly precious to us. 
When we started adopting medically needy children, there were things we 
thought we could handle and things we thought we couldn’t. Our first 
medically needy daughter was born with methadone in her system. We 
had to put a liquid form of the drug in her bottle to slowly wean her from it 
so she wouldn’t suffer withdrawal symptoms. lt took six months, but she 
was free of the paralyzing, painful affects of the addiction. 
Our next child came from a drug abuse situation as well. The call came like 
this. “We have a child just born here with no elbows, no knees, his feet 
bend backwards so his toes touch his heels, and his hands bend 
backwards too. He also has dysmorphic features. Would you come down 
and see if this would be a good fit?” lt turned out he had Arthrogryposis, 
and they were quite certain he would never walk. But when we went down 
to the hospital, and held that little beautiful boy, all we saw was our son. 
We fell immediately in love. And have been ever since! And he walks; runs 
even! He’s a typical 10 year old boy who amazingly makes the 
adjustments he needs to to do tasks that come naturally to most...he finds 
a way! 
Our youngest of this trio of medically needy children was this wonderful 
daughter of mine. We were told there was a 10 month old (born at 30 
weeks) with developmental delay that needed immediate attention. Later, 
she would be diagnosed with cerebral palsy. Her diagnosis seemed far 
outside our comfort zone, and exactly what we had said going in to this 
process, that we didn't want. It would change everything. The wheelchair. 
The constant care. The feeding tube (which is still how she eats the 
majority of her food). How do we communicate? But we went. And God
dropped this unbelievable treasure in our laps. lt did change everything. 
For the better! We fell so in love with this HIGHLY communicative, deeply 
emotional daughter who has an amazing sense of humor and whose smile 
brings joy to everyone who meets her! 
About a year ago, Adaya was sitting on my lap watching a movie with me. 
She can eat small bits of solid food, and we were sharing popcorn. She 
started choking. l tried everything. Her two eyes went in different 
directions. We called 911, praying to God we wouldn’t lose her! The 
ambulance got there pretty quickly, but it had been a long time to not be 
breathing. They felt (as did my wife) that it was a seizure. I had to watch 
them take my girl away in an ambulance with my wife, because Covid 
restrictions allow only one parent to go. l prayed and cried as I waited for 
news, thinking l could possibly lose her. Some of the worst hours of my 
life. lt was a seizure. Praise God, she recovered. 
But this child, who brought so much into my life that l initially thought l 
didn’t want, was almost taken from me. And it would have completely 
devastated me. l see the incredible value in who she is, who she was 
created to be. 
This bill allows parents to terminate their own child, based on things they 
fear will drastically alter their life. And in a panic, and in complete 
ignorance (because they haven’t even met the child yeti), they would be 
aided in making the most heart-breaking and irreversible decision of their 
life. They are allowed to deem the child simply not worth it. My child, by 
this bill’s standard, does not deserve to live unless someone is willing to 
put up with what’s “wrong” with her. But they will miss everything that’s 
RIGHT about her! 
My Savior, my Lord Jesus, did not consider me “inconvenient ” or 
“unworthy of saving” . In fact, He did just the opposite. The one that 
created me saw that l had broken things in my life, so He laid down His life 
for me! He gave up everything for me, rather than giving up on me. He has 
called me to do the same, and l have found the greatest joy and purpose 
in doing so!
