Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: My 
name is Eric Perkins, and I’m a resident of Orrington. I’m here 
to testify in opposition to LD 1619. I am very concerned with 
the plan to change Maine abortion laws to allow the termination 
of babies up until the moment of birth. The most logical 
argument for this change is to prevent harm to the mother’s 
health or mental wellbeing in the case of rape. According to the 
Guttmacher Institute ’s survey from 2004, only 7% of abortions 
were due to fetal/maternal health problems, and less than 0.5% 
of abortions were cases of pregnancy from rape. This means 
more than 92% of abortions had nothing to do with medical 
necessity. 
I am a registered nurse in this state, and I disagree with the 
claim that abortion is healthcare. No one would undergo a 
procedure that ensured half of the people involved would die. As 
a nurse, I have spent more than 20 years in the medical field. In 
that time, I have seen professionals ﬁghting to save lives, and 
patients and their families hoping and praying for better health 
and more time together. This is the only situation that argues for 
less life and more death. The idea is outright inhumane. 
I know some would say as a man I don’t have as much ofa 
right to speak, or my opinion isn’t as important. However, I do 
have a perspective that should be heard. I am the father of three 
precious daughters. I was the father of a little one who never 
made it to birth. I would have been the father of an adopted son 
if that plan had been successful. I felt the weight and joy of 
fatherhood when I saw their ultrasounds. While I could never 
know what it feels like to carry an unborn life, I saw the joy, 
excitement, and hope for the future every time, in my wife’s 
face. I also saw her despair with our miscarriage and failed 
adoption. Why were we so affected by these little ones, and 
those who rally to abort more babies are not? I would say it 
comes down to valuing life. Those that want the right for any 
mother to kill a perfectly healthy and viable baby are declaring 
those children are disposable. We as a society cannot allow this 
to happen. We cannot choose whether someone dies based on 
someone else’s opinion of their worth. We have seen this play
out in history, and it is always horriﬁc. All life is sacred. 
Ultimately, this appears to be based not on the desire of the 
people of Maine, but rather on the wicked desire for political 
clout by our Governor and some lawmakers who support her. 
Please, do not do this. History will judge us harshly if we choose 
to kill the innocent. If you are at all interested in bringing an end 
to the lack of civility and disregard for human life in our society, 
I implore you to start here. Protect the unborn! Protect the 
innocent! Do not abandon your humanity! Please vote ought not 
to pass.
