Eva Birk
Georgetown
LD 1343
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
my name is Eva Birk, I am 36 years old and live in Georgetown, Maine. Today I am a
mother, the breadwinner for my family and I have a career that I love in the U.S. 
Department of Transportation. Today I am looking back at my choice to wait to have 
a baby. 
After leaving Medomak Valley high school in Waldoboro, Maine, and entering 
college I struggled with balancing a fulfilling career, taking care of myself financially,
and reaching a goal I knew I always wanted -- to start a family. I made the choice to 
wait. I graduated magna cum laude in my college class, did a year of service in 
Americorps, then went back for a graduate degree. I served as a research fellow for 
several years before I got my first ""real"" job representing the construction industry 
in Washington DC. Even then, I knew that with over 100k in school debt, I needed to 
wait. I knew that for me, I personally could not start a family until I was confident I 
could support that family as the sole breadwinner if need be. Call me 
overly-independent, but that was my choice. Being self-reliant and able to take care of
myself is a core part of who I am. 
Last January, my husband and I welcomed baby Emma at Midcoast hospital in 
Brunswick. She came a few weeks later than expected and with a difficult, expensive 
birth. She came into a stable home with a mother who is the breadwinner and a father 
who is a mariner that works part time so he can take care of her. She has all the baby 
clothes, gadgets, and care she needs BECAUSE we waited. Access to abortion is THE
key part of my story that allowed me to wait. Access to abortion allowed me to pursue
this path for myself without fear, without shame and without regret. Baby Emma 
came at the exact right time for us. People need to be able to start a family when they 
decide it’s right for them, which means being able to decide not to start a family when
it’s not right for them. If you want future Maine parents to have access to the same 
path I did, then please, vote Ought to Pass on LD 1619 and LD 1343, and protect the 
choice to wait. 

