Hello, 
My name is Garrick Hoffman and l’m an Auburn resident and lifelong Mainer. Thank you for holding this 
public hearing. 
Members of the Judiciary Committee, I exhort you - vehemently - to reject bill LD1619. In my 
estimation, this bill is so self-evidently extreme that l’m frankly amazed l’m even here speaking before 
you to oppose such depravity. N0 reasonable person would support such extreme legislation, including 
the majority of Mainers, because any reasonable person would recognize why it's extreme to allow 
abortion - the termination of an innocent human being in the womb - up to nine months, for any reason, 
just because a doctor gave it the stamp of approval.' 
Advocates of LD1619 might argue that the bill is designed to “support women.” 
I am not convinced. 
Conversely, LD1619 is a moral abomination masquerading as a law designed to “support women” 
by allowing them to abort their unborn baby - yes, a baby; not a fetus, not a “clump of cells,” which are 
essentially euphemistic terms commonly used to conveniently dehumanize a an unborn human and to 
rationalize and justify killing it - late in the pregnancy just because her doctor approved or suggested it. 
Consequently, the bill effectively gives doctors moral carte blanche to make extreme decisions 
just because the law and their Phds give them permission to do so, for any reason. 
That is nothing short of a depraved scenario. 
Not only does abortion frequently harm women - the trauma from an abortion, the regret from 
abortion, complications (or even death) from abortion - but it harms future women. 
Considering the sex of the baby can be discovered quite early in pregnancy - determined via 
ultrasound by as early as 14 weeks, according to Healthline.com - and bill LD1619 allows for an abortion 
up to 36 weeks, it begs the question: how many future girls & women will this bill allow to be killed in the 
womb? 
l’d like to pivot a bit and say that anyone in this room who uses an Apple product has one 
because the founder’s parents weren't able to get an abortion. Steve Jobs was no pillar of morality or 
virtue (nor was he a woman, of course), but he was a pioneer, innovator, visionary, and leader. When 
Jobs‘ mother was pregnant with him, she and her boyfriend sought an abortion, but in the consen/ative 
area of California where they lived in the 1950s, they were unable to. They put Jobs - an “unwanted ” 
baby - up for adoption. He went on to become the founder and CEO of Apple, the chairman and visionary 
of Pixar, and a loving father, husband, and friend. He changed the lives of billions of people around the 
world, many of whom are in this room right now. 
When Jobs was a grown man, he met his biological mother. In his biography by Walter lsaacson, 
he said, “I wanted to meet my biological mother mostly to see if she was okay and to thank her, because 
l’m glad I didn't end up as an abortion. ” 
Again, with this in mind, it begs the question: How many future girls and women, how many future 
mothers, sisters, daughters, wives; how many future female leaders, pioneers, visionaries, innovators, 
will this bill allow to be killed in the womb, ostensibly to “support women”? 
I implore you to reject bill LD1619, and I thank you for your time.
