Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
State House, Room 438 
May 1, 2023 
LD 1619: “An Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws" 
Senator Carney, Representative l\/loonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Gary Foster and l am from the Town of Gray. i stand before you in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
As with all of you, I am able to be here because I was not the victim of an abortion, for 
which i thank God and good parents. 
Current Maine statutes allow for the termination of an unborn child, even in late term if the 
health or life of the baby or mother is at risk. 
LD 1619 allows for any child to be terminated at any time up to delivery by eliminating the 
special circumstances that permit ending the life of a late term baby, leaving it up to the 
opinion of a physician. Even if it is deemed "necessary" to end an unborn child's life, that 
should have been determined long before a pregnancy approached full term. 
l read the story of a couple who were missionaries, serving in The Philippines in the 1980's. 
in 1987 the woman contracted amoebic dysenteiy from contaminated water and was 
treated with high doses of antibiotics. When it was learned that she was pregnant, doctors 
stopped the drugs, but said the high doses of drugs likely damaged the fetus and 
recommended abortion. Being a Christian couple they could not end a life and refused. 
She delivered a malnourished, but otherwise healthy baby. That baby is today an athletic, 
mature adult with a passion for pursuing his ambitions. His name is Tim Tebow. So evena 
physician's opinion may not always be the right decision, and particularly when it comes to 
this bill where there is no stipulation for special circumstances "necessary" to end the life of 
a child in late term. 
The other issue I have with this bill is eliminating the penalty if an unqualified person 
performs an abortion. Though the qualifications of a person who may perform an abortion 
remain unchanged, there is no deterrent for any person to attempt the procedure. l can't 
believe any rational, thinking person would consider this a good idea. 
Though l value life as a gift from our Creator, and do not support the termination of an 
unborn life, l urge the committee to oppose this bill, and allow the current law to remain as 
is. 
Respectfully, 
Gary Foster 
Gray, l\/laine
