Testimony in opposition to LD1619 5-1-23 
Good afternoon honorable Senator Carney, Representative Moonan and distinguished 
members of the judiciary committee. My name is Heather Sprague and I'm a native 
Mainer from Cushing. l’m here today in opposition to LD1619 an act to improve Maines 
reproductive privacy laws. As a woman who has 
experienced a potentially unwanted teen pregnancy l know first hand what it's like to be 
faced with having to give up my future, my teen years and my freedom to care for 
another life when l could barely take care of my own. I realized that l was not 
responsible with my body, I didn’t take birth control or use protection, that I could not 
blame someone else, an innocent baby, my own flesh and blood for my own bad 
decisions. l knew l couldn’t kill my son for any reason but especially for something thatI 
did. My conscience wouldn’t let me and l couldn’t have lived with myself if I did, it would 
have ruined me. 
But this isn’t about me, it’s about legislation that would allow for full term babies to be 
terminated for any reason that can be thought up, not just if the mothers life is in danger. 
What if a doctor refuses to perform a late term abortion does that allow for the woman to 
shop around for one that will? What happens to the mother, who provides counseling to 
them after going through something so traumatic? As women we have known or have 
close friends who have had abortions. We have been there to help comfort them after 
what might have been the most devastating event in their lives.A 
friend is all they have after an abortion and many will have to live with the everlasting 
effects of that trauma. 
We can only imagine what these women will be dealing with after terminating an actual 
baby that can live on its own. l can tell you that most who support this bill have never 
had an abortion or seen what can happen to a woman after she’s had one. if they knew 
they wouldn't be so excited to support it. l would ask the committee to focus on 
legislation that seeks to treat humanity with respect and dignity, that would teach the 
young people the value of life so they protect it and aren’t going to just throw it away 
because they were irresponsible with it at their convenience or a doctor's approval. This 
totally disregards the value of life and lacks respect, morals and dignity. I plead with this 
committee to realize how devastating a vote to pass would be mentally and physically on 
the people of Maine. l respectfully ask that you ought not pass LD 1619. 
Thank you for your time. 
Heather Sprague 32 Pine Ridge Rd Cushing, ME 04563
