OPPOSE- LD1691 "An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws” Speaker Talbot Ross 
OPPOSE- LD 776 “RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Establish the 
Right to Bodily Autonomy ” (Sen. Hickman) 
OPPOSE- LD 1343 “An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People by Preempting the 
Field ofAbortion Regulation ” (Rep. Supica) 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Heather Sirocki, I live in Scarborough, and l oppose the three 
bills before you. 
What happened here in Maine after the Dobbs' decision returned abortion 
laws to each state? Absolutely nothing. Maine had already put into law the 
provisions involved with the Roe and Doe decisions. 
As you all know, Janet Mills’ campaigned that she would NOT expand 
Maine's current abortion laws. But here we are with her bill and many 
others. 
Gov. Mills stated her “legislation is inspired by the story of Yarmouth 
resident Dana Peirce, who had to seek an abortion out-of-state after she 
discovered her child was suffering from a deadly form of skeletal dysplasia, 
a random, rare genetic mutation. ” Gov. Mills explained Ms. Peirce’s baby 
had a deadly disease. Deadly. And Ms. Peirce stated that her baby “hada 
rare and lethal form of skeletal dysplasia." Lethal. 
As Gov. Mills and the baby’s mother both acknowledge, the baby, sadly and 
tragically, had a deadly and lethal disease. lt is unclear to me why this 
mother chose to go out of state for her abortion, given that she legally could 
have terminated her pregnancy here in Maine since Maine’s existing law 
already allows late-term abortions for non-viable babies. 
Current Maine law is broad and expansive. In Maine, one does not need to 
be a doctor to perform an abortion; one does not need to have an 
ultrasound; abortion clinics are not required to have state safety 
inspections; taxpayers are forced to pay for abortions; and, in case 
something goes wrong, providers are not required to have admitting 
privileges at a hospital, and there is no wait period.
lf this bill passes, it will legalize abortion to due date, many weeks past 
viability, for any reason, as long as the provider agrees to perform the 
procedure, and that provider does not need to be a doctor. 
Further, LD 1619 proposes to eliminate the criminal penalty if an abortionist 
is caught without a license. (“Any person not so licensed who knowingly 
performs an abortion on another person or any person who knowingly 
assists a nonlicensed person to perform an abortion on another person is 
guilty of a Class C crime.") 
It is my understanding, this baffling change would result in the abortion law 
defaulting to Maine’s generic licensing laws. 
ln other words, if this law passes, an abortionist could perform an invasive 
medical procedure that involves the late-term delivery and killing of a viable 
baby, in a dirty clinic, going in blindly - without an exploratory ultrasound, 
and get caught with no license, but could only be charged with a low 
level misdemeanor. How is this just? 
The last things a woman facing this difficult decision needs to worry about is if the 
clinic is clean and the provider is licensed.L 
This scenario is admittedly rare, perhaps as rare as Ms. Peirce’s tragic 
situation. 
This scenario should not be legal, and how can anyone think this is safe? 
Women deserve better. Maine deserves better.
4
