April 30, 2023  
 
Dear Honorable Members of the Maine Legislature,  
I wish to voice my opinion and concerns regarding : 
LD 1343 An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People by Preempting the Field of 
Abortion Regulation  
The standing doctrine based on the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution that holds that certain 
matters are of such a national, as opposed to local, character that federal laws preempt or take 
precedence over state laws. As such, a state may not pass a law inconsistent with the federal law.  With 
LD 1343  the State intends to occupy and preempt the entire field of legislation concerning the regulation 
of a person's decision to terminate a pregnancy and legislation concerning the provision of abortion.  
While the Supreme Court has handed back the states jurisdiction over abortion this proposal has far and 
overreaching implications to all Mainers well beyond abortion.  
At the state level, preemption occurs when a state statute conflicts with a local ordinance  on the same 
subject matter.  This gives the state another opportunity for a n ideological  power -grab. It starts with 
abortion and where does it end ? More important LD 1343 preempts the United State Standard Report of 
Induced Termination of Pregnancy  and will no longer report current required information “ the method 
used to perform the abortion; and the gestational age of the fetus at the time of the abortion ”. This 
opens the door wide for abortion from conception to  birth with no requirement to report it  as it is  today  
and ties neatly into LD 1619 that alleges privacy but truly does not have anything to do with privacy.  
James Dux,  
Searsport, Maine  
James Dux
Searport
LD 1343
April 30, 2023
Dear Honorable Members of the Maine Legislature,
I wish to voice my opinion and concerns regarding:
LD 1343 An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People by 
Preempting the Field of Abortion Regulation
The standing doctrine based on the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution that 
holds that certain matters are of such a national, as opposed to local, character that 
federal laws preempt or take precedence over state laws. As such, a state may not pass
a law inconsistent with the federal law. With LD 1343 the State intends to occupy and
preempt the entire field of legislation concerning the regulation of a person's decision 
to terminate a pregnancy and legislation concerning the provision of abortion. While 
the Supreme Court has handed back the states jurisdiction over abortion this proposal 
has far and overreaching implications to all Mainers well beyond abortion. 
At the state level, preemption occurs when a state statute conflicts with a local 
ordinance on the same subject matter. This gives the state another opportunity for an 
ideological power-grab. It starts with abortion and where does it end? More important
LD 1343 preempts the United State Standard Report of Induced Termination of 
Pregnancy and will no longer report current required information “the method used to 
perform the abortion; and the gestational age of the fetus at the time of the abortion”. 
This opens the door wide for abortion from conception to birth with no requirement to
report it as it is today and ties neatly into LD 1619 that alleges privacy but truly does 
not have anything to do with privacy.
James Dux,
Searsport, Maine

