Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Jeff Seaberg, and l’m a resident of Phillips. l’m here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I am pro life and I am pro choice. Nationally and locally l vote for the candidate not 
for the party. 
l am not religious, but I do have Faith. l will not be quoting scriptures, nor willl 
quote philosophers. I am an independent voice. 
l do not believe in abortion except in those cases of rape and that of the mothers 
heahh. 
Yet being a man I do not believe l have the right to dictate a women's right to 
choose. 
Currently the law in Maine states that an abortion is legal up to viability. There are 
lines within that law that will be taken out, speciﬁcally, "to presen/e the life or health 
of the mother." Without that line in the language, the law will read, “After viability an 
abortion may be performed only when it is necessary in the professional judgment 
of a physician I ask: Why? Why would we take out that line? Obviously there are 
rare cases when an abortion is necessaiy for the health of the mother, but that line 
is already in the law. Am l missing something? ln whose interest is this proposed 
bill? 
I have three good friends in their fifties who were adopted at birth. They never knew 
their biological mothers until well into their adult lives. l wonder about their very 
existence if the current law or proposed law were in the books at the time of their 
conception. Would their biological mothers have chosen to abort? Would they have 
made such a choice beyond viability? All of my friends had eventually reunited with 
their biological mothers. Although awkward, it was overall positive for all parties. l 
cannot imagine what those mothers felt when they gave up their babies for 
adoption, but l can imagine the happiness they must have felt meeting their adult 
children decades later. Ajustification that they did what they thought was best and 
they succeeded in bringing an incredible life into the world. 
This life we are given -whether you believe in God, Buddha, or chance- is precious. 
lt's a one hundred thousand and one shot that each of us are here today. We are 
the lucky ones. My adopted friends are the lucky ones. There is no reason to quote 
from others, l ask that; let life mature in a mothers womb, especially after viability. 
Leave the current law as worded. Please vote ought not to pass.
