Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
Thank you so much. My name is Jeff Mills and l am a ﬁsherman from South Thomaston. 
I'm here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
l talked to my eight-year-old grandson recently. l asked a few simple questions without 
explaining why. These were his simple and truthful answers that could be given abouta 
child's life at any point in pregnancy and therefore, not the least, at late term. 
l asked him: 
ls it okay to kill something for no reason? 
"NO" , he said. 
ls it okay to protect yourself from somebody hurting you? 
"YES" 
ls it okay to hurt somebody smaller than you? 
"NO" 
Are babies the smallest people in the world? 
"YES" 
Can babies protect themselves? 
"NO" 
Who protects babies? 
“Their mom". 
When babies are not born yet, who takes care of them? 
"Their mom". 
If a child believes these things to be self-evident, could that child ever believe that a baby 
ready to be born should be aborted? 
I then asked him the tough question. 
Should a mommy go to the hospital and ask the doctor to end her baby's life? 
Very emphatically my grandson said, "no".
That a child must hope that another child‘s life not be ended should give anyone reason to 
pause. The act affects far more than the life taken. Truly a life is far more than the 
biological mechanism by which human life is sustained. Even the spirit of a miscarried 
child never leaves the heart of a mother. For a mother's unconditional love is all a child can 
ever hope to have, especially through pregnancy fully to term. 
How is LD 1619 explained to a child? Should the explanation include that there isa 
difference between one and nine months, three and six, or four and ﬁve? Are we not then 
confusing their own self-worth? l am pretty sure that in a poll anywhere in the state that 
horror and dismay would peak at 9 months and be reﬂected in that poll. 
When that same child reaches the age of reason, how does the explanation not become 
rationalization? Societal damage has become this. What truth cannot be best displayed in 
the eyes of a child? Maybe a legislator should ask a child. 
Please vote ought not to pass.
