Statement opposing LD1619 
Joel Littlefield 
24 Pinewood Drive Wiscasset, ME 04578 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of Committee... 
My name is Joel Littleﬁeld. I'm a father of four, a husband, and a pastor at New City Church in Bath. I stand 
before you today to express my strong opposition to LD1619, a bill that seeks to legalize late-term abortions in 
Maine. 
ln Jeremiah 1:5 God says, "Before I formed you in the womb, l knew you; before you were born, l sanctified 
you." God knows us even before we are born. Every life is valuable and has a purpose. Abortion goes against 
God's plan for life and robs a child of the chance to fulfill the purpose that God has for them. 
Proverbs 24:11-12 instructs us to "Rescue those being led away to death; hold back those staggering toward 
slaughter. If you say, ‘But we knew nothing about this,‘ does not he who weighs the heart perceive it? Does 
not he who guards your life know it? Will he not repay everyone according to what they have done?" 
This bill will lead many to death. You can stop this and become their defenders. 
l am pleading with you to look and see that Regardless of location, size, deformation, illness, or the 
circumstances of a mother, we are dealing with a human life, a miracle of creation designed by God to give 
him glory and bring us joy, and it is our mandate not to look for ways to rid the world of the least of these, but 
to multiply, nurture, protect, love, and raise them to be productive humans, contributing to society 
themselves one day. Sure, they may not contribute a whole lot in the first few years, but neither did any of 
you, and here you sit today, and I'm thankful. 
My family was blessed to adopt our daughter when she was three and a half years old. She's 10 today. Her 
birth mother was only 13 when she delivered her at full term. She made the selfless decision to choose 
adoption instead of murdering her baby. Our daughter is a reminder that every human life, even with special 
needs, is valuable and worth protecting. Why did my daughter's birthmother choose this path, even though 
she fit well within the statistics that the pro-abortion movement champions as reasons and excuses for killing 
children in the womb? Because she listened to her conscience. That's what l’m asking of you. 
lt should be unthinkable that our lawmakers would write up a bill to legalize child sacrifice. 
it's not too late today, but if this bill does pass in the days ahead, there will be deep mourning and heartache, 
not only from me, and hundreds of thousands of Mainers, but from the Creator himself, Jesus Christ, who 
famously said this. 
”Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven." 
Matthew 19:14 
l urge you to reject LD1619 and any other bill that seeks to legalize or expand abortions in Maine. Mainers do 
not want this bill. Every life is precious, and it is our responsibility to protect and care for the vulnerable, 
especially for the unborn. Thank you for your time and consideration.
