Dear Madam, Mister and Honorable members of the Judiciary committee, my 
name is Jolene Shults, l reside in Lubec i\/laine, l'm here today to oppose LD 1619. 
l'm here to share my views on the impending abortion laws to be determined on 
this day. l deeply oppose abortion up to day of birth or any other time. l'ma 
woman who believes in woman having the right to control their own health care.l 
do not believe in the right to abortion. Putting aside any religious or political 
affiliation, my views are based on the true scientific fact. Roe VS Wade was 
determined with limited science input. The Science alone shows the developing 
fetus at the earliest states of conception. ’ Our Babies have a beating heart, a brain, 
hands, fingers a full developing body. We now can review at 3-d images and 
determine what is being developed during the first weeks of conception through 
date of birth. We now have a growing number of Fetal Maternal Surgeons in the 
United States that perform surgeries in utero to save the life of the baby...Yes save 
the life of the baby. The baby is a live little human, an innocent victim without a 
voice to be heard, Today l'm that voice., l'm here to give a voice to the baby. 
Women have the right to control their own health, they also have a responsibility 
to be responsible. Less than one percent of all abortions in the United States area 
result of sexual violence. lVlost abortions performed at the age rage of 20 to 43 
years. Nine percent of abortions are performed from the ages of 13 — 19 years of 
age. Although abortion rates have decreased over the years, we are still seeing 
where woman are using abortion as a birth control method, multiple abortions. 
Today we have multiple options for family planning, birth control pills, patches, 
injections, condoms. Most are free access. Let us focus on empowering our young 
woman, to care for there bodies, to honor themselves by making educated choices. 
Let us focus our attention on the mother and share the resources that supports 
them from pre-natal to post-partum. We have resources for healthy pregnancy, 
Housing, food security, educational opportunities that support trade school and 
coHege. 
Today on social media where a dog and her puppies were abandoned, a few of 
them had died. The outrage streaming over this report were overwhelming. We 
are outraged over a dead puppy but why are we not outraged over the slaughtering 
of our own babies. 
lvlaine does not need to be know as the state who run abortion clinicsl!
I pray we come to our senses align our thought and resources and support each 
other. 
Sincerely, 
Jolene Shults 
Lubec Maine
1
