LD 1619 
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproduc Ɵve Privacy Law s 
Senator Carney, Representa Ɵve Moonen, and members of the Maine Commi Ʃee on Judiciary , my name 
is Julie Hunter of Cherryﬁeld, Maine. 
I am wriƟng to urge you to oppose LD  1619. As you know, this law would allow abor Ɵon on demand fo r 
any reason up to the very moment of birth and would remove penal Ɵes for those who perfor m 
aborƟons withou t a license. So in essence, this bill is about whether or not to legalize the free murder of 
babies. I vehemently oppose this bill and beg you to oppose this on behalf of every unborn child. As 
lawmakers, you have sworn to uphold the U.S. and State Cons ƟtuƟons to the best of your ability, so help 
me God. I ask you to do that now. 
The sugges Ɵon that a baby can be murdered in the safest place (a mother’s womb) is horrifying to begin 
with, and the proposal that a baby can be murdered moments before it enters this world is barbaric to 
say the least. To remove criminal penal Ɵes associated with an abor Ɵon performed without license , as 
well as giving freedom to murder babies at will, regardless of medical scope of “need” to mother or child 
is an act that removes the most basic right for any human – the right to life. Unborn babies are human 
beings -  not just cells, not just fetuses as the writers of LD 1619 would suggest and would prefer you to 
think. At just 6 weeks of development, eyes are visible and teeth are forming. Gender can be learned as 
early as 10 weeks. At 20 weeks, they can feel pain. And at 24 weeks, they can hiccup and smile. Do not 
tell me they are mere cells – evidence infers otherwise.  
As a mother who lost two babies to miscarriage, I grieve those losses every single day . I am unable to 
comprehend how you could support the legal murder of babies who are completely helpless. I would 
have done and tries to do anything to keep my babies safe and secure in my womb. I dreamt of 
delivering healthy and strong babies. I could do nothing to prevent my losses but I can urge you to vote 
against LD 1619 so that each baby has a ﬁ ghƟng chance. So that each adop Ɵve mother has a hope to 
give those children a warm loving home.  
Are you aware of the trauma Ɵc aŌereﬀects of abor Ɵon on the mother? Once that innocent CH ILD (not 
fetus) is brutally and painfully murdered, what about the mother? Are you aware they are at risk for 
suicidal thoughts? What about a 6 Ɵmes higher suicide rate? Can we look at the sta ƟsƟcs that show they 
have a 154% higher risk of suicide? All the while not only has one life been taken, but now the mother 
must try to live with herself remembering the life she snuﬀed out by choice?  
Why do we focus on killing when we could spend Ɵme and energy proposing laws to make adop Ɵon 
simple for mother, child and hopeful parent? AdopƟon allows for mothers l ike me to open our arms to 
welcome babies that others would cast aside. I urge you to encourage ADOPTION funding programs 
where life is given, mothers and babies are supported and urged to choose LIFE. Do not allow our 
country to stoop so low as to murder more innocent children. Whether or not you have children or have 
suﬀered a loss, I would bet you have at least one child in your life somewhere. Look at their face in  you 
mind right now and imagine them being born, seconds from life and suddenly murdered. They are no 
more. Can you imagine the silent screams? I shudder at the thought.  
Please oppose LD 1 619. Thank you for your Ɵme.  
Julie Hunter
Columbia
LD 1343
LD 1619
An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Julie Hunter of Cherryfield, Maine.
I am writing to urge you to oppose LD 1619. As you know, this law would allow 
abortion on demand for any reason up to the very moment of birth and would remove 
penalties for those who perform abortions without a license. So in essence, this bill is 
about whether or not to legalize the free murder of babies. I vehemently oppose this 
bill and beg you to oppose this on behalf of every unborn child. As lawmakers, you 
have sworn to uphold the U.S. and State Constitutions to the best of your ability, so 
help me God. I ask you to do that now.
The suggestion that a baby can be murdered in the safest place (a mother’s womb) is 
horrifying to begin with, and the proposal that a baby can be murdered moments 
before it enters this world is barbaric to say the least. To remove criminal penalties 
associated with an abortion performed without license, as well as giving freedom to 
murder babies at will, regardless of medical scope of “need” to mother or child is an 
act that removes the most basic right for any human – the right to life. Unborn babies 
are human beings -  not just cells, not just fetuses as the writers of LD 1619 would 
suggest and would prefer you to think. At just 6 weeks of development, eyes are 
visible and teeth are forming. Gender can be learned as early as 10 weeks. At 20 
weeks, they can feel pain. And at 24 weeks, they can hiccup and smile. Do not tell me
they are mere cells – evidence infers otherwise. 
As a mother who lost two babies to miscarriage, I grieve those losses every single 
day. I am unable to comprehend how you could support the legal murder of babies 
who are completely helpless. I would have done and tries to do anything to keep my 
babies safe and secure in my womb. I dreamt of delivering healthy and strong babies. 
I could do nothing to prevent my losses but I can urge you to vote against LD 1619 so
that each baby has a fighting chance. So that each adoptive mother has a hope to give 
those children a warm loving home. 
Are you aware of the traumatic aftereffects of abortion on the mother? Once that 
innocent CHILD (not fetus) is brutally and painfully murdered, what about the 
mother? Are you aware they are at risk for suicidal thoughts? What about a 6 times 
higher suicide rate? Can we look at the statistics that show they have a 154% higher 
risk of suicide? All the while not only has one life been taken, but now the mother 
must try to live with herself remembering the life she snuffed out by choice? 
Why do we focus on killing when we could spend time and energy proposing laws to 
make adoption simple for mother, child and hopeful parent? Adoption allows for 
mothers like me to open our arms to welcome babies that others would cast aside. I 
urge you to encourage ADOPTION funding programs where life is given, mothers 
and babies are supported and urged to choose LIFE. Do not allow our country to 
stoop so low as to murder more innocent children. Whether or not you have children 
or have suffered a loss, I would bet you have at least one child in your life 
somewhere. Look at their face in  you mind right now and imagine them being born, 
seconds from life and suddenly murdered. They are no more. Can you imagine the 
silent screams? I shudder at the thought. 
Please oppose LD 1619. Thank you for your time. 

