Kaitlin Weiss, Brunswick 
4/25/2023 
LD #1619: An Act to Improve Mai_ne’s Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Governor Janet Mills, House Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross, Senate President Troy Jackson 
My name is Kaitlin Weiss and I am a sophomore at Bowdoin College, and originally from 
Summit, New Jersey. I am here on behalf of the Bowdoin Reproductive Coalition. I am Writing 
for LD #1619: An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
I am Writing in support of LD #1619 because it is a comprehensive and proactive bill that centers 
the health, safety, and privacy of individuals who seek abortion care. The current Reproductive 
Privacy Act includes a criminal statute that can be used to prosecute a non-medical provider who 
assists a pregnant person in terminating their pregnancy. This statute can be used to target anyone 
who assists someone with self-managing their abortion through abortion pills. According to the 
Guttmacher Institute: self-managed abortions through medication accounted for 53% of US 
abortions as of 2020. The Mifepristone Abortion bill was approved by the FDA more than 20 
years ago and has been used by more than 5 million people in the United States to safely end 
their pregnancies. Medication abortion is under attack across the country, and it is imperative that 
We protect this safe and accessible method of terminating a pregnancy in Maine. The current 
RPA has language that jeopardizes the safety of those who assist in this safe practice. 
LD #1619 also importantly removes the current gestational ban. Removing this ban 
ensures that each individual is able to make an informed decision with their health care provider. 
I do not believe anyone would make the extremely diﬁicult and painful decision to terminate a 
late term pregnancy without necessary cause, and I also do not believe it is my, or anyone’s place 
to deﬁne What a necessary cause is. As a college student, I am acutely aware of the disparities in 
access to transportation on our campus. I personally have access to a vehicle and would be able 
to travel out of state if I needed to obtain a late-term abortion purely because of economic 
privilege. Economic privilege should not be the deciding factor in Whether an individual must 
carry a pregnancy to term or not. At a time when reproductive rights are being rolled back across 
the country, it is essential that Maine remains a state that affirms bodily autonomy and individual 
agency. I am proud to learn, live, and vote in Maine, and legislation like LD #1619 demonstrates 
clearly to the people of Maine that our legislature recognizes and affirms our right to choose. I 
urge you to pass this bill.
