LD 1619: An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Oppose 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary 
Committee. My name is Karen Vachon. lam the Executive Director of 
Maine Right to Life, located in Auburn. lam a licensed health insurance 
agent by trade and former State Representative from Scarborough. l 
oppose LD 1619.S 
Maine doesn't need this bill. l\/laine existing abortion laws are among 
the most permissive in the country allowing for late-term abortions for 
non-viable babies beyond 24 weeks or pregnancy. 
Late~term pregnancy terminations are traumatic, risky, brutal, and, 
rare, and should be reserved for doctors whose expertise addresses 
such rare situations. The sad and tragic story of Dana Peirce and her 
baby, Cameron, who at 32 weeks was not viable, and was suffering 
from a very rare condition is a good example. 
Current law did not prevent terminating her pregnancy. Rather, having 
a qualified and experienced doctor in l\/laine was most likely the reason 
Dana needed to seek care out of state. 
As a health insurance agent, I have clients with complicated Lyme 
disease, rare cancers, and unique prosthetic needs. in all of these 
situations, the best doctors to treat their unique needs are out-of-state. 
For safety and best care — across the country, people seek specialists to 
treat rare conditions elsewhere. Dana's case is no different. 
This bill goes far further than Dana's traumatic, rare, and unfortunate 
situation. It permits the killing of viable babies up until birth. Thisis
NOT an abortion. lt is infanticide. This is barbaric, inhumane, and 
heartless. As a former lawmaker, each one of us who has the honor to 
serve must put our head on the pillow each night and discern: Did l do 
my best work for Mainers today? 
|\/Iaine is the oldest state in the country with a median age of 45. We 
are one of four states in the country that has more deaths/year than 
births. And Maine aborts 5.2 babies/day. This bill is literally killing 
l\/laine's next generation. This is not Maine — the way life should be. 
You all deserve a good night's sleep that you can feel good about. 
Please vote ought not to pass. 
Karen Vachon 
;,»._.,~, ,¢ {IR ».~ p‘ » ~ SJI‘ N; 
E. 
207-730-2664
