Testimony Before the Standing Joint Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney. Representative Moonen and the other Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Ken Libby. I live in Lewiston and am here to testify in opposition to 
LD1619, An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws. 
Nearly five years ago one of my daughters-in-law lost her baby at 22 weeks of 
gestation as a result of medical complications in the pregnancy. 
As one of the grandparents I got to hold and say “goodbye” to little Jeremiah. 
Jeremiah had clearly been well on his way as a very little human being and not an 
inconvenient blob of protoplasm. While doing so generated a danger to my 
daughter-in —law, great effort was expended to save Jeremiah. . 
Losing him was a long time wound for both parents. 
The middle son of my wife and me was an ‘inconvenient and unexpected 
development. He complicated things by being born eight weeks prematurely. 
I can guarantee you that he was a small, functioning, feeling and responsive 
person from birth. He now has a great wife and four children of his own. 
I cannot conceive of the termination of any such late term babies, such as I have 
held, as anything but murderously heinous. In Maine there are already legal 
measures in place to govern and assist in making those rare and very difficult 
decisions where mother/baby survivals are at issue. 
Further, my oldest child began as a result of my young and irresponsible action. 
That ‘inconvenient and unwanted ‘ bit of protoplasm was carried full term, adopted 
and she has come into my later life as a wonderful, loving and honorable 
daughter, wife, mother and grandmother. What a loss had she been “terminated ”. 
Jen and my nephew Dan knowingly carried full term and for several years have 
loved and raised a Downs Syndrome child named Ben. They knew and embraced 
the challenges. Neither they nor Ben's three ‘normal‘ siblings regret the decision. 
In today's society, with all the help and support available, there are much better 
solutions to such difficult situations than killing little people. 
Such a drastic bill in place would cause me and many other voters to makea 
candidate's stand on pro-life issues the prime litmus test for voting decisions. 
Along with a majority of Maine voters, I oppose LD1619 and any other such 
drastic full and late term abortion enabling laws. 
Please also do so. Thank you
