Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Kristin Tripp, and l’m a resident of Gardiner, Maine. l’m here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
How have we come to the point that we as a state could be willing to ignore the 
humanity of an unborn child who is developed enough to survive outside of the womb? 
How are we so callous that we place our own needs and convenience above the right 
of another human being to... be alive? 
L.D. 1619 is nothing short of barbaric and grotesque. Besides which, with adoption 
agencies in every state holding lists of families who are waiting months and even years 
to adopt infants, it's ludicrous to suggest that lt’s needed. 
As the mother of 10 children —yes, 10—- five of whom joined my family through 
adoption, I am intimately acquainted with a range of traumatic situations that lead to 
children being available for adoption. l’m in no way suggesting that carrying a baby to 
term, delivering it, and then placing it in the arms of strangers, or raising it yourself in 
less than ideal circumstances, is the easy solution. But it is the right one. 
Life is pervaded with difficulty and challenges. Some of those challenges feel crushing 
and impossible to overcome. lt’s natural to seek ways to lighten the load or find an 
alternate route. But ending a human life should never be an option! 
l am a woman. I have three daughters. l resent the message being thrust upon women 
and girls: that we must be rescued from the challenges of life. That we aren’t capable 
of meeting difficult situations head on and dealing with them with strength and dignity. 
That our miraculous ability to bring forth life in this world is cheap and can be thrown 
aside like garbage. 
We can value life and value women. These values are not mutually exclusive; in fact, 
they embrace each other.'
. 
ln closing, l have this to say to the committee: There are co-sponsors of this bill who 
have qualms about this bill. There are Democrat members of this committee who 
question if this bill should be passed into law. l urge you each of you, if you have any 
hesitation about this bill, if you will not listen to the thousands and thousands of phone 
calls, letters, texts, emails, and now testimony that you have received over the past 
days and hours, at least listen to your conscience. Be men and women of character 
and integrity who will stand for what is right. Do not be be swayed by Planned 
Parenthood lobbyists. Do not succumb to pressure from your party. If there is one issue 
that is worth standing up alone for, it is the lives of those who cannot stand up for 
themselves. 
Please, please, vote ought not to pass.
