May 1, 2023 
Honorable Senator Anne Carney, Chair 
Honorable Representative Matt Moonen, Chair~ 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Room 438, State House Station I00 
Augusta, ME 04333 
A Public Hearing Testimony in opposition to 
L.D. 1619: An Act to improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of The Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Kristen Gottlieb and l live in Mount Vernon and am here today to speak in 
opposition to L.D. 1619, This bill would make it legal for a licensed or UNLICENSED person to 
perform an abortion for any reason throughout the entire nine months of pregnancy. Up until 
the overturning of Roe vs. Wade, there was no push for abortions to be made available after 
26-28 weeks when it has been medically determined that a baby can survive outside of the 
womb without the mother. Governor Mills wants to expand women's “rights” by joining only7 
other States who currently allow for this type of abortion. A third trimester abortion is a 3-4 day 
procedure, and here is what happens on each day according to the Boulder Abortion Clinic’s 
website (https://wvwv.drhern.com/third-trimester-abortion/):
- 
4 First day: preoperative care. Fetal demise is induced~ 
- Second day: fetal demise is confirmed, and a single laminaria is placed in the cen/ix. 
- Third day: The laminaria is removed, and multiple laminaria are placed in the dilated 
cervix under local anesthesia. 
~ Fourth day: procedure.A 
ln simpler terms: . 
The abortionist injects the baby with a lethal drug to stop their heartbeat on Day 1. The mother 
then waits at the clinic until Day 2 when the abortionist breaks her amniotic sac and checks to 
be sure the baby is dead. On Day 3, the abortionist begins artificially opening her cervix. On 
Day 4, the abortionist removes the dead baby from her body. _ 
Do you think a 3-4 day long abortion procedure might cause the mother at this stage even 
more mental and physical complications than a one day abortion? Besides emotional side 
effects like PTSD, regret and depression, have you thought about the surgical complications 
for the mother at this stage? Some of the risks to the mother are high fevers causing pelvic 
inflammatory disease; injury or perforation of the uterus which will cause abdominal infections; 
a weakened cervix which may prevent future pregnancies; excessive hemorrhaging and blood 
loss. All of these complications are common and serious. 
Currently, there may not be many women who seek late term abortions as they are now only 
becoming more available to pregnant women, and the ones that do might be seeking it 
because she is unexpectedly pregnant, or pregnant with a baby who tested positive and could 
be born with a deformity or disease. We have been told that doctor’s make mistakes, so 
doesn’t it follow that they might administer tests with false positive results? Or thata
gi\<},_/ '\‘**j,_*- __ _,I K1 t_i.i'il_./ _ 4| 
T*\W“/\-'i§"’”“"' 
»~ P it 6 it /\"‘Y>“'*’“ c 
doctor might mistakenly read scans or lab results incorrectly on occasion? It is relatively 
common for pregnant women to be told their babies may likely be born with deformities or- 
genetic diseases, but they end up delivering perfectly healthy babies. 
Does it bother you that this bill states that the person performing this 3-4 day abortion 
procedure does not have to be a licensed doctor or nurse? Perhaps we don’t even need 
doctors or nurses as Governor Mills is suggesting in this bill. While this bill is about allowing 
abortion up until the day of birth, if we allow this in the name of women’s “rights” and continue 
celebrating abortion as we do in this country, we should be aware that this could lead to 
legalized infanticide. How can we even try to justify aborting the life of a baby the day before 
they are to be born, but call it murder the next day when they are to be born? 
ln an article by the American Life League, “lt must be made perfectly clear that infanticide ISa 
form of euthanasia. infanticide is very important because it is the “bridge between abortion and 
adult euthanasia. infanticide proponents argue “there is no real difference between a third 
trimester abortion and the killing of an infant soon after birth. ln fact, Joseph Fletcher, former 
President Emeritus of the Society for the Right to Die (formerly called the Euthanasia Society 
of America) and often called “Father of Situation Ethics” has referred to infanticide as “post- 
natal” abortion. ” 
How long before we look at newborn babies as less than persons, as valueless because they 
too are helpless and could not survive without their dedicated parent or caregiver? For that 
matter, what about toddlers? Are we really so self consumed that we need to have abortion 
legal throughout the entire 9 months of pregnancy and willing to sacrifice a child, whom at that 
point could survive outside the womb, instead of making sacrifices to have the child or give the 
baby up for adoption? 
If you allow L.D. 1619 to pass, don’t be surprised if you soon see legislation proposing to make 
it legal for a parent to euthanize their newborn because they cry too much and they are losing 
sleep or work, or are unable to afford daycare. We are not even replacing ourselves as it is in 
America and our birth rate continues to drop. If our laws protect only the rights of the strong 
and powerful, then the children, the elderly, and the disabled among us will be the ones most 
at risk. Do we really want to continue to change the way we look at people by desensitizing 
society to death and violence? 
We are not guaranteed an easy life. Some of the hardest things we face in life become our 
greatest joys. An unexpected baby could be the greatest relationship you never knew you were 
missing in your life, or in someone else’s life. We should be offering hope and life to enhance 
and support pregnant women who are facing an unexpected pregnancy, not giving people 
every possible way to end human life. Why aren’t we promoting life and giving hope? lsn’t life 
about relationships and love? 
Please vote NO on L.D. 1619. And please vote NO on L.D. 776 and L.D. 1346. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Kristen GottliebI i
lbbuwnnvronnuloiy lgSimMA\ronL 
Senator Carney and Representative 
Mooneyt Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
my name is Ann Dowdy BSN, RN, andI 
am a resident of Unity. I am here to 
testify in opposition to LD 1619. 1 also 
oppose LD l343Z>1‘T‘I(e» 
Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason 
is too extreme for Maine. LD 1619 
=-~ would allow a baby that could survive 
outside the womb to be killed. 
Rejoice at one week/25 weeks gestation 
Her father's wedding ring on her arm When we had our 20-week ultrasound in 
‘=*#*’~e= 1" 2021 and discovered God had given usa m .~» ._ .1.-. 
girl, Rejoice (after 5 boys), we were shocked and excited. Only 4 weeks later——at 24 weeks1 
day—she was born in Augusta on a Saturday morning in May with 20 minutes warning. By 
God's providence the right medical team was there to resuscitate and intubate our Rejoice (and 
do other life-saving care). The teams from Bangor Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and Lifeflight of 
Maine were available to further care for her and transport her. We were thrilled that she had 
survived, but sad to think that medical professionals and mothers in Maine are purposely 
choosing to kill babies just 5 weeks younger than her. According to the Maine CDC 12 babies 
Were killed by abortion that same year at 19 weeks. 
‘ Up in the Bangor NICU in the dark isolette with 
Rej oice’s eyelids not yet opened, her father andI 
longed to be close to her, to let her know she was not 
alone. She was holding her father’s ﬁnger, and I quietly 
reached into the isolette. She quickly let go of dad’s 
ﬁnger and grabbed my ﬁnger. After a While, without 
speaking a word, I carefully and gently let go of her tiny 
hand and walked away from the isolette. She 
immediately reached for her father's ﬁnger. Nurse Lisa- 
-who has decades of NICU experience, is known for her 
vast researching, and who’d worked so hard with 
Rejoice on the transport team--explained: “She can 
smell the difference between the two of you.” Consider 
this: neither of us wear perfume or cologne. Yet Rejoice 
knew the difference between the smell of mom's ﬁnger 
and the smell of dad's ﬁnger. She knew this before her 
eyes were open. She knew this before we had even been 
able to hold her. 
1 
Just because someone isn't fully developed yet or isn't 
developing as we want them to, does not give us the right to kill them, for in Psalms we read that 
. 1of2
TESTIMONY on LD 1619 
each unborn person is “wonderfully made” by God. Consider this: According to the National Institute for Mental Health, human brains are not fully developed or matured “until [the] rnid-to- late 20s”. 
Furthermore, though I certainly appreciate and have respect for doctors’ judgements, they are human just like the rest of us. They don’t know the future. The doctors said our Rejoice hada 50% chance of survival. Today she’s thriving with no long-term effects of her premature birth at 24 Weeks. 
As a registered nurse myself, I ﬁnd it horrifying that this bill removes any penalty for non- licensed persons killing another human being and risking killing the mother as well. This bill further fuels the 3"‘ leading cause of death in Maine (after cancer and heart disease, according to the Maine CDC)—abortion. 
I oppose LDl6l9. Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason is too extreme for Maine. This bill would allow a baby that could survive outside the Womb to be killed——a baby just like our precious, full-of-life Rejoice. That would be a tragedy for the baby, mother, father, the State of Maine, and the World. Please vote ought NOT to pass. 
2of2
