Testimony on LD 1619 
Monday, May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee, 
My name is Lisa Siciliano and I live in Westbrook. I’m also a pastor of the Portland House of 
Prayer Church in Portland. 
I’m here today to ask you to oppose LD 1619 
Personally, I’ve been blessed to have three healthy children, the youngest of which graduates 
from high school this year. But I also conceived another baby that did not live. I carried him for 
19 weeks, and 2 days. When I delivered him 21 years ago this week, he was perfect in every 
Way. His ﬁngers, toes, arms, and legs were all perfect. We could even see he already looked like 
his big brother. We named him Joseph. Often when abortion is considered, the baby, is 
considered to be just tissue that needs to be removed from a woman. However, when I delivered 
my son at 19 weeks, and 2 days, he was a perfect little boy, he just came too early. 
Also, often when abortion is considered, we hear it was an unwanted pregnancy. Yes, we know 
pregnancy does not always happen at a convenient time, but the child being carried in that 
mother’s womb is very wanted by someone who may not be able to have children as they 
planned. This was the case for my brother and sister-in-law. They had been married about l5 
years when they still had not been able to conceive. They decided to become foster parents in 
Maine and see if that could be a way for them to have a family. Shortly after they became foster 
parents, they received a call about a l5-year-old girl who had just delivered a baby. She and her 
family were not able to care for her. My brother and sister-in~law picked the little girl up from 
the hospital when she was just 2 days old. Instead of an abortion, this young mother chose to 
carry her daughter to term and put her up for adoption. Today my niece Gabrielle is a beautiful 
l6-year-old junior in high school, who loves every animal she’s ever met. 
The following year my brother and sister-in-law received another call. A young mother was 
struggling with substance abuse and could no longer care for her two-month-old daughter. 
Despite all the obstacles this young woman faced, she chose to give her daughter life instead of 
aborting her. Today, my niece Mia is a beautiful l5-year-old sophomore in high school who is 
becoming a beautiful artist. 
At every family holiday, birthday, and fun time together I’m so grateful the mothers of my two 
nieces chose LIFE instead of abortion. 
Abortion at ANY time, for ANY reason is far too extreme. 
This bill would allow a baby that could survive outside the womb to be killed. 
I ask you today to oppose LD 1619. Thank you!
