Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Lorraine King, and I'm a resident of Sorrento. I'm here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. 
I was 18 and married with a 3 month old baby when I found out I was pregnant again. After seeking 
counsel from my husband, family, and friends, the word abortion came up many times. I was so young 
and overwhelmed, it seemed the only reasonable thing to do. So, we made the appointment to have the 
abortion. 
Even after a brief counseling session at the clinic, I was not prepared for what was about to happen in 
that exam room. My husband was allowed to accompany me and from his vantage point, he was able to 
view the entire procedure. They used clear plastic tubing and he was able to see the pieces of our child 
being sucked up the tubing from my womb. Devastated, he fell onto my chest sobbing uncontrollably, 
joining me in my own deep anguish. Some part of me knew that I had done something horribly wrong but 
it was too late to change anything. The next few days of dealing with such a traumatic experience found 
me curled up in the fetal position, in pain emotionally and physically, barely able to get out of bed. 
Over time, the pain lessened. I had more children but I often thought of the child that was not allowed to 
live. What would he have looked like? (I always thought the baby was a boy.) I would never feel his little 
arms around my neck and he would not know my good night kisses. He never got to take his first steps, 
to laugh, and to play. He wouldn't graduate from school or get married or have his own kids. What does it 
look like to steal an entire life from someone? 
Looking back over my life, l’ve considered the abortion to be the worst mistake I've ever made. It brought 
me so much sorrow and regret. Even today, more than 40 years later, I cannot tell my story without tears 
because of the pain that still lingers in my heart. My one consolation is that because I believe in a loving 
God, I will once again see my child when ljoin him in heaven and that gives me peace. 
Though abortion seemed like the best solution, in retrospect, I know I could have made it work with two 
babies. There have been other things in my life I didn't think I would be able to get through and yet I did. 
I've found that I am stronger than I knew! If my story touches even one woman to make her rethink her 
decision to abort her child, I consider it worth the vulnerability and sorrow of telling it! 
Thank you for letting me share my experience. Please vote ought not to pass.
