Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, & Honorable 
Member's of the Judiciary Committee; 
My name is Lynsey Redmond, and I reside in and own a business in Lincoln, Maine; 
I stand strongly and firmly in opposition of LD1619. 
I am here to speak as a voice for those that would have their voices taken from them, if our state 
were to put such a demonic, extreme, heartless, and inhumane law in affect. 
We are Mainers- and Maine is noted as the safest state in the US. 
Where do we draw the line; 
You're safe only residing in Maine on the outside of the womb? 
Or only toddlers, teens and adults are safe, babies are at increased risk of murder? 
My husband Tony and I are former foster parents of 14 Maine children, exchange student host 
parents, permanent guardians of our daughter whom I have raised since 10.5 months old now 
almost 16, he's a father, and I a step-mother. 
I have dreamed of one day being a biological mother, but after several attempts with infertility 
treatment and as many miscarriages it's been to no avail. 
Abortion to a woman longing to be a mother who is unable to have a baby is a slap in ones face, 
and abortion to a baby inside a woman's womb is murder. 
If I were faced with a dilemma of my life or my baby's, there is no question; I would die to give new 
life. 
There are so many longing to add a baby to their lives, if raising a child isn't what you could do. 
Why wouldn't we spend our time, thoughts, and resources to make adoption affordable, not to 
murder the unborn?' 
My daughter has given me so much to live for and I can't imagine had her biological mother 
decided to abort her because she didn't have it all together, or was too young, using illegal 
substances, or had no support. 
In her shoes it would have been a prime example of what the majority of women would and if this 
bill passed will abort over. 
That would have taken away a perfect life that has been nothing short of a blessing to watch 
develop from a lil girl into a woman.
I cant imagine my life without my daughter whom I may not of given life to, but whom I gave my 
heart 
I have always been proud to say I am a Mainer and I sure hope that you will hear the majority of 
Mainers voices as we object this extreme bill and give us a reason to continue being proud of 
where we come from. 
I am Lynsey Redmond, I am God's child, I am a Mainer, and I am in opposition of LD1619, just like 
you should be. 
Choose Iove- choose life! 
Thank you.
