Senator Carney, representative Moonen, members of the committee, 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the committee, 
My name is Mara Seeley and l live in Glenburn. l am here because I am opposed to bill 
LD 1619. When you look at me do you see a lack of quality in my life, do you see my cyclic 
vomiting syndrome? Can you tell that I'm often in bed for days without moving? Does that take 
away from the value of my life? If I had been born in this day and age, my mother would have 
received a lot of pressure to abort me because of my extreme life altering diagnoses. Was the 
answer to my hard life, not letting me live at all? Abortion is not an act of compassion or 
necessity. It is a choice made by a woman and her doctors out of fear of the future. If a woman's 
life is in danger from her pregnancy her doctors will advise abortion, but if she wants to save the 
baby, they will try to save them both. We need to stop pressuring abortion and offer other 
choices such as adoption or life afﬁrming support. 
Abortion up until birth is not the answer. l work with a non proﬁt called Adoption Finder, 
we provide life afﬁrming sen/ices to moms and moms-to~be. We help over a hundred women 
every year and out of those women only four to ﬁve of them choose adoption and the rest raise 
their babies after discovering they have help from us. How about instead of offering abortions, 
we offer help. We tell these women they can have their babies. Did you know that 77% of 
women who take the abortion pill regret it after? According to Live Action 75% of abortion 
clients have a low income and 60% of women who have an abortion already had at least one 
live birth. What does that say to you? To me, it says that women are scared they cannot afford 
or care for another baby. That doesn't mean those babies aren't worthy of a chance at life. 
According to Adoption Network there are between one and two million couples waiting to 
adopt. Can we give these babies a chance to live and these couples a chance to parent. 
Instead of giving abortions we offer life afﬁrming care and adoption plans to these women.
