Senator Carney and representative Moonen, honorable members of the joint standing 
committee on the judiciary, my name is Marie Netti, and I am a resident of Oakland. I am here in 
opposition to LD1619. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. It is a privilege not taken lightly. 
I know as public opinion is being voiced here, both for and against this bill, although we are all 
being heard, you as a legislature are not necessarily looking for a consensus of the people. 
Because, as we all know, good law is not determined by someone's volume or by public 
pressure, but it is determined by its truth. l’m sure this legislature would agree that when good 
truth is applied correctly, laws are created which serve and protect everyone they represent, 
regardless of whether their voice is strong or whether their voice is weak. In light of this truth 
there are two questions that arise for me. 
1) Are the voices of everyone this bill will affect being heard? 
2) Are all those being affected in some way by the bill being protected? 
The answer to the first question is stunningly obvious, we all know it. There is a voice affected 
by this bill that can't be heard, it’s in the womb unable to speak, and therein lies the problem. 
We know that if this life could speak, it would be vehement in its own defense! Oh the things this 
child/fetus would say. But because this is not possible the weight of this voice being heard is 
placed on your shoulders, because, as I mentioned earlier, and I believe you would still 
agree...whether a voice is weak or strong it has the right to be heard. 
In response to the second question, “ Are all those being affected in some way by this bill being 
protected? ” Upon listening to some of the testimonies from those who support this bill, it was 
shared as a great concern for women to be able to access abortion. Although I don't believe in 
abortion per say, a question still remains....at what price? To lower standards of responsible 
medical care to allow access would be aniresponsible action. It would cause those being 
affected by the bill to not be protected. 
Because the answer to both these basic questions is no, I ask that you vote ought not to pass 
on Bill LD 1619.
