Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee: 
My name is Marie Meagher, from Starks, Maine. I heard that someone reported 
feeling threatened by my contacting them. Though absolutely NO threat was ever 
intended, please accept my apologies. I simply wanted to share my wishes 
concerning these Legislative Documents. 
I come before you today to speak in opposition of LD 1619, LD 776 and LD 1343. 
Here's my reasons why. I was 17 years old and found myself pregnant. Out of fear of 
the unknown I chose abortion. I'm here to say that 40 years later I still regret that 
decision! My one living child will be 35 years old this year. She has no living siblings 
because of that choice. 
I wish there had been someone to tell me the truth about that little heartbeat 
beginning to beat at just 20 to 21 days. A heart beat means there is Life! 
I wish someone would have told me the truth about the baby having finger prints 
and it's own blood type, that all the 46 chromosomes, 23 from Father and 23 from 
Mother were all in place for eye color and hair color. I wish I had been told all these 
scientific facts about how early the baby is developing. No one shared with me about 
adoption which can be a beautiful-life —giving option. 
I am here to say, Abortion is not healthcare! Care is not killing a baby in the womb 
where it's supposed to be the safest place to start your life! Caring for people is not 
making it easy to kill our offspring! Care is not permitting or making light of a very 
serious choice with very painful, long-lasting consequences. Just because something 
is permitted does not make it beneficial. 
Yes life has it's hardship, but hardships do build character. I'm here today so that 
you know that having abortion in your past does not make things easier, it is not 
beneficial to individuals or society. It brings darkness, and heaviness to life. 
The citizens of Maine deserve better than abortion! Therefore, I oppose and ask you 
to vote NO on LD 1619, LD 776 and LD 1343. These ought NOT to pass. Thank you 
for listening.
