r-ieiio, 
I am Mark McLaughlin 
I am a son, a grandson, a brother, uncle, cousin, brother-in-law, a husband and a friend to many. 
Not only a native Mainer, I am also a business owner in lvlaine. 
I've served my home state as an Aircraft Maintenance Technician in 
The Maine Air National Guard, in Bangor, as well as 20+ years with the USAF and AFRes. 
Above and beyond these relationships, I am most proud to say, I've been a faithful and loving 
father to 2 sons, Joshua and Daniel and 1 daughter, Ruble, as well as step-father to 2 step daughters, Gwen& 
Phebie. 
Today, Im here before you, to bring your attention to the issue at hand. 
Do you know that LD 1619 will remove the “viability ” restriction, which is the stage of development when a baby can 
survive outside the womb, from existing Maine laws. So, in other words, a child is able to sun/ive outside the womb 
but, this law would allow this child to be killed! 
Do you know that LD 1619 will allow the abortion (killing) of a baby up to full term? One due to be born, that day’?! 
\/Vhat happens when a child is removed from the womb, yet survives, alive, there on the table, outside the woml:-I 
What takes place at that point?! Will there be any attempt to help the child survive?! Or will there be an attempt to 
end that life?! LD 1619 is laden with questions and problems! Do NOT pass LD1619! We Do NOT want this in our 
state! 
The laws in Maine, concerning abortion, are already far too loose, allowing abortion until “viability ”! LD1619 will 
remove that restriction and allow the killing of babies right up to birth! This is NOT good! 
What makes our opposition believe this is necessary? Why the hurry to abort more innocent children?!!! It seems 
little thought is taken when pushing this agenda and little time allotted to those who oppose this, to respond! 
How can any thinking person believe this is ok?!!! It IS NOT! This is NOT good for babies, NOT good for our 
communities, NOT good for Maine! And I promise, NOT good for those of you pushing this legislation, today! 
Maine does NOT want this type of legislation! The people of Maine see this for what it is. It is wicked and 
unnecessary and we do NOT want this type of law in our state! 
I am reminded that our Declaration of Independence states: “We hold these TRUTHS, (not theories or thoughts but 
TRUTHS) to be SELF EVIDENT, that ALL men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain 
UNALIENABLE RIGHTS, that among these are LIFE... .” and it goes on, but begins there... with LIFE! ALL babies 
have a right to life! 
Good day
