Remarks by Matt Griffiths in Opposition to LD 1619: An Act to Improve 
Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary of the 131“ Maine State Legislature 
May 1“ , 2023 Maine State House 
Augusta, ME 
Senator Caney, Representative Moonan, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee, thank you for acknowledging my testimony 
in opposition to LD 1619. 
My name is Matthew Griffiths and I recently moved to Kennebunk. I 
was born and raised in the great state of Oklahoma. Oklahoma is proud 
to be the most pro-life state in the country- . I was adopted at birth, my 
brother was adopted at birth, and in 2017 my sister was fostered at birth 
and my parents adopted her just a few years ago. Oklahoma is a state 
where the sanctity of life is taken for exactly what it is. I was raised that 
way. I believe that way. And for my sister’s future, I am going to ﬁght 
that way. 
I’ve heard a lot of talk about extremism. If we want to talk about 
extremism — this right here. This Legislative Document. That’s 
extremism. This is changing Maine law in ways that it has never been 
done before. And that is dangerous. And it’s just plain wrong. 
Arguments have been made that this bill is what is in the best interest of 
women in the state of Maine. No. No. No. And I want to tell you why. 
It says right here in the bill - feel free to pull it up and take a look. Page 
2 line 4. “This bill changes the standard for when an abortion may be 
performed after viability to when a licensed physician determines that it 
is necessary instead of when it is necessary to preserve the life or health 
of the mother. " It then goes on to say this bill removes the criminal 
penalties for performing an abortion without being licensed asa 
physician, physician assistant or advanced practice registered nurse.” 
So, you are telling me that I need a license to drive my car. You are
telling me I need a license to smoke some weed, and in some places, I 
need a license to shoot off some ﬁreworks. I believe in New York it was 
that a man was arrested for giving his son a tattoo because he didn’t 
have a license to do that. Now you want to decriminalize people 
performing healthcare without a license. That’s terrible. It’s dangerous. 
It’s negligent. And it is going to cost people their lives. 
Rights for women are just as important as rights for those in the womb. 
Rights for those in the womb are just as important as rights for members 
of the LGBTQIZ3 community. Which I know this body cares greatly 
about. In 30+ states you can be charged for a double homicide if you 
murder a pregnant woman. We live in a world where the culture of 
death has become increasingly ubiquitous. Abortion has become a norm, 
and the value of human life has been increasingly eroded. We must 
remember that the right to life is the foundation of all other rights. 
Without it, there can be no liberty, no pursuit of happiness, and no 
justice. Together, we can support women facing crisis pregnancies. 
Together we can build a culture of life, where every human being is 
valued from conception to natural birth. This bill and everything it 
stands for is wrong. This bill is dangerous. And I encourage you to vote 
NO. 
Thank you. God Bless you.
