Life 
Senator Carney, Rep Moonen and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Comm on 
Judiciary: 
My name is Michael Ozga, and I'm a resident of Durham, ME. I'm here to testify in opposition to 
LD 1619.' 
Driving north from NH on I95, the ﬁrst sign we see proclaims the following: “Maine, the way life 
should be.” The Progressive/Abortion lobby in this country and Maine has “progressed ” from safe, 
legal and rare, to late term abortion and now abortion upon demand. As a civilized people, is this what 
we call progress? Is this “The way life should be?” The questions, of course, are rhetorical as the 
answers are self-evident. 
American law followed common law throughout the 18"‘ and 19"‘ centuries. By the time the l4“‘ 
Amendment was adopted in 1868, 75% of our states had laws on the books that made abortion a crime 
at any point during the pregnancy. That consensus endured until the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision. Bya 
vote of 7-2, the court conferred a broad right to obtain an abortion invoking the “right to privacy” and 
“due process” language within the ls‘ , 4"‘ , 5"‘ , 9”‘ and 14"‘ Amendments. In other words, the l973 court 
inferred a right that does not exist within The Constitution, but they claimed is, nevertheless, protected 
by the Bill of Rights. The logic is absurd on its face. 
In 1992, the court upheld Roe by a 5-4 majority invoking “stare decisis. ” In 2022, by a vote of 5-l-3, 
the 1973 Roe case and 1992 Casey decision was overturned. The three justices that argued to uphold 
both Roe and Casey made no substantive argument, they relied simply on “stare decisis” which is Latin 
for, “to let things stand.” However, “stare decisis” is not an inexorable command. It is a principle of 
policy. Otherwise, both Dred Scott (1857) and Plessy (1896) would still be law. Thank God they are 
not, as the Dred court ruled that slaves were, indeed property, and the Plessy decision upheld 
segregation laws. 
Stare decisis has been invoked when it ﬁts the courts ideology and ignored when it does not. This is not 
progress, nor the way life should be. 
Eugenics, forced sterilization laws, legalized abortion, late term abortions and now abortion on 
demand. All this under the euphemisms of “progress, ” “reproductive rights” and “choice.” Can we look 
at ourselves in the mirror and honestly consider this “progress ” or “the way life should be?” Asa 
Constitutional Republic, we are a self-governing society. With self-governance comes freedom, with 
freedom comes responsibility. The concepts of freedom and responsibility are mutually inclusive. One 
cannot exist without the other. However, when it comes to abortion the left is vociferous about their 
“freedom” to choose yet want total abdication from any responsibility of that choice. This is the 
behavior of children not free adults. 
If viewed through the prism of life this issue would transcend ideologies. That would indeed, be 
progress and most certainly, the way life should be! 
I'll end this by quoting the 18"‘ century economist and philosopher, Edmund Burke; “The only thing 
necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing. ”
