Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My name is Michaela Gladu, and l’m a resident of Orrington. I’m here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
This bill is a direct assault on the sanctity of life and draws dangerous parallels to an 
operation conducted in 1939 under Hitler known as Operation T-4. 
First, I would like to share with you that I have been in the chair of an abortion clinic out 
of fear and selﬁshness. It Wasn't until I was shown the love of Christ Jesus when it was revealed 
to me that a mother's love for her child starts while her baby is still in her Womb. But the 
abounding and endless love of Jesus Christ and the understanding that a mother's love to her 
unborn is selﬂess even to her own demise was found too late for me. It is the most painful 
emotional and physical experience to have your baby pulled by suction from your womb.A 
human that was unique to exist once and never again. Not a day goes by that I do not regret that 
life altering decision I made out of selﬁshness and fear. 
The Nazi physicians performed what we know of these "mercy killings ” , as Hitler called 
them, on newborns. When I draw the parallel from this bill to Hitler's Operation I want to 
recognise the only difference is the location of the baby. This bill proposes the killing of an 
infant before they even draw their ﬁrst breath. Hitler's Nazi physicians used two methods almost 
identical to what physicians would be allowed to do in this bill. The ﬁrst method being the use of 
a lethal chemical cocktail injected into the infant causing a heart attack. How are late term 
abortions conducted? By use of a lethal injection which includes the drug digoxin, the same drug 
used in state executions. The second method Hitler's physicians would use is the starvation 
method. Simply starving the infant to death. The physicians in this bill would use the pill 
Mifepristone which prevents the baby from growing, essentially starving them to death, and the 
mother gives birth to a dead baby. Again, the difference between Hitler's Nazi physician 
operations and what this bill would allow is the mere location of the baby. How is it that the 
location of a baby is what deems their life worthy or not to live even if it is just for a few 
precious moments? 
This is a step in a very dangerous direction for human rights, deciding who lives and who 
dies based on their size, medical condition, or location. These were the very same variables the 
Nazi physicians based their operation on as well. 
I'd like to close by saying love is selﬂess. Perfect love casts out all fear (1 John 4:18). 
Please vote no on bill LD 1619 and stand on the right side of history with me.
