Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, 
A person is referred to as a fetus for just a ﬂeeting amount of months. When provided access to life, they will bea 
child for about twenty-four times longer. Most then go on as adults for decades beyond that; yet all the while 
remaining human. 
We’re too quick to believe we’re dealing with the here and now, while signiﬁcantly impacting the years to come. 
Further expanding the ability to abort our smallest New England citizens, beyond what’s currently been legalized, 
will subsequently leave us Weak and without choice. 
My unexpected pregnancy contributed to the life of a kind-hearted Maine girl named Winter. This January, Winter 
independently chose to share her love of books by donating one hundred dollars of Christmas money to our 
community library. The grateful staff shared that the money will purchase eight to ten books for their visitors to 
enjoy. 
If half of the children that were aborted in Maine, Within the same year Winter was born (source: maine.g0v), went 
on to also have a love for reading and donated just half the amount she did; our state’s libraries would have seen an 
additional $45,900 or 3,902 books from seven-year-olds, this year alone. 
Our state’s current abortion rights are consequential while providing ample time for an expectant mother to consider 
information, individual circumstances and follow through with a desired termination of life. So what is intentionally 
and unintentionally being promoted by expanding this timeframe, when exceptions deemed necessary are already 
being accommodated? Not to mention the expansion on who can perform such an act. 
With over three-quarters of abortions being performed through unmarried mothers (sources: maine. gov and cdaorg), 
I understand ﬁrsthand the fear, anxiety, and other intimidating challenges these girls and women are abruptly faced 
with. In fact, the seven reported abortions by mothers younger than the age of ﬁﬁeen in 2021 were all performed 
before nine weeks of gestation (source: mainegov). By extending that time frame, you will extend the opportunity 
for temporary feelings to overcome women to take permanent action. Irreversible and ﬁnal. 
As community members, we’re collectively better equipped to encourage and educate, to provide supplies and care 
and to adopt children, than we are to heal and deal with the consequences of the severed hearts of impacted 
individuals down the road. 
Laws provide beneﬁcial guardrails for society, and keeping the shortest window on the open season to end another 
human's life, is no exception. 
2015 Maine abortion totals: 
hltps:&gww.n2aine.gov/disks/?necdc[nublic-health-sjvstems/(lala-2research/data/c/ocyrnents@ABO%20VSTAB%20Tq 
bles 20I5.gd[ 
Respectful regards, 
Nichole McClure 
Carmel, ME
