TESTIMONY AGAINST LD 1619 
Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
My name is Patty Browning, and l am a resident of Mapleton. l am here to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
I am opposed to LD 1619 because it is too extreme. I have talked to many people who 
are pro-life, pro-choice and those who claim to be neither, about this bill and they all 
repeat "you mean it would be allowed up to and including 9 months?" . Theyjust shake 
their heads and say ”what are they thinking?" The pro-choice people always said, ”|'m 
for choice but that is too extreme" . 
How can we think of a 5-9 month old baby and not care that their life can be taken at 
any moment for any reason? Just because they are not wanted, they are too small, they 
do not yet have a voice, does not mean that they do not have the right under the 
Constitution to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. 
When we push abortion laws to the extreme, such as late term abortion, it creates a 
lack of love and cherishing of human life. When society becomes callous to the taking of 
human life, especially the life of a baby ready to be born, it is a short step to more 
extreme laws, such as peri-natal abortion and also puts the mentally ill, Down's 
Syndrome children, as well as the old and infirm in danger of extreme suicide assistance 
laws. 
l had a very close friend who got pregnant right after high school and had an abortion 
followed by another pregnancy and another abortion. Even though she now has two 
beautiful daughters, she regrets the abortions and it affected her first marriage. This is 
what abortion does, it haunts women through their lives. Our local Pregnancy Care 
Center in addition to all the assistance they provide women, also provides abortion 
recovery, and women who have had an abortion 25-30 years prior have come to the 
Center asking for help with recovering from the haunting pain caused by abortion. Can 
you imagine how much more pain would be caused after a late term, ready-to-be —born 
baby is aborted? 
Please do not let Maine become known as ”the extreme abortion law State" , with 
late/full term babies beating hearts stopped and where those who survive abortion 
would be left to die.T 
Please vote ought not to pass. 
Thank you.
