TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1619 
By: Patty Whiting, R.N. 
Good afternoon. I am Patty Whiting and I am a resident of Scarborough and a nurse in 
Portland. 
For the past 50 years, Maine law has allowed abortions until the fetus is “viable.” 
“Viability ” is the point at which a baby can be removed from the mother and survive outside the 
womb.. 
The bill that you are currently considering would allow a woman to kill her baby after it is 
viable for any reason, or no reason This is unbelievable. This is murder! 
The only situation I can think of that would cause a woman to terminate her pregnancy 
after her baby is viable - other than for her life or health, which is already allowed under Maine 
law - would be if she discovers late in her pregnancy that her baby is defective in some Way. 
However, if a woman cannot cope with raising a special needs child, she should not be allowed to 
kill it. At that point - after viability - she can either wait and deliver the baby or have it removed, 
and then put it up for adoption. Many couples are anxiously waiting to adopt special needs 
babies.. 
As a nurse I work with brain injured patients; and I can tell you that they gare just as human 
and wonderful and deserving of life as everyone else. 
I know the enonnous pressure that a woman who is considering abortion is under. I found 
myself pregnant my freshman year of collage. The decision was excruciating - whether to abort, 
to keep, or to place my baby for adoption. I ended up doing the latter, and3I got-to meet my 
daughter face to face when she was 20. I have become so close with her and her wonderful 
family. She is so glad I let her live. It was a decision we both could live With, whereas abortion 
kills the baby and wounds the woman.r 
All my friends who have aborted have regretted it deeply. They thought it would ﬁx the 
problem but, instead, they’ve had much difﬁculty not feeling pervasive guilt. I think that 
abortion after the baby is viable will be especially harmful psychologically since, by that late 
date, the woman will have felt movement and kicking and life. 
Please don’t allow the killing of these precious, viable human beings, and protect the 
mental health of women. Please vote “Ought NOT to Pass” on this inhumane, extreme bill. 
Thank you.
