Testimony for LD 1619 
May 1, 2023 
Good afternoon, Honorable Members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Peter Mullaney, I'm 
a resident of Falmouth, Maine. l’m here to testify in opposition to LD 1619, i_D 1343 and LD 776. 
The idea of expanding abortion in Maine beyond the existing 24 weeks and up to the birth of the 
unborn child I believe is repulsive, disrespectful of human life and unnecessary. Man is not God. 
There already are provisions that take into consideration if the life or health of the pregnant woman 
is at risk or the pregnancy is not viable. Regrettably the right to kill a baby is already guaranteed in 
Maine statutes. What we don’t need is an expansion of infanticide in Maine. LD619 will be 
among the most extreme abortion laws in this country. 
Voters in Maine last cycle were led to believe by both gubernatorial candidates that abortion laws 
in this state were adequate and would be left alone but the elected governor now wants to expand 
the timeframe in which babies in the womb can be canceled or murdered. 
I've survived 9 months in the womb and so have all of you. What about rights? Don't unborn 
children deserve the right to be born in and experience life and opportunities in this wonderful 
country. Voting for LD1619 is a vote for death. 
Maine is one of a few states that have more deaths each year than births. In fact we are the oldest 
state in America. The idea of depriving life to even more future Mainers doesn't make sense. 
Currently in Maine the average is 5 abortions daily or 150 per month, annually the average is 1800 
that are reported. Future Mainers murdered in the womb, not given a chance at life. 
There are no winners in abortion. The unborn child is dead. Women many times are haunted, 
hurting, remorseful and shameful the rest of their lives and it's a small percentage who will talk 
about their abortion. I guess you could say that these businesses that eliminate unborn children for 
profit benefit from abortion. isn't that a disgusting fact. 
An attitude adjustment is what's needed. Respect for life is lacking and desperately needed. 
Support for families and pregnant women is desperately needed. There are other options for 
women experiencing unplanned pregnancies. Adoption is at the top of the list. There's a long line 
for families wanting to adopt newborns. 
The taking of innocent life is just not right, l believe we all know this. Go against the grain, you'll 
sleep better. 
Voting no on LD1619 will make sure that thousands of innocent and precious boys and girls will 
live and have the opportunity to pursue their dreams, bless and enrich the lives of others and 
enhance Maine cities and towns. Please vote ought not pass. 
Thank you.
