Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary: 
My Name is Ramsey Tripp and l’m a resident of Gardiner. I am here today to testify in 
opposition to LD 1619. 
l find it interesting that this bill is labelled 1619. The first year slaves where brought to this land. 
My native land. lt was a time when slaves had no voice, much like today when babies have no 
voice. This bill is no more about “Women’s Rights” than slavery was about the rights of slave 
owners. 
Let’s not allow another atrocity to enter our land. We should have learned by now that every 
life is precious and every life deserves a chance to live in freedom and dignity. 
Do not let the modern slave traders like Planned Parenthood lead you down a path of darkness 
just so they can enrich their purses. Planned Parenthood has spent millions of dollars in the 
last election cycle to buy votes and they think they own you. They think this bill is a slam dunk 
for them because they have spent so much money in our state getting legislators elected. 
Let me remind each of you that you do not work for Planned Parenthood. You work for the 
people of Maine and this bill would enhance the narcissistic culture that is being promoted by 
Planned Parenthood. There used to be a time in our state that we did what was right for our 
children even though it may cost us everything. Today we are saying, “lt’s only my way, my life, 
my choice that matters and my baby has nothing to do with it.” 
l would like each of you to think about the way in which this bill is worded, “to terminate a 
pregnancy ” and ask yourself what happens when a pregnancy is terminated ‘? This decision 
impacts more than just the mother and the doctor. There is a third person involved. That is the 
person living inside the mother. Unless a mother has four hands, four feet, two minds, or two 
hearts... there is another person living inside the mother. Planned Parenthood doesn’t want 
you to ask questions about the baby living inside the mother. it doesn’t fit their narrative. This 
decision greatly impacts that person living inside the mother because every single timea 
pregnancy is “terminated, ” a baby dies. The person inside the mother dies. 
What does it mean to terminate a pregnancy? Wording that has been intentionally chosen to 
mislead. Ask yourself and ask those who stand before you, why they won’t call this what it is? 
Why do they use terms that mislead? Every single time a pregnancy is terminated a baby dies. 
So today every time you hear a Planned Parenthood Representative testify and they say, 
“terminate a pregnancy ” remind yourself what they are really saying is “ending the life ofa 
baby.” Terminate a pregnancy = end the life of a baby. 100% of the time you terminate a 
pregnancy, a baby dies. 
We don’t need to end the lives of more babies in Maine so Planned Parenthood can get richer. 
Don't fall into the trap of this narcissistic legislation that wants take the lives of viable babies. 
l urge all of you but especially those of you who are on the fence about this ghastly practice of 
full term abortions to change your heart and your mind and vote ought NOT pass. 
Respectfully, 
-Ramsey Tripp
