Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, and honorable members of this committee. My name is 
Rob Cross, and I am a resident of Dedham. l am here to speak in opposition to LD 1619. 
As we gather here today to address this proposed legislation, l believe it is important to immediately 
note that our state currently provides adequate abortion access for its residents. Expanding access as 
prescribed in LD 1619 is extreme in its intent and undermines the premise of being a civilized society. 
Additionally, studies show that the neuroanatomical apparatus for a fetus to experience pain is usually 
present by 26 weeks* . Would this not illustrate that we are dealing with existing human life? Would the 
child dying in pain be an issue discussed with the woman carrying the child? Wouldn't this pain be 
considered inhumane in any other circumstance, like the death penalty? Not only is this bill extreme but 
appears to be ill conceived in its concern for the wellbeing of the mother. 
In the United States life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness are unalienable rights granted to us by our 
creator and enshrined in our Declaration of Independence. The right to life, and the freedom to thrive 
should be protected across the world, but more so here in the United State of America. We are no longer 
addressing an issue that is speciﬁcally political, but one that is wholly moral in its context. We need to be 
sure of who we want to be as individuals as well as what we want to reﬂect to our posterity. l would like 
to believe that the individual character of each committee member, as well as their desired legacy, is not 
that of wanting to cause intentional pain and destruction to human life. 
l would appeal to each member of this committee to consider in depth the repercussions of removing 
the current limitations to the term services may be accessed, as well as eliminating the penalties to 
service providers. 
l stand here today in opposition of this bill, but more importantly, I stand here in support of the sanctity 
of life as ordained by our creator. I urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD1619. 
*Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist's report of fetal pain
