May 1“ , 2023 
Senator Ja¢k$°" , Representative Ta|b°i and members of the 
committee. 
Good afternoon, 
My name is Robert l\/lackey Jr, lam a Maine citizen, and I oppose this bill that 
allows the unfettered killing of viable babies in the womb. 
As I was contemplating what l would say at this hearing today, it occurred to me— 
‘ls it worth the time to speak on behalf of the tens of thousands of Maine babies 
who have had their lives taken from them, even before they were allowed to 
breath the air or see the sun, or even smell the fragrances of the Maine coastal 
waters, or the pristine forests? 
Have all these representatives made up their minds, and at this point are simply 
going through the motions of "listening" to the testimonies of the l\/laine people- 
sitting with ears plugged and a doodle pad covered with ink by the days end? 
Or, perhaps, one or two or ten are willing to listen to the hearts cry of the Maine 
voter, and even more importantly, the Maine children who were never allowed to 
live? 
The latter is my hope. That some of you still have ears to hear. 
I stand before you, a Christian man, and in the name of Christ, who told his 
disciples, "Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for to such 
belongs the kingdom of heaven." He was reaching out to a segment of society 
that was thought to be insignificant. Children, in their weakness and vulnerability, 
have much to teach us as adults. Which one of the thousands of aborted babies in 
this state or the millions in this country could have solved some of our greatest 
issues? 
Cured cancer? Viable renewable energy? A music protégé like Bach or 
Beethoven? 
Science tells us these babies are individuals and have a separate DNA from the 
man and woman who conceived them. lt also tells us they feel pain.
ln 1887 the State of l\/laine abolished the death penalty because of a botched 
hanging thatcause prolonged suffering FOR A GUlLTY MAN, Daniel Wilkinson, 
who murdered a constable while Wilkinson was committing burglary. Because his 
execution created ‘undue suffering ’ and took to long, capital punishment was 
abolished. 
If we are quick to have mercy on the guilty, what is it that keeps you from having 
mercy on the innocent? 
The Maine State Constitution clearly states first in the Preamble: 
PREAMBLE. 
Objects of government. ...secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of 
liberty, acknowledging with grateful hearts the goodness of the Sovereign Ruler 
gf the Universe and imploring God's aid and direction in its accomplishment... 
Have you sought the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe, God's direction in this 
vote? 
If you have not, then may He have mercy on your souls... the mercy you refuse for 
these babies.
