My first rea ction when I  read this bil l was, “What on ea rth is this suppos ed to mean?  Thi s
doesn’t sound like a la w, it sounds like a statement of intent.  And who is ‘T he State? ”  
The Maine  Constit ution beg ins, “We the people of  Maine...”   The pe ople ARE the State of
Maine, y et I don’t believe  that’s what this bill int ends.
Merr iam Webster provides the f ollowing de finitions:
Intend 1: have ( a cour se of a ction) as one 's purpose or obje ctive; plan.
Occupy 3a: to take or  hold possession or control of
Preempt 1: take a ction in order to pr event ( an anticipa ted eve nt) from ha ppening ; foresta ll.
Maine Constitution Article  1, Section 1  gives us “ce rtain natura l, inherent a nd unalienable
rights, among  which ar e those of e njoying a nd defe nding life  and liberty ...”  Doe s this bil l intend
to remove our  unalienable  right to defend life ?
It appea rs our “ State” nee ds to be reminded of  the Constitut ion by  which we  agreed to opera te.
Maine Constitution Article  1, Section 2:  “Power  inhere nt in people.   All pow er is inherent in
the people;  all fre e governme nts are f ounded in their a uthority  and instituted for their be nefit;
they have the refore a n unalienable  and indef easible r ight to institute gove rnment, and to a lter,
reform, or totally  chang e the sa me, when the ir safe ty and happine ss require  it.”
Article 1, Sect ion 13 : Suspension of laws.  The law s shall not be suspended but b y the
Legislature or its authority .
Article 3 Sect ion 1:   “Power s distributed.  The power s of this gove rnment shall be divided into 3
distinct departments, the leg islative, executive and judicial.”
Section 2:  “To be  kept sepa rate.  No person or per sons, b elonging to on e of these
departm ents, shall exerc ise any of  the pow ers proper ly belongi ng to either of the other s,
except in the case s here in expressly  direc ted or pe rmitted.”
Article 4, Sect ion 1 : “The le gislative power sha ll be vested in 2 distinct branc hes, a H ouse of
Represe ntatives, and a  Senate, e ach to ha ve a ne gative on the other , and both to be sty led the
Legislature of Ma ine, but the people re serve  to them selves power to propose laws  and to
enact or  reject the sam e at t he polls  independent of th e Legislature , and also re serve  power  at
their own option to approve  or re ject at the polls any  Act, bill, resolve or  resolution passed by  the
joint action of both branc hes of the L egislature...”
This bill s ays, “The State intends to oc cupy  and pre empt the entire  field of leg islation...”  That
appea rs to allow the State to do what only  the L egislature and the  people a re authorized to do.  I f
our g overnme nt intends to ignore  our Constitut ion, perha ps it is t ime for us to “to a lter, re form,
or totally  chang e” tha t gove rnment.  I  sincere ly hope we  have not c ome to that point.  Pl ease vote
LD 1343 “oug ht not to pass.”
