II 
Madam/Mister Chair & Honorable Members. ofthe Judiciary 
Committee, 
I am speaking against Bill LD1619_ 
l\/Iy name is Ruth Jones I live in Windham l\/laine, I am a parent and very 
proud grandmother, I have taught in Preschool-PreK programs for more 
than 20 years; I have a degree in Early Childhood Education, and my 
BHP for special needs along with many certiﬁcations and trainings to 
work with Children and Families in the ﬁeld of Early Childhood as well 
as with Special Needs. 
At just twenty-two I found that I was pregnant with my second child, at 
that time I had left a very difficult marriage and was living as a single 
parent working full time, while living in the only apartment that I could 
afford, in a tough area of Portland, my apartment was small with no 
central heating. 
At the time I found out I was pregnant I had been physically sick, losing 
weight and having pains that could not be explained, which led to my 
need of seeing a doctor at the clinic; eventually it was found that I was 
pregnant, they immediately scheduled me for an ultrasound to 
determine how far along the pregnancy was and any difﬁculties. 
During the ultrasound severaldoctors came into the room to view the 
baby on ultrasound, I could sense something was very wrong. 
Consequently, I was told that the baby was not developing normally 
showing a great deal of excess ﬂuid in her skull effecting the 
development of her brain and that she would not be born without 
serious developmental problems. I was also advised that considering my 
young age and life circumstances an abortion was their best 
recommendation.
They gave me the phone number to set up an abortion and sent me 
home. I seriously considered and even called to set up an abortion 
however I ended up hanging up the phone and not following through. 
Even though I came from a very dysfunctional family background 
myself, I knew the life growing inside me was real and deserving ofa 
chance, not just a choice for me to end making my life easier. 
I went back to the clinic a month later and of course another ultrasound 
was done, not only was she developing perfectly she was and is perfect 
in every way. 
I am proud to say that my daughter grew to be a true blessing, she was 
on the honor roll her entire school career and even won State of I\/Iaine 
Math Championship in the 5th grade, she has traveled all over the world 
in herjob, bought and owned her own home before she married and 
now the mother of two very beautiful little girls. She is a successful 
woman an amazing mother and wife. 
She also is "life" and contributor to human life and society that may 
never have been had I chose to follow the doctor's advice and have the 
abortion. 
Thank you for your time, I am grateful for the opportunity to speak the 
truth on such an Important matter today.
