My Name is Sara Molinski I reside in Cutler, ME. The biggest, lie I was ever told, 
was that the "mass of cells within my uterus was my body" 
I am a mother of two beautiful and unique individuals, productive members of 
our society. Although, before they were born, I engaged in unprotected sex and 
found myself pregnant with my first child. I was alone and scared. I didn't want to 
deal with the stigma of being a young single mother, I had my whole life ahead of 
me. I always stood for Pro-Life as a young adult. I believed it's my body, my 
choice. That the mass of cells within my uterus was mine to discard if need be. 
I walked into the abortion clinic alone disconnected from my growing child. The 
Doctors and Nurses in the clinic are not supposed to show you the ultrasound 
picture, before proceeding to terminate an unwanted pregnancy. For whatever 
reason my provider didn't turn the screen full. I was able to see that ultrasound 
image. Before me in real time video image was my 14-week-old child, heart 
beating, body moving, sex organs visible, arms, and legs. This wasn't a part of my 
body; it was an individual that I helped make. It was uniquely made, he or she had 
their own genetic makeup, a unique heartbeat. This was not ”my body" , It was 
the body of another human life, living within my human vessel. Completely 
capable of feeling pain at 12-20 weeks of gestation. That image burned in my 
memory for years after my abortion. I struggled with depression and mental 
anguish thinking back to that day and regretting my decision to terminate my 
pregnancy. 
LD 1619 will not only give all rights to the provider on where and how the 
abortion will be carried out but will put no limitations on the age of gestation. My 
fetus was only in the beginning of the second trimester and had all the 
characteristics of an individual not a clump of inanimate cells. To terminate a child 
fully capable of surviving outside of the mother's womb or even partially born is 
completely barbaric and is without a doubt an act of murder. 
I am here today to urge you not to pass this bill. I have experienced the mental 
trauma caused by knowing that I took a life. Please, do you want the genocide of 
millions of voiceless children on your conscience? We who have come here today 
to warn and beglyou not to put this bill into law, we have done our part. Now 
these lives are in your hands. Its not just a political stance it is a human life. 
Remember all lives matter!
