Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:' 
My name is Stacy Veevers-Carter, and l’m a resident of West Bath. l am 
here to testify in opposition to LD 1619. l hold a BA in Women’s Studies 
and l am a Registered Nurse with clinical focus in end of life care. 
Abortion advocates state that full term abortion is a difficult decision. This is 
because choosing to have chemicals injected into your child's body via. 
your womb to stop the heart and soften the tissue of the baby, to incise the 
base of the skull and suction the brain out so the child is more easily pulled 
from the womb, goes against all the instincts of a pregnant woman. Women 
do not want to END the life of their child. They want relief from their fear. 
All humans live with fear and face challenges, some more than others, like 
women in crisis pregnancies and like my son who lives with Down 
syndrome. This prenatal diagnosis has a 70% abortion rate; in Iceland that 
rate is 100%. Think about that. 
Supporting one another in their fears and challenges is how we grow in. 
love, patience, and a desire to serve others. lt is how we build societies that 
work for the common good and protect its own. LD 1619 goes against what 
it means to be human. 
End of life review is a time when decisions once made, especially those, 
one regrets, are often revisited. Being at the bedside of hundreds of dying 
people l can testify to the suffering people experience when they can no 
longer correct wrongs. The anguish women who suffer the effects of full 
term abortion is very real. lt will play out for the remainder of their lives, 
particularly at death. 
Legislators of Maine, you must cast your vote for this bill in light of the fact 
that one day you too will do your own end of life review. True, courageous 
leadership demandsthe most vulnerable in society are preserved and 
protected. Do you want the unimaginable suffering of women and death of 
babies to be your legacy? This bill is not a legacy; it is a lie. VOTE NO ON 
LD 1619. 
Stacy Veevers-Carter, West Bath,ME
