Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary committee, fellow 
Mainers: 
My name is Stephen A. Spaulding MD, from Scarborough, Maine. I come before you to oppose 
LD 1 61 9. 
When I was serving as the Army Family physician for the Worms, Germany American military 
base, I had a soldier come in one day requesting referral for abortion. She was single, a Sergeant, 
and could not see how she could get through being pregnant and having a child. As it turns out 
she was already at least 23 weeks pregnant, and abortion was not legal in Germany that late in 
pregnancy. Though I encouraged her that help was available for her, if she wanted an abortion 
this late in pregnancy, she’d need to go to The Netherlands, Where abortion was legal up to 24 
Weeks. This she resolved to do. 
However, when evaluated in the Netherlands, she was found to be more than 24 weeks pregnant, 
so no abortion was able to be performed. I did not see her for another 6 months. 
Then she came to see me, just about hugged me, and thanked me profusely for being kind to her 
when she had seen me. As it turned out, she had her baby, had arranged for her mom to care for 
the baby until she was transferred back to the States, and was so thrilled that she had given birth 
to her baby daughter. She was so happy to be a mother, and grateful for someone who had 
listened in her hour of need. 
How many women I have spoken to who had abortions, because they had not imagined they how 
they could get through a pregnancy and have a baby, with no one to support them. But there are 
LOTS of people who would support pregnant women during and after pregnancy. 
Had abortion been available after 24 weeks, she would have been deprived of the joys of new 
life, motherhood, and all that goes along with it, and her baby daughter, who she had already 
been feeling kicking in her womb for weeks, would have been killed. Pregnancy is not a disease; 
it is a human condition in which a woman is gestating another little human being in their womb. 
Abortion goes against human nature, deprives one human being of their life, and scars their 
mother. It is not health care, because it interrupts a healthy condition by ending the life ofa 
small, innocent human being. I don’t support abortion at any stage of pregnancy, as an innocent 
human life is taken, but I understand how some people justify it for various reasons early in 
pregnancy. But it seems especially heinous and hard to justify when it is performed on an 
innocent child who could survive outside of the womb. Please don’t allow more women to make 
decisions that turn a mother against her child, scarring those Women and taking the lives of their 
innocent children without due process of law. PLEASE, Vote NO on LD I619. 
Stephen A. Spaulding MD 
(If time: You know, the law is there to protect the vulnerable, and there are no more vulnerable 
human beings than the unborn. The law also teaches, and it is currently teaching that some 
innocent human lives can be taken at the desire of others without due process of law. This law if 
passed would worsen that situation.)
