 Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland  
 
510 Ocean Avenue     Telephone: (207) 773 -6471 
Portland Maine  04103-4936     Facsimile: (207) 773 -0182 
Suzanne C. Lafreniere, JD  
Office of Public Policy  
 
 
 
Comments  of Suzanne Lafreniere, on behalf of the Roman Catholic Diocese  
 Written testimony in opposition to 1343–   
An Act to Protect the Reproductive Freedom of Maine People by Preempting the Field of Abortion Regulation  
Senator  Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee  on 
Judiciary , my name is Suzanne Lafreniere and  I represent the Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland in 
opposition to  LD 1343 .  The Diocese has a population of over 279,000 Catholics* or one -fifth of the total 
population of the state of Maine.  In addition to its  141 churches organized into  48 parishes, it has 
nine elementary schools,  one private elementary school,  one diocesan high school and one private high 
school. It also includes one Catholic college, Saint Joseph's College of Maine in Standish.  Within the 
diocese, there are also  seven subsidized housi ng units, four rehabilitation and residence facilities,  and 
two child -care centers. There are three Catholic hospitals operating independently of the diocese as well 
as Catholic Charities Maine, the state's largest social service agency, which operates as a separate 
corporation.  
It comes as no surprise to any legislator or any member of the public that the Diocese of Portland 
vehemently opposes this law.  Respect for unborn human life is the foundation of the Church's constant 
social teaching  and social jus tice ministries .   
Current Maine law is broad and expansive. In Maine, one does not need to be a doctor to perform 
an abortion; one does not need to have an ultrasound; abortion clinics are not required to have safety 
inspections; taxpayers are forced to p ay for abortions;  teenagers are not required to get parental consent,  
providers are not required to have admitting privileges at a hospital, in case something goes wrong; and 
there is no wait period.12 
  There are numerous other abortion  related bills which will be heard and voted on this session.  
Taken in complement with each other, Maine will be  a destination state for abortions.  What a tragedy this 
would be.  Maine is the way life Should be.  
Please vote LD 1343  as Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration today.  
 
*www.pewforum.org/religious -landscape -study/state/maine/  
 
 
 
 
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/ag/docs/Abortion%20Rights%20in%20Maine.pdf  
 
2 https://www.abortionfinder.org/abortion -guides -by-state/abortion -in-maine  
 
