My name is Tabatha Littlefield and I live in Unity, Maine. My husband and I have five children. Our first 
child was born 6 weeks premature, but completely healthy and vibrant. We went home the next day. 
He is now a happy and successful adult. I know from my own experiences with pregnancy that an infant 
in the womb, while dependant on his mother, is an individual human being, a separate life. He or she 
has a unique personality and from the moment I can feel that baby moving inside of me, I can sense 
their emotions and responses to what is going on around me. Babies in the womb respond to their 
father's voice and the voices of others who live with them. They respond negatively and move quickly 
away from the device that takes an ultrasound. I think they experience some level of pain from an 
ultrasound, which is why they move away fast. When I was 20 weeks pregnant with my 5"‘ child, we 
attended a symphony orchestra production of Walt Disney classics. When the music played, she 
DANCED inside me with so much enthusiasm that it was visible from the outside! 
What bothers me the most about this bill is adoption. My sister has type 1 diabetes. She and her 
husband were blessed to have two children of their own, but her body could not have any more. Yet 
their hearts longed for another baby! They chose to adopt. They were ready and willing to accept and 
love any baby, no matter what health issues or special needs that baby might come with. Although the 
process was costly, they were prepared to find a way to make it work. They waited in line for yea rs to 
get their baby. There are loving parents WAITING and LONG/NG for a baby to hold. Women have 
options other than abortion if they are unable or unwilling to keep a baby. My sister and her husband 
did finally get to adopt a baby boy. What a blessing and answer to prayer that boy isl How horrible to 
think he may have been aborted had it been more convenient for his biological mother. 
Please don't pass LD1619. Every baby is a gift from God, precious, and unique. These children have the 
same ”rIght to life" that we are all endowed with by our Creator, according to our Declaration of 
Independence. 
Tabatha Littlefield 
213 Bailey Road 
Unity, Maine 04988
