Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
Hello, I am Theresa Clark, resident of Winslow, Maine, and I'm here to testify against LD 
1619. 
As a woman who has experienced eight pregnancies and has seven living children, l 
completely understand the special miracle each child is. Every human life is precious, 
valuable, and worthy of protection in the womb and beyond. At the moment of 
conception, a unique person is created, who will never be duplicated or replicated. Each 
child is a precious gift and blessing! l have heard our babies’ heartbeats as early as 
seven weeks gestation and experienced the incredible joy of feeling their movements in 
utero as early as eleven weeks. l have lived through the trauma and devastation of 
miscarriage as well. The grief and pain of infant loss have long lasting impact. Similarly, 
women who experience abortions deal with life long depression, remorse, and grief. 
l had two high risk pregnancies, which endangered my health due to preeclampsia. At no 
point did my OB suggest we terminate my pregnancy, but rather that we deliver my' 
children early, which saved the lives of both myself and my babies! Carrying my babies 
to 30+ weeks and then killing them needlessly is unfathomable! l believe it is unethical 
and immoral! 
Mothers and children need our help and support. They need our protection and care. 
They are valuable and worthy of our love and care! This legislation does not value 
women or children! This legislation promotes a culture of death and disposal. The 
expansion of abortion in Maine does not stop rape, sex trafficking, or other sexually 
abusive activities against women. Rather, it emboldens rapists and abusers, as the result 
of their actions (pregnancies) can be hidden, removed, and discarded. 
The youngest and most vulnerable should be protected and cherished, not slated for 
death and dismemberment. 
“Maine- the way life should be” should not be full of death and destruction! 
Maine can do so much better to protect our mothers and children! There are people here 
in Maine who love mothers with unexpected and unwanted pregnancies. We want to 
help and support them to a life of success! We know that abortion is NOT the answer! t 
The people of Maine DO NOT WANT abortion expansion!
