L.D. 1619, An Act to Improve Maine's Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Committee on Judiciary 
Hon. Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
Hon. Matt Moonen, House Chair 
May 1, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Committee on Iudiciary, 
My name is Thomas Page. I'm a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine and have been practicing in Maine 
since 1996 as a physician, Board Certified in Obstetrics and Gynecology. I've attended over 3,000 
deliveries. I present today: 
In Opposition to LD 1619 
In Ianuary of this year Governor Mills proposed a bill to “strengthen Maine's reproductive health 
care laws" . Gov. Mills cited, as an example of the need for a change in the current law, the 
unfortunate circumstance of an expectant mother, “later in her pregnancy" , discovering that her 
child had a lethal skeletal dysplasia. As this was discovered after Z4 weeks into her pregnancy, the 
cut-off for a legal abortion, this understandably anguished family not only had to endure the 
crushing news that this pregnancy wouldn't result in a healthy child, but the additional insult that 
the State of Maine wouldn't allow what most would consider to be an effective and compassionate 
end to this pregnancy. 
As a physician with over 30 years’ experience caring for women concerned for the health of their 
children and themselves, I find the current law allowing the safe and effective option of an induced 
abortion, prior to viability, as appropriate in most circumstances. Without going into the myriad of 
complications that can adversely affect a pregnancy, and the well~being of a pregnant mother, it's 
safe to say that the current law addresses the ability of the medical community to care for and treat 
the overwhelming majority of circumstances that arise. 
The above example of a lethal skeletal dysplasia, an affliction occurring with a frequency of 2 out of 
10,000 pregnancies is a rare exception and would affect 2 or 3 births here in Maine each year. 
(Maine had 12,000, or so, deliveries in 2021) 
In this bill, LD 1619, the Governor proposes that this situation, the legal ability to terminate a 
pregnancy beyond the age of viability, would be facilitated only with the guidance of "qualified 
medical professionals in conjunction with their patients" . 
I agree with the spirit of Governor Mills’ proposition, however: 
LD 1619 doesn't effectively address the Governor's concern. 
Sec. 2. 22 MRSA §1S98... (of LD1619) 
1. Policy. It is the public policy of the State that the State not restrict a woman's exercise of her 
private decision to terminate a pregnancy before viability except as provided in 1597-A. 
After viability an abortion may be performed only when it is necessary in the professional 
judgement ofa physician licensed pursuant to Title 32, chapter 36 or 48. It is...
I stop there to point out the inherent flaw in this proposed legislation. In essence, the Governor is 
proposing that any licensed physician can, for any diagnostic reason, allow a pregnant 
woman to legally undergo an abortion after the pregnancy has reached viability. 
I share the Governor's concern that there are circumstances, rare as they may be, where a lethal 
congenital or chromosomal anomaly may go unnoticed in a pregnancy until after 24 weeks. In 
that unfortunate circumstance, the law should allow a pregnant mother the option of an early 
delivery knowing it will result in the delivery of a non-viable child. 
As LD 1619 is proposed, a physician could, in their professional judgement, diagnose a pregnant 
woman with any disorder and recommend an abortion as treatment. As an example, a psychiatrist 
could recommend a late term abortion as the treatment for depression. More examples could be 
cited but the point is easy to see. There are no clear guidelines as to what judgement of what 
specialty would allow an abortion. 
The law regarding abortion, as it is currently written, allows for a pregnant mother to decide the 
fate of her pregnancy prior to the age of viability. The first half of a pregnancy involves much testing 
to establish the health and viability of that pregnancy. By 20 weeks the testing is usually complete. 
An anomaly that is incompatible with life outside the womb, such as a lethal skeletal anomaly, is 
usually discovered by this time. As an obstetrician, the law in Maine thankfully allows us the 
opportunity to offer termination service to our patients, but within reason. It's a most unfortunate 
situation but we accept that childbirth and the reproductive process is an imperfect art and there 
are teams of professionals that are comfortable providing the necessary and compassionate care in 
all circumstances, including these unfortunate pregnancies. 
The vast majority of congenital and chromosomal abnormalities that result in non-viable 
pregnancies are detectable by 20 weeks. Clearly, not all are and if we are to practice medicine here 
in Maine to the highest standard, which we do, we need to adjust the legislative aspects of health 
care appropriately. 
In this instance, and with the Governor's intent in mind, the Iudiciary Committee should not 
approve LD 1619 as it is written and seek to amend or re~write it to accommodate the treatment of 
those specific pregnancies involving lethal neonatal and fetal disorders for which the Governor's 
intentions are actually directed. 
Thank you for considering my testimony. I'm happy to answer any questions. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Thomas Page,DO
