131“ MAINE LEGISLATURE 
FIRST SPECIAL SESSION-2023 
Legislative Document No. 1619 
H.P. 1044 House of Representatives, April 12, 2023 
An Act to Improve Maine’s Reproductive Privacy Laws 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: My name is Thomas Gaffney and 
I live in Stockton Springs, Waldo County. 
Should This Bill Become Law? 
(And Much More!) 
Abortions may legally be performed by a licensed physician who determines it 
necessary AFTER “viability ” of the fetus, i.e. any time after 24-26 weeks 
(counting from the first day of the last period). Viability means achieving sufﬁcient 
maturity to survive into the neonatal period, given the availability of the 
requisite technological support, in other words, support to sustain a viable 
human life. 
Should This Bill Become Law? 
Abortions may be performed when it is not necessary for the preservation of 
the life or health of the mother. 
At the time of this hearing, abortions after liability are Class D Crimes if the 
person knowingly disregarded the viability of the fetus; and the person knew 
that abortion was not necessary for the preservation of the life or health of the 
mother. This Crime is punishable by up to 364 days incarceration anda 
$2,000 ﬁne. Medications are widely available to “terminate pregnancies ” for 
teens and adults, taken before viability is achieved.
Should This Bill Become Law? 
It will be legal to perform abortions up to the day of natural birth. 
This Bill, if passed, will make us all complicit in murder (premeditated killing 
of one human being by another). Have we not learned from the many 
thousands of lives already taken? 
Instead provide an ounce of prevention that is worth a pound of cure: 
Fund our schools to give children and their parents the knowledge and skills 
to relate with self and others in healthy relationships embodied in the Golden 
Rule, beginning in Kindergarten thru High School graduation. 
Fund an expansion of Pregnancy Resource Centers for every county in Maine. 
Expand support for comprehensive adoption services statewide, following the 
model of Act of Love Adoptions (aactoﬂoveadoptions.com). 
Fund Public Service Adoption announceme nts online and on all broadcast 
media throughout Maine. 
All of us here can be grateful our own lives did not end in the womb. 
Still, we will never know how many of the children who have been aborted 
would hab ve ecome the very people we dearly need 
for this time in which we live! 
Every human life is priceless and e lt qua o any other. As such, the cost of 
support to preserve life is modest, the benefits are endless. 
Please vote not to pass.
