Tiffany Clark' 
RN, BSN, CLC, SRAS 
Skowhegan, ME 
LD 1619 OUGHT NOT TO PASS 
Good afternoon, Senator, Representative, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Tiffany Clark. I am a resident of Skowhegan, and l am here 
to testify in opposition of LD 1619. 
I am a registered nurse, certified lactation counselor, sexual risk avoidance educator, and 
mother of two. I began my career as a labor and delivery and postpartum mother/baby nurse in 
the birthing center of a local critical access hospital. I currently serve women facing unexpected 
pregnancies. 
I believe that LD1619 is too extreme for Maine. Abortion at any time for any reason is 
unnecessary and inhumane. You have likely heard the pro-choice argument that abortion needs 
to be expanded up until nine months because of medical necessity. Current law in Maine 
already covers medical necessity, and I am here to tell you, as a healthcare professional that 
specializes in women's health and pregnancy, that there is never a medical indication for 
abortion in the third trimester. In the case that a woman or her pre-born child hasa 
life-threatening condition, and continuation of pregnancy is inadvisable, the quickest and safest 
way to separate mom and baby is not by murder of the baby, but delivery of the baby. The 
dilation and evacuation process of third trimester abortions typically takes several days as the 
abortionist has to ﬁrst dilate the woman's cervix, a timeframe not compatible with emergent help. 
In the case of a true medical emergency, at gestations later than viability (which is 23-24 weeks, 
though babies have survived as early as 21 weeks gestation), a cesarean can be performed to 
not only save the life of the mother, but ideally, also that of the child. 
I am no stranger to difﬁcult pregnancies. I experienced extreme, all day sickness, weight loss, 
perinatal mood disorders, and consequent health problems with each of my pregnancies. I had 
planned and hoped and still experienced intermittent regret regarding my choices. I feel 
immense empathy for women facing pregnancy unexpectedly. lt’s why I do what I do. 
I am not here to oppose LD1619 because I do not want what’s best for women and their 
children. I am here to oppose LD1619 because women deserve better than abortion and they 
deserve better than the risks that come with it. Risks of abortion increase with progression of 
gestation - the risk of death from septic abortion is one example - and expanding abortion 
access in Maine to the extent that it would be one of the most extreme laws in our entire nation- 
will increase the incidence of complications and worsen prognoses for women. It is not right for 
Maine. It is not right for women. 
l urge you to vote “ought not to pass" . Thank you.
