My name is Trish Berube, and I live in Lewiston and I'm here to oppose LD1619. 
Everyone who has looked into the eyes of their newborn babyiis transcended to a place that reaches 
beyond their roles as mother and father. A woman who conceives a child is a mother, whether she raises 
the child, gives the child up for adoption, or consents to an abortion. We know these women as our 
friends, wives, sisters, our family, our loved ones. Once conception happens, if no one interferes, and if 
everything goes well, about nine months later, the pregnancy terminates, and there's a baby. A human 
being. A human life. 
When a woman carrying a child in her womb decides it’s ok to end that life it is a denial of her feminine 
nature, and everything that goes along with the gift of womanhood. A denial of her ability to nurture, to 
care for, and to bring forth new life. 
it’s no secret that abortion harms women. There are organizations that only exist to help women find 
forgiveness, and recover due to the physical and psychological harm from having procured an abortion. 
Just over a decade ago, the British Journal of Psychiatry reviewed 22 major studies done between 1995 
and 2009 that examined the psychological effects of abortion on women. What they found includes the 
following: 
0 There is an 81% increased risk for mental health problems, 10 percent of which is directly 
attributable to the abortion. 
0 27% of women are more likely to use self-soothing drugs. 
0 21% are more likely to display suicidal behaviors. 
0 35% are more likely to commit suicide. 
Not to mention the devastating psychological and physical consequences:- 
Alcoholism 
Child abuse 
Divorce & Relationship problems 
Drug abuse 
Post Abortion Syndrome (PAS) 
Psychological impairment 
Repeat Abortions 
Sleep disorders 
Suicide 
Thoughts of Suicide 
Deaths 
immediate complications 
Breast cancer 
Ectopic pregnancy 
Placentia previa 
Uterine perforation 
Stillbirth 
Premature delivery 
Low birth weight 
Miscarriage 
With the death of Roe v Wade it's time to help women heal from their abortions. Pass supporting bills that 
help mothers protect the life growing in them! Let us begin a time of national healing from abortion, by 
creating bills and programs that will generate a tidal wave of healing across the country, and seta 
positive and life affirming example! For the sake of our children, please vote “ought not to pass."
