Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee; my 
name is Zoe Reich, and I live in Portland, Maine.T 
l’m a mother and Mainer. I'm sharing my deeply personal story with you because we 
have the opportunity to come together as a compassionate community and help people 
like me and families like mine. 
My road to motherhood was bumpy and unexpectedly political. What began asa 
planned, healthy ﬁrst pregnancy took a devastating turn when severe fetal anomalies 
were detected during a routine scan. A team of doctors laid out my options and what the 
different paths forward would look like. All were terribly heartbreaking. And I was lucky 
because my doctors were able to have an informed and open conversation with me so 
that l could make the best decision for me and my family. That decision was to have an 
abortion. 
But providing information was all they could do because the state l was in at the time, 
New York, banned abortion after 24 weeks, similar to the law in Maine. Their hands 
were tied; they could not legally offer me the care I, and they, understood l needed. 
l was at the most vulnerable moment of my life; my husband and I had just been given 
life shattering news by doctors we trusted. Doctors who were forced by lawmakers to 
tell us “we’re sorry, we can‘t help you.” 
l was denied critical abortion care when l needed it because of a cruel and arbitrary 
timeline set by politicians, not doctors. 
The only way l could access care was to immediately get on a plane and leave my 
home and my support network of family and friends. l traveled to Colorado, to one of the 
few facilities that, even before the fall of Roe, could legally provide the medical carel 
desperately needed. Accessing that care required walking behind thick bulletproof glass 
that protects patients like me and the providers who risk their lives to help us. 
My abortion cost $10,000, plus travel expenses. l’m lucky l had the support and 
financial resources; but the reality is that most people do not. 
It doesn’t have to be this way. Abortion is healthcare. All Mainers should have the 
freedom to get the healthcare they need, when they need it, right here at home. 
The end of my ﬁrst pregnancy was heartbreaking beyond words. But my abortion wasa 
blessing and a liberation and a salvation.
The truth is: 
Any restriction on abortion is extreme for the person who needs it. 
Any restriction on abortion is a violation of someone’s autonomy. 
Any restriction on abortion hurts someone’s family. 
l often think of the opportunities and futures that abortion access makes possible: jobs, education, fulﬁlling relationships, safe and healthy future pregnancies, economic stability for families of all sizes. My abortion changed my life and allowed me to go on to have two amazing, healthy, children. 
lt’s difﬁcult to share my story, but it’s imperative to understand that patients who need abortions later in pregnancy are your family, your friends, your neighbors- we are people you know and love. 
l love this state and l want it to be a place where no one will be forced to endure the cruel and punitive suffering that I did, in order to get the healthcare they need. I hope you not only hear my story, but feel my story, and vote Ought to Pass on LD 1619 and LD 1343.
