Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Judiciary 
Committee,My name is Zoe Hutchins, i'm 15 years old, and I live in Fairfield. I’m here to 
speak against LD 1619. 
I'd like to start by asking two questions. Is your life precious to you? Who gets to decide 
whether a life has value or not? 
Only God can say whether life is precious. 
Jeremiah 1:5 Before l formed you in the womb l knew you, before you were born I set 
you apart. 
Psalm 139:13-16 For You (God) created my inmost being; You knit me together in my 
mother’s womb. I praise You because I am fearfully and wonderfully made; Your works 
are wonderful, I know that full well. My frame was not hidden from You when I was 
made in the secret place. When I was woven together in the depths of the earth, Your 
eyes saw my unformed body. All the days ordained for me were written in Your book 
before one of them came to be. 
Ephesians 2:10 For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, 
which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them. 
Aren't you glad that your mother, or grandfather, or a friend of one of your parents 
understood that your life was precious? From the unborn baby to the person confined to 
a bed with severe physical disability; all life has value whether someone else thinks it 
does or not. 
Here are some names of people alive today that were attempted to be killed by 
abortion. Some were conceived in rape, some in incest, some in a crisis pregnancy, 
some in teenage pregnancy, some with down syndrome, some with cerebral palsy. All of 
these people are thankful that no matter how their life was started that someone 
understood that their life was precious and had value enough to save them. 
Melissa Ohden, Claire Culwell, Josiah Presley, Gianna Jessen, Nik Hoot, Amy Miles, 
Joel Fevig, Tim Berndt, Sarah Elizabeth Brown 
These people affirm that ALL children, children like you and I once were; have the right 
to live. No one should have the right to end someone’s life in this country but everyone 
should have the right to be alive in spite of what others think about their life. 
\/Ole C\_)8\(\\' QQH’ ‘fl; €0§$ O“K ~ 
M gov.
