Testimony in Support of LD 1549 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 20, 2023
Testimony in Support of LD 1549
An Act to Direct the Public Utilities Commission to Seek Informational Bids Regarding
Small Modular Nuclear Reactors in the State 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am from Winterport. I am submitting this testimony 
in support of LD 1549, “An Act to Direct the Public Utilities Commission to Seek 
Informational Bids Regarding Small Modular Nuclear Reactors in the State.”
With the incredible capacity and reliability of nuclear power, it is hard to believe 
how little it is utilized in our country. France invests heavily in nuclear energy, and 
twelve years after the Fukushima disaster we see Japan planning to reactivate reactors 
and increase their supply. The safety record of the nuclear industry in the United States 
should give us confidence to pursue nuclear power; we must learn from past disasters 
in other countries and adapt rather than shrinking back from a great opportunity.
I do not find the idea of having nuclear reactors in our State—even one in my 
own community, were that a possibility—upsetting. I am in favor of more local jobs and 
more local energy. What I do find upsetting is high energy prices, which hold back 
families and businesses from economic growth.
If we are to be forced to divest ourselves of fossils fuels, then any serious effort 
to expand alternative sources of energy must consider nuclear power. Maine must do 
her part to provide her citizens with energy security by seeking out clean nuclear power
Testimony in Support of LD 1549 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
generated right here in our State rather than purchased at high prices from less reliable 
sources. Mainers need cheap energy.
We cannot spurn domestic oil production, diminish coal-fired electricity, 
disregard nuclear energy, and at the same time expect our economy to recover. 
Something must fill the gap, and solar and wind do not yet have the capacity to 
realistically meet our energy requirements. I would like to see all options considered, 
and I see small modular nuclear reactors as a viable route we would be remiss to 
overlook or ignore. Please direct the Public Utilities Commission to request these 
informational bids.
I ask the Committee to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
