Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Support of 
L.D. 1549, An Act to Direct the Public Utilities Commission to Seek Informational 
Bids Regarding Small Modular Nuclear Reactors in the State 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
April 20, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. I am Steven Hudson, an attorney with the ﬁrm of Preti 
Flaheity, here today on behalf of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG). IECG has been 
representing medium and large sized consumers of energy in Maine for more than twenty-ﬁve years at 
the state, regional and federal level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our 
members and cost-effectively help Maine achieve its climate goals. IECG testiﬁes today in support of 
LD 1549, An Act to Direct the Public Utilities Commission to Seek Iry’ormatz' onal Bids Regarding Small 
Modular Nuclear Reactors in the State. 
“There’s no transition that works without nuclear, full stop.”1 
- Mark Carney, Chair, Brookﬁeld Asset Management; Head of 
Transition Investing, September 2022 
“Nuclear power and hydropower form the backbone of low-carbon electricity generation. 
Together, they provide three-quarters of global low-carbon generation. Over the past 50 years, the 
use of nuclear power has reduced CO2 emissions by over 60 gigatonnes — nearly two years’ worth 
of global energy-related emissions. ”2 
- International Energy Agency, May 2019 
1. Nuclear energy protects air quality 
2. Nuclear energy’s land footprint is small 
3. Nuclear energy produces minimal waste?’ 
- US Department of Energy, June 2022 
l 
https:if ﬁnancialpostcomfconimodities/ene1"g}g[brool<lields~carnev~savs~ne£-zero=doesnt “w0rk~without-nuclear-power 
2 httpszf/WWW.iea.orgireportsfnuciear-poWer~in-gt»c1ean~eneI'gv~system 
3 hug//www.e11ergygovineiarticles/'3 —r§asQgs-Why»nuolear-clean-and-sustainable
l
IECG shares these quotes and references to materials to help the Committee understand how the 
countries of the world are going to get to Zero carbon — a goal that the State of Maine has committed 
itself to accomplish. SMR technology under development worldwide, but especially in the U.S. and 
Canada is an important step in achieving aggressive climate change mitigation. 
“Achieving climate policy targets will require large-scale deployment of low-carbon energy 
technologies, including nuclear power. The small modular reactor (SMR) is viewed as a possible 
solution to the problems of energy security as well as climate change.”“ 
- Iyer, Hultman, Fetter and Kim, University of Maryland and 
the Joint Global Research Institute, 2014 
LD 1549 is a small step in the State learning more about developments of this technology, and possible 
opportunities for leveraging investments of others in helping to secure a source of zero-carbon base-load 
energy, Whether located in Maine or located in a jurisdiction which can deliver such energy to Maine. 
IECG urges you to support this bill, which seems like a good way to start without binding the State to do 
anything except learn more. Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is happy to 
answer questions now or provide additional resources for the Committee at the work session. 
4 
Iyer, Gokul, Hultman, Nathan, Fetter, Steve, Kim, Son H., 2014. Implications of Small Modular Reactors for Climate 
Change Mitigation, Energy Economics, 45, l44—l54.( doi: 10. l0l6/j.enec0.20l4.06.023), 
http, _gf§spp.un"ld.edu; ’sitesidefault£tilegit) l 9- 
Q1/lgiplications%2Ooi ‘?/620SMRs%2Oibr§ ’£i2j)Clggate ‘5§2GChange%2(}Mitigation.pdt ‘
2
