 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of  Law 
 
 
DATE:  Feb. 16, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Criminal Justice & Public Safety  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                      samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 244, Resolve, Directing Maine Emergency Medical Services to   
  Convene  a Stakeholder Group to Explore Emergency Medical Services 
  Career  Pathways and Educational Opportunities in the State  
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety: I write on behalf of the 
University of Maine System (UMS) to express our support and willingness to 
participate in the stakeholder group proposed by LD 244 . 
UMS is the largest contributor to the state’s workforce and in the past decade, our 
public universities have collectively conferred 55,970 degrees – led by those in 
health professions , including nursing, mental health and human services, health 
sciences and public health.  
While our System does not currently offer EMS -specific training courses, our universities’ 
nursing program leaders are eager to explore new partnership s to help address this 
severe workforce shortage, and see opportunities especially to support simulation and 
skills testing .   
Additionally, we would like the Committee to know that the University of Maine 
operates a student -run EMS service . The University Volunteer Ambulance Corps , 
know  as UVAC,  provides emergency transport and stand -by service for the UMaine 
campus and communities of Orono, Veazie, Old Town, Milford and Bradley , and last 
year celebrated its 50th anniversary . UVAC responds to about 500 calls and provides 
nearly 30,000 hours of service annually . Licensure as an EMT is not required to serve, 
through there is always at least one licensed EMT on -board. UVAC support s weekly 
trainings and offers members of the corps an EMT course on the Orono campus 
through a partnersh ip with the Winslow -based Atlantic Partners EMS. UVAC serves as 
an extracurricular for our students, including those pursuing healthcare professions, that 
allows them to gain valuable healthcare experience while also providing vital emergency 
medical services in the area. We think this model is one the stakeholder group 
envisioned by LD 244 could consider.   
UMS thanks Sen. Curry and the co -sponsors of this Resolve for including our System  
and, given our statewide workforce impact  and healthcare training facilities , looks forward 
to helping to strengthen and grow emergency medical services career pathways and 
educational opportunities .  
