tea
$e __ _>,,m, STATE OF MAINE 
ﬁg PUBLIC urrtmrss oorvuvussrow 
. 
Qgﬂgggg 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
4 Neither for Nor Against 
LD 923, An Act to Improve Disclosure of Present and Future Costs to Maine 
Electricity Consumers 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 923, An Act to Improve Disclosure of Present and Future Costs to Maine Electricity 
Consumers on behalf of the Maine Public Utilities Commission (Commission). 
D f d Ct e erre oss 
Section l of this bill would require the Commission to annually post on its Website an estimate of all 
deferred costs for which ratepayers of each public utility may be responsible, including any debt 
incurred by the utility and accounted for in the schedules, separately stating the principal amount and 
interest that accrued or will accrue, in addition to any amounts attributable to the return on equity. It is 
not clear to the Commission what is intended by “deferred costs.” is this limited to costs speciﬁcally 
deferred by the Commission or is it more expansive? It is important to note that not all “deferred costs” 
are ultimately recovered by a utility. This could make the information required on the Commission ’s 
website potentially misleading to customers. If moving forward with the bill, it may be helpful to 
define What is meant by deferred costs and whether the Commission is required to post only those costs 
approved by the Commission for recovery from ratepayers. 
J anuarv 1“ to December 315‘ Residential Rates . 
LD 923 also requires (section 2) that on January ls‘ of each year the Commission post on its website 
residential transmission and distribution rates applicable from January ls‘ to December 31“ . Currently, 
the Commission ’s website does include a rate chart,1 but it does not capture the rate in effect on 
January ls‘ . The Commission has been exploring Ways to improve this chart and make it more useful to 
ratepayers. This directive regarding the applicable rate on January 1“ is consistent what has been 
discussed internally. However, we would like to note that the rate that is applicable on January 1“ may 
change several times over the course of year due to various adjustments (for example stranded cost 
adjustments). Therefore, for most, if not all transmission and distribution utilities there is not a singular 
applicable rate in effect from January ls‘ to December 315‘. 
‘ https://www.1naine.gov/mpuc/regulated-utilities/electricity/delivery-rates 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, I-lallowell, l\/H3 04347 MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 71 l FAXI (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony ~LD 923 March 21, 2023 
Commission Orders 
LD 923 also requires the Commission, in an order approving a change in a schedule of ﬁled rates, to 
include the Commission ’s estimate of the total deferred costs, the estimated or actual term of the 
deferral, and the total estimated interest and return on equity included in the utility’s approved rate. The Commission notes that it regularly includes the projected allowed return on equity in such orders. The Commission has no objection to including an estimate of total deferred costs and the actual or 
estimated term of the deferral, subject to the clariﬁcations discussed above. 
Lastly, it is unclear to the Commission if sections l and 3 of the bill are meant to apply to all utilities or 
just transmission and distribution utilities. The language as drafted applies to all public utilities; 
however, the title of the bill implies this is meant to apply only to transmission and distribution utilities. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the Work session.
2
