P O W E R EI 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 92.3 
An Act to Improve Disclosure of Present and Future Costs to Maine Electricity Consumers 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I am here 
today on behalf of Versant Power neither for nor against LD 923. 
As stated in the summary of this legislation, LD 923 would require the Public Utilities Commission to annually 
publish on its publicly accessible website current residential transmission and distribution utility rates and an 
estimate of all deferred costs for which ratepayers of a public utility may be responsible. It also requires the 
commission, when issuing an order approving a rate change, to include an estimate of the total deferred costs, the 
estimated or actual term of the deferral, and the total estimated interest and return on equity included in the 
utility's approved rates. 
First, we would note that the Commission already reports rates on its website, broken out by transmission and 
distribution, stranded cost, and standard offer. 
The concept of disclosing an estimate of all deferred costs is more complicated, and while Versant Power is 
committed to complying with directives set forth by the Legislature and Commission, we believe that there area 
number of nuances that should be addressed if the Legislature decides to proceed with this legislation. 
LD 923 would presumably include in the deferred costs it contemplates accounting orders, which allow the utility 
to defer recovery of certain prudently-incurred costs until a future date. The PUC may issue accounting orders for 
various types of expenditures, whether via speciﬁc regulatory dockets (e.g., proceedings to recover extraordinary 
storm costs) or as part of the utilities ’ rate cases or other proceedings. 
Currently, an accounting order would be requested in an initial public proceeding, followed by further discussion 
in the utility’s next rate case (another public proceeding) when the deferred costs are proposed to be incorporated 
into rates. 
The current language of LD 923 does not specify the format the PUC should use to collect and, more important, 
present this information to customers. Without context, it is not clear that customers would be able to easily 
understand these data, what they represent, whether or not those amounts were previously approved by the 
Commission, or how and when these costs are applied to rates. 
For these reasons, should the Committee decide to move forward with this legislation, we would urge more 
technical discussion about exactly what information is being sought and if the PUC has recommendations on how 
to effectively produce that information in a manner that is helpful to customers. 
Thank you for your consideration and we would be pleased to answer questions or provide more information at 
the work session upon your request. 
Bangor Hydro District -— PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District -— PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
