TESTIMONY OF INDUSTRIAL ENERGY CONSUMER GROUP
‘ 
I 
In Support of LD 923 » 
An Act to Improve Disclosure of Present and Future Costs to Maine Electricity 
Consumers 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology: 
The Industrial Energy Consumer Group is an incorporated not-for-profit trade 
association of Maine manufacturers and other industrial energy consumers. As 
members of this Committee know, IECG advocates at the state, regional and federal 
level for rapid and efficient climate mitigation while assuring reliability and low costs for 
all Maine consumers. 
IECG supports LD 923, because Maine electricity consumers desewe to know what our 
Public Utilities Commission thinks the price tag will be, for the present and future costs 
for which consumers will be liable in transmission and distribution utility rates. We do 
have one proposed revision to the bill as printed, to define “deferred costs” as including 
all present and future costs for which ratepayers are or may be obligated. 
This bill would require the Commission to disclose its best estimate of all present and 
future costs for which public utility ratepayers are legally obligated or could be 
responsible. For example, the cost estimate would include principal and interest . 
amounts associated with public utility debt, as well asany amounts attributable toa 
return on equity. It should also include costs associated with Maine’s energy policy, 
such as net energy billing and long-term contracting programs. 
By requiring the Commission to provide this estimate, the bill would shed important light 
on the costs driving T&D rates. This would give consumers and policymakers actionable 
information about utility rates and their drivers - and this is essential if Maine is to use 
scarce ratepayer dollars as efficiently as possible, -to maximize the “bang for the buck". 
The bill would also require the Commission to publish information on transmission and 
distribution rates for residential consumers. As industrial energy consumers, IECG 
knows how important it is for a customer to know the price they will pay for electricity, 
both now and in the future. By ensuring clear disclosure of T&D rates, this bill could help 
consumers make better decisions about electricity.' 
As noted above, we suggest a revision to the bill, to‘ define “deferred costs” as including 
all present and future costs for which ratepayers are or may be obligated. This revision 
would ensure the estimates properly reflect the scope of ratepayer cost exposure. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 923. l would be happy to 
answer any questions now or at the work session. IECG urges this committee to vote 
Ought to Pass on this bill._ 
20239521 .1
