 
   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
     mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler   Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1403,  “An Act to Promote Minimum Wage Consistency by Limiting the  
Authority of Municipalities Regarding Minimum Hourly Pay ” 
April  11, 2023  
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst  
 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is James Myall. I’m an Economic Policy Analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I’m here 
today to testify in opposition  to LD 1403 , “An Act to Promote Minimum Wage Consistency by Limiting the Authority of 
Municipalities Regarding Minimum Hourly Pay.”  MECEP opposes this bill because it would potentially reduce wages for 
tens of thousands of workers in the state, undermine M aine’s principles of home rule, and ignore the reality of higher 
costs of living for certain parts of the state.  
There are currently two municipalities in Maine which have set higher minimum wages than the statewide minimum 
wage – Portland and Rockland. In both cases, their local minimum wage is $14 per hour this year, and will rise to $15 per 
hour next year.  Under LD 1403, these local ordinances would be immediately invalidated, and thousands of Mainers  
who earn at or near the minimum wage could  see lower wages in 2024.  While the difference between the projected 
local and statewide wages next year appears small – likely 55 cents per houri – even this difference would mean a loss of 
$1,144 a year for a full -time worker. And for workers living paycheck -to-paycheck, this is a significant amount.  
What’s more, we believe the minimum wage is an area in which it is appropriate to maintain Maine’s tradition of home 
rule.  The statewide minimum wage should act as a floor to guarantee a basic standard of living and dignity of work to all 
Mainers. Allowing local governments to set higher wage levels in their localities allows th em to account for the higher 
cost of living in those areas.  
Finally, it’s worth recognizing that this bill would overrule the wishes of voters in Portland and Rockland.  In both 
municipalities, the current ordinances were approved by referendum  in 2020 – by 66 percent of Rockland voters in and 
60 percent of Portland voters. If local residents feel that a minimum wage increase is inappropriate for their town or 
city, they can reject the proposal, as we saw Portland voters do last year. The legislature should not be second -guessing 
what’s right for these towns and overruling their voters.  
I urge you to vote “ought not to pass,” to preserve wages for thousands of Mainers, to preserve Maine’s home rule 
tradition, and to preserve the will of voters in Portland and  Rockland.  
Thank you. I’ll be happy to take any questions.  
 
Note  
 
i Based the Congressional Budget Office’s estimated rate of inflation for 2023 of 4.8%, in their February 2023 budget outlook report.  
