 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Opposition to  
LD 1403 , An Act to Promote Minimum Wage Consistency by Limiting the Authority of 
Municipalities Regarding Minimum Hourly Pay  
 
April 11, 2023  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee.  My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1403  
on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s 
Legislative Poli cy Committee and directed to establish positions on bills of municipal interest.   
The authority of self -governance is a privilege that the residents of Maine’s 484 
communities take seriously.  No two communities are alike.  Residents are motivated by 
different priorities, principles,  and values, which are translated into policies, ordinances and 
charter provisions that are debated openly and rigorously at the annual town meeting and at 
selectboard and council meetings.   
Municipal government proceedings ar e open, heavily monitored by media and regulated 
by the requirements of Maine’s Freedom of Access laws.  They are also conducted at times of 
the day when a majority of residents are available to participate, and through the use of remote 
technology, now ac cessible at great convenience.  Municipal government is truly an open book.  
For this reason, municipal officials strongly oppose the minimum wage preemption 
proposed in LD 1403 .  Barring an inherent risk to public health or safety, residents should retain  
the authority to weigh the benefits and risks and make decisions on a variety of issues that 
address the community’s interests and priorities.    
The Legislature’s authority to limit local control should be used sparingly.  The very 
individuals who elect lawmakers should in turn be entrusted to decide what is best for their 
communities.    
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective.  If you have questions about the 
Association’s testimony, please do not hesitate to contact me at 1 -800-452-8786 or 
kdufour@memun.org . 
 
 

