,. HoUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
£30,; 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
3 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
‘ 
(207) 287-1400 
Holly T_ Sargent TTY: Maine Relay 711 
625 York Street 
York, ME 03909 
(207) 358-4793 
Hollv Sar2ent@legislature.maine.,<1ov 
April ll, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Holly T. Sargent in support of 
LD 1016, An Act to Support College Students Participation as Interns 
Before the State and Local Government Committee 
Good afternoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. I am Holly Sargent, and I represent 
District I47, the historic town of York. I am here today to speak in strong support of LD 1016, 
An Act to Support College Students Participation as Interns. 
My support of this bill is personal, professional and practical. 
Despite the danger that I am divulging my age, I share that as a newly minted graduate of 
Windham High School and a new college student I received an internship to work in the ofﬁce of 
Senator Edmund S. Muskie in Washington DC. This experience opened my eyes, shaped my 
career choices and strengthened my political values. This bill before you today allows more 
Maine students to have an early exposure to public service and legislative policy making. 
My professional support stems from my many experiences crafting fellowships and internships 
while working at Harvard’s Kennedy School and the Rhodes Trust. I negotiated fellowships for 
Israel, Southeastern Europe, Denmark and, yes, even Maine, and I then watched as individuals 
returned to their homes and contributed to their communities. 
Investment in people, especially young people, yields the greatest return on investment. If 
one broadens their experience, helps them hone their skills and builds their network of 
acquaintance, one can be assured of the lifelong ripple effects. 
My practical support comes from the heartfelt, albeit early, assessment that, as a citizen 
legislature, we can all use extra brain power as we digest over 2000 pieces of legislation. We 
also can always beneﬁt from additional perspectives. This may not be desired by all legislators, 
but it can be of tremendous value to our performance and for the inspiration of future leaders. 
Thank you for your time, I’m willing to answer any questions you have of me.
