tlnivenszties 
UNIVERSITY OF MAll\lE SYSTEM! 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
Regarding LD 1016, An Act to Support College Student Participation 
as Policy Interns for State Legislators, April 11, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State & Local Government: My name is Samantha Warren and I am the Director of Government 
Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS), providing informational testimony today 
regarding LD 1016, An Act to Support College Student Participation as Policy Interns for State 
Legislators. 
Maine’s public universities have a long tradition of preparing and placing students in high 
impact internships that provide real-world learning, and career and community connections 
that increase learner success and the likelihood they will stay to live and work in the state 
after graduation. 
Most relevant to your consideration of LD 1016 are three programs led by the University of Maine: 
The Kenneth Palmer Maine State Legislative internship Program, administered by the 
UMaine Political Science Department, was started in the 1990s by the now-retired Professor 
Palmer. The program places 2-4 interns each spring semester in legislative leadership 
offices, typically those that best align with the students ‘ political leanings. Students work two 
full days in Augusta, earning six credits, and take their classes on campus the other days. 
UMaine_has also run a congressional internship program in,Washington, D.C. since 1958. 
The Maine Government Summer Internship Program, administered by UMaine’s Margaret 
Chase Smith Policy Center in partnership with the Maine Bureau of Human Resources, 
places talented college students in full-time, 12-week paid summer internships with local and 
state government. Since its establishment in 1967, the program has placed more than 1,800 
students and many have gone on to pursue public service careers. The 52 interns in 2022, 
including your constituents, conducted compensation studies for State agencies, developed 
data dashboards to assist Department decision-making, created informational webinars for 
navigating MaineCare and much more. The 2022 program report will be forwarded to the 
Committee staff. 
The Maine Public Policy Scholars Program, which is funded by the Maine Community 
Foundation and administered by UMaine’s Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center, supports a 
student from each UMS university undertake a year-long research project studying a current 
state public policy issue. Students receive a $5,000 scholarship and up to $1,000 for research 
expenses including travel. _ 
UMS supports the intent of LD 1016, which is consistent with our commitment to both provide 
meaningful paid work learning experiences to our students and to sen/e as a resource to the 
Legislature and its policy-making. This is an exciting idea, and we appreciate Representative Osher 
bringing it forward. The volume and quality of applications for our relevant current programs suggests 
there would be strong student demand for opportunities like those proposed by the bill. 
University of.Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent- University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque isle - 
University of Southern Maine- University of Maine School of Law
However, based on our extensive experience administering government internships, we believe there 
must be ample time and thought given to developing a program that best positions participating 
students, legislators and the institutions for success, especially given the scale of what is being 
proposed (up to 185 interns). We also think rather than creating something entirely new, there is real 
opportunity to leverage existing programs like the UMaine offerings I've overviewed, and to think 
about legislative committees and nonpartisan offices as alternative or additional internship host sites. 
UMS would recommend that this bill be amended into a resolve creating a commission to study the 
further development of a State House internship program, carefully considering things like internship 
duties, duration and work location; the placement process; training of interns and legislators; 
curriculum and cohort development; student safety; supervisory structure; space and equipment 
needs; program evaluation and reporting; and the funding that would be necessary to support intern 
compensation, program administration and other costs. 
We would recommend the group report back to this Committee with recommendations before the 
Second Regular Session and be inclusive of legislators, leadership office staff, nonpartisan 
legislative staff including the l_egisIature ’s Executive Director and Human Resources Director, 
students or alumni with relevant internship experience, and university internship coordinators and 
law, political science and/or public policy faculty. 
We would welcome participating in this process and thank the Committee for your support of 
Maine's public universities and our students. 
Page 2 of2
