Testimony re LD320 “Resolve, to Establish the Maine Multicultural Center Welcome Center Initiative” 
 
 
My name is Dennis Chinoy  I’ve been a longtime volunteer with WIN,  Welcoming Immigrant 
Neighbors, which is now incorporated into the Maine Multicultural Center as the direct 
services component for immigrants to the Bangor area.   I volunteer with MMCC, as well 
  
I can attest that MMCC is an organization whose core of extremely dedicated, community-
engaged and talented volunteers have been working for some years now to ensure that 
newcomers to our community can access the social, logistical, educational, medical & other 
critical resources they need to navigate, and to integrate well into our community.   And to 
package that in a warm welcome for people now far from home.  We are not case workers, 
but nevertheless work to provide that kind of wrap-around care such a welcome 
requires.  Bangor’s designation as a refugee-re-settlement site by Catholic Charities, Maine’s 
federal agency that oversees Refugee Immigrant Services, has been largely on the strength of 
MMCC's work. 
 
The migration of immigrants to Maine, as we know, encompasses a broad spectrum ranging 
from those with few resources in flight from duress in their home countries, to well trained 
professionals seeking economic opportunity here.  MMCC welcomes them all.  In the case of 
foreign-trained workers, their ability to succeed, and hopefully stay to continue to enhance  
the strength of our local economy, depends on the multi-faceted support we can help provide.   
MMCC has already done critical groundwork in this preparation and has developed 
relationships with other community entities which this work must involve. 
  
Until recently MMCC has done this work with not a penny of public funds from local, state or 
federal sources.    Going forward, as the numbers of New Mainers accelerate, the only way this 
work can be sustainably accomplished is to add dollars to the volunteer expertise and 
compassion that has powered it thus far. 
 
We’ve watched as the numbers of immigrants to southern Maine has spiked and how Portland 
and other communities have strained to accommodate them.  In the Bangor area we have a 
fairly short window to be proactive in contending with what will be a northward flow of New 
Mainers.   That impending influx does not depend on whether  these funds are approved. They 
are here, and they are coming.  However, the Bangor area’s ability to sustainably contend with 
and to integrate refugees arriving here very much depends on your approval of these funds.   I 
urge you to approve them. 
 
Dennis Chinoy 
36 Garland St, Bangor 
dennischinoy@gmail.com  
207 659 2474 
 
