 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Testimony of Beth Pearce  on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 11 , 2023  
 
Supporting : 
LD 1256 , “An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine Dental Education 
Loan Program ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Mastraccio  
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Ad vancement and Business , I am Beth Pearce , Oral Health Program Manager  at 
the Maine Primary Care Association (MPCA).  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
 
Oral health care access in Maine is a priority for MPCA  and our Community Health Center Network . As 
an organization, w e are  focused on supporting CHCs with the expansion of MaineCare’s comprehensive 
adult dental benefit. This includes dental assistant training, addressing health eq uity needs, and 
ensuring that CHC voices are included at relevant state -level meetings.  
 
As we know, Maine is experiencing workforce shortages in many heath care professions, and dental 
providers  are no exception. Rural areas, in particular, are experienc ing critical challenges with access to 
care . As more adults have access to the expanded dental benefits, the health centers’ patient population 
and the complexity of the patient needs have increased. CHCs are doing everything they can to ensure 
that patien ts receive the quality treatment they deserve, but waitlists continue to be long across the 
state. All efforts that work to find solutions to this dire situation  are -appreciated .   
 
Much of our work has been focused on assisting CHCs with the use of dental therapists at their practices. 
Dental therapists are mid -level providers that can perform both restorative and some extraction 
procedures. Their work in a dental practice  can alleviate the many demands on general dentists, allowing 
them to focus on the more complex procedures. This leads to each provider type working to the highest 
scope of their licensure.  The first and only dental therapist in Maine is working at a Commu nity Health 
Center under the supervision of staff dentists. This new staff member has become so important that the 
health center plans to only hire new general dentists who support this staffing model.   
 
Dentists at Community Health Centers have shared that the  Maine Dental Education Loan Program  
through FAME is a great asset when recruiting  Maine dentists to rural areas . Expanding the  eligibility to 
include dental hygienists, dental therapists, dental assistants and expanded fun ction dental assistants  
would support t hese efforts and significantly  increase access to care . 
 
 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, thank you for considering our comments. Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at bpearce@mepca.org  with any follow up questions.  
 
Beth Pearce  
Oral Health Program Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
