Testimony of Courtney Vannah, Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives, MCD Global Health 
for LD 1256: An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine Dental 
Education Loan Program  
Before the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
Public Hearing: Tuesday April 11,  2023 
 
Dear Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and esteemed  members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business , I am pleased to offer 
testimony in support of LD 1256, An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding 
the Maine Dental Education Loan Program . I am the Program Manager of Oral Health 
Initiatives at MCD Global Health , a dental hygienist, and a lifelong resident of rural Maine. I 
am submitting testimony to encourage the Committee  to support this bill to include the array of 
dental health professionals practicing in our State .  
The exclusive nature of the existing  statute, limiting loan repayment to dentist s only , negative ly 
affects Maine’s ability to attract valuable members of the oral health workforce. In my 
professional role, I have been comp iling oral health  workforce data across  Maine. Thus far, my 
research indicates  that there are 3X more open/unfilled positions for dental hygienists  than 
dentists, and even more dental assisting positions.  
Moreover, Maine desperately needs to ease the burden on the dentists by reducing the demand 
for dental surgery/ restorative  dentistry . The way to do this is by expanding  the prevention  
specialist  workforce , the dental hygien ists, who are  tasked with PREVEN TION  of dental 
disease . We know that preve nting dental disease is not only more  cost effective  than treatment , 
but prevention  also minimizes  unnecessary emotional  and physical trauma  caused by the 
treatment  of a PREVENTABLE condition. Focusing solely on recruitment of those tasked with 
treating existing disease perpetuate s the nature of a broken system that is focused on restoration  
not prevention.  
As a former faculty  member  in the Dental Hygiene  Program at the University  of New Engl and, 
where the majority of students  come to Maine for their education  from out -of-state, I can attest 
sincerely that the student loan debt they incur is no match for the lower wage offerings in 
Maine . Something must be done to level the playing field if we  want to attract these valuable 
workforce members, asking them to join our State where they are, unfortunately , guaranteed  
less pay than if they return home to our neighboring  states  to the South.  
I’m hopeful that you will leverage this opportunity to support the expansion of Maine’ s oral 
health workforce and  thank you greatly for your consideration of my testimony on this 
important issue.  
Sincerely,  
Courtney E. Vannah, IPDH, MS, MPH  
Program Manager, Oral Health Initiatives  
MCD Global Health  
