 
                                                   
105 2nd St Suite 2A  
Hallowell, ME 04347  
MOHC@mcdph.org  
www.maineoralhealthcoal ition.org  
 
Testimony of the Maine Oral Health Coalition  
Submitted by Judith Fei nstein, Coordinator   
In Support of  LD 1256 ,  
An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine Dental Education 
Loan Program  
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator  Curry , Represen tative  Roberts  and distinguished members of the  Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement & Business  Committee , this testimony is submitted on behal f of the Maine Oral 
Health Coalition  (MOHC)  in support of LD 1256 . Founded 25 years ago as the Maine Dental Access 
Coalition, we have function ed as a broad netwo rk, and maintain a close interest in policy and systems 
changes that can improve access to services and oral health status in Maine.  
 
The MOHC  has been consistently supportive of legislative proposals that come forward with the intent 
to increase acc ess to oral health services throughout Maine . In fact, the MOHC  provided the in itial forum 
for discussion and the development  of the Maine D ental Education Loan Program over 20 years ago and 
in the rules that were promulgated to implement it , in partnership with the Maine Primary Care 
Association and DHHS . In our view,  the Program has been well utilized over the years and has met the 
overall objectives it was designed to address. However, times have changed , and it may very well be 
time to take a critical  look at the  Program ’s funding level and requirements .  
 
• The loan am ount  is low in comparison to the costs of dental school and the debt burden most new 
dentists face when they graduate . The loan a mount has not changed and has lost value.  
• The r equirement  for Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) designation was based on federal 
definitions by def ault, absent the existence of  any specific to Maine. It’s time to look at amending  
the P rogram ’s requirements , and to consider how to develop criteria th at work in our state .  
• Providing care to  MaineCare membe rs as a percentage of the pr actice panel was required because 
of the need to create more  access to care . A critical look at the percen tage of MaineCare  patients  to 
be served , within a given geographical  location and  other parameters could mean , for example, that 
a small , rural , private practice  could be an eligible  site for a dent ist or other de ntal professional  
eligible for the Program . 
• Extending eligibility  to include dental hygienists, dental therapists, expanded function dental 
assistants and dental assistants  recognize s the role of the dental team and the painful  fact in 2023 
that a dental practice cannot function effi ciently without sufficient staff. Those other professionals 
also face significant debt ; incentives to pr actice in our underserved area s that also help relieve th eir 
debt burden  should be a win -win.  
• The program needs mor e funding . Increasing the f unding level for the program , to increase the 
number of participants and their loan amounts,  will make it more attractive to applicants.  
 
We all should do all that we can to encourage , welcome and retain interested dental professionals to 
offer  their skills to care for people in Maine who ne ed that care.  Extending eligibility  for the Maine 
Dental Education Loan Program to include dental hygienist s, dental therapist s, expanded function dental 
assistant s and dental assistant s, and increasing  the Program ’s funding , are tangible actions you can take.  
 
We urge the Committee to consider the potential of LD  1256  to help  relieve the severe and persistent 
workforce challenges tha t continue to  limit access to oral health care  in Maine .   
 
Thank you.  
 
Judith Feinstein, MSPH, Coordinator  
 jafme52@gmail.com  MOHC Steering 
Committee  
 
Wendy Alpaugh, DMD  
General Practice 
Dentist, Stonington  
 
Kalie Hess, MPH  
Children’s Oral Health 
Network of Maine  
 
Beth Pearce  
Maine Primary Care 
Association  
 
Bonnie Vaughan,  
IPDH, MEd, MBA  
Kennebec Valley 
Family Dentistry 
Center and Maine 
Dental Hygienists’ 
Association  
 
Judith Feinstein, MSPH  
Coordinator  
 
The Maine Oral Health 
Coalition  represents a 
statewide group of 
organizations and 
individuals who work 
together as a network 
to support each other 
in raising awareness 
and promoting oral 
health and dental 
disease prevention 
activities, through 
community education 
and advocacy, with 
the vision that oral 
health is valued as a 
vital element of 
wellness for all Maine 
residents.  
 
