 
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine | Kalie Hess | kalie@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 
 1 Testimony of Kalie Hess, Associate Director 
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine 
LD 1256: An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine Dental Education Loan Program 
Before the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business 
Public Hearing: Tuesday April 11, 2023 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement, and Business, my name is Kalie Hess and I am the Associate Director of the Children’s Oral Health 
Network of Maine (COHN/Network). Our network includes providers of dental care and leaders in communities 
and educational institutions who work collaboratively to ensure that all children in Maine can grow up free from 
preventable dental disease. 
 
We hear from partners all over the state about the dental workforce shortage and we are actively working on 
solutions that can help us better use the workforce that we have to prevent disease before it begins. COHN has 
also been partnering with the State of Maine on their public oral health workforce effort. There are significant 
workforce challenges that are resulting in severe illness for people all over the state and our Network is 
extremely concerned about this issue. 
 
Ultimately, the cost of dental education is a barrier to growing the workforce needed to protect our state’s oral 
health. COHN supports adequately funding the Maine Dental Education Loan Program and expanding access to 
dental assistants, expanded function dental assistants, hygienists, and dental therapists as well as dentists. The 
broader dental workforce is critical for bringing preventive care to all children so that we can begin to prevent 
this disease before it takes hold and requires more complex and more expensive treatment. All of these 
professions are critical to helping us create a Maine free from preventable dental disease. Expanding this 
program to the entire dental team respects and acknowledges the valuable role that the entire oral health team 
has in protecting oral health. 
 
We also would encourage efforts to ensure that this program is specifically supporting providers who serve a 
higher percentage of people with MaineCare and/or offer a sliding fee scale. Children with MaineCare face 
extreme waitlists for dental care and are therefore much less likely to have received any preventive care 
compared to their peers with commercial insurance (only 42% of children with MaineCare had even a single 
preventive dental claim in 2021 compared to 63% of children with commercial insurance).1 
 
Furthermore, expanding access to this loan repayment program is also an issue of gender equity. The reality is 
that the dental assistant and hygiene workforce is disproportionately made up of women.2 Supporting the 
broader dental workforce with loan repayment is a small way to mitigate the wage gap that women often face.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
 
1 https://www.mainecohn.org/assets/docs/2020-COHN-Data-Brief.pdf 
2 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK219663/ 
