Norma Desjardins DMD  
                                            778 Main Street                             Van Buren ME  04785  
 
 
Testimony ‘Neither for Nor Against’ LD 1256:  An Act to Increase Access to 
Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine Dental Education Loan Program  
 
Respected Members of  the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business 
Committee ,  
I am Dr. Norma Desjardin s, a practicing dentist i n Maine since 1992.  
 
Over the past several years I have had to continuously recruit providers to work in our dental 
practice, a small nonprofit that was set up 12 years ago to provide a dental home for the 
thousands of Aroostook County children who would otherwise not have a dental office to go to , 
mainly because  they are MaineCare insured.   Recruiting for any practice in Maine is a difficult 
task.   In our case, it's especially challenging.   I find my days filled with trying to find a 
dentist, dental  hygienists, or assistants t o come work with us.   In a post- pandemic world, it's 
even more difficult.    
 
As such, it's important  to use any and all available incentives for which dental providers might 
qualify.   This includes the current Maine Dental Education Loan Program, which cur rently serves 
dentists.   It's also limited to $238,000.   If it were opened up to more types of dental providers, 
it would only make sense that it would be necessary to increase the funding  of this 
program.   To limit it to fewer dentists and add in more pro vider types without increasing the 
total amount allocated to the program is a fruitless proposition.  
 
In an Education Data Initiative report dated Nov 2022, ( Hanson, Melanie. “Average Dental 
School Debt” EducationData.org, November 19, 2022, 
https://educationdata.org/average -dental -school -debt),  it is stated that the average dental 
student total debt is $293,000, with 42% of 2589 re spondents being over $300,000 in debt.  I 
personally know young dentists who have indebtedness of $400,000.  It generally takes 8 -9 
years to become a dentist, not counting the additional years needed if one is to specialize.  
 
In contrast, dental hygienist education resulting in an RDH degree may range from 3 -  4 years in 
total. The average indebtedness is considerably lower.  While  I understand that the numbers 
are relative , I also know that 'robbing Peter to pay Paul' doesn't work.    
 
We do  need all dental provider types in various practice modalities.   However, adding more  
types of potential recipients of the MDEL without adding more funds is not the way to go 
here.   It will make dentist recruitment that much more difficult, which will in turn make 
recruitment of assistants and hygienists more difficult.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
NJ Desjardins DMD  
