Ur:/' \/erssi ties 
UNl\/ER$lTY OF MAME SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System 
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren 
ln Support of LD 1256, An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the 
Maine Dental Education Loan Program, April 11, 2023 
Senator Curly, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: My name is 
Samantha Warren and I am the Director of Government Relations for the University of Maine 
System (UMS), which supports LD 1256, An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by 
Expanding the Maine Dental Education Loan Program. 
The University of Maine at Augusta (UMA) currently offers three allied dental-related degree 
programs: 
o A three-year Associate of Science Dental Hygiene degree with the option to complete one 
additional year to earn a Bachelor of Science in Dental Hygiene; 
o Maine's only Commission on Dental Accreditation (CODA) accredited Dental Assisting 
program, through which students earn a three-semester certificate or two-year associate 
degree and are prepared to sit for the Dental Assisting National Board Certified Dental 
Assisting exam immediately upon successful completion of the certificate program; 
0 and the state's only Maine Board of Dental Practice approved Expanded Functions 
5 
Dental Assisting (EFDA) program, typically a two-semester pathway to allow individuals 
who already hold a dental assisting or dental hygiene credential and have at least one 
year of clinical dental experience to gain further skills, abilities, and employment and 
earning opportunity. . 9 . 
These programs are delivered in Bangor and Lewiston and include extensive hands-on clinical 
components through which our students prepare for the workforce gjg provide free and low-cost 
preventive and restorative services to community members including Veterans, members of the 
Maine National Guard and at-risk children who lack adequate access to dental care. We are proud 
that our allied dental programs have 100% job placement rate, and 95% of students are 
Mainers, who stay here to live, work and contribute to our communities after they graduate. 
These dental programs are extremely expensive to operate due to low student-to-faculty ratios 
(typically 5:1) and the cost of supplies, equipment and clinical facilities maintenance — as 
required by our rigorous accreditation standards (CODA). To offset these expenses in-part, UMA 
charges differential tuition, with dental hygiene students paying $400 per credit hour above UMA's 
regular per credit hour tuition rate, dental assisting students paying $100 more per credit hour and 
the university experiencing an operating loss of about $700,000 annually on these programs. 
While our dental hygiene program still costs students less than half of what they'd pay to attend 
the only private program in the state, we realize cost can be a barrier to enrolling and persisting to 
degree completion for many aspiring allied dental professionals Maine so desperately needs. 
UMA dental hygiene students who take out loans borrow $6,599 annually on average -- around 
$20,000 over the course of a three-year program, or $26,000 for those achieving a bachelor's 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent- University of 
Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presque isle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
degree. While dental hygienists in Maine earn well above Maine’s average annual income, this 
level of debt may be difficult to discharge, especially for those in rural areas where wages are 
lower but lack of dental care access is acute. 
Our System maintains that the State’s best investment is always in front-end college 
affordability, including appropriations for UMS that allow our public universities to keep 
both tuition costs and student debt down. However, we support LD 1256 because our we 
believe it will encourage more Mainers to enroll in allied dental education degree programs 
and to practice in underserved areas of the state after they graduate. 
The Legislature has long recognized that access to dental care is essential enough to the health 
and wellbeing of Maine and its people that dentists who agree to practice in high-need areas 
deserve direct public investment in the form of loan forgiveness. 
Hygienists, dental assistants and EFDAs are the foundation of dental care in our state. 
These allied dental professionals maximize dentists ’ ability to serve patients while also 
safely providing high-quality, critical services to patients themselves. Expanding the Maine 
Dental Education Program to include them recognizes their important contributions to 
Mainers’ oral and overall health and will yield a high rate of return given the comparative 
costs of their degree programs to those required to earn a DDS or DMD. 
I thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for your ongoing support of the University of 
Maine System. 
Page 2 of2
