“W ii/\AlNE 
DENTAL 
WASS©ClA “il©N 
Testimony of the Maine Dental Association 
Before the 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business Committee 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1256 An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine Dental 
Education Loan Program 
Public Hearing: Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and Distinguished Members of the Committee: 
My name is Therese Cahill and l serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Dental 
Association. The MDA is a statewide association dedicated to advancing excellence in dentistry. 
The MDA represents 85% of the dentists in Maine; there are 774 practicing and retired dentists 
who are active members of the association. 
On behalf of the Maine Dental Association, I am respectfully providing ”neither for nor against" 
testimony on LD 1256 An Act to Increase Access to Oral Health Care by Expanding the Maine 
Dental Education Loan Program. 
While the MDA appreciates the sponsor's intent and wholeheartedly supports initiatives to 
increase access to care, particularly in rural areas of Maine, we cannot support an initiative that 
will limit access to student loans or loan forgiveness programs currently available to dental 
students seeking to practice in Maine. 
Some of you may remember that in 2010 Maine voters approved a $5 million bond package 
with $3.5 million going to establish UNE's College of Dental Medicine. Since then, more than 90 
UNE dental school graduates have remained in Maine — an astonishing number.‘ 
Without sufficient access to programs such as the Maine Dental Education Loan Program, UNE 
College of Dental Medicine graduates and graduates of other dental schools may well look to 
other states. Now is certainly not the time to limit the amount of scholarship dollars Maine 
allocates to future dentists who will return to or remain in our State. it's imperative that this 
program remains intact. 
1 
As Maine expands dental care access, UNE will train more dentists lbangordailynewscoml 
PO BOX 215 Manchester, ME 04351 ' T 207.622.7900 = F 207.622.6210 = medentalorg
With that said, dental practices across Maine and throughout the country are all too aware of 
the increasing shortage of dental hygienists and dental assistants. A report co-authored by the 
American Dental Association's Health Policy institute, the American Dental Assistants 
Association, the American Dental Hygienists ’ Association, the Dental Assisting National Board 
and ignite DA in late 2022 indicates a looming crisis: 
The dental sector is facing a serious workforce shortage. Vacant positions in dental 
assisting and dental hygiene have reduced dental practice capacity by an estimated 10% 
nationally. One in three dentists who do not have full appointment schedules indicate 
that trouble filling staffing positions is a contributing factor. Workforce shortages were 
initially attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. We now know that is just part of the 
story. Enrollment in dental assisting programs has been trending downward since 2015, 
and the pandemic had a negative impact on dental hygiene program enrollment. While 
there has been some recovery of enrollment in dental hygiene programs, data suggest 
that dental assisting program enrollment will not rebound in the near future. As Cl result, 
workforce shortages are likely to remain an issue for years to come? 
it is our sincere hope that this Committee will consider allocating additional funding to the 
Maine Dental Education Loan Program in order to create new scholarship opportunities for the 
positions referenced in LD 1256. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
2 Dental workforce shortages: Data to Navigate Today's Labor Market (ada.orgl
