 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
 
in support of LD 1670 
 
An Act to Strengthen Maine's Agriculture, Food and Forest Economy by Funding the Maine Agriculture, 
Food and Forest Products Investment Fund and Ame nding Related Provisions of Law  
 
4/26/2023 
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and distinguished m embers of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry : My name is Amy Winston . I live in Edgecomb  and I am testifying 
on behalf of Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI)  in support of LD 1670 , An Act to Strengthen Maine's 
Agriculture, Food and Forest Economy by Funding the M aine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products 
Investment Fund and Amending Related Provisions of Law . 
 
Founded in 1977, CEI is a non -profit , mission -driven community development corporation  (CDC) and 
community development financial institution ( CDFI ) based in  Brunswick.  CEI works to build a just, 
vibrant and climate resilient future for people and communities in Maine and rural regions. We do this 
by integrating financ e, business expertise, and policy solutions which help to make the economy more 
equitable.  Since its inception , CEI has invested $32,682,424 in agriculture and food related businesses  
and $9,092,591 in the forest products sector. Our 46-year commitment to supporting job -creating  
natural resource -based businesses and local supply  chain development  has only grown  in the last 
decade1.  
 As focused  as we have been providing capital to farms and small food businesses , we know that these 
investments are not enough
2. We continually seek new investment partners and sources of pati ent, 
affordable , and flexible  financing . Scarce in private markets , this type of capital is critical to the 
development, retention and expansion of sustainable food and forest pr oducts  businesses.  
 This bill will provide access to capital and technical services that do not currently exist on a statewide 
level in Maine.   LD 1670  appropriates  $20 million per year to the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest 
Products Investment Fund , which fosters business growth, talent and innovation in ( proposed in LD 1565 
and) establis hed by LD 1733 , An Act to Provide Allocations for the Distribution of State Fiscal Recovery 
Funds  (Public Law 2021, Ch. 483, Part KK) . It is state policy to foster business growth , talent,  and 
innovation in Maine’s agricultural, food and forest products in dustries  and to promote climate  resilient 
supply chains3. This fund creates  a sustainable funding mechanism th at will supp ort ongoing investment 
 
1 Since 2012: CEI has invested a combined $29 million in loans and equity in 168 farm and food related businesses that hav e 
created a projected 780 jobs ; of these 168 loans, 114 (68%), went to underserved businesses . CEI made $4.7 million  in co mbined 
loans and equity investments in 18 forestry  businesses  that creat ed a projected  235 jobs ; of these loans, eight  (8, or 44% ) wen t 
to underserved businesses. Since 2018: CEI has provided $17,513,606 in financing to food and agriculture related enterpr ises and 
$1,922,500 in the forestry sector.  
2 See CEI’s testimony in support of LD 1565, the predecessor to this bill, in the 130th Legislature, and the source of the language 
in LD 1733, Part KK, which established but did not fund  the Maine Agriculture, F ood and F orest Products Investment Fund.  
3Maine Economi c Development  Strategy , 2020- 2029: A Focus on Talent and Innovation;  Maine Won’ t Wait : A Four Year Pla n for 
Climate Action ( 2020)  
 
in these industries  and redress  longstanding inequities in accessing  capital and TA services , in 
accordance with recommendations ma de to this committee by the Permanent Comm ission on Maine ’s 
Racial, In digenous and Tri bal Populations’  LD 870 report back to this committee.4 This Fund f acilitates 
strategic investment s in Ma ine agriculture, food systems, and forestry businesses through interagency 
coordination and public -private partnerships  with service  providers that have experience and expertise 
in the se sectors and can serve as conduits for delivering services and capital effectively and efficiently  to 
low income community businesses . Additionally, it aligns wit h regional food  system planning5, which  will 
help get more Main e grown food into the traded sector.  
 
Research conducted between  2015 -2022  at the Harvard  Kennedy School Center for Business and  
Government  and here i n Maine6, has demonstrate d the growth potential in  Maine ’s agriculture, seafood 
and food and beverage processi ng cluster ; the urgent need for infrastructure  investment ; and demand 
for technical services and equity -like capital.  In 2022 , through  the federally funded Governor ’s Maine 
Jobs and Recovery P lan Agricultural Infrastructure  Investment Program , the Maine Department of 
Agriculture , Conservation and F orestry (DACF)  received 850 funding requests from qualifying businesses, 
worth $180 million and subsequen tly awarded  $19.3 million allocated for this purpose to a mix of 64 
farm and food processing businesses statewide . Finally, DACF  completed an  assessment of the financial 
and te chnical business services available to farm, food , and forest products businesses . This study  
confirmed the Fund fulfills a need that is not being met  and creates a unique opportunity to ensure a 
sustained funding source for these iconic businesses, enabling them  to innovate and  grow .  
 
It is m odeled on Vermont’s successful Working Lands Enterprise Fund and Fa rm to Plate Initiative and 
Massachusetts’ racial equity focused Food Innovation Trust Fund ; and expands on existing industry 
efforts  here in Maine  – e.g., FocusMaine , Maine Center for Entrepreneurs ’ Top Gun  and Food 
Accelerators , and CEI’s Tastemakers Init iative  and Catalyst Fund –  to propel innovation, business growth 
and job creation in early -stage and start -up food processing and manuf acturing businesses, which 
employ local people and source from Maine growers/producers, multiplying each investment. All of Maine bene fits from successful businesses in these sectors.  
 Thank you f or the opportunity to testify in favor of  this important proposal . This bill promises  to advance 
Maine’s  agricultural and fore st products economy. Attach ed to  this testimony, please find a comparison 
of the successful VT and MA models, a fact sheet  on this bill , and profiles of innovative businesses in 
these sectors that have benefited from this kind of capita l. These case studies illustrate the benefits and 
impact of t his resource . We look forward to working collaboratively  with  the Departments o f 
Agriculture , Conservation and Forestry , Economic and Community Development, University o f Maine  
Cooperative Extension, the Fund Advisory Board, and other stakeholders to help laun ch this Fund.   
 We urge the co mmittee to vote Ought to Pass  and fully fund LD 1670 .  
 
4 Land Access for Indigenous & African American Farmers in Maine: Report to the J oint Standing Committee  on A griculture, 
Conservation and F orestry ( February 2022)  
5 Food Solutions New  England’s A New England Food Vision and the New England Food System Planners Partnership New 
England Feeding New England: Cultivating A Reliable Food Supply  
6Growing Maine’s Food Industry, Growing Maine | Harvard Kennedy School  Harvard  (2015) ; Maine Departments of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry  and Economic and Community Development,  Heritage I ndustry Infrastructure Su rvey : Results & 
Analysis – Agriculture & Fores try (2021)   
Comparison of Vermont and Massachusetts Models  
Vermont Working Lands Enterprise Initiative 
(WLEI)  Massachusetts Food Innovation Trust Fund  
Vermont Farm to Plate established in statute, 
2011.  
• Farm to Plate is Vermont’s model food 
industry statewide strategic plan to develop 
workforce, support and grow businesses and 
markets (value chain coordination)  
 MA Food Trust Program established in statute1, 
2017.  
• Designed to complement existing MDAR 
programs and in conjunction with MA Food 
Policy C ouncil (comprised of state agencies 
and public stakeholders)  
Vermont Working Lands Enterprise Fund (WLEF) 
established in statute in 2013, to provide needed 
capital to businesses, service providers engaged 
in Farm to Plate  
• Invests in local businesses that  are derivative 
of and sustaining working landscapes, to 
grow the VT brand and increase its value 
through increased statewide investment 
across state’s educational and economic 
sectors (includes a Higher Ed Food System 
Consortium to develop workforce train ing 
and food business career ladders)  State allocated $1 million in an environmental 
bond bill - part of the state’s capital investment 
plan  
• Establishes a financing infrastructure that 
invests in businesses to increase healthy 
affordable food options and i mprove 
economic opportunities to nutritionally 
underserved communities2 
 
Statute (6 VSA 46043, 46074) creates board  
consisting of industry, government, finance 
sector, business  and industry technical services, 
to administer fund and develop policy 
recommendations to serve as an impact 
investment organization to:  
• stimulate economic development (foster 
entrepreneurism, business development and 
job creation) in state’s agriculture and forest 
product sectors  
• increase value of raw and value -added 
products through development of state and 
export markets  
• provide priority funding to support enterprise 
development, including technical assistance • Overseen and evaluated by Mass. 
Department of Agricultural Resources 
(MDAR)  
• Co-administered by 2 established community 
development financial institutions (CDFIs) 
selected by competitive RFP.  
o CDFIs are critical partners  
o Franklin County Community 
Development Corporation (FCCDC) 
serves western counties, and Local 
Enterprise Assistance Fund (LEAF) 
serves the eastern part of the state, 
to ensure statewide geographical 
reach.5  
• Chapter 23A Section 65(a) est ablishes the 
program, paragraph (b) sets out authorizes a 
 
1 https://mapublichealth.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/02/environmental -bond -bill-healthy -food -financing -
language.pdf  
2 https://www.mass.gov/news/baker -polito -administration -launches -1-million -initiative -promoting -access -to-
healthy -local  
3 https://law.justia.com/codes/vermont/2018/title -6/chapter -207/section -4604/  
4 https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/section/06/207/04607  
5 These organizations contract with the Food Trust to ensure that applicants meet national best practice  
guidelines. This is an additional layer, that is voluntary, and not needed to effectively, efficiently administer funds.  
that directly supports enterprise 
developm ent   
• grow economies, cultures and communities 
of VT’s working landscape through essential 
catalytic investments in critical leverage 
points w/the VT farm and forest economy.  
• Find the critical leverage points: identify 
opportunities and challenges related  to 
access to capital, infrastructure, product 
development, marketing, training, research 
and education, succession.  
• Expand existing, identify and develop new 
profitable markets (in state and out) for food, 
forest, fiber products and value -added 
agricultu ral products, including farm -derived 
renewable energy.  
• Oversee public engagement: establish 
application process, eligibility criteria, award 
grants and loans, identify leveraging 
opportunities, industry clusters, priority 
infrastructure.  
• State agencies p rovide admin support (2 ftes 
added in statute, 2014).  CDFI to develop and implement flexible 
financing programs, raise funds, evaluate 
applicants, make award decisions, underwrite 
loans and monitor compliance and impact.  
• The statute indicates eligible  activities and 
directs the CDFI to cooperate with the state 
food policy council to target underserved 
communities, and work in conjunction with 
local community colleges and vocational 
education institutions to develop programs 
designed to train and educat e food sellers 
respecting the designating and marketing of 
nutritious foods and to assist in the 
development of public education programs 
designed to make the buying public aware of 
the need for nutritious foods and the identity 
of nutritious foods.   
• MDAR  is currently receiving applications from 
CDFIs to administer the Program.6 The 
program structure therefore may change 
under new management.  
 
Fund is composed of monies appropriated by the 
legislature and received from public or private 
sources approved by board (6 VSA 46057).  
Grants are awarded in the following categories  
• Producer Association Grants  
• Service Providers  
• American Rescue Plan Act Grants  
• Trade show assistance grants  Eligible activities include, but not be limited to  
• the developme nt, renovation and expansion 
of supermarkets  
• year -round farmers’ markets, food truck 
commissaries and community kitchens  
• retail, restaurant and supporting food 
distribution hub options serving such food 
opportunity areas as approved by the 
department and t hat demonstrate a 
meaningful commitment to sell fresh, local 
products  
• infrastructure for urban and rural -based 
community -supported agriculture businesses  
• working capital for projects including but not 
limited to, equipment and furnishings, 
workforce traini ng, security and certain 
predevelopment costs  
Farm to Plate and Working Lands Enterprise Fund 
reauthorized and reallocated with broad support  
in VT Legislature:  
• Overall impact (2012 -2022):  • Since its establishment in 2019, the Program 
has 
o Funded 66 projects in 12 different 
counties , creating over 1000 jobs  
 
6 https://www.mass.gov/service -detai ls/massachusetts -food -trust -program#feedback   
7 https://legislature.vermont.gov/statutes/section/06/207/04605  
 
o 418 farm, food, and forestry 
businesses funded , creating 539 jobs.  
o $13.6 million in direct investment.  
o $22.5 million in matching funds 
(cash, in kind, other private and 
public investment) leveraged  
o Statewide investment in all 14 
counties  
o 24,000 working acres maintained  
o $55 million in annual sales th rough 
grant supported projects  
• Governor Phil Scott (R) has proposed a $4 
million allocation to the fund for 2024.  
• VT Governor Scott on the WLEF: “It’s clear 
these efforts and investments make a 
difference, which is important to our 
economy and state…to…ma ke Vermont more 
affordable, and protect the most vulnerable.”  
 o 21 projects are owned or controlled 
by a person of color. 31 are owned or 
controlled by a woman.  
o Invested $4.16 million into 
businesses and leveraged in 
additional $13.7 through investments  
o 88% of Workers Hired from Within 
the Local Community  
o Over 300,000 individuals  with 
Improved/Expanded Access  to 
healthy foods  
o 91% of Projects Accept or Will Accept 
SNAP & WIC  
o  
Recommendation:  
• CEI recommends that Maine enact a food system investment program  and enterprise 
development fund  as an important element of state agriculture policy .  
• This tool is needed  to build the Maine brand , grow , and innovate Maine food businesses , and 
create jobs .  
• A hybrid version of the successful VT and MA programs might house the plan at the Department 
of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, to be administered by a qualified community 
developme nt financial institution/statewide economic development organization.  
• As written, an Advisory Board and annual reporting oversees fund performance and progress 
toward climate and food system policy goals.  
 
 
 
KEY FEATURES
• Completes legislative work begun in the 129th and
continued in the 130th Legislatures, which studied the
need for and established the Maine Agriculture, Food and
Forest Products Investment Fund.
• Supports the resiliency of Maine’s food supply and
production chain through strategic investments in Maine
agriculture, food systems, and forestry businesses.
• Fills a gap in needed capital and business assistance that does
not currently exist in Maine.
•
Ensures equitable access to capital and technical assistance
for historically disadvantaged populations.
• Supports existing industry efforts from Maine-based
organizations to propel innovation, business growth and job
creation in early-stage and start-up food processing/manufacturing
businesses, which employ local people and source from Maine
growers/producers, multiplying each investment.
• Promotes interagency coordination and public-private
partnerships.
• Modeled on successful programs in Vermont and
Massachusetts.
• All of Maine benefits from successful businesses in these
sectors.QUICK FACTS
Goal:   Bipartisan bill to support Maine’s heritage industries
Sponsor:   Speaker Talbot-Ross, House District 40Amount:   $20,000,000 in FY2024 and 2025 for infrastructure 
investment and technical assistance to critical businesses
This Bill:   Provides a unique opportunity to ensure a sustained 
funding source for the state’s critical and iconic agriculture, food and forest products businesses, enabling them to innovate and grow.  AN ACT TO STRENGTHEN MAINE’S AGRICULTURE, FOOD AND FOREST ECONOMY BY FUNDING THE MAINE AGRICULTURE, FOOD AND FOREST PRODUCTS INVESTMENT FUND AND AMENDING RELATED PROVISIONS OF LAWLD 1670 Capitalizes the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund - established by the 130th Legislature to facilitate strategic investments in the state’s agricultural, food and forest products processing and manufacturing industries. 
This document was created by Coastal Enterprises, Inc. 

Contact:
Amy Winston, Senior Policy DirectorAmy.winston@ceimaine.org
207-504-6339LEGISLATIVE PROCESS
LD 1670 has been scheduled for a public hearing by the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, 
and Forestry next Wednesday, April 26th at 9am.
•Testify In person: the Public Hearing starts at 9am, in Room 214 of the Burton Cross State House – there are 2bills scheduled for hearing at this time. Bring 20 copies of your written testimony.
•Submit Written Testimony and/or Register to testify by Zoom via the Maine Legislative online portal 30min. before scheduled start time. (Written testimony can be submitted at any time up until the work sessionwhere they will vote on the bill, so if you miss Wednesday’s deadline, there will be another opportunity toengage.)
•Choose: Public Hearing
•Choose a committee (from dropdown list): Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry.
•Choose a date: APR 26, 2023 9AM
•Select the bill you want to testify/submit testimony for: LD 1670, An Act to Strengthen the MaineAgriculture, Food and Forest Products Economy and Amend Related Provisions of Law
•IF YOU PLAN TO TESTIFY: Check off the box underneath the red text that says “I would like to testifyelectronically over Zoom”. If you do not check this off, you will not get any Zoom information sent to you.
•Click on Upload File, to upload your Testimony.
•Complete your information: Name, Town or Organization.
•Click Submit/Register
ALIGNS WITH AND IMPLEMENTS
• Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020-2029: A Focus on Talent and  
Innovation and DECD Domestic Trade Project (to ensure robust, climate-safe 
food supply chain, foster talent and innovation in food manufacturing, marine 
systems, and the biobased economy)
• Maine Climate Action Plan (statutory objectives, to reduce carbon emissions 
and build local and regional food systems)
•Recommendations of the Permanent Commission’s Land Access for 
Indigenous & African American Farmers Report (2022)
•Maine Food Cluster Project Findings, highlighted in Growing Maine’s Food 
Industry, Growing Maine
• FocusMaine (growing quality food and agriculture jobs in Maine)
•Maine’s role in Food Solutions New England’s A New England Food Vision and 
the New England Food System Planners Partnership New England Feeding 
New England: Cultivating A Reliable Food Supply (USDA funded regional 
food system, supply chain resilience) 
•Maine’s Ending Hunger by 2030 Plan (food security is economic security)
• Maine Food Strategy Framework: A Tool for Advancing Maine’s Food 
System
If you have any problems call either the:
Legislative Information Office - (207) 287-1692
Committee Clerk - (207) 287-1330
“From my first visit with my advisor as a budding 
entrepreneur to our successful loan application for 
working capital, CEI has been an integral support 
system for growing our company- and st ill is.”
— JOEL ALEX, Owner, Blue Ox MalthouseAGRICULTURE 
& FOOD SYSTEMS
COASTAL ENTERPRISES, INC.
30 Federal Street, Suite 100, Brunswick, Maine 04011
207.535.2920 | www.ceimaine.org
CEI works to build a just, vibrant and climate-resilient future
for people and communities in Maine and rural regions. We do this by 
integrating finance, business expertise and policy solutions in ways that make 
the economy work more equitably.
WHAT WE DO
CEI works closely with 
farm and food businesses 
to address operational, 
workforce, and market 
access.  Our industry focus 
on agriculture and food 
systems supports the legacy 
and promise of Maine’s 
farms, recognizing the need 
for economic diversification 
and environmental 
sustainability.
CEI has the tools to help Maine’s food 
and agriculture businesses succeed. 
FREE, SECTOR-SPECIFIC 
ADVISING on starting, 
growing or transitioning a 
successful business that creates & 
sustains good jobs
BUSINESS LIFE CYCLE  
FINANCING along a 
continuum of capital, from 
microloans to equity investment
INDUSTRY 
ACCELERATION  
translating sector 
knowledge into industry-wide 
initiatives that add value, increase 
profits, and expand access to 
marketsPOLICY ADVOCACY  
for pragmatic solutions that 
reduce barriers and expand 
opportunities for businesses and 
families.Sector Expertise
CEI’s committment to Maine’s 
agricultural and value-added foods 
sector spans our 40-year history.
AGRICULTURE &
FOOD SYSTEMS
Flexible Financing
We can help you identify the best available capital source for your business from our variety 
of nontraditional financing options, including flexible debt, lines of credit, and equity:
•  Loans from $50,000 to $3 million for 
equipment, property and working capital 
• Wicked FastTM Loans up to $25,000• Equity investments
•  Micro loans from $5,000 to $50,000 for 
small business or startup costs
OUR IMPACT
Over its 45-year history, CEI 
has loaned and invested more 
than $32 million to food system 
enterprises and leveraged an 
additional $124 million from 
financial partners.
CEI’s food system impact over 
the past 10 years:
• 1,986 jobs for Maine people in 
the local food system; 
• 412 food entrepreneurs 
received technical business 
assistance; and
• 2,758 acres of farmland 
maintained in production.WHAT WE OFFER
Free, confidential consulting  from 
a skilled support team of industry 
consultants, business advisors, and loan 
officers ready to help you with:
• Industry Expertise
• Credit and financing 
•  Accounting, record            
keeping and cash flow 
analysis •  Business start-up and 
acquisition 
•  Strategic planning and 
operations 
• Marketing and sales 
“We hope that every dollar spent here upholds the 
connection between farmer and eater, makes it easier 
for the next entrepreneur to start a business, makes the 
air cleaner, the world fairer, and our bodies healthier. 
Our CEI business advisor and lender were key to this 
venture. They saw us through right to opening day.”
 — SARAH MORNEAULT ,  Co-Owner, Tiller & RyeOur deep Maine roots and passion for economic 
development give CEI industry consultants, business 
advisors, and loan officers extensive expertise and 
insight into the unique challenges andopportunities 
faced by entrepreneurs in the agriculture and food 
systems sectors. 
We do more than provide funding for farms and 
entrepreneurs - we forge 
networks, embrace new 
technologies, advocate 
for better policies, and 
celebrate how these 
sectors sustain our way 
of life. Maine farms and 
food businesses know 
they can rely on us for 
advice, capital and support.WHY CEI?
FOR MORE INFORMATION  
Contact Keith Bisson
keith.bisson@ceimaine.org | 207.331.3646
Since Briana Warner took over as CEO of Atlantic Sea 
Farms in 2018, she has transformed the company formerly 
known as Ocean Approved from the first commercially 
viable seaweed farm in the country to a retail product 
company that is winning food industry awards and 
increasing consumer knowledge of kelp as a delicious and 
climate-positive ingredient, all while supporting Maine’s 
working waterfront. This transition was made possible 
with support of targeted funding from CEI and Maine tax-
incentivized financing. 
The heart of Atlantic Sea Farms is its network of 24 kelp 
farmers. Since the 2018 transition, the company no longer 
grows its own kelp to harvest, instead opting to work 
with Maine fishermen by supplying them with kelp seed, 
training them on growing techniques and, perhaps most 
importantly, providing a guaranteed purchase of their 
entire harvest. The arrangement allows Atlantic Sea Farms 
to outsource farming to individuals who are knowledgeable 
about Maine’s waters and have the necessary equipment 
(boats, ropes) on hand, while it helps the farmers, who 
primarily fish or lobster, diversify their income.
To create an outlet for increasing amounts of farmed kelp (production increased from 40,000 lbs. of 
seaweed in FY19 to 800,000 lbs in FY21), Briana has focused on establishing the Atlantic Sea Farms 
retail brand and selling to ingredient companies and fast casual restaurants as base ingredients. 2020 
kicked off strong, with the February launch of a partnership with sweetgreen™, a national fast-casual 
restaurant chain focused on salads, with a special offering developed by renowned chef David Chang 
-  a partnership profiled in the NY Times and Washington Post. 
Atlantic Sea Farms was also preparing to launch their retail food brand, consisting of pureed kelp cubes 
for smoothies, thaw & eat shredded kelp and fermented seaweed products, like the Good Food Award-
winning Sea-Chi. When the pandemic hit, wholesale to retailers and direct e-commerce sales became 
even more vital. But launching a retail brand, particularly with an unfamiliar key ingredient like kelp, 
takes a lot of consumer education and advertising. 
To date, Atlantic Sea Farm’s growth has been financed by a dedicated group of angel and institutional 
investors, including CEI.   Given the company’s relationship with its kelp farmers, Atlantic Sea Farms 
was an excellent fit for CEI’s Catalyst Fund, which makes early-stage equity investments in food system 
businesses that support local agriculture and aquaculture production in Maine and the northeast.
“Entrepreneurs need investors willing to invest in infrastructure,” said Briana. “That’s where CEI first 
came in. The Catalyst Fund investment gave us the flexibility and time to scale up our value-added 
products, helping to grow the impact and health of seaweed farming along the coast, with the objective 
of building a diversified income stream for coastal fishermen in the offseason.”
In late February 2020, Atlantic Sea Farms learned they had also been named 
to that year’s CEI Tastemakers cohort, a FocusMaine-supported program 
that provides specialized consulting and investor networking opportunities 
for emerging food and beverage companies. The $15,000 in funding from the 
ATLANTIC SEA 
FARMS
Tastemakers program allowed them to hire iBec Creative, 
a local digital marketing firm, to develop an online-focused 
marketing plan that boosted their Google ranking, increase 
website traffic & ecommerce sales, and launched a targeted 
brand ambassador program.
“It couldn’t have come at a better time,” recalled Briana, 
“because we were applying for funding for more advertising. 
We knew we needed to do substantial advertising, to get 
people to know about our products and to drive people both 
to the store to purchase on the shelf and our store on the 
Internet. It came at a time when we needed it, as everything 
just started shutting down. It drove sales directly to our 
e-commerce site and also the support retailers when we 
weren’t able to demo in person. It wasn’t a ton of money, 
but it did a ton for us.” 
The ability to hire and pay expert consultants was a key 
feature of the Tastemaker program for Briana. While she 
acknowledged there was a critical mass of retired business 
professionals offering advice on a volunteer basis, she 
emphasized there was a different level of engagement and 
service with hired consultants, who “are hard-charging to 
get the job done because they’re being paid for it by real 
money.”  
Flexible money like that provided by the Tastemaker Initiative isn’t easy to come by, Briana noted: 
“What was so cool about the Tastemakers funding is that it was quite literally focused on the question, 
‘What you need to make your business grow?’ So you could use it to fund things like digital ads, when 
that is not something there is usually money for. Quite frankly, that flexibility made fifteen thousand 
worth more to us than fifty thousand dollars would be if it was limited to something like equipment 
purchases. We could use it on what’s actually going to make us money.”
Coastal Enterprises Inc. (CEI)
info@CEIMaine.org | www.CEIMaine.orgLEARN MORE ABOUT ATLANTIC SEA FARMS  
Website: https://atlanticseafarms.com/
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/OceanApproved/ 
Instagram: https://instagram.com/atlanticseafarms 

Client Profiles
AGRICULTURE & FOOD SYSTEMSTo provide the missing link in the creation of a Maine beer made with 
100 percent local ingredients, entrepreneur Joel Alex established Blue 
Ox Malthouse, sourcing and malting Maine grains. In Maine, barley is 
typically grown as a rotation crop, mostly for potatoes. Since rotation 
crops are not commercially valued for that single purpose, they are 
plowed under to replenish the soil, or sold cheaply for animal feed. 
Blue Ox Malthouse, however, offers farmers an alternative premium 
off take and gives local breweries a critical local ingredient. The 
project is a win-win-win for the whole brewers’ supply chain. Today, 
Blue Ox Malthouse counts 100 different 
breweries in Maine and New England as 
customers and works with about 10 local 
Maine farmers. In reciprocity, the waste, 
or spent grains from the malting process, 
returns to farms to be used as livestock feed. 
CEI Role:  CEI provided technical support and business advice 
prior to start up and made its first loan to Blue Ox Malthouse in 2015. BLUE OX 
MALTHOUSE
LEARN MORE ABOUT BLUE OX MALTHOUSE
Website: www.blueoxmalthouse.com
Mousam Valley Mushrooms produces organic mushrooms cultivated 
on Maine hardwood & straw inside a former dairy barn in Springvale, 
Maine. By moving the growing and packing into a controlled and fully 
automated indoor environment, Mousam Valley Mushrooms has 
been able to optimize the ideal conditions present in the mushroom’s  
natural habitats while eliminating natural threats such as adverse 
weather. The company’s ability to consistently produce mushrooms 
year round has allowed them to service wholesale clients and 
restaurants in Maine and  the northeast. 
CEI Role: Mousam Valley Mushrooms had potential to grow 
their business, but they needed capital and employees to ramp up 
production. CEI invested in the early-
stage company, allowing them to do 
the facility build outs they needed. CEI also provided workforce 
consulting to help the company hire in a tight labor market. The 
consulting led to the reorganization jobs duties in order to allow 
supervisors to focus on increasing yield, while making other 
jobs more accessible to individuals with barriers to employment 
through a vocational rehabilitation program. MOUSAM VALLEY 
MUSHROOMS
LEARN MORE ABOUT MOUSAM VALLEY MUSHROOMS
Website: www.mousamvalleymushrooms.com

After farming out west for many years,  Melissa Law and Ben Whelan 
and Jeff and Abby Fisher moved to Buxton, Maine in 2017 to start  
Bumbleroot Organic Farm. Together, the team grew vegetables and 
flowers on their small plot of land for two years. In 2016, the four 
were able to purchase an 89-acre farm in Windham, significantly 
increasing their production capability.
“We moved to Maine to start the farm and be closer to family, but 
also because we heard that there are many great service providers in 
Maine and that the State has a strong agricultural community. I’m glad 
to say that the rumors were definitely true, and we’ve been supported 
so many Maine organizations, including Maine Farmland Trust, from 
whom we purchased our land, Coastal Enterprises Inc, which helped 
with the financing, and the Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners 
Association (MOFGA), who is our organic certifier and has provided 
countless educational opportunities for us and our peers.”
CEI Role:  CEI provided financing for the purchase of the Windham 
farm in 2016 and provided assistance from CEI’s Women’s Business 
Center in writing their business plan. Nominated by CEI, Bumbleroot 
was recognized by the U.S. Small Business Administration as the 
2018 Maine Young Entrepreneurs of the Year.
COASTAL ENTERPRISES INC.
Coastal Enterprises Inc. | 207.535.2920 | www.CEIMaine.orgBUMBLEROOT             
ORGANIC FARM
LEARN MORE ABOUT BUMBLEROOT ORGANIC FARM
Website: www.bumblerootorganicfarm.com
Dedicated to serving Maine since 1995, Crown O’ Maine Distribution 
Company (Crown) distributes locally grown produce across the 
length and breadth of Maine and New England. Crown connects 
buying clubs, restaurants, and neighborhood retail establishment to 
a growing collection of foods produced by local farmers, fishermen, 
and artisans.
Crown works to support a regionally secure food supply through what 
they term as  “co-production.” As the distribution vehicle for many 
Maine farms, Crown is in a unique position to interface information 
about the “big picture” and coordinate efforts for the next year’s 
production among its many members in 
order to enhance each farm’s ability to 
produce and serve wider markets both in 
state and New England.
CEI Role:  CEI provided equity to help fuel the company’s ability to 
serve Maine farmers, grow sales, develop internal efficiencies and 
meet the ever-increasing demand for Maine foods. CROWN O’MAINE
LEARN MORE ABOUT CROWN O’MAINE 
Website: www.crownofmainecoop.com

Common Wealth Poultry is a small poultry processing 
facility, with three primary business lines: 1) commercial-
scale processing of birds for New England farms, 2) USDA 
labeled co packing and 3) Common Wealth Poultry-
branded products from throughout the northeast US. 
Although they are considered a “small” facility, they also 
happen to be the largest USDA inspected poultry facility in 
New England, filling a vital niche in the local food system. 
Cameron DeLeone, Common Wealth’s Vice President, put 
it this way. “There is a lot of support for very small-scale 
agriculture in Maine. Everybody is thrilled to support 
farmers markets and other hyper local businesses, but as 
you move away from the seasonal products offered there, 
you see buying habits go very quickly from local production 
to the largest scale of commodity production without 
respect for provenance. There is a big gap, in my opinion, 
in terms of support for mid-size processors that contribute 
to local economy in important ways, provide opportunity 
to Mainers, and offer alternatives to commodity products 
from far out of state.”
Common Wealth is looking to fill that gap by being a resource for mid-size farms - bigger than the farmer 
with a dozen birds in his backyard, but smaller than the industrial-scale poultry farms that supply the 
national distributors. It’s an important niche, but one that is often ignored. 
“There is a huge lack of focus on that level of the food infrastructure,” Cameron laments. “We’ve grown 
like crazy and we we’re producing far too many birds for the size of the facility we were in. We just built 
a new facility, and had to come up with $700,000 to cover equipment costs.” 
The company struggled to get the financing they needed for the expansion. “It is very difficult to 
get traditional bank financing, so we ended up going through Farm Credit. It’s always this logistical 
nightmare to get money, even though we’ve been in business for 10 years and are showing clear growth 
every year.”
Common Wealth was a member of the Tastemakers program in 2019 and 2020, a partnership between 
CEI and FocusMaine to help established food and beverage companies with a commitment to local 
agricultural production, expand and improve production capacity, create jobs, and meet targeted 
growth goals by offering funding for tailored consulting and access to financial resources and investor 
networking opportunities.
As a participant in Tastemakers, Common Wealth received $20,000 to redesign/update and expand their 
processing lines to produce humanely, sustainably raised, premium chicken product. CEI contracted 
with key consultants – to provide guidance and expertise on equipment and financial services.
Cameron sees a clear role for the state to step in and support mid-scale processing. “It would be a 
great vote of confidence to see the state say “we are happy to nurture the small-
scale, hyper-local agricultural industry, neighbors buying from neighbors, 
but we also want to support these businesses that have the potential to create 
a regional impact. The state ought to work to cultivate that, because these 
COMMON WEALTH 
POULTRY
producers have the potential to attract talent to the region, 
and reinvigorate Maine’s agricultural and manufacturing 
tradition. It makes these places attractive to live because 
there are career opportunities.”
Job creation is key to Common Wealth’s business model 
– one of the company’s stated values is to empower the 
local community by creating opportunity and well-paying 
jobs. This is particularly true for Maine’s immigrant 
communities. Common Wealth’s job page is in four 
different languages, including Somali, Arabic and Swahili 
in addition to English, and all their chicken and duck meat 
is Halal guaranteed. Their commitment to diversity has 
made Common Wealth one of the largest employers of 
immigrants in Maine. 
“In terms of values, we are really interested in helping 
people to find meaningful employment in a business where 
they can grow,” Cameron emphasized. “We pay well over 
the industry average, not only because we’re in a state with 
a high minimum wage, but because we promote people 
after they’ve been here for a while.”
Cameron isn’t shy about the challenges of the industry – 
“it’s dirty work and the hours are long” - but it’s important 
both for the employment opportunities and for its role in 
the regional food supply. 
Coastal Enterprises Inc. (CEI)
info@CEIMaine.org | www.CEIMaine.orgLEARN MORE ABOUT COMMON WEALTH POULTRY
Website: https://commonwealthpoultry.com/
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/commonwealthpoultry/
Instagram: https://instagram.com/commonwealthpoultry
LOOKING TO START OR GROW YOUR FOOD PROCESSING OR AGRICULTURE-BASED BUSINESS?
CEI’s Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems Program supports an economically just and sustainable food system 
that creates quality jobs for a diverse workforce and builds wealth and resilience in rural communities. CEI offers free 
business advising, short & long-term financing and the Tastemakers Initiative, a targeted food and beverage producer 
accelerator in partnership with FocusMaine. Learn more at: https://www.ceimaine.org/advising/natural-resources/
agriculture/

