 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN SUPPORT – LD 1670 ‘An Act to Strengthen Maine's Agriculture, Food and Forest Economy by Funding the Maine 
Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund and Amending Related Provisions of Law’  
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen  - Chair, Representative Pluecker - Chair, and Members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry,  
 
My name is Christine Cummings and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association  
(MGFPA) .  Unfortunately, I’m unable to be here in person today as we’re hosting our association’s annual meeting and 
professional  development conference but please do not misconstrue my absence as a lack of support. The Maine Grocers 
& Food Producers Association is a business trade association representing Maine’s food community; Main Street 
businesses , including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, food and beverage producers 
and processor s, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service companies.  
 
We are grateful for Speaker Talbot -Ross’ support in establishing the Maine Agriculture, Food System and Forest Products 
Infrastructure Investment Advisory Board  and Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund  which was 
put into law via LD 1733 within the state’s omnibus package . LD 1733 assigned  the 'State Fiscal Recovery Funds' as a part 
of the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021  and was  signed by the Governor on July 19, 2021  (originally brought forward as 
LD 1565 An Act To Strengthen Maine's Agriculture, Food and Forest Economy) . 
 
There is a bountiful market of Maine food producers. In the fall of 2022, Maine awarded nearly $20 million in grant 
awards through the Maine Jobs & Recove ry Plan to help Maine farmers and food processers address infrastructure needs 
to expand in -state production and processing. It was noted, “These funds will help our farmers increase the supply of 
Maine -grown food, meet growing demand, create and sustain j obs in one of Maine’s iconic heritage industries while also 
strengthening our food system, supporting economic growth, and enhancing Maine’s national reputation for food 
excellence.” Of particular interest is that these AIIP grants “will be used to support  a variety of infrastructure needs, 
including harvesting, processing, and manufacturing or packaging and handling equipment.” The grants will ensure 
“resilience, grow our agricultural and food economy, and enhancing production of Maine -grown foods.” We fully support 
endeavors  to further assist Maine ’s foo d producers and manufacture rs both in infrastructure  investment and market 
expansion.  
 
Addi tional data supporting  the n eed for the funding includes Maine’s Quarterly and Annual Industry Employment and 
Wages  data  that report s more than 280 “Food Manufacturers” (NAICS code 311) are established in the state (growing by 
more than 40 established businesses since 2015)  (Q3/2 022) . According to the 2023 Feeding the Economy  Report , 
America’s food and agriculture sector, show s incre ased economic output in every state compared to the 2022 report. 
Maine’s economic impact from the food and agriculture sector includes more than 205, 000 jobs, $10B in total wages, and 
a total output of $32.93B. This includes the direct economic impact emp loyed and doing business in agriculture, 
manufacturing, wholesaling, and on - and off -premise retailing as well as supplier and induced economic impact across 
manufacturing, transportation, government, financial services and beyond.1 
 
According to a study by Portland -based Fork Food Lab, the Maine “Story” has the potential for a 10% -20% premium in the 
marketplace .2  IRI, a data analytics and insight company,  reports that a leading product claim  trend  for products in 2020 
included ‘prod uct origin .’ Funding  the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund  will establish a  
 
1 https://goodstone.guerrillaeconomics.net/reports/0b790408 -64c3 -4730 -9dc0 -b585e14e557d  
2 Fork Food Lab 2.0: Market Analysis,  Caroline Paras March 1, 2020  April 26, 2023  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 foundation of capital to allow for both private and public monies.  This will better position  the industry , both retailers and 
food manufacturers alike,  to meet the demand for Maine foods . Secondly, this bill will ensure i nvestment objectives are 
appropriately targeted and not duplicative while establishing various grant s and loan s as part of the fund .  
 
70% of the small -scale food producer community has indicated that they need assistance with wholesale  partnerships,  
determining shelf -life, relationship buil ding, distribution ( including how to find and determining the criteria for the correct 
partnership s) along with assistance in logistic, pricing, marketing and sales strategies . Our industry has indicated that 
there is a lack of co -packing options  and co-located , quality food production spaces.  A frequently referenced  obstacle is 
that l ogistics and distribution models favor larger business models over small -scale production of smaller batches and 
lower profits, especially with cold goods.  It is encouraging t o think that this effort with  an accompanying assessment  will 
be funded for additional,  targeted and appropriately scaled food processing infrastructure projects . We’re looking 
forward to learning whether or not funds and this strategy can also play a role engaging retailers with technical assistance 
for local buying and marketing program resources.  
 
Maine’s 10 -year Economic Development Strategy  identifies ‘food’ as  one of the four ‘thematic areas’ “in which Maine has 
current strengths, there is growing global demand, and there is a potential for job creation.” To quote the plan, “From 
aquaculture to traditional seafood harvesting to value -added food production, grow th is anticipated in these food 
industries and Maine can benefit greatly by growing our capacity to meet these markets. This global trend intersects with 
Maine’s strengths in marine resources, food, manufacturing and technical services. Maine can be a lead er in the 
development of new and sustainable ocean fisheries and products.” The increasing interest and demand for healthy and 
sustainable options sets the stage for Maine’s locally sourced products and ingredients to prosper. Maine is known for 
quality go ods and is well -positioned for growth; ensuring funds and the proper allocation of funds to enable the food 
processing and manufacturing sector to grow is critically important for these companies to meet the demand.  
 
We are encouraged tha t Maine DECD and DACF will work collaboratively to execute on the structure and spending  of the 
fund ’s dollars. This is an  opportunit y to harmonize Maine’s sometimes fragmented food network and to collectively work 
together on food -related  economic development program ing with  input from  stakeholders, business owners, and 
government entities  ensuring Maine’s food producers  are well positioned for  long -term success . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.  
 
 
Christine Cummings   
Executive Director  

