WILD BLUEBERRY COMMISSION OF 
MAINE 
April 26*‘ , 2023 
Senator lngwersen 
Representative Pluecker 
Members of the Committeeon Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry'
I 
RE: Testifying in Support, LD 1670, An Act to Strengthen Maine s Agriculture, Food and Forest 
Economy by Funding the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund and Amending 
Related Provisions of Law 
My name is Eric Venturini and I am the Executive Director of the Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine. 
This bill, and the annual funding that it allocates, will be a game changer for Maine agriculture and for 
Maine's heritage wild blueberry industry and we wholeheartedly support it. Thank you Speaker Talbot 
Ross and cosponsors, many of whom are on this Committee, for putting this bill forward. 
The bill before you is the result of several years of effort on the part of the legislature, the Department 
of Agriculture Conservation and Forestry, the Department of Economic and Community Development, 
and the Governor's office. The fund was first established, unfunded, in 2021. Subsequently, the DACF in 
coordination with the DECD surveyed "agricultural, food, and forest product industries to inform 
development and structuring of disbursements/'1 That survey, I believe, also helped to structure last 
year's Agricultural infrastructure Investment Program (AllP). AllP allocated $20 million in federal funds 
through a competitive grant process to enhance agriculture and food processing infrastructure in Maine. 
l have asked several wild blueberry producers and value-added users of wild blueberries, who were 
fortunate enough to secure Al|P funding last year, to submit testimony in support of this bill today. From 
them, you will hear how instrumental this capital injection is and will be in helping them to build a more 
vibrant and viable future for their businesses and their downstream partners. They will tell you how 
essential it is t0—essentially make AllP permanent-now in the form of the Agriculture, Food, and 
Forest Products Investment Fund so that others can access the same opportunity. 
The State received more than 850 applications from farmers and food producers in response to the 
request for proposals to the Agriculture Infrastructure Investment Program. This equates to a total 
request of more than $180 million—about nine times the program's allocation. ’ This dramatic 
1 Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. 2021. Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products investment 
Fund Assessment, Interim Report. December 1, 2021. https:1/legislature.maine.gov/doc/7732 
1 Office of Governor Janet T. Mills. Governor Mills Announces Nearly $20 Million in Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan Grants to 
Support Maine Farmers and Food Processors. Press Release. August 19, 2022.' 
https:[/www.maine.gov[governor/mills/news[g0vernor-miIls~announces-nearly-20~million-maine-iobs-recover\tplan-grants- 
support-maine'
- 
..,,;~=;;;;/i. :. I .\ 
, ,.j-;.;~;;_/1;, : V,
~ .~ . '*' §~§< .i?%'eT;;-5: . s ,~ -1 1‘~ 
. V ~.».~ ~;Z“§'~<\r: A A 1 ~ 5 
. .’>
oversubscription demonstrates both the tremendous need for capital infrastructure investment in this 
sector, and the phenomenal success that the department and partners had in making the application 
process accessible. 
l would like to point out several structural considerations that I hope this Committee, the Departments, 
the Maine Agriculture, Food System and Forest Products Infrastructure Investment Advisory Board, and 
others involved in the development of this fund and its execution will consider as the program develops. 
Limited Eligibility: AIIP was so successful, in part, because it was only open to farms and food 
producers. This fund should remain true to that purpose and should gig be 
available to organizations, non-profits, associations, and other entities, e.g., the 
Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine should not be eligible for this funding. 
Ease of Applying: Current grant and loan programs available to farmers would be more utilized if 
the application process was simpler. USDA grants, e.g., Value-Added Producer 
Grants, due to an extremely complicated and burdensome application process, 
limit applicants to those that can hire a professional grant writer, or to business 
owners that have their own gra nt-writing experience. That does not make for an 
equitable and accessible program. I suggest that the application process for 
e 
these grants is upon the AllP—simple and straightforward. 
Eligible Expenses: As demonstrated by the oversubscription to AllP, farmers and food producers 
are in dire need of capital investment in agriculture and food processing 
infrastructure. These basic infrastructure expenses should be eligible under this 
fund. Additionally, one of the most significant issues facing agriculture in Maine 
today is access to a reliable labor pool. One of our biggest barriers to producers 
being able to hire a workforce is their inability to comfortably house workers. If 
farm worker housing were an eligible expense under this fund, this funding 
would very quickly help to resolve our sector's workforce challenges. 
Again, thank you Speaker Talbot Ross and cosponsors for putting this bill forward. We will do all that we 
can to help it succeed. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have now or in the work 
session. 
Sincerely, 
4,’. 
Eric Venturini 
Executive Director 
Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
Eric.\/enturini@maine.edu 
(207) 478-7612 - 
wltnf‘ 
2.a9sr.=.':rg§; ‘§l =1“ 
MAlNE%?§
e 
5784 York Complex Suite 52 - 
Orono, ME 044695784 - 
207-581-1475 - 
wbcm@maine.edu 
wildbluel:>errycommission.org
* 1 »!x »§% *<»s “ 1?~
