James Hanna
Cumberland County Food Security Council
LD 1670
Testimony of Jim Hanna of Portland in Support of LD 1670, An Act to Strengthen 
Maine's Agriculture, Food and Forest Economy by Funding the Maine Agriculture, 
Food and Forest Products Investment Fund and Amending Related Provisions of Law
Honorable Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
As Executive Director of the Cumberland County Food Security Council (CCFSC), I 
represent a diverse food system coalition that agrees that our power to build nutrition 
security and end hunger depends on the strength of Maine’s ability to produce its own
food. We believe that our country’s inequitable access to resources for historically 
disadvantaged producers is a significant barrier to their participation in local food 
systems. 
For Maine’s local food production system to thrive, it must support all those who 
aspire to provide food for our communities. This legislation intentionally addresses 
racial equity and lack of access to capital and technical assistance that historically 
disadvantaged populations have had in food related industries. Another important 
element of this investment is that it supports development of infrastructure specific to 
processing and adding value to food grown by Maine farmers and ranchers, 
particularly under resourced and socially disadvantaged farmers. 
I was part of the team that prepared the report in response to LD 870: Resolve, 
Directing the Permanent Commission on the Status of Racial, Indigenous and Maine 
Tribal Populations To Study the Impact of Policies Regarding Agriculture, Access to 
Land, Access to Grants and Access to Financing on African-American and 
Indigenous Farmers in the State. Our work developed recommendations including the 
“creation of and funding allocation for set-asides for Black/African American and 
Indigenous farming and food-based projects that will aid in purchasing land, 
equipment, general operational costs, etc.” LD 1670 can do this.
As this committee has observed, the requests for the AIIP funding were nine times 
what was available for distribution. Owners of small farms and livestock operations 
need access to capital to compete with large agricultural corporations and build our 
local food economy. 
CCFSC supports this $20 million investment in technical assistance to critical 
infrastructure for FY2024 and 2025. This is a rare opportunity to provide a funding 
source for the state’s critical agriculture and food enterprises, enabling small 
businesses to innovate and grow.
