 
 Dear Members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee,  
 
I write in support of LD 1670. 
 
My partner and I have owned and operated Blue Barrens Farm, a family blueberry farm in Washington 
County, for 35 years.  We have raised our children largely from the proceeds of our  farm and our four 
children have all continued to work and reside in Maine, where in their various ways they enrich our lives 
and those of the broader community.  They all help with the annual harvest and with the more difficult 
fieldwork. 
 
Maine is a great place to be a family farmer, as we live in a socially rich community of small farmers who 
all share a dedication to the careful stewardship of our beautiful state and to hard work.  And we feel 
amply aided in our efforts by the expertise readily available from extension agents at the University of 
Maine and from state and federal agriculture programs. 
 
Although we love being Maine family farmers, we must acknowledge that farming in Maine can be 
extremely frustrating as we are continually held to a lower level of productivity than is possible for us 
owing to a lack of resources. 
 
We grow, harvest, process and market organic wild Maine blueberries.  We have ready markets 
throughout New England, access to productive blueberry land, a great capacity for hard work, and as 
much expertise as we require.  What we’ve always lacked—until just last year—is access to the funds 
necessary to expand our operations. 
 
To serve both local and distant markets with fresh and frozen wild Maine blueberries requires processing 
equipment, freezing equipment, and refrigerated delivery vehicles, all of which are too expensive to buy 
outright from farm proceeds.  The situation for us has been similar to wanting to start a family and buy a 
house, but having to pay cash for the house up front—it makes for a much delayed start. 
 
This has been our farming experience in Maine—year after year of frustratingly slow expansion of our 
efforts owing to lack of equipment and facilities to further them.  We have felt hobbled, held back, all the 
while eager to shake off our fetters and broaden our efforts. 
 
And just last year we have.  We are the recipients of an AIIP grant and here’s the difference it’s making:  
we’re installing a freezer, buying a refrigerated delivery van, and expanding our processing barn and 
worker housing.  Because we will now have these facilities, we are bringing more blueberry land into 
production, we are hiring more workers to help us harvest and process our crop, and we are expanding our 
markets throughout New England.  We are greatly ramping up our efforts at last, and this entirely because 
of AIIP. 
 
The great thing about the AIIP grants is that they go directly to the farmers who need them and for the 
kind of processing equipment and facilities those farmers have identified as necessary.  We urge that this 
aspect of AIIP be preserved, as this is the most direct way to have the greatest and most immediate 
impact. 
 
Many Maine farmers would expand their efforts if they had access to better facilities and labor.  AIIP 
could greatly benefit these farmers by funding facility enhancement and worker housing and for this 
reason we urge the committee to make AIIP permanent. 
 
Thank-you for the opportunity to testify, 
Mark Jacoby 
 
 Lisa Mushrall 
Blue Barrens Farm 
