Ron  Howard
Brodis Blueberries
LD 1670
My name is Ron Howard and my family owns Brodis Blueberries. We were one of 
the very fortunate recipients of the original AIIP Grant which has and will make an 
incredible difference in our long term success at sustaining our now 9 generation 
family farm. It offered not only amazing opportunities for us as a farm to improve our
efficiencies and expand our market but helped us make stronger bonds with other 
farms and buyers in a cooperative nature.
Like many farms and certainly wild blueberry farms in particular, many of the recent 
years have returned prices below cost the cost of growing our crop making it 
impossible to build capital to improve . This is particularly troubling as the 
knowledge of the health benefits and popularity of wild blueberries have grown 
considerably in recent years and yet growers have not had the capital to expand and 
take advantage of this trend. The AIIP design to allow growers to submit for 
infrastructure and equipment was so timely.
Over the last few years I have applied for almost a dozen grants from local to national
opportunities. The grants have included those that are so complex that farmers have to
hire a grant writing professional if they want any chance to be successful.
This last AIIP grant administrated by Department of Agriculture and Forestry and 
their partners proved by far to be wonderfully communicated, thorough, practical and 
offering flexibility that you never see elsewhere. The design of the application was 
thorough and easily understood. The webinars held by the department were timely 
and very helpful. Despite there being an appeal holding up the process, we were all 
included in communications to be aware of what was happening. I bring this up as I 
want you all to know that when you pass this bill, that you can be confident that it will
be handled professionally and fairly.
And finally, these funds should be made available to small to medium size farms that 
do not have the flexibility to obtain funds to compete compared to the larger farms, 
processors and nonprofit farms.
Thank you!

