MAINE 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy and Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, before 
the 131"‘ Legislature's Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
April 26, 2023 
Good morning Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Shelley Megquier and l am 
testifying today on behalf of Maine Farmland Trust (M FT) in support of the LD 1670 —An Act to 
Strengthen Maine's Agriculture, Food, and Forest Economy by Funding the Maine Agriculture, Food, 
and Forest Products Investment Fund and Amending Related Provisions of Law. 
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, 
and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently 
protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. ln 2022 alone, 
MFT supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants — delivering 
over 680 hours of technical assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses 
grow their profitability. Our main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, 
Stewardship, Farm Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research. 
MFT believes that to support Maine's rural economic development, farms must be economically 
viable. Over the years, MFT has collaborated-with farmers, food businesses, and economic 
development organizations to establish enterprises and deliver a range of programs and services 
focused on establishing a vibrant and resilient agricultural sector and food system in Maine. We 
work directly with farmers of all experience levels as they develop markets and grow successful 
businesses. MFT's support services and programs for farmers include individualized farm business 
planning and workshops and technical assistance that are designed to help farmers develop their 
businesses strategically and scale up their wholesale operations to obtain more market resilience 
and economic stability. We also support the expansion of new markets that connect more Mainers 
with Maine-grown food. 
In our work we have seen how Maine farmers need improved processing infrastructure and other 
innovative opportunities across all agricultural sectors to increase the supply of Maine-grown 
products and to create new market opportunities for local farms. For instance, the lack of meat 
processing capacity has been a long-standing challenge for livestock farmers in the state. As Maine's 
immigrant population grows, so too does the need for religiously and culturally appropriate meat 
processing, including halal processing. Expanding dairy processing capacity, particularly for value- 
added products and in proximity to dairy farms, could help dairy producers grow their businesses 
and lower costs. And the seasonality of fruit and vegetable production in the state requires 
innovation to produce shelf-stable local products that can feed Mainers and create market 
opportunities outside of the state all year long. The lack of food processing infrastructure weakens 
Maine's food and agriculture economy and serves as a challenge for individual farm businesses that 
are seeking to strategically scale up their operations. 
97 1\/Iain Street, Belfast, ME 04915 ~ 207.338.6575 0 mainef2Lrm1andtrust.0rg
At the same time, there is enormous growth potential for the food sector in Maine and the sectors 
that support it like farming. In fact, Governor Mills’ 10-year economic development strategy 
identifies the food sector in Maine as one of the four areas most ripe for economic development 
because of the state's current strengths, the growing global demand, and the potential forjob 
creation in that sector? But investment in food processing infrastructure is a necessary first step to 
growing this important segment of Maine's economy. As the economic development strategy notes, 
"[f]rom aquaculture to traditional seafood harvesting to value-added food production, growth is 
anticipated in these food industries and Maine can benefit greatly by growing our capacity to meet 
these markets/'2 This type of investment will also be necessary to meet the state's new climate 
action plan strategy of ”increase[ing] the amount of food consumed in Maine from state food 
producers from 10 percent to 20 percent by 2025 and 30 percent by 2030 through local food 
system development/'3 This strategy recognizes the importance of growing our local food sector to 
ensure food security for the state given the supply chain disruptions that are anticipated to result 
from climate change in the future. 
LD 1670 would help to provide the needed investment in Maine's food sector by capitalizing the 
Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products investment Fund. This fund was established in the 
130“ Legislature to expand strategic infrastructure investments in the agriculture, food, and forest 
products economies. The $20 million-dollar annual investment proposed in LD 1670 will support 
Maine's heritage industries, including agricultural producers and processors, by increasing access to 
new markets and opportunities through public-private partnerships. LD 1670 would also prioritize 
investments in historically marginalized, underrepresented, and underserved communities, in 
alignment with the recommendations of the Permanent Commission's 2022 Report on Land Access 
for Indigenous & African American Farmers by addressing the lack of access to capital and technical 
assistance that historically disadvantaged populations have had in food related industries. Based on 
their track record managing other funds, the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
is poised with the experience and skills needed to effectively administer the Maine Agriculture, 
Food, and Forest Products Investment Fund. Lastly, we are optimistic about the way that LD 1670 
will contribute to workforce development across Maine's agriculture and food economy — growing 
talent helps to address labor challenges as well as bringing new perspectives and the potential for 
new business innovations into the sector. 
For all of these reasons, MFT hopes that you will support LD 1670 to ensure a sustained funding 
source for Maine's agriculture, food, and forestry sectors. 
1 
Maine Economic Development Strategy (2020-2029): A Focus on Talent and Innovation (2019) at 14, available at: 
lattps://www.maine.govfdecd!sites,!rnaine.gov.decdffélesfiniinefiles/DECD 120919 smpdf. 
2 Id. at 18. 
3 
Maine Climate Council, Maine Won't Wait, A Four-Year Plan for Climate Action (Dec. 2020) at 13, available at 
https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/files/inline- 
files/MaineWontWait_December2020_printable_12.1.20.pdf.
2
