STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
 
 
April 27, 2023  
 
Senator Henry Ingwersen  
Representative Bill Pluecker  
Committee on Agricu lture, Conservation and Forestry  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and esteemed members of the Committee,  I 
am writing in support of LD 1670, An Act to Strengthen Maine's Agriculture, Food and Forest 
Economy by Funding the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products Investment Fund and 
Amending Related Provisions of Law .  
 
The Maine Agriculture, Food & Forest Products Investment Fund was established during the 
130th legislature under LD 1733 (P.L. 2021, ch. 483, §§ KK -1-3), An Act To Provide Allocations 
for the Distribution of State Fiscal Recovery Funds . The bill before you  seeks to allocate funding 
for this new initiative and essential staffing resources. We understand the bill appropriates 
$20,000,000 per year to the fund as ongoing appropriations that will lapse unless funds are 
encumbered. It also directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 
collaborate with the Department of Economic and Community Development to  ensure that 
investment objectives are appropriately targeted and not duplicative and to establish various 
grant and loan instruments as part of the Maine Agriculture, Food and Forest Products 
Investment Fund.  
 
The Department agrees with our colleagues in the Department of Agriculture , Conservation, and 
Forestry  with respect to the critical need for substantial infrastructure  investment across Maine’s 
agriculture, food, and forest products sectors . Bolstering local infrastructure will strengthen our 
economy by diminishing supply chain vulnerability, foster business activity, grow opportunities 
for rural communities, and facili tate climate change resilience.   
 
Capitalizing this fund is consistent with several of Maine’s economic development goals , as 
described in Maine’s 10 -year Economic Development Strategy:  
1. “Pursuing opportunities for sustainable fishing, such as aquaculture, to complement 
traditional fishing and meet the growing demand for a traceable food supply that is 
changing the way we fish and farm.” “Supporting the continued growth of bio -based 
altern ative products that emerge from the intersection of wood supply, bioplastic, and 
advanced building material technologies.”  
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
 
Funding is needed to support Maine’s sustainable fishing and aquaculture industry to help alleviate 
the world’s growing protein defi cit, and funding is needed to support Maine’s forest economy as 
it evolves and diversifies, elevating Maine’s key position in developing solutions to meet shifting 
global demand.  
 
LD 1670 also aligns well with DECD’s Domestic Trade Pilot Program, which wa s funded by the 
Maine Jobs & Recovery Plan and aims to help Maine businesses increase sales of goods and 
services to customers within the United States.  
 
In summary, we agree that Maine needs strategic investment in our agriculture, food, and forest 
products infrastructure, and we welcome the opportunity to fully fund this historic investment in 
Maine agriculture and forestry products. We thank Speaker Talb ot Ross for bringing the bill 
forward and we look forward to continuing to work with the sponsor and the committee on this 
proposal.   
 
Thank you for your time , and your consideration of this bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
Victoria Foley  
Legislative Affairs & Communications  
Dept. Of Economic and Community Development  
 

