jam‘ ';~ 
_ M5315 Maine Department of Health and Human Stu luv» 
(|m.erm,,- ii Commissioner ’s Oftue 
%i ll State House Station 
D 109 Capitol ‘strut 
“ Tel: <20?) 2813707; rm; (207) zsv sans 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Rtlrn) 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce for Family Independence 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Opposition of LD 117 An Act to Prohibit the Use of Electronic Beneﬁts Transfer System 
Cards for Cash Withdrawals 
Sponsored by: Senator Eric Brakey 
Hearing Date: February 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Anthony Pelotte, and I serve as Director of the Ofﬁce 
for Family Independence in the Department of Health and Human Services. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to LD 117, An Act to Prohibit the Use of 
Electronic Beneﬁts Transfer System Cards for Cash Withdrawals. 
Maine people use Electronic Beneﬁts Transfer, or EBT, cards to access ﬁnancial support through 
several programs. These include the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) 
program, and other programs intended to support Maine families as they work toward their 
education goals and self-support, such as the Additional Support for People in Retraining and 
Employment (ASPIRE) program, Higher Opportunity for Pathways to Employment (HOPE) 
program, and Parents as Scholars (PaS) program. EBT cards provide access to support payments 
intended to support items such needed for education and work activities such as gas, car repairs, 
child care, and education or work tools. EBT cards also hold State Supplement payments, also 
issued by OFI to people eligible for Supplemental Security Income (SSI), and Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) beneﬁts to counter food insecurity. 
The Ofﬁce for Family Independence opposes the passage of this bill. First, and perhaps most 
importantly for the Committee ’s consideration, the bill is in violation of federal law. Federal law 
42 U.S.C. 602 (a)(l)(A)(vii), requires States to ensure that recipients have adequate access to 
their cash assistance. Failing to meet such a requirement would likely result in the 
Administration of Children and Families (ACF) rejecting Maine’s required TANF State Plan and 
would jeopardize Maine’s eligibility for TANF block grant funds of 76 million dollars annually. 
Additionally, this bill would also contradict one of the primary purposes of TANF as deﬁned in 
42 U.S.C. 601 - to aid families so that children may be cared for in their own home. The 
proposed change would greatly impact a families ’ ability to pay rent and utilities, as most 
landlords and utility companies do not accept EBT card payments. While most of these cash 
payments issued on EBT cards can be utilized as a point-of-sale transaction at a retailer, direct 
cash withdrawals are critical to ensure families can access supports quickly and in a ﬂexible 
manner to allow for efﬁcient and cost-effective options. Many vendors, such as electric, water,
sewer, oil companies and landlords, do not accept EBT card payments. In a time of high heating 
costs and a statewide housing crisis restricting the access to these payments would prove 
detrimental to the stability and safety of many Maine families. 
It is for these reasons that the Office for Family Independence opposes the passage of this bill. 
Again, thank you for the opportunity to discuss LD 117 with you, and please know that the 
Department and the Ofﬁce for Family Independence are available to provide any information 
that may be helpful as you consider this legislation. Thank you for your time, and I would be 
happy to answer any questions you have now or for the work session.
