ii' 
=9; . .. =’ 
airs?" 
Eric L. Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting LD 117, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Electronic 
Beneﬁts Transfer System Cards for Cash Withdrawals 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee ’ 
February 15, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, I am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, 
Poland, and Durham. It is my honor to be here with you today and present LD 117, “An Act to 
Prohibit the Use of Electronic Beneﬁts Transfer System Cards for Cash Withdrawals. ” 
To begin with some history and context, this proposal today should be considered as one of 
several this session, revisiting past ideas debated by this committee in the years I chaired it 
alongside Representatives Drew Gattine and Patty Hymanson. 
After an election mandate on welfare reform in 2014, this committee found bipartisan support to 
pass several bills to increase transparency and accountability with welfare dollars. One of those 
policies was legislation I sponsored, alongside former Senator Nate Libby of Lewiston, to 
prohibit the use of welfare dollars (from the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program) 
for the purchase of alcohol, cigarettes, lottery tickets, and various other items that violate the 
spirit and purpose of the program (with repeated violations resulting in suspensions of beneﬁts). 
I am proud of that bipartisan accomplishment, but I acknowledge it left open a gaping loophole 
in the law, which makes enforcement challenging: TANF beneﬁts can be Withdrawn for cash at 
any ATM. Once redeemed for cash, it is hard to ensure beneﬁts are not being used for prohibited 
purchases. 
While I am an adamant defender of the rights of any person to use the money they eam in any 
fashion they see ﬁt, welfare beneﬁts are not earned. Welfare dollars are taken from the 
paychecks of taxpayers and redistributed for stated purposes. As such, Maine taxpayers have the 
right to demand a degree of accountability in ensuring those stated purposes. 
Further, we are living in the 21st Century. The barriers to making payment with a card are lower 
than ever. In fact, it is hard to ﬁnd a place of business these days that does not accept digital 
payment. _A 
Eliminating cash withdrawals with EBT cards will help enforce the bipartisan reforms the Maine 
Legislature enacted in 2015— . prohibiting the purchase of alcohol, cigarettes, and lottery tickets 
with Welfare dollars —— and ensure TANF dollars are spent for their intended purpose: providing 
temporary assistance to needy families. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of this legislation. Let’s build on past bipartisan 
welfare reforms with some common sense measures for program integrity.
