126 Sewa" Street Maine Equaljustice Kathy Kilrain del RIO 
Augusta, Maine 04330-6822 Advocacy & Programs Director 
TTY/VOICE: (Z07) 626-7058 - - kkm-a]nde|ri°@meJp org 
www maineequaljusticeorg people pollcy Soluuons 
MEJ Testimony in Opposition to LD 117, An Act to Prohibit the Use of Electronic Beneﬁts 
Transfer System Cards for Cash Withdrawals 
February 15, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, l use she/her pronouns, and l’m 
the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am 
speaking today in opposition to LD 117. 
l am disappointed to be testifying today because bills similar to the one before you have been 
heard and rejected in previous legislative sessions because they raised serious legal and policy 
concerns. That is again the case with this bill. There are many hardships experienced by low- 
income families in our state and LD 117 would only make it more difficult for those families 
with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) or older Mainers and people with 
disabilities who receive State Supplemental Security Income (SSI) to meet their basic needs. In 
2021, one in three Maine adults struggled to cover their household expenses, and Maine has 
become one of the least affordable housing markets in the country} lt is programs like TANF 
that provide a lifeline for Maine families so they can stay afloat. 
LD 117 would prohibit assistance received through the Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) System 
from being redeemed for cash. This prohibition would apply to both low-income families with 
children that receive TANF and certain ASPIRE reimbursements on an EBT card, as well as older 
Mainers and people with disabilities that receive their State SSI supplement on an EBT card. 
This legislation would make simple everyday tasks like paying bills more difficult for these 
families. 
People living on limited income need cash to pay for basic needs, including rent, food, gas, 
getting their car repaired, electricity, heat, using the laundromat, taking public transportation, 
and much more. This bill would have significant consequences for families and individuals who 
use the benefits on their EBT card to pay for their everyday necessities. Most landlords do not 
accept payment by electronic means or if they have an electronic portal, it can't accept funds 
from an EBT card so many tenants must pay their rent with cash. This bill would result in more 
evictions for families, older Mainers, and people with disabilities. We have worked with many 
1See the State of Poverty in Maine prepared by Maine Equal Iustice: 
https2_//maineequaliustice.org_/5ite/assets/fiiesj2Z84/stateofpovertyinmaine8 5x11 1-4-21.pdf.
2 
clients who need to use TANF or SSI beneﬁts to pay for electricity, oil, or other heating costs, so 
they need to take cash off the card to pay those providers. Having access to a working car or 
public transportation is essential for these families and individuals to get to work, school, and 
medical appointments. Not all gas stations, most mechanics, and public transportation systems 
don't take EBT cards so they need to take out cash from the card to pay those costs. Many 
retailers don't accept EBT cards so l\/lainers need to take cash from the card to pay for food, 
diapers, their kids’ clothes, and many other necessities. These are just some examples, but 
there are many others. 
Additionally, this legislation raises at least two issues that would make it subject to legal 
challenges. First, federal law, further emphasized by federal guidance from the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, makes clear that TANF families must have adequate access to 
cash stating explicitly that ”states should maximize the flexibility for recipients to access cash 
withdrawals/'2 The federal guidelines continue by discussing where ATMs should be located 
and how fees should be minimized when possible, demonstrating that having adequate access 
to cash is essential to all families but especially families receiving TANF benefits. 
Furthermore, Kansas had enacted a provision similar to LD 117, although it merely limited, but 
did not preclude cash withdrawal. Nevertheless, the Kansas Department for Children and 
Families (which did not itself propose this limit) rescinded this requirement after receiving 
notice from the federal DHHS that it was inconsistent with the aforementioned federal TANF 
law requiring that families have ”adequate access to their cash assistance. ” 
Secondly, preventing families from accessing cash with their EBT card places the state at risk of 
financial penalty for violating the federal Fair Labor Standards Act and Maine law. As you know, 
Maine's TANF program requires many recipients to perform work requirements in order to 
meet the program's participation requirement. This work is subject to the Fair Labor Standards 
Act (FLSA), which requires that the person performing such work must receive pay in the form 
of cash, or something that can be readily converted into cash.4 ln some instances, depending 
on the work activity, the state must ensure the TANF benefits paid are at least equal to the 
amount of hours that the person is engaged in the work activity, and it would be penalized if it 
did not. By restricting access to these required cash payments to those performing these 
services, DHHS would be at risk of FLSA penalties. 
l also want to state clearly that much data shows that when low-income families and individuals 
receive cash - whether it is through benefits like TANF or SSI or it is through another mechanism 
like tax credits - they use it for everyday needs: food, rent, heating costs, diapers, school costs, 
2 See additional guidance on adequate cash access provisions of 45 CFR parts 264 and 26 from the federal 
DHHS at https:[fwww.acf.hhs.g0v,fofa/policy-guidance/tanf-acf-pi-20 1 6-O2—additional-guidance-adequate 
access-provisions-45-cfr-parts. 
3 See Jim McLean, "Federal warning leads Kansas officials to cancel limits on welfare ATM withdrawals, ” 
Wyandotte Daily (Aug. 5, 2015), https:f_/Wyandottedaiiy.cornffederal-warning~ieads-kansas-officiais-tq 
cancel-iimits-on-amt-welfare-withdrawals ,1’. 
4 29 C.F.R. § 531.27.
3 
clothing.5'6 Poor people are just trying to survive and bills like this imply that they are somehow 
different from those of us who have economic security and that they cannot be trusted to 
spend cash to meet their families ’ most basic needs. This is simply not true. 
Legislation like LD 117 has been considered and rejected at least twice before because it 
violates existing laws and does nothing to improve the lives of struggling Maine families. This 
bill would result in greater homelessness, hunger, and hardship for low-income families with 
TANF and older Mainers and people with disabilities with State SSI. For all these reasons, we 
strongly urge you to again reject this proposal and vote Ought Not to Pass for LD 117. Thank 
you for your consideration and I'm happy to answer any questions. 
5 https://www.mecep.(>rg_/biog,/niecep-rep0rt-shows-the-child-tax-credit-made —a-tangible-difference-for 
6 https:j/www.cbp_p,org/research/income-security/incteases-in-tant-cash-bene ﬁtdevels-are-critical-to-heir; 
families-meet 
0#:~:text=TANF%20provicles%20a%2Oi/ital%20support.in%2OBiaci<%2Oand%20Latinx%20communities
