Hebert, Michelle 
From: annlinn kruger <ann3145@gmail.com> 
Sent: Monday, March 20, 2023 11:33 AM 
To: Hood, Maggie; Hebert, Michelle 
Subject: Testimony Against LD1038 An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting by Repealing the Ranked 
Choice Voting Laws 
T his message originates froml outside theMaini ﬁaegisliitilci-é;A A A 
f fA 
R 
Q‘A 
;f5 .: 
Thanl<You for this opportunity to submit written testimony against LD1038 An Act to Reinstate Plurality 
Voting by Repealing the Ranked Choice Voting Laws. I believe it is to have a hearing on 22 March 2023. 
My name is Annlinn Kruger and I am a resident of Bar Harbor, Maine. 
Our state motto, Dirigo, I lead, appears on our state seal with the Polar Star. They represent the citizens ‘ guide 
and the object to which the patriot's best exertions should be directed. So it is particularly pertinent that 
its origins relate to voting — 
for voting is certainly how our citizens ‘ patriotic exertions guide the ship 
of state. And indeed Maine leads the nation in both voter participation and in laws which support 
voter participation. Such as Ranked Choice Voting or Instant Runoff Voting, which guarantees to we 
citizens of Maine a more fair, representational, and efficient electoral process. More voter 
participation at less cost - ultimately a more representative government. And in fact, a majority of 
l\/laine voters have repeatedly supported Ranked Choice Voting. So l find it spectacularly offensive 
and dishonest that sponsors of repealing Ranked Choice Voting say their bill is to be enacted by the 
People of the State of Maine, when it is exactly the opposite of what we we've said we want. And what 
the courts have defended as a constitutional path to achieving the benefits ofa majority candidate 
while avoiding the shortcomings of a run off election. What Republicans have failed to achieve by 
debate at ballot box and argument in the courts ~ overturning Ranked Choice Voting - they now seek 
to impose by legislative diktat. By short circuiting the political and judicial processes, these sponsors 
are promoting the idea of a legislature unbound by the checks and balances our democratic republic 
is supposed to operate under. As a senior citizen who has long volunteered to register voters, get out 
the vote, and help at polling places, l appreciate how important supporting voter participation is — 
and 
fear the demoralizing effects of voter suppression. Mainers are independent, innovative, practical, 
efficient, and thrifty. Ranked Choice Voting checks all those boxes. Please oppose LD 1038's meritless 
enforcement of plurality voting and repeal of Ranked Choice Voting. ThankYou.
1
