Betsy Williams
Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network
LD 1038
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and distinguished members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee. 
My name is Betsy Williams and today I will read testimony prepared by my colleague Kathryn 
Kellison. We are speaking on behalf of the Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy 
Network, which links over 500 individuals in 26 churches across the state in faith-based 
advocacy. Kathy is unable to attend today and asked me to deliver this on her behalf.
Kathy writes: I am a registered voter in Windsor, Maine and I am testifying today in opposition
to LD # 1038, An Act to Repeal Ranked Choice Voting. One of the fundamental principles of 
my Unitarian Universalist faith is promoting use of the democratic process in all our affairs.
When I was in elementary school, I learned that democracy is a system of government where 
the majority rules.  This made sense to me.  The bedrock of democracy is that elected 
officials represent and honor the will of the majority of people. 
Our government is stronger and more representative when more candidates run for office.  
The more voices there are, the more ideas there are, and the more choices voters have.  The
more choices voters have, the more they pay attention to the issues and the solutions that 
candidates propose. This only works with a system like ranked choice voting. 
In our old system the person with the most votes, not a majority, won. Many of our candidates
came into office winning less than half the vote.  In my opinion, such a person cannot claim to
be representing ‘the people’.
A majority of voters in Maine agree and have endorsed ranked choice voting twice by 
referendum. 
First, in 2016, 52% of Maine voters approved using ranked choice voting in elections.  
Following this vote, a conflict between the referendum and the State Constitution led the 
legislature to pass a bill delaying its implementation. Then, in 2020, a people’s veto of that 
legislation resulted in the voters of Maine expressing even more support for rank-choice 
voting.
I believe that Maine voters are capable of making good decisions for our state. We, and 
democracy in Maine, benefit from assurance that the will of the majority prevails in our 
elections. 
I urge you to reject LD1038 and leave the last word to us, the voters. Thank you.

