 
 
 
 
March 22, 2023  
 
Sen. Craig Hickman , Chair  
Rep. Laura Supica , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 1038 An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting by Repealing the Ranked -choice Voting Laws  
Chair Hickman , Chair Supica , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs. My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director f or RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti -corruption organization.  RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in opposition to LD 
1038 An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting by Repea ling the Ranked -choice Voting Laws.  Our organization 
believes strongly that Ranked -choice Voting enhances the democratic electoral process and should be 
maintained in Maine.  
RepresentUs is America’s leading nonpartisan anti -corruption organization fighting  to fix our broken and 
ineffective government. We unite people across the political spectrum to hold corrupt politicians 
accountable, defeat special interests, and force the government to meet the needs of the American 
people. Regarding the electoral proce ss, we work to  pass powerful state and local laws that expand 
voter access , make elections more representative,  and enhance  election  security.  To that end, we are 
supportive of Ranked -choice Voting  (RCV) . 
LD 1038 would repeal Maine’s used of RCV and take Maine’s electoral process backwards. RCV has many 
benefits. It  gives voters the opportunity to express their true preferences without fear of accidentally 
helping candidates who they don’t support. Since successful candidates need to win a majority of  the 
vote, they have to go beyond their base and build broader coalitions to govern. RCV also opens the door 
for more voices in our elections, as candidates no longer have to fear the “spoiler effect”.   
When voters have the opportunity to better express th eir preferences, and candidates are incentivized 
to go beyond a narrow base to connect with the broader community, the officials who win elections 
need popular buy -in to maintain support. For officeholders, this backing becomes a clearer mandate to 
govern in exchange for more responsive governance.  
RCV is used by approximately 13 million voters, in 59 cities in over 10 states and statewide in 2 states. In 
addition to Maine, t his includes places from  Alaska to New York City where RepresentUs has thrown our 
full support behind the locals leading the way.  When Alaska adopted RCV, becoming the second state to 
use the system statewide after Maine, 85% of Alaskans reported RCV to be simple and successful.  
Mainers have strongly supported RCV twice at the polls, first with the initial ballot measure to enact RCV 
and later with the people's veto to repeal it.  
We urge the committee to protect Maine’s Ranked -choice Voti ng system by voting no on LD 1038.  

