Diane Vernesoni
Topsham
LD 1038
Ranked Choice Voting: A failed “solution” for an imaginary problem
Ranked Choice Voting was a law created by public referendum in 2016. Maine’s November 
2018 election was the first time it was used to elect members of congress.
Let’s take a quick look at what was promised to us by the original proponents of RCV in order 
to persuade us to vote for this dramatic, new process; and what really happened in Maine’s 
2018 second congressional district election with RCV:
First, we were told RCV would reduce negative campaigning and, therefore, less money 
would be spent overall. Sadly, RCV failed abysmally at these goals. The race between Jarrod
Golden and Bruce Poliquin was one of the most expensive and dirtiest in Maine history. The 
winner, Jarod Golden, spent more than $31 Million and most of that money was for negative, 
unfounded ads against his opponent. 
Second, we were told we could vote for the person, not the party, allowing third party 
candidates a better chance.  But the combined total of votes for third party candidates in the 
second district was only a single-digit percentage and the final winner of the race was a major
party candidate, as predicted. 
Finally, and what was supposed to be the most important aspect for RCV:  we were told we 
could be assured that the winner would get a majority - more than 50% - of the total votes 
cast.  But even that didn’t happen, and according to the Democracy Journal, it usually 
doesn’t.  The Maine Secretary of State’s office tells us that the total number of votes cast in 
the 2018 second congressional race was 296,077. Half of that number would be 148,039. But
the winning number of votes that Jarrod Golden received was only 142,440 – far less than a 
majority of votes cast. That’s because many ballots, over 5600, were thrown out in the 
“second round” which results in a much smaller number needed to win and the loss of a 
Constitutional right to vote for those people.  
This most important aspect of Ranked Choice Voting was simply false. Proponents knew this 
from the beginning but continued with the “majority” deception as it was necessary to get 
support for the referendum that created this law.  
 Ranked Choice Voting is a complicated and convoluted solution in search of an imaginary 
problem. Oh it looked so simple in the advertising – “what is your favorite flavor of ice cream? 
What is your second favorite?” But RCV solved no electoral problems, created a long and 
contentious second round and recount, and the winner will forever be in doubt.

