Testimony of Representative Edward Polewarcqvk introducing 
LD 1038, An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting by Repealing the Ranked-choice Voting Lawse 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans And Legal Ajfairs 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans And Legal Aﬁairs: I am Edward Polewarczyk, Representative for House District 47, 
which includes Alna, Jefferson, Whiteﬁeld and Wiscasset. I am here today to present: 
L.D. 103 8, An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting by Repealing the Ranked-choice Voting Laws 
Many different issues were discussed with voters during my campaign. One of the more 
signiﬁcant issues was Ranked-Choice Voting. Many were against Ranked-Choice Voting, only 
one voter was in favor of it, believing that a candidate should be elected by a majority of the 
voters. 
In the 1800's Maine determined the results of its election using a majority of the votes cast. 
When a majority was not achieved by any candidate, additional elections were held until a single 
candidate received a majority of the votes cast. The result was an increasing public lack of 
conﬁdence in the election process. 
The 7th Amendment to the Constitution of Maine was adopted and became eﬂective on July 
29, 1848. In that amendment the words, "a majority," were replaced with the words "the greatest 
number." The result was, that since 1848 (for I68 years), elections in Maine were decided by 
"plurality" . The winner of an election being decided by the candidate receiving "the greatest 
number of votes". 
In 2016 a Citizen's Initiative resulted in a referendum that was passed on November 8, 2016 
by the voters 52% to 48%.. The Maine Supreme Court was asked to provide an opinion on the 
constitutionality of the referendum and responded on May 23, 2017 that the Ranked-Choice 
Voting Act conﬂicts with the Maine Constitution. 
Currently Ranked -Choice voting is applicable to Primary elections, Presidential and 
Congressional Representatives and Senators. So here we are today, a mix of Plurality decided 
elections and Ranked-Choice Voting decided elections. 
The objective of this bill is to clearly specify that all elections are to be decided by plurality, 
including Govemor, Representatives, and Senators, as required in our Constitution, and Primary 
Elections, Presidential and Congressional (Representatives and Senators) elections. 
An increasing number of my constituents complain about Ranked Choice voting. They view 
Ranked-Choice voting as a more complicated system. Voters are not sure where it does apply or 
does not apply and what to expect for a given election. Many are not sure how to complete the 
ballot. Many don't want the other candidates but feel that they have to make additional choices 
or their vote will be disregarded. They believe it violates "one person, one vote" 
It is especially divisive in the case where the person with the most votes loses as a result of 
applying second choices and there is the question of the validity of the election. Plurality has 
been accepted and worked for 168 years.— 
Our history has shown that majority voting has lead to a lack of conﬁdence in our elections. 
That lack of conﬁdence. resulted in the change to plurality voting with the seventh Amendment 
to our Constitution. Is history repeating itself? 
Having a voting system where Plurality is used in some elections and Ranked-Choice voting 
is used in others, decreases the conﬁdence our constituents have in the validity of our elections.
