Linda Haskell
Garland, Maine 04939
LD 1038
LD1038 An Act to reinstate Plurality Voting by Repealing the Ranked-choice Voting Laws.     
Ranked choice voting is a disaster. One Person. One Vote. That is how American elections 
work. RCV threatens to undo this very principle of one person, one vote.
RCV work discounting votes, diminishing voter confidence, and threatening prompt election 
results, slower results, increased irregularities, multiple rounds of tabulation until numerous 
candidates has been thrown out and the remaining has more than 50%, which is 
false-election tabulation results.
Perhaps the most concerning component  of RCV elections is the required changes to the 
ballot counting process. Similar to caucus process still used in places, RCV ballots must be 
transported to a centralized location for counting due to multiple rounds of tabulation in the 
event of a instant runoff, increasing the cost of the election and the vulnerability to 
mismanagement. 21 When informed that RCV increases election irregularities, 71 percent of 
all voters, regardless of party affiliation, are more likely to oppose RCV.22 RANKED-CHOICE
VOTING LEADS TO LENGTHY DELAYS IN ELECTION RESULTS.
In Alaska 15,000 votes were cast out before Mary Peltola was declared the winner. In fact 
60% of the voters voted Republican in the first round. , but by the last tally, Peltola came out 
ahead by just 5,129 votes. Conveniently for the Democrats, more than 11,000 ballots were 
exhausted - or tossed - by the second round simply because they only voted for the other 
Republican candidate instead of ranking all of the candidates. In 2018 Poliquin in 2nd 
Congressional  District
had 46.33% and Golden had 45.58% in the first round, but 8000 votes were systematically 
thrown out, to declare Golden the winner. CHEATING PLUS!!!!
RCV therefore creates FALSE MAJORITY, not true majority. Not only does this fly in the face 
of our American principles of "one-person, one-vote," it allows candidates to "fail-up" to beat 
the candidate that had the most votes inthe first round. RCV is a complicated system and it 
threatens fast and accurate ballot  counting. Plurality is simpler and accurate and works 
extremely well. Abraham Lincoln only had 39.8% of the popular vote in the 1860 presidential 
election. If there had been RCV, we would have lost a great President.
Worst of all, huge numbers of New Yorkers were disenfranchised by the end of the 
vote-counting process. All told, more than 140,000 ballots --nearly 15% of the total cast-- 
were thrown out, because they didn't rank enough candidates for their votes to make the final 
round.New York City stifled their voices, that's undemocratic--and un-American.San 
Francisco Bay area admitted that, it announced the wrong winner in a race with ranked 
choice voting. it is now recounting the results in every election that used this system. That 
doesn't happen with normal voting, but in ranked-choice voting, it is common.
This is My testimony: LINDA P. HASKELL, GARLAND, MAINE 04939 LD1038 MARCH 22, 
2023 pUBLIC hEARING 
Americans win when their votes count. One0person, one-vote, and we should keep it that 
way.
