Testimony in Support of LD 1038:
“An Act to Reinstate
Plurality Voting by
Repealing the Ranked-choice Voting Laws”
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1038.
Ranked-Choice Voting is a fad, and a costly failure, both in practice, and in the
abstract. Political scientists have studied it and found that greater ballot complexity
drives “the negative effect of RCV…[which] increases as elections become less
competitive, and that it increases with the number of candidates.”
1
Voters should understand that, under RCV, their votes may not count.
As Hazel Dukes, president of the New York State chapter of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People to The New York Post in 2021,
“Ranked choice voting is not beneficial to minorities. It’s voter suppression.”
2
Think of it this way: less than one percent of mailed ballots are rejected in the
average U.S. election, but a 2019 Maine Policy Institute analysis of nearly 100 RCV races
found that, on average, “exhausted ballots” made up more than 10-times that amount.
For those not familiar with the term, exhausted ballots occur when a voter does not rank
one of the two final-round candidates, and their ballot is removed from the final tally.
A report by Princeton professor Nolan McCarty submitted to the U.S. District
Court in Maine found that, in 15 of 98 races studied, more than 20 percent of ballots
were exhausted. McCarty also found higher rates of exhausted ballots among electorates
with more elderly and non-college-educated voters.
3
In other words, these voters cast legible ballots, but were ultimately excluded
when determining the “majority winner.” How can a system be branded as more
3
Expert Report of Nolan McCarty, Ph.D., Professor of Politics and Public Affairs at Princeton University. 
Hagopian, et al. v. Dunlap, et al. U.S. District Court for the District of Maine. July 22, 2020. 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nF2MGnR98u1ZFD8tIIcurE3qoLKNbUkg/view?usp=sharing
2
https://nypost.com/2021/07/01/naacp-head-slams-ranked-choice-voting-urges-overhaul-of-board/
1
McDaniel, Jason. The Costs of Complexity: An Analysis of How Ranked-Choice Voting Affects Voter 
Turnout.
Election Sciences Reform and Administration
.
October 24, 2019. 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1k9uyZdjiI3yAYX63y9Unsm54ViX2Rkp2/view?usp=sharing
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

democratic when it relies on removing ballots from the final count to arrive at its false
majority?
Often because of high rates of exhausted ballots, more than six-in-ten RCV
winners do not earn a majority of votes cast. Some say this can be solved through voter
education, but McCarty saw higher rates of exhausted ballots even among electorates
with more experience with RCV elections.
Under RCV, not only must voters understand the issues and candidates on their
ballots, but they must strategically plot their choices to maximize their effect on the
outcome. By declining to rank every candidate or choosing to vote for less-widely
popular third-party candidates, their votes are unwillingly diluted.
In this way, RCV has its own “spoiler effect,” similar to the way in which today’s
third-party voters must succumb when asked to choose one of the two major party
candidates to avoid “throwing away a vote.” It is certainly no better in this regard.
One thing is certain: RCV is inherently more complex and confusing to voters
than the status quo, which is reflected in the level of exhausted ballots and disaffected
voting blocs.
Voting systems should meet some basic criteria: casting a ballot is as easy as
possible, and that every voter is assured that his or her vote will count equally toward
the result. Unfortunately, RCV fails even these simple tests.
Please deem LD 1038 “Ought To Pass” and restore Maine’s elections to a clear
standard of binary ballots and plurality vote counting instead of relying on opaque and
unaccountable RCV tabulation. Thank you for your time and consideration.
