 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
Neither for Nor Against  
 
LD 1038 , An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting by Repealing the Ranked- choice Voting Laws  
 
March 22, 2023 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert , and I am providing testimony neither for nor against  
LD 1038 on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative 
Policy Committee (LPC). Fo r reference , the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA 
and establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.    
Ranked choice voting (RCV) has been a controversial topic to grace Maine’s coffee tables 
over the past several years  that ga rners mixed opinions from all corners of the state . Although 
RCV was passed by Maine voters with a healthy majority in 2016, resistance ensued from 
opponents, and yet again,  voters expressed their will resulting in the RCV system being set up 
and utilized for the 2018 midterm elections.  
A study from Jesse Clark, MIT Election Data + Science Lab, on the effect of ranked choice 
voting in Mainei, showed that using the RCV system “seems to boost non -major party vote share  
(and increase since re voting ),” but that the behavioral and campaign effects anticipated did not 
produce such stark changes. In fact, it the study hints that civil discourse actually increased with the use of RCV, however, for useful long -term effects data, this topic should be continually 
studied.  
MMA agrees. Studying the effects produced by using the RCV voting system will help 
determine if the system has the intended outcome. Regardless of whether  municipalities are in 
favor or against  the use  of RCV, local leaders support  Maine voters exercising their constitutional 
right to vote in whatever manner is set before them. Likewise, Maine town and city clerks stand ready to conduct elections in the fair and responsible manner that they are already accustomed 
to providing.  
For t hese reasons, the LPC is neither for nor against  LD 10 38. Thank you for  your time and 
for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
 
 
i https://electionlab.mit.edu/articles/effect- ranked -choice -voting -maine  

