Sylvia A Seplowitz
Orono, ME
LD 1038
 Situation: I stand in favor of HP674, no. 1038, An Act to Reinstate Plurality Voting 
by Repealing the Ranked Choice Voting Laws. 
Data:
•I agree with Rep. Polewarczyk’s testimony statements in introducing this bill. 
•I personally had to look up “ranked voting” and make numerous calls in order to 
vote in the last election. I had no idea how to navigate this voting system having 
recently moved back to Maine and encountering ranked voting for the first time. I 
made several calls and looked online on government websites, to establish that it was 
okay to just vote for one candidate. I found it difficult to understand and quickly 
realized that many people I spoke to didn’t understand or know the answers to my 
questions. So after finally figuring out what I could and could not do, I voted. 
•I had difficulty accepting this change at the time and still do. I am 75 years old and 
have been voting all my life. This new “Ranked voting” system seemed to add 
needless steps to voting and I am certain, made voting less direct and efficient. Why 
complicate what is simple and works?   
•The Maine Constitution supports one vote for one candidate not “Ranked Voting.”
•The Maine Supreme Court decided that “Ranked Voting” conflicts with the Maine 
Constitution. 
•I live in a Senior Community and know several seniors who, like me, did not 
understand “ranked choice voting,” found it confusing, or had misconceptions about 
how to vote. I am an intelligent and educated senior who found the purpose and 
method of “ranked choice voting” difficult to understand and its method 
implementation unconstitutional and unsafe. 
•For my entire life the winner of any election for a government office was 
determined by whoever received the most votes, there was no first choice, second 
choice, or third choice. the winner could be determined simply by counting the votes 
for each candidate. This system worked well for all those years. Why would anyone 
want to vote for a second or third choice? I want the best, my first choice! It’s not like
we are betting on a horse race. We are electing government officials who are going to 
represent us on very important matters that affect our daily lives. We know who we 
want to win, and it’s not our second or third choice. It is our first and only choice.  
Solution:
That this act to reinstate Plurality Voting by repealing the Ranked Choice voting laws,
LD1038, be approved and instituted as law, restoring faith in our voting procedure 
and constitutionality to our voting system here in Maine. 
 
