POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 291 An Act to Support Young People Affected by Substance Use Disorder 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of An Act to Support Young People Affected by Substance Use Disorder. NAM! Maine and other mental 
health advocates have attended multiple hearings and work sessions before this committee's esteemed 
colleagues sitting on the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee regarding very similar issues and 
concerns. Although we recognize that this is a concept draft, we strongly support any and all work that is 
being proposed in Health and Human Services, as it shifts the ownership and support for the young 
people of our state back to the correct system. 
According to the most updated facts sheet released by the State of Maine Department of Health and 
Human Services website, 1 in 4 high school students in the state have been offered, given, or sold illegal 
substances on school property. It was also reported on the website that according to the most recent 
Maine integrated Youth Health Survey, 22% of high schoolers and 4% of middle schoolers had used 
marijuana in the previous 30 days. The same survey revealed that 23% of high schoolers also consumed 
alcohol in the previous 30 days, with 33% of those who responded saying that they had drank, also 
reporting consuming 5 or more drinks in a row which constitutes binge drinking. Distressingly, 3% of 
middle schoolers reported taking a prescription medication that was not prescribed to them. Lastly, 4% 
of the young people who participated in the survey reported that they required substance use 
treatment, and they did not receive it. Using a medium sized high school size in the state for context, 
which would be 600-700 students, there are 27-28 students that currently require substance use 
treatment and are not receiving it. Please consider making a calculation for the high school students in 
your districts to continue to consider the staggering number of young people in each community 
requiring care and not receiving it. 
NAMI Maine supports the work and initiatives ofthis committee in ensuring that the investments of this 
committee will provide critical resources and allow for the best possible outcomes for our children. 
Maine has struggled with the weight of substance use disorders for a considerable amount of time. 
Investing in treatment for young people will assist in the long-term health and well-being of our state. 
ABOUT NAM! MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the NationalAIllance on Mental lllness, Maine Chapter (NAM! Maine) is the state's largest grassroots 
mental heaith organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAM! Maine engages with leaders and community partners at ail levels to improve the state’s mental 
health system through collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
(207) 622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.0rg
