295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 291 
"An Act to Support Young People Affected by Substance Use 
Disorder " 
Sponsored by Representative LaRochelle   
April 10, 2023  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance 
advocates fo r the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 291, “An Act 
to Support Youn g People Affected by Substance Use Disorder .” As you've already 
heard , the sponsor's amendment directs the Department of Health and Human 
Services in conjunction with the  Department of Education to convene a working 
group to study the feasibility and issue s related to establishing a recovery high 
school in the state .  
 
According to the Association of Recovery Schools,  recovery high schools are 
secondary schools designed specifically for students in recovery from substance 
use disorder or co -occurring disorders. These high schools m eet state 
requirements for awarding a secondary school diploma,  while also requiring the 
student to be working a program of recovery from substance use or co -occurring 
disorders as determined by the student and the school . Additionally, recovery 
high schools provide support for families learning how to live with and provide 
support for their t eens in recovery.  
 
According to the US Department of Health and Human Services’ Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration, more than 341,000 young people 
between the ages of 12 and 17 enter addiction rehab ilitation  programs each year. 
Natio nal research shows that most “traditional schools” are not equipped to 
handle students in the early stages of sobriety. In fact, 8 out of 10 students who 
return to their previous schools experience a relapse within a year.  
 
Other states are experiencing me asurable success with recovery high schools  but 
before we can understand what role these innovative schools may play in our 
state’s continuum of care , we should conduct a study. I urge committee members 
to vote ought to pass on this important piece of legi slation. Thank you and I’d be 
pleased to answer any questions you have for me.  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

