 
Written Testimony  
In Favor of LD 291: 
An Act to Support Young People Affected by Substance Use Disorder  
 
 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 291 
 
April 10, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services,     
My name is Tess Parks , and  I serve as the Recovery Rising Coordinator at Portland Recovery 
Community Center (PRCC) . I am writing to you today on  behalf  of Leslie Clark, PRCC’s 
Executive Director, in favor of LD 291.  
PRCC’s mission is to provide support, education, resources, and advocacy for people recover ing 
from and affected by addiction, and to spread the message of hope throughout the state of Maine 
and beyond. As a recovery community center , we know that many adolescent Mainer s are 
affected by SUD and more resources are needed to support them in findin g recovery.  
A 2012 report from the US Department of Education Office of Safe and Drug Free Schools noted 
that 85% of adolescents entering addiction treatment in the US begin regular use of alcohol and 
other drugs before the age of 15. According  to the US Department of Health and Human 
Services Office of Adolescent Health, 62%  of adolescents  perceived no great risk from having 
five or more drinks once or twice a week . In Maine , the 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health 
Survey1, reported that 10% of respondents (Grades 9 -12) reported taking prescription pain 
medicine without a doctor’s prescription or differently than how a doctor told them to use it at 
least once.  
Recovery high schools have operated in the United States  for the past 35 years.  As of 202 3, there 
are 42  US recovery high schools that are members of the Association of Recovery Schools . 
These secondary schools  are designed specifically for students in recovery from SUD or co -
occurring disorders. Although schools operate differently depending on state standards and 
available community resources, every school educates students on substance use or co -occurring 
disorders, meets state requirements for awarding a secondary diploma, intends that all students 
attending be in recovery and wor king a program of recovery, and available to any student in 
                                                           
1 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey High School Detailed Report – Maine (Weighted)   
 
recovery who meets state or district eligibility requirements2. While receiving academic 
instruction  students work on emotional skill acquisition, and the five Social -Emotional Learning  
(SEL)  core competencies, which include self -awareness, self -management, social awaren ess, 
relationship skills, and responsible decision -making.  
Although conceptual, LD 291, An Act to Support Young People Affected by Substance Use 
Disorder, introduces a model of sec ondary education that should be considered to bring to 
Maine . Students that attend recovery high schools have increased sustained sobriety, higher 
attendance rates, and increased GPAs in comparison to students that have returned to their 
traditional high schools3. Maine youth with SUD deserve this option for secondary education.  
We want all people affected with SUD to have support and resources at all stages of their 
recovery journeys. We especially want young people to have access to programs that are gea red 
towards adolescents, such as recovery high schools, so that more people can start a life of 
recovery sooner. When people enter recovery at younger ages, individuals and their families are 
spared years of pain  and loss. Recovery high schools are an inve stment in  the future health of 
Mainers, their families, and our communities.  
We thank Representative LaRochelle and co -sponsors for introducing this important concept 
piece of legislation. We strongly urge this committee to vote in favor of LD 291.  
Sincer ely, 
Tess Parks  
 
If you have any questions, please contact:  
Leslie Clark  
Executive Director  
Portland Recovery Community Center  
102 Bishop Street  
Portland, Maine 04103  
207-553-2575  
 
                                                           
2 Association of Recovery High Schools   
3 Finch, Andrew, and Holly Wegman. "Recovery high schools: opportunities for support and personal growth for 
students in recovery." The Prevention Researcher, vol. 19, no. 5, Dec. 2012, pp. 12+. Gale One File: Health and 
Medicine .  
 
