Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
 
Caitlyn Jordan 
Bangor, ME 04401 
 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation. 
 
My name is Caitlyn Jordan, and I am a recovery coach at the Bangor Area Recovery 
Network. This job looks like being able to support the many people who come into the center 
and help them in their journey to finding recovery in whatever way that looks like to them. The 
people who work and volunteer at the BARN create a safe atmosphere for everyone who walks 
through the doors. Through working at the BARN, I have learned many things including Harm 
Reduction, what it looks like to be out in the field working with the people who society 
immediately shuts away. Working with the people who are truly scared to be vulnerable and 
raw with society because of the fear of already knowing what a lot of people have to say 
through seeing it all over social media. These recovery centers and our services are what 
provide them with that safe space that brings healing.  
 
I am a person in recovery from SUD (substance use disorder) when I came into the 
rooms of the BARN, I was only 21 years old. I came in a scared, broken girl, who was just 
running from so many wounded things in life. All I knew was how to run. I came into the center, 
and I was immediately welcomed with open arms by everyone I saw. It was honestly 
overwhelming at first and my immediate thought was to run. I truly didn’t know what It was like 
to have people care about my well-being let alone the amount of people that did. Through my 
time being at the BARN which has been close to 17 months, I quickly learned so many life skills 
such as, how to socialize with people, setting healthy boundaries with the people I have in my 
life, I learned what it meant to have positive relationships with people, I learned how to have 
fun in my life without the use of substances and the best thing I have learned is how to feel. I 
ran from so many things in my life but when I came to the BARN and participated in 12 step 
meetings, the seed was planted, and I was able to water it. Now I get to sponsor women and 
allow them to find joy in their life again, get to show them there is Hope.  
 
