Testimony in Favor of LD 1714 
An Act to create a sustainable funding source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Catherine Clough-Bell, LADC, CCS 
Lakes Region Recovery Center 
Bridgton, ME 04009 
 
RE: LD 1714 
 
May 9th, 2023 
 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation,  
 
My name is Catherine Clough-Bell, LADC, CCS. I have been in the substance use disorder treatment profession for 
26+ years. Over the course of the last 15 years, those of us in the treatment profession have witnessed substance use 
disorders become increasingly prevalent and deadly.  I am also the Founder of the Lakes Region Recovery Center 
which opened just over 5 years ago in Bridgton. Bridgton is a rural town located in the heart of the Lakes Region of 
Western Maine, in Cumberland County .   
 
Since the Lakes Region Recovery Center has opened, it has forged relationships throughout the community, providing 
a safe and welcoming place for people with substance use and mental health disorders. People are able to socialize 
without fear of discrimination, or stigma related language. The Lakes Region Recovery Center provides recovery 
coaches that are integrated into treatment services in our community, as well as providing recovery coaches to our 
local Hospital ED.  NARCAN is available for distribution at the Recovery Center, and the Hospital ED, with patients 
being provided a packet of resources for them to get help.  NARCAN trainings continue to be offered throughout the 
community, including the local high school. We were welcomed at the local farmers market where resource 
information and NARCAN is offered. I have firsthand experienced the gratitude of community members for the 
services the Recovery Center provides, with one local official stating that perhaps if these services were around when 
her brother was alive, he might still be alive today and he might have gotten help. These services had previously been 
non-existent, and it is doubtful that without this Recovery Center they would be offered. I fear that without a more 
sustainable funding stream for Maine Recovery Centers, communities will greatly suffer. 
 
Passing LD1714 will allow for an increase in staffing that Maine Recovery Centers desperately need and will provide 
Maine Recovery Centers with a more permanent and sustainable funding stream for the years to come. As they say, it 
takes a village and we need our Maine Recovery Centers with us in this fight. I beg, plead, and urge you to pass 
LD1714. 
 
I thank the committee for taking the time to read this letter.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Catherine Clough-Bell, LADC, CCS 
Lakes Region Recovery Center 
Bridgton, ME 04009 
 
 
