Testimony in Favor  of LD 1714 : 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers  
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Cheryl Kaufman  
Wells, ME 04090  
 
Re: LD 1714   
May 10, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation , 
My name is Cheryl Kaufman. I am a resident of Wells, ME and will be graduating with m y Bachelor of 
Science  in nursing this month from the University of New England and entering the workforce as a nurse 
this summer. I am also proud to be a friend and ally to those in r ecovery. I am speaking to you today in 
favor of passing LD 1714.  
As part of my education at the University of New England I h ad the opportunity to volunteer at Portland 
Recovery C ommunity Center and had t he honor of mee ting se veral members of the Portland Recovery 
Community . What a blessing that experience wa s. Everyone  that I spoke with, without exception, told me 
that Portland Recovery Community Center is an integral part of their recovery process. The love and 
acceptance that I felt while at the center was almost tangible. From the steady stream of people in  and out 
of the center all day I cou ld tell that this is a place w here people feel accepted, safe, appreciated and at 
home. W e need more centers like PRCC throughout our st ate and the pass ing of LD will help this happen.  
Many of the persons in recover y that I spoke with while at PRCC told me th at Portland , Maine has an 
incredible recovery community . They told me that Portland is well known for their support of individuals 
struggl ing with addi ction . You should be very proud of the work that the state of Maine has done to 
establi sh this netwo rk of support and care. As a citizen of Maine,  I ask that you continue to support the 
recovery community by passing LD 1714 to establish a s ustainable funding stream for years to come. 
This bill will allow RCCs to be properly staffed and provide the services that have been proven to 
increase the chances of sustained remission from SUD. I urge this committee to pass LD 1714 and ensure 
that every RCC in  Maine has the resources  necessary  to support people with SUD.   
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Cheryl Kaufman  
