May 9th, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
My name is Christine Wight, and I am a Hiram resident. I am also an ally of a person who struggled for 
30 years from substance use disorder (SUD). I am speaking to you today in favor of passing LD 1714. 
My mother moved my brother here in 2018 with a beautiful vision that this move would solve 
his alcoholism. This was the ticket she would say, and that would set him on the right track to 
sobriety. It began beautifully, they made 2018 a wonderful year full of adventure and laughs. In 
2019 I moved up to Maine to be closer to both, because family is important even during 
struggles. I arrived in September and remembered sitting with my brother one day and asking 
him if he felt ok because he looked gray, he said stomach issues, and cracked another beer. Mind 
you this was typical behavior pattern for him, so no one thought much of it. November came and 
I was hired at Lakes Region Recovery Center as the Recovery Coach Coordinator. November 
11th, I found my brother deceased in his home. To this day it is a struggle to try to help my 
mother deal with this grief. I wonder, if only I had known about Recovery Centers, and the 
resources they provide or if even the family had made our way to Maine sooner, would any of 
that save him? Because I had just got a job at Lakes Region Recovery Center and the knowledge 
I was receiving, and the amazing people I work with, and the resources available, could that have 
saved him? Do you have that brother in your life or sister, or aunt, or cousin that may be quietly 
struggling? Pass LD1714 because people’s lives are at stake and the importance of Recovery 
Centers can be the one place that could start a journey for someone who is struggling with SUD. 
Each one of you have encountered someone in your life that can use a safe place like Lakes 
Region Recovery Center. LD1714 should absolutely be passed, SUD struggles continue to grow, 
and the Recovery Centers are a lifeline for those who have lost their way. 
Be the change this world needs, pass LD1714. 
Thank you, 
Christine Wight 
 
 
Christine Wight
Lakes Region Recovery Center
LD 1714
Im submitting a testimony. Written statement, unable to attend zoom.
