Testimony in Favor to LD 1714:  
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers  Using a 
Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue  
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1714 An Act To  Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers  
May 10, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation,  
My name is Donna Lu Holden, and I am a person in long -term recovery  from substance use 
disorder (SUD). I am a resident of Cape Elizabeth. I am writing to you today in support of LD 
1714.  
 
My first experience with Portland Recovery Community Center was volunteering about ten years 
ago. I assisted with telephone recovery su pport (TRS), which involved making calls to people in 
recovery to check -in with them to see if they needed any support. This was my first experience 
volunteering in a recovery setting. I felt needed, and I found a new purpose.  
 
In the last ten years, I ha ve sought various recovery services and treatment options. In November 
2021, I found myself back at PRCC at the new location at 102 Bishop Street. Since I have been 
back, I have had the opportunity to work on my recovery, attend mutual aid meetings, make 
connections, and volunteer. When I first came back, I felt anxious. Over time, I have felt more 
comfortable. Today, I feel like I am at my second home.  
 
I have learned so many things since I started coming to PRCC. I became a volunteer recovery 
coach after taking the training offered at PRRC. I love working with recoverees  and supporting 
them as they work different pathways of recovery. I am planning on starting a new mutual aid 
group that focuses on women in sobriety and all that that entails.  
 
LD 1714 wil l help recovery community centers across the state offer a broad variety of services. 
I hope that this Committee will pass LD 1714.  
 
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to submit my testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Donna Holden  
 
 
