   
 
Testimony in Favor to LD 1714: 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Emily Davis 
Program Manager 
Portland Recovery Community Center 
102 Bishop Street 
Portland, Maine 04103 
 
Re: LD 1714- An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
05/08/2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
My name is Emily Davis, I am a resident of Portland Maine and the current Program Manager at Portland 
Recovery Community Center. I am a person in recovery from substance use disorder who has benefitted 
greatly from the community and fellowship that recovery centers provide When I was misusing 
substances, I was isolated, anti-social and depressed. Upon entering recovery, one of the first 
recommendations was to volunteer at the Portland Recovery Community Center. I was out of my comfort 
zone, and nervous for how I would feel or be received. I could have not felt more different, as I made 
friends, and met likeminded people at PRCC. The national model of an RCC (Recovery Community 
Center) is for any person suffering from substance use disorder to find support, no matter their pathway to 
recovery. RCC’s have proven to help people maintain long term recovery, build recovery capital, and 
improve quality of life. I can without a doubt share that this has been my experience through my time at a 
recovery community center. The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) recognizes Recovery Support 
Programs are one of the integral components of comprehensive drug addiction treatment.  
A recovery community center focuses on recovery from substance use disorder and provides nonclinical, 
peer recovery support services such as recovery support groups, recovery coaching, telephone recovery 
support, skill-building groups and harm reduction activities. RCC’s have a variety of recovery-focused 
outreach programs to engage people seeking or in recovery and recovery-focused policy and advocacy 
activities. My own family has benefitted from RCC programming including a family support group called 
“The Family Restored”. After I got out of treatment, while I was living in a recovery residence, my 
mother found powerful support and community at this weekly group held at PRCC. She was able to listen 
to others who also had children in recovery, and learn how to best support while taking care of her own 
emotional needs. I have found my own passion within my work at the PRCC. In 2022, I spearheaded a 
LGBTQ+ committee that hosted a Chem Free Canopy at the Pride Parade in Portland. It was the event’s 
first substance-free tent to provide a non-alcoholic option for parade goers. The mocktails were ‘sold out’ 
within the first 2 hours of the event. People thanked PRCC for providing a judgement free, fun option for 
those not participating in drinking or using drugs.   
 
   
 
According to the Center for Disease Control, one in seven Americans are suffering from SUD. If LD 
1714 is passed, centers will have more capacity, and another reliable funding source to provide services to 
more people suffering from substance use disorder. I am in favor of LD 1714 because with more 
resources, RCC’s across our state can continue to make powerful, positive change for people. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit my testimony. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Emily Davis 
emily@portlandrecovery.org  
31 Massachusetts Ave 
Portland, ME 04102 
Emily Davis
Portland
LD 1714
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation,
My name is Emily Davis, I am a resident of Portland Maine and the Program 
Manager at Portland Recovery Community Center. I am a person in recovery from 
substance use disorder who has benefitted greatly from the community and fellowship
that recovery centers provide. When I was misusing substances, I was isolated, 
anti-social and depressed. Upon entering recovery, one of the first recommendations 
was to volunteer at the Portland Recovery Community Center. I was out of my 
comfort zone, and nervous for how I would feel or be received. I could have not felt 
more different, as I made friends, and met likeminded people at PRCC. The national 
model of an RCC (Recovery Community Center) is for any person suffering from 
substance use disorder to find support, no matter their pathway to recovery. RCC’s 
have proven to help people maintain long term recovery, build recovery capital, and 
improve quality of life. I can without a doubt share that this has been my experience 
through my time at a recovery community center. 
The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) recognizes Recovery Support 
Programs are one of the integral components of comprehensive drug addiction 
treatment. Recovery Community Centers focus on recovery from substance use 
disorder and provide nonclinical, peer recovery support services such as recovery 
support groups, recovery coaching, telephone recovery support, skill-building groups 
and harm reduction activities. RCC’s have a variety of recovery focused outreach 
programs to engage people seeking or in recovery and recovery-focused policy and 
advocacy activities.  RCC’s help people find the resources they need to improve their 
lives and become contributing members of the community.
My own family has benefitted from RCC programming including a family support 
group called “The Family Restored.” After I got out of treatment, while I was living 
in a recovery residence, my mother found powerful support and community at this 
weekly group held at PRCC. She was able to listen to others who also had children in 
recovery, and learn how to best support while taking care of her own emotional needs.
I have found my own passion within my work at the PRCC. In 2022, I spearheaded a 
LGBTQ+ committee that hosted a Chem Free Canopy at the Pride Parade in Portland.
It was the event’s first substance-free tent to provide a non-alcoholic option for parade
goers. The mocktails were ‘sold out’ within the first 2 hours of the event. People 
thanked PRCC for providing a judgement free, fun option for those not participating 
in drinking or using drugs.  
According to the Center for Disease Control, one in seven Americans are suffering 
from SUD. If LD 1714 is passed, centers will have more capacity, and another 
reliable funding source to provide services to more people suffering from substance 
use disorder. I am in favor of LD 1714 because with more resources, RCC’s across 
our state can continue to make powerful, positive change for people.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit my testimony.
Sincerely,
Emily Davis
emily@portlandrecovery.org
31 Massachusetts Ave
Portland, ME 04102

