Testimony in Favor  of LD 1714 : 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers  
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Hanul Moon  
Portland, ME 0410 2 
 
Re: LD 1714   
May 8, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation , 
My name is Hanul Moon , and I am a Portland resident. I am also a person in recovery from substance use 
disorder (SUD). What that means to me is that I have not used any addictive substances  since June 5, 
2022. I am speaking to you today in favor of passing LD 1714.  
I arrived in Portland in July 2022 on the recommendation of professionals within the SUD recovery 
community. When I first arrived, I was overwhelmed with f ear and loneliness. I moved into a men’s 
recovery residence on the West End without knowing a single person out of the 20 men I lived with.  
My recovery residence has requirements for work or volunteering. I had heard others in the recovery 
community talk a bout the Portland Recovery Community Center as a great place to volunteer. Showing 
up to that volunteer orientation laid the foundation for my recovery.   
The recovery community center was and proves to remain a cornerstone in the foundation of my 
recovery.   As a volunteer, it helped me develop a sense of purpose, accountability, and the opportunity to 
have meaningful connections with my community. Beyond volunteering, I participate in numerous  
mutual -aid meetings. I now host a couple mutual -aid meetings.  I have learned how to hold space for 
others, and not just those within the recovery community, but my family, friends, and strangers.  
Having a recovery community center that is staffed and accessible has been an invaluable blessing. It has 
given me the tool s to maintain my recovery. I have witnessed countless others receive the same benefits. 
There is now research backing up the crucial nature of recovery community centers in supporting 
sustained recovery.  
 
LD 1714 will provide Maine Recovery Community Cent ers with sustainable funding for years to come. 
This bill will benefit not only those in SUD recovery, but the Maine community at large. Members of the 
center, including myself, engage the community through various service work. I now participate in adult 
rec sports and volunteer with other community organizations. I plead this committee to pass LD 1714 to 
ensure that communities in Maine grow stronger and thrive for the years to come.  
 
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to  answer any questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Hanul Moon  
Hanul Moon
Portland, ME
LD 1714
Testimony in Favor of LD 1714:
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers
Committee on Taxation  
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Hanul Moon
Portland, ME 04102
Re: LD 1714 
May 8, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation,
My name is Hanul Moon, and I am a Portland resident. I am also a person in recovery
from substance use disorder (SUD). What that means to me is that I have not used any
addictive substances since June 5, 2022. I am speaking to you today in favor of 
passing LD 1714.
I arrived in Portland in July 2022 on the recommendation of professionals within the 
SUD recovery community. When I first arrived, I was overwhelmed with fear and 
loneliness. I moved into a men’s recovery residence on the West End without 
knowing a single person out of the 20 men I lived with.
My recovery residence has requirements for work or volunteering. I had heard others 
in the recovery community talk about the Portland Recovery Community Center as a 
great place to volunteer. Showing up to that volunteer orientation laid the foundation 
for my recovery. 
The recovery community center was and proves to remain a cornerstone in the 
foundation of my recovery.  As a volunteer, it helped me develop a sense of purpose, 
accountability, and the opportunity to have meaningful connections with my 
community. Beyond volunteering, I participate in numerous mutual-aid meetings. I 
now host a couple mutual-aid meetings. I have learned how to hold space for others, 
and not just those within the recovery community, but my family, friends, and 
strangers. 
Having a recovery community center that is staffed and accessible has been an 
invaluable blessing. It has given me the tools to maintain my recovery. I have 
witnessed countless others receive the same benefits. There is now research backing 
up the crucial nature of recovery community centers in supporting sustained recovery.
LD 1714 will provide Maine Recovery Community Centers with sustainable funding 
for years to come. This bill will benefit not only those in SUD recovery, but the 
Maine community at large. Members of the center, including myself, engage the 
community through various service work. I now participate in adult rec sports and 
volunteer with other community organizations. I plead this committee to pass LD 
1714 to ensure that communities in Maine grow stronger and thrive for the years to 
come.
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any 
questions. 
Sincerely,
Hanul Moon

