 
May 8, 2023 
Testimony in Favor to LD 1714: 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Jared Colby 
1060 Forest Ave 
Portland, ME 04103 
 
Re: LD 1714- An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
May 10, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
 
My name is Jared Colby, and I am product of many poor decisions followed by one good one. Current 
residing in Portland, I made a conscience choice to take my life back and become the father that my 
daughters deserve. I testify before you as a living being who had encountered death on multiple 
occasions. I also stand witness on behalf of being a habitual criminal defendant. 
 
I spent many years of my life selling illicit substances to support my drug habit and those around me. 
With a life of SUD, Trauma, and untreated Co-occurring disorders, I have spent many sleepless nights 
behind the walls of multiple correctional facilities. Without any sense of hope left in my soul, I entered a 
long-term inpatient treatment program at the Maine Correctional Center in Windham. It was during that 
time that I became dedicated to the transformation needed to become the person I was meant to become. 
 
I am in support of the proposed bill LD 1714 – As An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for 
Recovery Community Centers. Community has become an essential part of my recovery along with 
giving back. I am apart of multiple organizations that take part in helping folks to overcome the 
adversities they battle that many take advantage of. I.E. helping folks find clothing, food, housing, 
opening bank account, acquiring driver licenses etc. These organizations also take part in playing a major 
role helping folks into detox treatment and finding them sober living. 
 
In conclusion, Recovery Community Centers are staples to our communities. Drug overdoses has increase 
without sight of any other long-term solutions currently available. We need folks to have a safe place and 
community if we want them to become successful in their recovery journey. Without a doubt, having a 
tax on cannabis just makes sense to give back to those who have struggled with substance use disorders. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit my testimony. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jared Colby 
Founder + CEO 
C: 207-272-4923 
 
