Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
 
May 5th, 2023 
 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
 
Joseph Hartel 
Bangor, ME 04401 
 
Re: Passage of LD 1714 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: 
 
My name is Joni Winkler and I moved to Maine from Memphis, TN 5 years ago when I took a 
position as a Family Nurse Practitioner.  At the time I was looking for a geographical cure for 
para-alcoholism, generational shame and codependency.  I had been attending Al Anon and 
Adult Child of Alcoholic and Dysfunctional Family 12 Step programs in Memphis.  The position 
I took was in Urgent Care and I soon found out that I was running into the same psychological 
obstacles preventing health and wellbeing with my patients that I had in TN.  I knew that if I 
could not help patients reach into their psyche that healthier lifestyle choices would not occur.  
Even more important to me on a personal level I had a forever all-consuming, innate to my soul a 
desire to help treat my schizophrenic brother James Winkler.  It was at that time I decided to go 
back to school for Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner at Husson University.  
 
While obtaining my Master’s in Psychiatric Nursing we were required to obtain 180 clinical 
hours in courses pertaining to psychotherapy.  To achieve this I started attending Narcotic 
Anonymous and Alcohol Anonymous meetings at the Bangor Area Recovery Network (The 
BARN) in Brewer, Maine. There is something to be said about walking into a 12 Step meeting – 
it is powerful and full of goodness.  As mentioned above I was very familiar with 12 step 
programs but walking in The BARN’s doors I finally felt like I belonged to this community and 
that it is part of my purpose.  I also acquired friendships that supported my belief in the 12 step 
programs.   
 
For my Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner requirements, I wrote a paper entitled The Lack of Mental 
Health Care in Rural Maine.  It led me to start an Adult Child of Alcoholic and Dysfunctional 
Family  (ACOA) Program at The Bangor Area Recovery Network.  There are very few ACOA 
programs in the state of Maine.  I felt this is the way to not only treat the addicted person but the 
entire family.  This program was founded 22 years ago and is in every state and across the globe.  
We have in person attendees and zoom attendees from Cairo, London, Australia, Canada, and all 
over the United States.   As of May 20th, we will be having our 2nd year anniversary of this group.  
I also am currently a member of the Board of Directors at the BARN.   
 
 
Writing this letter is difficult for me for being a Psychiatric Nurse Practitioner as well as a 
Family Nurse Practitioner I see the negative effects of Marijuana on people’s health daily.  I see 
how my patients who abuse and are addicted to Marijuana require sometimes twice as much 
psychotropic medication because the receptor sites to accept these meds may be taken by 
Marijuana.  I see the negative effects on lungs, gastrointestinal, and increased anxiety caused by 
this drug.  I see how when under the influence of Marijuana people can’t make decisions let 
alone make good decisions for their health and mental wellbeing.  I see how the use of this drug 
prevents patients from dealing with their emotions and problem solving.  I worry how the use of 
this drug affects developing brains and decreases teenagers’ IQ’s if used before the age of 20.   
 
To help combat the above problems I ask that the Bangor Area Recovery Network be allotted the 
funds to help support recovery of all addictions, mental illness, para-alcoholism, and 
codependency.   
 
Truly…. I ask of you….help me help them.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Joni L. Winkler, PMHNP, FNP 
 
