Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Joshua Warren 
23 Harriett Ave 
Windham, ME 04062 
Re: LD 1714- An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
May 8, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
My name is Joshua Warren, and I am from Windham, Maine. Thank you for taking the time to allow me 
to speak about my support in passing LD 1714. I am advocating for the bill because I wholeheartedly 
believe that Recovery Centers are among the most important tools against the overwhelming problem of 
addiction and overdose deaths in Maine. 
I am a person in long-term recovery who has used a combination of pathways to recovery. Before walking 
into a Recovery Community Center, I felt stigmatized, isolated, and disconnected from society. 
Volunteering at a Recovery Center was a turning point for my dignity, self-esteem, purpose, and 
belonging. I advocate for supporting Recovery Community Centers because I truly believe that 
connection is the keystone of recovery and wellness.   
I am immensely grateful for the connections and transformations I have witnessed and experienced 
through the Recovery Community Center. The access to services has allowed me to become a Peer 
Recovery Coach, Certified Peer Support Specialist, and group facilitator for SMART Recovery. 
Additionally, I have recently earned a degree in Substance Abuse and Mental Health Rehabilitation and 
Counseling. The education I have received emphasizes the unparalleled value of using peer support 
services across multiple pathways and disciplines at every stage of change. The encouragement, love, 
compassion, and assistance I received at the center has helped countless individuals like me realize my 
potential and find purpose.  
Community is essential in every step of the recovery journey. LD 1714 will provide Maine Recovery 
Community Centers with sustainable funding to continue providing essential peer-based services like 
Recovery Coaching. I plead with this Committee to pass LD1714 to ensure that Maine communities 
receive the support they need to continue their work on the front lines of addressing addiction through 
community, connection, and access to resources.   
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify and will welcome any questions. 
Sincerely, 
Joshua Warren 
