Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333 
 
Julie Burnham-Leavitt, LADC, CCS 
Oakland, ME  04963 
RE: LD 1714 
 
May 3, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, 
 
My name is Julie Burnham-Leavitt, I am a resident of Oakland and I work as a Substance Use Disorder 
Counselor in Skowhegan. I have seen the impact substances have on my community and the struggle that 
people who use substances endure every day. I am speaking to you today in favor of passing LD 1714.  
 
When my 14-month-old grandson died on November 2, 2021, due to the combined effects of Fentanyl and 
Tramadol, I knew I had to do something to create change in my community. There is a lack of connection and 
communication among community members and organizations. We need more programs and services for 
individuals that feel stuck in the drug world. The addition of Recovery Community Centers in each town would 
make all the difference. 
 
Recovery Community Centers increase the positive outcome for individuals striving to create a life that makes it 
easier for them not to use substances. Individuals that I have worked with frequently share stories of making 
connections with others that are in recovery. The stories I hear tell of the impact connections have in their lives 
and the hope created to keep going and not only survive but thrive. These are the type of connections we want 
to pass on to youth in our communities.  
 
It is our job as the surviving members of our communities to advocate for more recovery resources to prevent 
further deaths. The more resources we have, the more families of people who use substances can learn about 
and get involved with recovery efforts. The more we invest in recovery for our Maine communities, the more 
recovery will be within reach for those that feel it is so far away.  
 
LD 1714 will provide Maine Recovery Community Centers with a sustainable funding stream for many years. 
This bill will allow recovery centers to be staffed properly and provide the resources needed for individuals 
struggling to maintain their recovery. The services provided by recovery centers have proven to increase the 
likelihood of maintaining long-term recovery from substance use disorders. I strongly urge the committee to 
pass LD 1714 to ensure that all Recovery Community Centers in Maine have the resources necessary to support 
individuals with substance use disorder.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Julie Burnham-Leavitt, LADC, CCS 
 
 
 
 
