Testimony in Favor  of LD 1714 : 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers  
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Justin Reid  
Portland, ME 04103  
 
Re: LD 1714   
May 3, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation , 
My name is Justin Reid , and I am a Portland resident. I identify as  a person in  recovery from substance 
use disorder (SUD). What that means to me is that I have  abstained from the use of drugs and alcohol 
since December 8 , 2014.  I am speaking to you today in favor of passing LD 1714.  
The story of my substance use can be summarized as a 17 -year period that included the progression of 
unhealthy behavior, consequenc es (legal and otherwise) and isolation from others. My 30th birthday was 
spent in a rehabilitation program, followed by a year of going back and forth between abstinence -based 
recovery and active substance use.  
In early 2015, I was introduced to the full spectrum of recovery community  resources  in Portland, Maine. 
This included living in a recovery residence, attending mutual aid support meetings and being introduced 
to the Portland Recovery Community Center (PRCC).  
It quickly became clear to me that the PRCC was a unique and special place. From the moment I was 
greeted by a volunteer at the front desk to departure, the space felt safe and welcoming. This was the 
complete opposite of the places I had been subjecting myself to in the years previous. Whether  talking to 
staff or the members of the center, my recovery was being supported by others who could relate, through 
their own experience.  
The factors of an internal desire to recover, some willingness to act on that desire, and the support of 
peers in my community helped me to create a solid foundation in recovery. Once the foundation started to 
form, the importance of giving back became clear and this had been demonstrated by folks that had been 
at the center formally volunteering or showing up as a membe r and taking the time to have healthy and 
motivating conversation with others.  
Recovery Community Centers (RCCs), like the PRCC, provide a low barrier support to those in or 
seeking recovery. I have witnessed the many miracles take place within the walls and I know that many 
more have the opportunity to happen, as long as it exists. Mainers from every part of the state should be 
given the opportunity of recovery with the support of RCCs.  
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Justin Reid  
