Testimony in Fa vor of LD 1714  
 
May 10, 2023 
 
Hello, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation,  
 
My name is Kari Taylor , and I am a person in recovery from substance use disorder (SUD), the 
Director of the Western Maine Addic tion Recovery Initiative  and T he HILLS Recovery Center 
(Oxford Hills) , and a resident of Nap les.   I am writing  to testify on behalf of LD 1714 , An Act to 
Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers Using a Percentage of the 
Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue.  
 As someone in recovery  from SUD  and the D irector of a new recovery center in Oxford Hills , I can 
attest to the critical  importance  of these centers in providing ongoing support and resources to 
those who are trying to overcome addiction.  
 
Recovery Community Center s are often the first point of contact for individuals seeking help with 
addi ction. Thes e centers provide a safe and supportive environment where people can connect with 
others who are going through similar experiences and access a range of services . For many people , 
these centers are a lif eline that helps them st ay on the path of recovery.  
 
However
 , many recovery community centers struggle to secure sustainable funding despite their 
vital importance . Too often, these centers rely  on grants or donations, which can be unpredictable 
and insufficient to meet the growing demand for services . For example, the HILLS Recovery Center 
only has enough funding to employ  two  full-time and one part -time employee , including  myself as 
Director. We have no support staff and rely on volunteers to fill in the gaps. As a result, we are only 
open 20 hours a week, creating a huge barrier for people needing  service s. In addition, the little 
funding we have only lasts another two years. So, while trying to help people with minimal 
resources , we also have to spend much of our time securing  additional funding.  This bill would 
create a dedicated funding source that would help ensure the long -term viability of these centers 
and allow them to expand their r each and impact . It will allow us to focus on what matters most , 
helping peop le. 
 
From my own experience, I know how crucial it is to have ongoing support and resources as I work to maintain my sobriety. Recovery is not a one -time event but a lifelong journey, and recovery 
community centers play an essential role in hel ping people stay on that path. When  I was i n active 
addiction, I felt alone  and shameful. I didn ’t understand why I couldn ’t moderate my use . I didn ’t 
know there were other people “ like me ” and that support was  available to change my life. Almost 
six years ago, I came to Maine for treatment and was introduce d to the Por tland Recovery 
Community Center  (PRCC)  and many others on the same journey . I felt hope for the first time, being 
with  so many people who exper ienced what I experienced and were getting better . I often  thin k 
about people who are still suffering , and if  only they knew  that they are not alone.  
 
I urge you to support this bill and help ensure that rec overy community centers have the resources 
they need to continue making a positive impact in the lives of people like me who are in recovery 
from substance use disorder. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideratio n. 
Sincerely , 
Kari Taylor  
