To the Maine Legislature: 
RE:  LD1714 
 
I am the Director of the Larry Labonte Recovery Center in Rumford, ME and a person in long term 
recovery.   We opened LLRC in January of 2020 and since then have organized different programs in the 
River Valley Area. 
We have Recovery Coaching programs in assorted schools, along with Peer meetings:  we are the 
leading trainer of how to administer Naloxone and the leading distributor in the area.  We have trained 
many educators, businesses and groups as well as doing one on one training in LLRC and in outreach.  
We have limited cells phones to give to those in need with 3 months of service, we distribute bags full of 
personal items such as body wash, shampoo, toothbrushes and paste, socks etc. to people being 
released from the Oxford County Jail and the homeless.  We try to have winter coats for people  and do 
our best to make people comfortable. We hold Narcotics Anonymous, Alcoholics Anonymous, and 
Alanon meetings and we recovery coach adults.  We also hold sober events with the latest being a 
Superbowl party and a cribbage tournament. 
Our funding is very limited to $50,000 compared to our $196,000 budget resulting in our staff working 
on fund-raising projects and grants throughout the year.  If LD1714 was to pass this would free us up to 
establish coaching in more schools and many more programs. 
LLRC has touched many lives in the past three years, we have been accepted in the community as a 
place where people can get help, find resources to meet them where they are at all in a comfortable, 
nonjudgmental setting. 
Please take all this into consideration when voting on LD1714.  This would not only mean everything to 
the staff who are in recovery themselves but to the community. 
Thank you. 
 
Kathie Williams, Executive Director 
Larry Labonte Recovery Center 
412 Waldo St 
Rumford, ME  04276 
Kathie@llrecoverycenter.com  
207-357-9462 
 
 
 
Kathie Williams, Executive Director
LarryLabonte Recovery Center
LD 1714
Kathie Williams, Executive Director
Larry Labonte Recovery Center
412 Waldo St
Rumford, ME  04276
Kathie@llrecoverycenter.com
207-357-9462

