Testimony in FAVOR of LD 714:   
An act to create a sustainable funding source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
May 8, 2023 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: Passage of LD 1714 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation. 
My name is Kylee Francis-Fowler I am a 33-year-old woman living with substance use disorder in the 
Penobscot County. I would like to share my testimony on much my local Recovery Centers has affected 
my life. I am a woman in Recovery and am living proof that recovery works. I first started at a sober 
woman’s house in Portland frequenting the Portland Recovery Community Center PRCC participating in 
self-help groups and connection with others who also live with substance use disorder. I was able to ask 
others who have been in my same position for help.  Having the connection was a huge part in finding 
my own purpose. I now live back in my hometown Community of Indian Island and have utilized the 
Bangor Area Recovery Network resources top explore how I wanted to make a difference. I now work as 
a Peer Recovery Advocate for the Penobscot Nation Healing to Wellness Court Program.   
To me passing this bill will keep the doors of endless possibilities open for others who find their way 
through a door of a Recovery Center. Each person I’ve been able to share my story of strength and 
wisdom with will in turn share their own story to another person and this is the cycle I now live. Instead 
of the grips of active use where each day was as scary hopeless spiral. Having the funds to open more 
centers to exceed the demand. Maine is rural the need for a center close by for every community is 
doable. Please keep the doors of recovery open for anyone who wants. I couldn’t think of where I would 
be right now without the PRCC and the BARN. I hope you all make the safe choice. 
Sincerely,  
 
Kylee Francis-Fowler 
Peer Recovery Advocate for the Healing to Wellness Courts 
Physical Address: 6 Down Street Indian Island, ME 04468 
Mailing Address: 12 Wabanaki Way Indian Island, ME 04468 
Kff@penobscotnation.org  
207-827-3430(fax) 
207-827-3415(main line) 
207-217-0529(cell phone) 
 
