Testimony in Favor of LD 1714 
An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers Using a 
Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue 
 
May 9, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, 
 
My name is Laura Chritton, I live I South Portland, Maine, and I am reaching out to testify in 
favor of LD 1714: creating a sustainable funding source for recovery community centers using a 
percentage of the adult cannabis tax revenue.  
 
I am a person in long-term recovery, with 5 ½ years away from using a mood or mind-altering 
substance.  When I started my recovery journey in Massachusetts, I learned the importance of 
connecting with a community of sober people, knowing I can’t sustain recovery alone. I moved 
to Maine 2 years ago and didn’t yet know anyone in the recovery community. When I landed in 
Portland, I googled ‘recovery community centers’ hoping that something would come up.  Thank 
goodness, the Portland Recovery Community Center appeared in my search, and I made my 
way over to check it out.  What I found was a welcoming space with a warm group of peers, 
informing me of the multiple types of daily meetings, opportunities for service work, social 
activities and connection I knew I craved and needed to support my new path in Maine as a 
sober woman.   
 
I continue to use the PRCC as a go-to resource for my recovery and am grateful that so many 
other recovery community centers have opened around the state.  In addition, today I work as a 
peer recovery coach for PRCC, providing coaching to people at the Cumberland County Jail 
and connecting them to PRCC upon release to support their opportunity for long term 
recovery. None of us in the recovery community should be alone, and we don’t have to be with 
the presence of recovery community centers, bringing us together for a common cause: to 
recover from our diseases of whatever addiction we suffer from, and to help others to recovery 
wherever they may be in their journey. 
 
With the help of a percentage of the adult use cannabis tax revenue, our recovery centers could 
be more sustainable, more centers could open around the state, helping to reach the need of so 
many isolated, drug and behavior addicted residents.  Recovery community centers are a 
central place where individuals can learn about all the recovery resources that are available.  I 
am indebted to the PRCC for being there when I arrived in Maine and am grateful it has become 
a central part in aiding and sustaining my recovery. 
 
Thank you all for receiving my testimony and for the work you have done, are doing, and will 
continue to do. I ask this of you, please stand with me in support of LD 1714: An Act to Create a 
Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult 
Use Cannabis Tax Revenue. 
 
I am available to receive any questions you may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Laura Chritton  laurachritton@gmail.com   617.435.1605  
 
Laura Chritton
South Portland
LD 1714
Please see attached file.
