 
 
 
 
To the State House Taxation Committee: 
I am writing today in support of LD 1714, An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source 
for Recovery Community Centers.  You will hear testimony today mostly from the people 
who desperately need these services--those who suffer from Substance Use Disorder 
(SUD). I wish to highlight my own personal experience with two Recovery Community 
Centers.  
 I am the mother of an adult son with a decade long history of Opioid Use Disorder. 
When he first asked for my help with his addiction I went into panic mode, trying every 
avenue to get my son the services that would help him get into recovery.  My first visit 
to the Portland RCC was in November 2020 during the height of the pandemic, and I 
was given information and resources to help my son and myself.  I also received a follow 
up call to “check in on how I was doing”! That impressed me-- Someone out there 
cared!  
Although I knew nothing about resources at the time, I have since been able to educate 
myself about this terrible medical crisis and to understand that there are very few 
resources in Maine to tackle this crisis unless you have good private insurance or can 
take out a second mortgage on one’s home! Most Maine families do not have access to 
those resources themselves.  What else could I do for my son?  The answers did not 
come easily. Things seem to have shifted quite a bit in 2023.  It is because of the work of 
many people in the Recovery community to raise awareness of harm reduction, 
resources and on the ground, grassroots work.  
I have had the pleasure of working with staff at both Portland and Bath RCCs.  The need 
for these centers to continue and be of service to the communities in Maine is critical.  
And we need more of them! I understand there are 19 and another one opening later 
this year. If we are to make a dent in the number of opioid related deaths, we need to 
have a presence in every community.  Every parent and grandparent in the State of 
Maine needs to know what to do if their child or loved one needs recovery services!  No 
one should feel as helpless as I did when I first learned about my son’s SUD.  It takes a 
village to raise a child. It also takes a village to help with the crisis.  The silent pandemic 
is now part and parcel of our communities.  As a mom, I have met many other family 
members around the state in all walks of life who have been affected.  At the beginning 
of this year I was at a retreat for crafters and at my table of five women, four of us had 
been trained in how to administer naloxone.  Four!  And none of us knew each other—
we were all from very different parts of the state.  That’s when I realized that Substance 
Use Disorder is no longer a phenomenon.  It is part of our everyday lives and we must 
have resources to combat the epidemic.  
 
Last fall I had the great privilege to work with the Bath RCC when I attended a training 
there on how to begin a conversation about the stigma that families and people who 
use drugs experience in communities. It was a very eye-opening training.  Later on, 
another parent and I took a “train the trainer” workshop on how to hold such meetings 
in our own communities to raise awareness.  Earlier this year I had the opportunity 
through the BRCC to establish a support group for families of loved ones with SUD.   We 
call it an “Affected Others support group and it meets once a month.  If it weren’t for 
this Bath RCC, we would not have a safe space to meet and we would not have the 
resources to reach out to those who really need these services.   
 
I consider myself to be a Recovery Ally, working in this field to help save lives, to 
educate communities on harm reduction and to offer hope for families that our children 
can and DO recover-- but they need a way. They need our help.   I am happy to say now 
that my son is in early recovery and yet he had to spend a good year of his life in serious 
unsupervised detox without any availability to get help.  Somehow he managed to find a 
way to get help on his own after several fits and starts towards sobriety.   
 
Now we need to look at how the RCCs can be adequately funded.  They need the State’s 
assistance by directing 12% of the adult use cannabis tax revenue.  Based on last year’s 
tax revenue, this bill could provide approximately $3.28 million dollars a year as 
sustainable funding for centers across Maine.  The citizens of Maine need this help. If we 
don’t have access to those resources, we will surely not stem the tide of addiction and 
mental health crises.  Our families will give up hope and their loved ones will continue to 
sink into deeper addiction.  We can do better. I know we can and I trust that this 
Committee will see the power and effectiveness of what the RCCs are doing and help 
adequately fund their work.   
Thank you for your time in reading this. 
 
Laurie Haapanen 
Brunswick, Maine 
5/8/2023 
