295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
          
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1714  
“An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery 
Community Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult Use 
Cannabis Tax Revenue ” 
Sponsored by  Representative  Rana  
May 10 , 202 3 
 
Good morning  Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation .  My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I am a 
resident of Westbrook , Maine . I am also  the Executive Director of  the Alliance for 
Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association 
representing the majority of Maine’s community -based  mental health and substance use 
treatment providers, providing services  annually  to over 80,00 0 Maine men, women, and 
children  across the state . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound 
policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness 
of our behavioral health care system.  
 
The Alliance is in su pport of LD 1714 , “An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for 
Recovery Community Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax 
Revenue .” We thank the sponsor, Representative Rana , and co -sponsors for bringing 
forward this legislation.  
 
LD 1714 seeks to establish the Recovery Community Centers Fund within the D epartment 
of Health and Human Services to fund Recovery Community Centers through 12% of the 
adult use cannabis tax revenue. Based on Maine Adult Use Cannabis tax revenues from 
2022 , this bill could provide approximately 3.28 million dollars a year to the Recovery 
Community Centers Fund.  
 
Recovery Community Centers (RCCs) are safe spaces for individuals in recovery from 
substance  use disorders . These centers provide a supportive envi ronment for people to 
connect with others who understand their struggles, find resources to support their 
recovery, and access programs and services that promote long -term recovery. However, 
funding for RCCs in Maine is limited, which means that we have le ss than the number of 
RCCs we need in the state.  In the face of the continuing crisis of opioid overdoses, and 
the long -standing impact of alcohol use disorder in Maine, it  is crucial that we prioritize 
funding for RCCs to ensure that individuals in recov ery have access to the resources and 
support they need to sustain their recovery.  
 
RCCs offer a wide range of services and programs to support those in recovery. For 
example, they often offer peer support groups, counseling services, job training, and 
educ ation on addiction and recovery. These services are essential to help individuals 
maintain sobriety, improve their mental and physical health, and rebuild their lives after 
addiction.  
 
Investing in RCCs makes good fiscal sense . Substance use disorder  costs Maine millions  of 
dollars every year in healthcare costs, lost productivity, and criminal justice expenses. By 
funding RCCs, we can reduce the burden of substance use disorder  while also helping 
individuals in recovery rebuild their lives.  I urge you to vote ought -to-pass on LD 1714. 
Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

