Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: LD 1714  
May 9, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
My name is Michelle Thomes, and I am a Gorham resident.  I am the mother of someone in recovery for a 
substance use disorder (SUB).  I am writing to you today in favor of passing LD 1714. 
Becoming a member of the Portland Recovery Community Center in October of 2022 was a lifeline that 
my son desperately needed.  On October 5th my son called me and said he needed help.  We spent the 
night sleeping on the bathroom floor.  The next day we went to the Spurwink Crisis Center in Portland 
while there we met Matt.  Matt told us his story and told us about the Portland Recovery Community 
Center.  He told my son that his chances of success going it alone were very slim and encouraged us to go 
to PRCC.  It took a few weeks, but we made an appointment to become volunteers.  Since that week, I 
have volunteered every Monday night.  My son goes over several times a week.  He met is AA Sponsor 
there, he has a Recovery Coach from PRCC, he is a leading member of the Young Peoples Recovery 
Program that holds meetings there, he attends SMART Recovery Meeting and AA meetings at PRCC, he 
participated in the Easter Egg Hunt and spent New Year’s Eve there.  He’s made friends and built 
relationships.  He’s made connections and found purpose and built his self-esteem back up and all 
because he had the opportunity to walk through the doors at PRCC.  While I am not in recovery, PRCC 
has become an important part of my life and the highlight of my week.  There is something truly amazing 
about being connected to a place that’s sole purpose is to be a positive, inspiring and judgement free place 
for people with SUD. 
Th more we invest in recovery resources, the more chances people in recovery have of sustaining 
remission.  The more resources and opportunities people have to take that first step into recovery could 
make that difference between being sober and not.  So many lives are lost every year because of a lack of 
resources.  LD1714 will provide Maine RCCs with sustainable funding for years to come.  Allowing 
Recovery Centers to provide so many much-needed services that I’ve seen firsthand that work.  I urge this 
committee to pass LD 1714 and ensure that every RCC in Maine has the resources necessary to support 
people with SUD.   
 
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions.  
 
Thank you for your time, 
Michelle Thomes 
