 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
Testimony in support of LD 1714 – “An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery 
Community Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue"  
 
May 1, 2023  
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, my 
name is Pa tricia  Hamilton , Public Health Director  of The City of Bangor, and I’m providing testimony on 
behalf of the Bangor City Council in support of LD 1714, An Act to Create a Sustainabl e Funding Source 
for Recovery Community Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue.  
The recovery community c enter model has proven to be effective in the greater Bangor Area.  In Bangor, 
the Together Place Peer Run Recovery Center emp owers adults in mental health or substance use recovery 
to take leadership in their own lives.  Their peer -run recovery groups and community based programs have 
proven effective in supporting those challenged by mental illness and substance use disorder.  Across the 
river  in Brewer, the Bangor Area Recovery Network’s (BARN) mission to provide peer -based services, 
education, outreach, and advocacy has proven highly effective. They offer a safe haven for those seeking 
recovery, their loved ones, and their com munities.  
Due in large part to the success of these entities, the City of Bangor believes strongly in the effectiveness 
of recovery communities that provide nonclinical, peer recovery support services such as support g roups, 
recovery coaching, skill  build ing groups, outreach programs, and the like.  The research supports these 
experiences as well. According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, “ while 
the body of research is still growing, there is mounting evidence that people receiving peer recovery 
coaching show reductions in substance use, improvements on a range  or recovery outcomes, or both.”  
The Together Place and the BARN, like most peer run recovery programs across Maine,  often  struggle to 
make ends meet.  They rely heavily on grants and donations, neither of which are reliable sources of 
funding. Dedicating a percentage of the adult use cannabis tax revenue to recovery community centers 
would be a step in the right direction.  This dedicated source of revenue will allow them to focus on what 
they do best – supporting individuals on their journey to recovery. 
With the full support of the Bangor City Council, I urge you to pass LD 1714. Thank you for your 
consideration, and please  do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
 
 
Patricia Hamilton, Public Health Director, patty.hamilton@bangormaine.gov  
Deborah Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager/ Director of Human Resources, 
courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
