 
Patricia A. Kimball 
518 George Road, Hermon, Maine  04401 
207-478-2415- patkimball4@gmail.com  
 
Good Morning Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation.  I am here today to testify in favor of LD 1714 An Act to Create a Sustainable 
Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax 
Revenue.   
My name is Pat Kimball and I am a resident of Hermon and retired after working in the field of 
prevention, treatment and recovery for over 30 years.  If you google the work Sanctuary you will see the 
definition is a place where people who are in danger seek safe harbor or haven.  Recovery Centers are a 
sanctuary to hundreds of people who are seeking support for their recovery from substance use 
disorders.  In 2017 Maine had two recovery centers and under Governor Mills leadership and her 
commitment to recovery in 2023 we now have 17 recovery centers located all over the state.  Her 
commitment is remarkable and I am grateful she has the vision to understand how these centers create 
a place of hope and recovery.  My fear is when her term is complete someone with her vision will not be 
in her place and along with that will go the funding to support these centers.  Without financial help 
these centers cannot do their work.  This bill will secure that centers will be able to get the financial 
support they need to continue offering a safe and caring recovery community center.  
If you have not visited a Recovery Center, I would encourage you to do so.    As I shared, I have worked 
in the field of substance use disorders for over 30 years and have been part of many programs but from 
the moment I walked into the Bangor Area Recovery Network affectionally called the BARN I could feel 
this sense of hope and caring that was within those walls.  When you walk into the center you are not 
judged, you are greeted with a smile, and “how can I help you” The work in recovery centers is done by 
an army of volunteers who do every thing from Recovery Coaching, offering space for self help groups, 
sponsor educational sessions, helping with employment or simply offering just a hug. There is no 
payment required to come into a center accept to be respectful and to be a part of our community.  If 
you have a recovery center in your area, consider yourself fortunate.  
On any given day in the centers, you will see things like reaching out helping others, attending self-help 
group, sharing over coffee, learning how to apply for a job, getting support for having a not so good day 
or a place to share how many days you are clean.  Center is about support, caring and help. Treatment is 
important and we need to ensure that people have access to treatment but recovery is the journey to 
regain happiness, self-respect and put the joy back into your life.  Having a place where you can share 
your struggle, strength and hope is essential in saving lives.  
I would encourage you to invest financially in Recovery Centers.  By passing this bill you secure this 
funding so we can continue to save lives and create health communities.  Please let me know if you have 
any question, I would be happy to share. Thank you for your time.  
Patricia  Kimball
Hermon
LD 1714
Patricia A. Kimball
518 George Road, Hermon, Maine  04401
207-478-2415- patkimball4@gmail.com
Good Morning Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and the members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation.  I am here today to testify in favor of LD 1714 An 
Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers Using 
a Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue.  
My name is Pat Kimball and I am a resident of Hermon and retired after working in 
the field of prevention, treatment and recovery for over 30 years.  If you google the 
work Sanctuary you will see the definition is a place where people who are in danger 
seek safe harbor or haven.  Recovery Centers are a sanctuary to hundreds of people 
who are seeking support for their recovery from substance use disorders.  In 2017 
Maine had two recovery centers and under Governor Mills leadership and her 
commitment to recovery in 2023 we now have 17 recovery centers located all over 
the state.  Her commitment is remarkable and I am grateful she has the vision to 
understand how these centers create a place of hope and recovery.  My fear is when 
her term is complete someone with her vision will not be in her place and along with 
that will go the funding to support these centers.  Without financial help these centers 
cannot do their work.  This bill will secure that centers will be able to get the financial
support they need to continue offering a safe and caring recovery community center. 
If you have not visited a Recovery Center, I would encourage you to do so.    As I 
shared, I have worked in the field of substance use disorders for over 30 years and 
have been part of many programs but from the moment I walked into the Bangor Area
Recovery Network affectionally called the BARN I could feel this sense of hope and 
caring that was within those walls.  When you walk into the center you are not 
judged, you are greeted with a smile, and “how can I help you” The work in recovery 
centers is done by an army of volunteers who do every thing from Recovery 
Coaching, offering space for self help groups, sponsor educational sessions, helping 
with employment or simply offering just a hug. There is no payment required to come
into a center accept to be respectful and to be a part of our community.  If you have a 
recovery center in your area, consider yourself fortunate. 
On any given day in the centers, you will see things like reaching out helping others, 
attending self-help group, sharing over coffee, learning how to apply for a job, getting
support for having a not so good day or a place to share how many days you are clean.
Center is about support, caring and help. Treatment is important and we need to 
ensure that people have access to treatment but recovery is the journey to regain 
happiness, self-respect and put the joy back into your life.  Having a place where you 
can share your struggle, strength and hope is essential in saving lives. 
I would encourage you to invest financially in Recovery Centers.  By passing this bill 
you secure this funding so we can continue to save lives and create health 
communities.  Please let me know if you have any question, I would be happy to 
share. Thank you for your time. 

