Richard Willigar
Pir2Peer Recovery Center
LD 1714
Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
May 8, 2023 
 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333 
 
RE:  Passage of LD 1714 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation: 
 
My name is Richard M. Willigar and I am a Board member for Pir2Peer Recovery 
Center located at 2323 Medway Road, Medway, Maine. I am a resident of East 
Millinocket, Maine.  Pir2Peer opened its doors in Millinocket, Maine in January 2020
only to be ordered by Governor Mills in March 2020 to close its doors due to the 
Covid pandemic that affected our entire country. In September, 2022, Pir2Peer 
purchased a larger building in Medway, Maine (20 miles southeast of Millinocket) 
that provides the organization more space to grow physically as well as provide more 
space for recovery meetings and services. This move also strategically located 
Pir2Peer closer to the interstate to better serve its area of service which is the entire 
Katahdin Region.  
Pir2Peer is a beacon of hope and recovery in the Katahdin Region for those affected 
by substance use disorder as well as a source of support for those who are affected by 
someone’s use of substances. Pir2Peer provides recovery resources, recovery 
coaching on a one-to-one basis in person or online, counseling services, NA meetings,
AA meetings, Alanon meetings, faith-based recovery meetings, community-based 
programs such as our painting program, Bingo, telephone supports 24/7, and most 
importantly, a safe place for recoverees, their families, and friends. All services and 
programs are “no cost” to participants. Pir2Peer also runs a most successful 
community meal program entitled “Grab N Go” which provides a free monthly, hot 
cooked meal to anyone. This program is supported through grant and community 
donations and continues to be instrumental in fighting our Region’s food insecurities. 
Pir2Peer currently receives funding through a small state contract in the amount of 
$50,000 which helps to cover mortgage, electric, oil, winter plowing expense, 
insurances, office supplies, mandatory coffee, meeting expenses, community 
programs such as paint night, Bingo and Grab N Go meals. Pir2Peer also provides 
help with transportation to and from our Recovery Center so that no one is left 
without recovery supports. Currently, it is a real struggle every month to meet our 
financial obligations and when something like “a pipe bursts (which it did this past 
winter”), it is next to impossible to find the $1,000 out-of-pocket deductible to pay 
out prior to the insurance money being released to complete the repair project.  
Recovery Center attendance is linked to enhanced income, employment, and 
well-being. Expanding recovery support services increases the economic successes 
long-term recovery brings to Maine as evidenced through the paying of bills and 
debts, repair of credit standing and paying state and federal taxes. Funding Maine 
Recovery Community Centers also supports individuals with finding and sustaining 
long-term recovery, which in turn, helps mitigate the economic costs of Substance 
Use Disorder. Recovery Centers also lower crime and add to the statewide public 
health. 
It is of utmost importance that LD 1714 be passed. Currently, our great State of Maine
is experiencing more demand for recovery services than resources available to meet 
this need. Supporting recovery is a community responsibility as well as a state 
responsibility. Pir2Peer Recovery Center provides Regional support every day the 
doors are open offering a safe place for people in crisis, recovery supports and 
programs, assistance for people looking to rejoin the workforce and society, and 
supports for those seeking to sustain long-term recovery.  
To fully operate our recovery community center along with the recovery supports 
provided as well as provide funds to grow these supports with staff support, Pir2Peer 
requires a minimum base budget of $300,000. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Richard M. Willigar 
Board Member, Pir2Peer Recovery Center, Inspiring Hope For the Katahdin Region 
2323 Medway Road 
Medway, ME 04460 
 
 
 
 
