 
 
 
 
May 10th, 2023  
 
Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: 
 My name is Robert Fickett and I am the Executive Director of the Bangor Area Recovery 
Network, a Bangor resident, and a person in long term recovery from substance use disorder. I am here 
today to give testimony in support of LD 1714 on behalf of myself, the organization I lead, and the 
recovery community that calls the Bangor Area Recovery Network its home. 
 Substance use disorder is a complex, chronic, and devastating disease that affects millions of 
Americans each year. Across Maine we have witnessed the relentless toll this disease inflicts in our 
communities. It tears families apart, displaces people from their homes and jobs, and claims the lives of 
our friends, family members, and neighbors. But I am not here to speak to you of the obvious negative 
impacts of substance use disorder. I am here to speak to you of the hope and courage that lives in the 
hearts of thousands of recovering individuals across Maine that have broken those bonds of 
demoralization to find a new life of freedom in recovery. Thousands of individuals who find their 
support, comfort, safety, and connection in the rooms of recovery community centers.     
Recovery community centers across Maine offer a safe and supportive environment for those in 
recovery, providing resources and services such as recovery coaching, education, job training, pro-social 
events, and support meetings. These centers also offer a range of services to family members and loved 
ones as well as providing opportunities for civic engagement and advocacy in the community. Recovery 
community centers are a vital part of the comprehensive continuum of care for the treatment of 
substance use disorders and play an important role in our public health system. 
We cannot afford to allow the financial sustainability of these centers to be neglected or face the 
uncertainty of depending on funding sources that may not be there next year or the year after that. This 
is why I urge you to pass LD 1714, to ensure that the extraordinary work at these centers can continue 
and that individuals, myself included, can continue to find purpose, connection, love, and transformation 
at their recovery community center. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
 
Robert Fickett 
Executive Director 
Bangor Area Recovery Network 
(207) 945-8090 
robert@bangorrecovery.org  

