 
844 Stevens Ave. 1st floor REAR, Portland ME 04103  
www.mainerecoveryresidences.com 
Page 1 of 2 
 
May 10th, 2023 
Testimony in FAVOR of LD 1714 
  
OUGHT TO PASS 
 
TESTIMONY of Dr. Ronald Springel on behalf of MARR regarding LD 1714  
An Act to Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community 
Centers Using a Percentage of the Adult Use Cannabis Tax Revenue 
 
Presented by: Rep. Ambureen Rana 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski and REP. Perry, co-chairs of the Joint Committee on Taxation 
and honorable members of the Committee. 
 
My name is Dr. Ronald Springel, I am a retired addiction medicine physician who now 
serves as the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Recovery Residences 
(MARR).  
 
MARR is a 501 (c) 3 charitable organization that inspects and certifies recovery 
residences at the national standard. Our members operate 75 recovery residences with 
800 beds in 12 Maine counties.  
 
We support LD 1714 without equivocation.   
 
When Governor Mills took office in 2019, we had two recovery community centers in 
Maine – the Portland Recovery Community Center (PRCC) and the Bangor Area 
Recovery Network (BARN). Today we have 10 times that number. These vital places for 
early recovery to take hold and sustained recovery to be nourished are making a real 
difference. If you were to sit in a quiet spot at one of these centers and observe what 
happens under their roofs, you would be amazed. 
 
You would see people coming who need a bed in a recovery residence. To attend a 12-
step meeting. To meet with a recovery coach or recovery program sponsor. You would 
see people who want to check out the job board or attend a yoga class. You would see 
a person experiencing homelessness come in out of the elements for a refreshing drink 
or a snack. You would see a parent desperate to find a treatment program for a son or 
daughter. You would see people sharing how recovery has saved their lives and want to 
pass on their gratitude.  And so much more. 
 
 
844 Stevens Ave. 1st floor REAR, Portland ME 04103  
www.mainerecoveryresidences.com 
Page 2 of 2 
 
While LD 1714 does not assure enough funds for all the current centers to operate, it 
would be the first time funds are designated to secure a revenue stream for them. While 
other worthy programs may want to benefit from cannabis taxation revenue, few would 
be as appropriate for support. Using tax dollars from cannabis to support recovery 
makes sense. 
 
Therefore, MARR urges OUGHT TO PASS for this valuable legislation. 
 
Thank you for your support of LD 1714. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Ronald D. Springel, MD 
Executive Director 
Maine Association of Recovery Residences 
Ron@mainerecoveryresidences.com  
207-228-5456 
