Tanya Seyler
Portland 
LD 1714
Committee On Taxation 
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Tanya Seyler 
Westbrook, ME 04092
Re: LD 1714
May 10,2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation 
My name is Tanya Seyler, I am a resident of Westbrook Maine and I am a grateful 
person in recovery. What this means to me is that I am on a daily journey of recovery 
for substance use disorder that requires abstinence from all substances. This is a 
lifelong journey that requires care vs. cure. The care approach works best for my 
recovery, which is why I am speaking on behalf of LD 1714. 
After several suggestions I became involved in my local recovery center,  I Thank 
God I Did!   Never could I have imagined what I would find on the other side of those
doors after struggling for almost two decades to maintain sobriety. In 2003 my two 
boys and I were homeless bouncing from hotel to motel before ending up at a family 
shelter. I was drowning in guilt, shame and regret, questioning if thing’s could 
possibly get any worse. They could and they would, when my children were removed 
from my care due to my substance use disorder. I love my children and would do 
anything to have them home. My only hope was a reunification plan requiring total 
abstinence from all substances.  I did everything required and custody was returned to
me. I wish I could say that love was enough, that was the end and we lived happily 
ever after but that would be a lie. 
My recovery center met me where I was at. No judgement, or shame just smiling 
faces and warm embraces. For once I felt built up instead of beat down. People there 
were believing in me when I didn’t believe in myself. I was encouraged to explore  
opportunities that were being offered, such as Recoveree Coaching Training.  With 
the support of my local recovery center I have discovered I am so much more than 
just a mom, I am Tanya,!
The rise in substance use disorder related deaths show how desperately needed 
recovery centers and related services are for people with SUD. Everyone deserves to 
feel supported, which is why I can only hope that you will pass LD 1714 making it 
possible for recovery center’s to continue to help support people with SUD on their 
journey to recovery.
Thank You so much for this opportunity to testify and I am happy to answer any 
questions you may have.
Sincerely, 
Tanya Seyler 
