Testimony in Favor of LD 1714: 
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
Committee on Taxation   
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Tom MacElhaney, LADC 
Lewiston, Maine 
 
Re: LD 1714  
May 2, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
My name is Tom MacElhaney, and I am a Lewiston resident. I am also a person in long-term recovery 
from substance use disorder (SUD). What that means to me is that I have not misused any addictive 
substances since 2012. I am speaking to you today in favor of passing LD 1714. 
Becoming a member of Portland Recovery Community Center in 2012 was one of the most helpful 
components of my early recovery. At the time, I was living in transitional housing in Portland, Maine and 
had little-to-no support otherwise. The PRCC helped provide a foundation for me to become a 
contributing member of society.  Many staff members and other volunteers were in recovery themselves. I 
found role models and was shown that recovery was possible. I found a community of people that did not 
judge me.  
I have stayed in contact with the Recovery Center since it’s conception both personally and 
professionally. I have witnessed hundreds, if not thousands of others have similar experiences as I had 
myself to the Center. This center was a home base for people to restart their lives.  
 
I would be remiss to not mention the countless friends and community members that are no longer alive 
today to advocate for recovery resources. The more we invest in recovery resources, the less funerals my 
community attends. LD 1714 will provide Maine RCCs with a sustainable funding stream for years to 
come. This bill will allow RCCs to be properly staffed and provide the services that have been proven to 
increase the chances of sustained remission from SUD. I urge this committee to pass LD 1714 and ensure 
that every RCC in Maine has the resources necessary to support people with SUD.   
 
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any questions.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Tom MacElhaney, LADC 6199 
Thomas MacElhaney
Lewiston
LD 1714
Testimony in Favor of LD 1714:
An Act To Create a Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers
Committee on Taxation  
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Tom MacElhaney, LADC
Lewiston, Maine
Re: LD 1714 
May 2, 2023 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Taxation,
My name is Tom MacElhaney, and I am a Lewiston resident. I am also a person in 
long-term recovery from substance use disorder (SUD). What that means to me is that
I have not misused any addictive substances since 2012. I am speaking to you today 
in favor of passing LD 1714.
Becoming a member of Portland Recovery Community Center in 2012 was one of the
most helpful components of my early recovery. At the time, I was living in 
transitional housing in Portland, Maine and had little-to-no support otherwise. The 
PRCC helped provide a foundation for me to become a contributing member of 
society.  Many staff members and other volunteers were in recovery themselves. I 
found role models and was shown that recovery was possible. I found a community of
people that did not judge me. 
I have stayed in contact with the Recovery Center since it’s conception both 
personally and professionally. I have witnessed hundreds, if not thousands of others 
have similar experiences as I had myself to the Center. This center was a home base 
for people to restart their lives. 
I would be remiss to not mention the countless friends and community members that 
are no longer alive today to advocate for recovery resources. The more we invest in 
recovery resources, the less funerals my community attends. LD 1714 will provide 
Maine RCCs with a sustainable funding stream for years to come. This bill will allow 
RCCs to be properly staffed and provide the services that have been proven to 
increase the chances of sustained remission from SUD. I urge this committee to pass 
LD 1714 and ensure that every RCC in Maine has the resources necessary to support 
people with SUD.  
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any 
questions. 
Sincerely,
Tom MacElhaney, LADC 6199

