Testimony in Favor or LD 1714: 
An Act To Create Sustainable Funding Source for Recovery Community Centers 
 
Committee of Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Me 04333 
 
Tracey C. Martin 
Norway, ME 04268 
 
May 8,, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation, 
 
My name is Tracey Martin, and I am a Norway resident. I lost two family members due to drugs/alcohol. 
I am speaking to you today in favor of passing LD 1714. 
 
My position here at the Lakes Region Recovery Center located in Bridgton, Maine is as Executive 
Director. We are in a rural area of Maine, and I moved my entire life to Norway Maine, because I 
believed 5 years ago it was the best way to help those struggling with Substances. I have had the 
pleasure of working with some amazing people along the way that fully believed in these recovery 
centers and how effective they are in this state.  
 
When we opened this recovery center, we were not sure of exactly what to expect. Since we opened the 
doors 5 years ago, we have helped create programs at our local hospital such as distribution of Narcan 
to patients and the” Bridge Program”. The bridge program will give the patient experiencing 
withdrawals access to comfort meds and connections with an MOUD program within 12-24 hours. We 
are also called in to our local hospital for patients that are there longer term. It is a way to provide 
support and connection for when that person is released. We can connect those people with resources 
and be that support they need. Let’s not forget about the ones that didn’t make it. What can we do with 
the families? Well, we can provide support groups and recovery services for family members that are 
struggling. I believe that if my family members had a recovery center to turn to for support, they may 
still be alive and  I have heard that from many people in the community regarding lost loved ones.  
 
Recovery Centers need more resources. We serve many people in our community and we need to be 
adequately staffed. This bill would allow centers to have sustainable funding, it would mean that we 
would be able to keep our doors open later and be able to be accessed on the weekends. Our services 
have been proven to help people struggling with an SUD.  
 
I thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to answer any/all questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
Tracey C. Martin  
