LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
~ 
Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure 
Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
LD l 3 5 1 (LR2362) 
Rep. Lookner, Grayson 
All Modes, All Roads, All Day, Every Day 
Consultant: Peter Muller (https:[/www.|inkedincom/inlprtgurul) (https:[Lprtconsulting.com ) 
Chief Technology Officer at Vuba Corp 
ASCE Automated People l\/lover Standards Committee 
President, Advanced Transit Association — (https://www.adva11cedtransit.org/ ) 
0 Whereas Maine suffers a systemic lack of public transit and funding therefore; 
v Whereas Maine suffers a systemic lack of public transit coordination regionally and 
statewide; 
v VVhereas Maine suffers a systemic lack of funding for transportation repair and 
maintenance; 
¢ Whereas transportation in Maine accounts for approx. 54% of GHG; 
v Whereas Maine is a rural state with insufficient ridership to justify current modes of 
public transit statewide; 
¢ This bill would amend Title 23 to make an explicit commitment to personal rapid transit 
utilizing maglev and multiple other technologies to fill gaps; address systemic barriers; 
and relieve its carbon footprint. 
Title 23: TRANSPORTATION 
Part 9: Advanced Transportation 
Chapter 625: Low-speed Maglev System Transportation 
Subchapter 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
23 §9002. Definitions 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the 
following meanings. 
1. “SkyWay” is a new mode of transpoitation. 
a. SkyWay is not a train. It is not a monorail. It is not light rail. It is a small lightweight 
elevated guideway on which 4-passenger pods travel powered by magnetic levitation 
under voice control as researched and developed by the Southern Maine Research 
Institute, MicroRail Division. 
b. SkyWay is a tram-like, elevated lightweight ﬁxed guideway of stainless steel and 
composites which uses limited space above sidewalks and/or parking lanes in the public
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
\ Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
R.O.W. to avoid congestion. It uses four passenger non-shared car-like ePods to move 
people and freight. 
c. It is the least expensive and most environmentally friendly mode of transit with near-zero 
energy usage, near-zero carbon production and miles of solar generation. 
d. This personal rapid transit system eliminates accidents. Snap-together construction 
eliminates the need for disruptive heavy equipment, concrete trucks and environmental 
damage during construction. It is driven by LSMs (linear synchronous motors) and 
magnetic levitation. 
e. Unlike any other mode of transportation, it is not ridership dependent. 
f. SkyWay is necessary if Maine is going to meet planned climate goals. It is the equitable 
transit solution for disadvantaged individuals. 
g. MicroRail deploys its SkyWay guideways above the public ROW, both sides of the road 
(to eliminate the risk of crossing streets), so as not to interfere with whatever sidewalks 
or parking exist at surface level. Its low costs offer an expansion of access for low- 
income and all diverse populations. 
h. Primary characteristics: small; lightweight; silent; smooth; fast; reliable; cheap; 
expandable; autonomous; on-demand; non-stop; 24/7/365; all weather; street-level door— 
to-door service; stationless; intelligent (empathic AI); 
2. Public transportation. Any entity that provides or intends to provide transportation services to 
the general public. This includes private and public entities that provide such public-facing 
services. 
3. Personal Rapid Transit (PRT) - “PRT is a driverless transit solution that utilizes its own 
infrastructure in order to provide a very high level of service and reduce congestion on surface 
roads. Small deployments have been in public operation around the World for decades (United 
States since 1975, The Netherlands since 1999, United Arab Emirates since 2010, United 
Kingdom since 201 l, South Korea since 2013). Large deployments with thousands of vehicles 
and hundreds of stations are now emerging in the UAE and India with many more being planned. ” 
- PRT Consulting 
4. Fixed Elevated Guideway includes the public right-of-way; the steel, niron and composite 
guideway and appurtenances; support pylons; elevators and other appurtenant structures. 
5. MaineDOT, as used herein, refers to the State of Maine Department of Transportation and all of 
the entities to which it has delegated responsibilities related to transportation such as Metropolitan 
Planning Organizations (MPO) and Authorities. 
6. Regional transportation corporation. "Regional transportation corporation" means any 
private, nonproﬁt corporation formed for the express purpose of providing public transportation 
services to more than one municipality but which is not wholly or partly owned by the 
municipalities. The corporation must be approved, for the purpose of providing public 
transportation services, by the municipal officers of each community to receive public
LD13S1 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
~ 
Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me magiev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
transportation services from the corporation. After being approved by the municipal OffiC61'S of5 
or more communities, such a corporation shall be duly certified as a regional transportation 
corporation by the Department of Transportation and is subject to all applicable Public Utilities 
Commission rules governing charter and rates of fare. See also 30-A §350] 
23 §9003 Establishment of service 
1. Establishment of service. MaineDOT is directed to take all actions that are reasonably necessary 
to initiate and support PRT passenger service between points within this State. 
23 §9004. Initiation and establishment of elevated maglev personal rapid transit services. 
1. Passenger — SkyWay may conduct transportation of passengers between any two points 
anywhere in Maine, wherever their guideway is deployed. 
2. Freight - SkyWay may transport freight between any two points anywhere in Maine, wherever 
their guideway is deployed, within weight limits TBD. 
3. Delivery - SkyWay may provide for home delivery of goods in regions where their guideway is 
deployed. 
23 §9008. Authority - This Act authorizes and directs: 
A. MaineDOT to develop rules and regulations appropriate for the inclusion and promotion of 
personal rapid transit as offered by SkyWay by MicroRail to minimize roadblocks and 
obstructions to its successful research, prototype and pilot deployment. 
B. MaineDOT shall include a representative from MicroRail as a voting member on each study, 
board, committee and such, gathered for the purpose of evaluating some portion of any of the 
State’s passenger and freight transportation systems including: 
Q Title 23, §74: Freight transportation advisory council; 
Q Title 23, §75. Rail corridor ‘ use advisory councils 
Q Public Transit Advisory Council 
v Greater Portland MPO 
0 Regional Transportation Advisory Committees 
C. Maine DOT to provide assistance for advanced transportation research associated with a new 
mode of transportation known as SkyWay by MicroRail, a project of the Southern Maine 
Research Institute, to include: 
1. Assistance with grant application(s) for Federal funding from USDOT, USDOE, NSF and 
other agencies to support: 
a. development of a working prototype with 100’ of elevated guideway, and when ready, 
b. deployment of a pilot project in a rural area; and 
c. deployment of a pilot project that serves an urban cluster or industrial site (such as 
Brunswick Landing).
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
~ 
Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
2. Advice on areas of greatest priorities for public transit, light freight, and low-income 
transportation. 
D. Maine DOT to participate with a study in shared uses of the public right-of~way to allow for 
deployment of SkyWay in the public right-of-way. See 131“ LD 298 
E. The University of Maine System “University Transportation Center” and research departments 
to provide research assistance speciﬁc to this mode of transportation, and development and 
implementation thereof. 
F. The Efficiency Maine Trust is directed: 
1. to establish a program of rebates and renewable energy credits (RECS) for the placement of 
miles of solar generation along the SkyWay elevated guideway; and 
2. to support deployment of micro grids (neighborhood) for electrical distribution via the 
SkyWay guideway; 
3. to support deployment of electrical storage systems; 
4. to support placement of vehicle charging systems by MicroRail along SkyWay’s routes; and 
5. to allocate RGGI funding for deployment of solar technology, for energy storage and for local 
grid systems. 
G. The Maine Broadband Coalition to direct resources for l gig ﬁber broadband deployment ona 
sole-source contract basis to MicroRail wherever Sl<yWay is deployed. 
H. The Public Utilities Commission to determine reasonable rules and guidance for utility aspects 
of SkyWay and to negotiate resolutions and arbitrate differences when conﬂicts or disputes arise 
with consumers or commercial entities other than disputes already covered by contracts. 
23 - §9010 Funding: operations of SkyWay are expected to be self-funding. Special or unusual or 
extraordinary requests or modiﬁcations by an unrelated entity must be pre-funded. See also 23 §8006, 
§8007, and §8008; 
0 https:[/wwwtransportation.gov/rural/funding-opportunities 
~ OFPR to provide necessary funding from the State Multi Modal Fund 
0 "Major new ﬁxed guideway projects, or extension to existing systems financed with New Starts funds, typically 
receive these funds through a full funding grant agreement that defines the scope ofthe project and specifies 
the total multi-year federal commitment to the project." (Federal Transit Administration 
https:[/www.transit.dot.gov/funding[grants/metropolitan~statewide-planning-and-nonmetropolitaw 
transportation-planning~5303-5304) 
23 - §9011. Reasonable fares
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
* 
Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me magiev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
Fares established pursuant to this chapter must be set at reasonable levels to encourage use of this 
service. If the cost of assessing, collecting and maintaining a fare structure is greater than the fares, 
there will be a no-fare structure. 
23 - § 9111 Purpose 
The SkyWay by MicroRail is a body both corporate and politic in the State established for the 
general purpose of promoting passenger transportation services. It is declared that the purposes of this 
chapter are public and that the SkyWay system must be regarded as performing the governmental 
function of passenger transportation for the public good in carrying out this chapter. 
23 - §9117. Fair practices; affirmative action - The authority is subject to and shall comply 
with Title 5, chapter 65. Code of fair practices and affirmative action 
23 - §9119. Exemption from taxes 
Because the accomplishment by the entity SkyWay of the purposes stated in this chapter is for 
the beneﬁt of the people of the State and for the improvement of their commerce and prosperity 
and is the performance of essential governmental functions, the authority may not be required to 
pay any taxes or assessment on any property acquired or used by it for the purposes provided in 
this chapter; except that service facilities leased or rented by the entity to business entities are 
subject to taxation and assessments must be made against the tenant in possession based upon the 
value of the leasehold interest. The entity may not be required to pay any tax upon its income 
except as may be required by the laws of the United States. See also 30-A §3511 Exempt from 
taxation; ﬁxel tax reﬁmd. 
Sec. 3. The commission membership. Resolved: That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 
study committee consists of l3 or more members appointed as follows: 
l. Two members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including one 
member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature; 
2. Two members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House, 
including one member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the 
Legislature. 
3. One member representing the investor-owned transmission and distribution utility with 
the greatest number of customers in the State, appointed by the President of the Senate; 
4. One member representing the investor-owned transmission and clistribution utility with 
the second greatest number of customers in the State appointed by the Speaker of the House; 
5. Two members representing the SkyWay transportation/utility project.
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
’ Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
6. Engineering experts appropriate to the technology. 
Related Statutes 
Title 5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND SERVICES 
Part 12: Human Rights 
Chapter 337: Human Rights Act 
Subchapter 5: Public Accommodations 
§4594-G. Standards for facilities constructed or altered after March 15, 2012 
Title 20-A SCHOOL TRANSPORTATION §54XX 
Title 23 TRANSPORTATION §§ all 
Title 24-A: MAINE INSURANCE CODE - Chapter 93: Transportation Network Company Insurance §73XX 
Title 30-A: MUNICIPALITIES AND COUNTIES 
Part2: Municipalities 
Subpart 5: Health, Welfare and Improvements 
Chapter 163: Transportation §35XX 
Potential funding sources: 
https://www.transportation.govirural/funding-oppoitunities 
https://content. govdeiiaerycoin/accouiits/U SDOT/bulletins/3510-48c 
Maine Multimodal Transportation Fund 
23 MRSA §7103-A. Deposit into Multimodal Transportation Fund account 
The Treasurer of State shall receive all revenue derived from the tax levied pursuant to Title 36, chapter 361 and taxes paid under Title 36, 
section 1865 and shall deposit all revenue in the Multimodal Transportation Fund account established in section 4210-B. 
23 MRSA §4210-B. MultimodalTransportation Fund 
1. Establishment of fund. The Multimodal Transportation Fund, referred to in this section as "the Multimodal Transportation Fund" is 
established as an Other Special Revenue Funds program through the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. Funds appropriated, 
allocated, transferred or deposited in the account accrue interest earnings that must be used within the Multimodal Transportation Fund. 
2. Establishment of program. The department shall establish the Multimodal Transportation Fund program through the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services, Office of the State Controller. 
3. Use of funds. The funds deposited into and disbursed from the Multimodal Transportation Fund must be used for the purposes of 
purchasing, operating, maintaining, improving, repairing, constructing and managing the assets of multimodal forms of transportation, including, 
but not limited to, transit, aeronautics, marine and rail, of the State, municipalities and multimodal providers. The commissioner may use the funds 
to make loans to counties, municipalities, state agencies and quasi-state government agencies for multimodal forms of transportation upon such 
terms as the commissioner determines, including secured and unsecured loans, and in connection with the secured and unsecured loans take 
appropriate actions to protect the security and safeguard against losses, including foreclosure and the bidding upon and purchase of property upon 
foreclosure or other sale. 
4. Disbursements from fund.
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
~ Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglev@rnaine.rr.com 207—797-7891
l 
5. Other fund sources. The Multimodal Transportation Fund may accept funds from other sources, including, but not limited to, the Federal 
Rail Administration, to carry out the provisions of this section. 
6. Financial management. All assets including the cash balance, liabilities and equity in the Augusta State Airport Fund must be transferred 
to the Multimodal Transportation Fund and accounted for in a manner prescribed by the Department ofAdministrative and Financial Sen/ices, Ofﬁce 
of the State Controller. 
7-A. Sales tax revenue. On July 1st of each year, the State Controller shall transfer to the Multimodal Transportation Fund an amount, as 
certiﬁed by the State Tax Assessor, that is equivalent to 100% of the revenue from the tax imposed on the value of rental of a pickup truck or van 
with a gross weight of less than 26,000 pounds rented from a person primarily engaged in the business of renting automobiles and the value of rental 
for a period of less than one year of an automobile pursuant to Title 36, section 1811 for the ﬁrst 6 months of the prior ﬁscal year after the reduction 
for the transfer to the Local Government Fund as described by Title 30-A, section 5681, subsection 5 and the transfer to the AW Recreational 
Management Fund pursuant to Title 36, section 1820. On October 1st of each year, the State Controller shall transfer to the Multimodal 
Transportation Fund an amount, as certiﬁed by the State Tax Assessor, that is equivalent to 100% of the revenue from the tax imposed on the value 
of rental of a pickup truck or van with a gross weight of less than 26,000 pounds rented from a person primarily engaged in the business of renting 
automobiles and the value of rental for a period of less than one year of an automobile pursuant to Title 36 section 1811 for the last 6 months of 
the prior ﬁscal year after the reduction for the transfer to the Local Government Fund as described by Title 30-A, section 5681, subsection 5 and the 
transfer to the ATV Recreational Management Fund pursuant to Title 36 section 1820. The tax amount must be based on actual sales for that ﬁscal 
year and may not consider any accruals that may be required by law. 
Title 36, chapter 361 - Railroad Companies 
Title 36, section 1811 - Sales tax 
Title 36, section 1820 - §1820. Tax on rental of all-terrain vehicles 
Title 36, section 1865 — 
§1865. Deposit of use taxes paid on certain fuels 
23 MRSA §4251 Public-private partnerships; transportation projects 
1. Definitions. As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following meanings. 
A. "Agreement" means a contract between the department and a private entity to create a public~private partnership that allows for private sector participation 
in the financing, development, operation, management, ownership, leasing or maintenance of a transportation facility and that sets forth rights and obligations 
of the department and the private entity in that partnership 
B. "Project" means the initial capital development of a transportation facility 
C. "Proposal" means a conditional offerof a private entity that, after review, negotiation, documentation and legislative approval, may lead to an agreement as 
provided in this subchapter. 
D. "Transportation facility" means a facility that is or if developed would be within the jurisdiction of the department including a highway, bridge, railroad line, 
pier, airport, trail, ferry vessel, building or other improvement. 
2. Applicability. This subchapter applies to a proposal or agreement for a private entity to form a public~private partnership when the department 
estimates that the initial capital cost of a project is $25,000,000 or more or when the proposal includes placing tolls on existing transportation facilities 
that were not previously subject to tolls. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit or otherwise affect programs that do not meet the criteria of 
this subsection. 
3. Authorization. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the department is authorized to receive or solicit proposals to form a public-private 
partnership with respect to a transportation facility. Proposals must be reviewed in accordance with this subchapter. Upon approval of the 
Legislature as provided in this subchapter, the department may enter into an agreement. All proposals must comply with section 73. 
4. Standards for review. Before submitting a proposal to the Legislature for approval the department must ﬁnd that the proposal meets the following 
standards. 
A. The purpose of and need for the transportation facility must be consistent with the long-term planning of the department. 
B. The private entity must have the ﬁnancial, technical and operational capacity to discharge the responsibilities set forth in the proposal cost-effectively and 
responsibly as determined by the department. This capacity must include, but is not limited to, meeting department prequalification standards for 
professional engineering services and general contracting.
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglev@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
C. The proposed transportation facility must be owned, controlled, operated and maintained in a manner satisfactory to the department. 
D. The proposal must be costeffective in the long term. 
E. The proposal must limit the use of state capital funding to less than 50% of the initial capital cost of the transportation facility and to the extent practicable 
minimize the use of transportation funding sources such as the Highway Fund, general obligation bonds supported by the Highway Fund, the TransCap 
Trust Fund underTitle 30-A, section 6006-G and program funding provided by the Federal Highway Administration. 
F. If the proposed transportation facility is to be supported by tolls or other user fees, the private entity must provide a traffic and revenue study prepared 
by an expert acceptable to the department and national bond rating agencies. The private entity must also provide a finance plan consistent with the traffic 
and revenue study that identifies the proposal costs, revenues by source, financing, major assumptions, internal rate of return on private investments and 
whether any government funds are assumed to deliver a cost—feasible project and that provides a total cash ﬂow analysis beginning with implementation 
of the project and extending for the term of the agreement. 
G. The proposal must demonstrate safeguards adequate to ensure that no significant additional costs orsen/ice disruptions would be borne by the traveling 
public and residents of the State if the private entity defaults or cancels the agreement. 
H. The proposal must include a provision that any contractor performing construction work required by the agreement must furnish performance and 
payment bonds or irrevocable letters of credit in an amount equal to the cost of the construction work. Any action on such a payment bond or irrevocable 
letter of credit is subject to the requirements of Title 14, section 871, subsection 4. 
I. The proposal and the transportation facility must comply with all requirements of applicable federal, state and local laws and department rules, policies 
and procedures. . 
J. The proposal must identify the law enforcement jurisdictions and responsibilities relative to the transportation facility. 
l<. The proposal must provide that all reasonable costs of substantially affected local governments and utilities related to the transportation facility are borne 
by the private entity or are otherwise provided for to the satisfaction of the department. 
5 Proposal and selection processes; solicited and unsolicited. The department may request proposals from private entities for a public-private 
partnership for a transportation facility or may accept unsolicited proposals pursuant to this subsection. 
A. if the department receives an unsolicited proposal and determines that it meets the standards in this subchapter, the department shall 
publish a notice of the receipt of the proposal on the department's publicly accessible website or through advertisements in newspapers. 
if a notice is published exclusively in newspapers, the notice must appear in 2 or more public newspapers circulated wholly or in part in the 
State and in one public newspaper circulated wholly or in part in the county where the proposed transportation facility is to be located if 
any such newspaper is circulated in that county. The notice must provide that the department will accept, for 120 days after the initial date 
of publication, proposals meeting the standards in subsection 4 from other private entities for transportation facilities that satisfy the same 
basic purpose and need. A copy of the notice must be mailed to each local government in the area affected by the proposal. 
B. After the proposal or proposals have been received, and any public notiﬁcation period has expired, the department shall rank the 
proposals in order of preference. ln ranking the proposals, the department may consider factors that include, but are not limited to, 
professional qualiﬁcations, general business terms, innovative engineering or cost-reduction terms, ﬁnance plans and the need for state 
funds to deliver the project and discharge the agreement. The department shall undertake negotiations with the private entity submitting 
the 1st—ranked proposal. if the department is not satisﬁed with the results of the negotiations, the department may, at its sole discretion, 
terminate negotiations with that entity and the department may negotiate with the other entities in order of the ranking of their proposals. 
If only one proposal is received, the department shall negotiate in good faith and, if the department is not satisﬁed with the results of the 
negotiations, the department may, at its sole discretion, terminate negotiations. 
C The department may require that the private entity assume responsibility for all costs incurred by the State or local governments before 
execution of the agreement, including costs of retaining independent experts to review, analyze and advise the department with respect to 
the proposal. 
6 Tolls, fares. An agreement may authorize the private entity to impose tolls or fares for the use of the transportation facility. The following 
provisions apply to such an agreement. 
A. The agreement must be consistent with the trafﬁc and revenue study required under subsection 4, paragraph F.. 
B. The agreement must ensure that the transportation facility and any related toll facility are properly operated and maintained in 
accordance with department standards or standards generally accepted in the transportation industry. 
C. The agreement must include provisions governing changes in tolls or fares.
LD1351 An Act to Expand Transportation Research and Manufacturing in Maine to Ensure Access to Affordable Public Transportation 
a 
Amendment. Submitted by Kenneth Capron, Portland, Me maglex/@maine.rr.com 207-797-7891 
D. The department may require provisions in the agreement that ensure that a negotiated portion of revenues from a toll-generating ora 
fare-generating transportation facility is returned to the department over the life of the agreement. 
7. Exercise of powers. If the department exercises its power of eminent domain for the development and construction of a transportation facility 
pursuant to this subchapter and section 73, the department must retain ownership rights and interests taken. The department's power of eminent 
domain may not be conferred on a private entity. The State may provide maintenance, law enforcement and other services with respect toa 
transportation facility owned by a private entity when the agreement provides for reasonable reimbursement for such sen/ices. 
8. Term of agreement. An agreement may not exceed a term of 50 years unless the Legislature, upon the recommendation of the Commissioner 
of Transportation, approves a longer term. 
9. Legislative approval. If the department determines that a public-private partnership proposal and draft agreement meets the standards of this 
subchapter, the department shall submit to the Legislature a bill that authorizes the agreement. The bill must include a statement that the proposal 
meets the standards in subsection 4, a summary of the substance of the draft agreement and a description of the nature and amount of state 
investment, if any, including effects on programmed capital work. If legislative approval is granted, the department shall report to the joint standing 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over transportation matters by February 1st of each year as to the status of the project and any 
substantive changes to the public-private partnership proposal. 
10. Information in public record. Except as provided in subsection 10-A, information obtained by the department under this subchapter is a public 
record pursuant to ‘Ftle 1, chapter 13, subchapter 1. 
10-A. Conﬁdential information. Information submitted to the department relating to a public-private partnership proposal under this subchapter is 
conﬁdential and not a public record under Title 1, chapter 13, subchapter 1 if the private entity submitting the information designates the information 
as being only for the conﬁdential use of the department and if: 
A. The information is a trade secret as deﬁned in Title 10, section 1542, subsection 4; or 
B. Disclosure of the information would result in a business or competitive disadvantage, loss of business, invasion of privacy or other 
signiﬁcant detriment to the private entity to whom the record belongs or pertains. 
If legal action is ﬁled to gain access to the information designated as conﬁdential under this subsection, the private entity must defend its 
designation and the department shall release the information in accordance with the order of the reviewing court. Failure to defend the 
designation under this subsection constitutes a waiver of conﬁdentiality by the private entity and the department shall release the 
information. 
11. Report of proposals. By February 1st, annually, the department shall provide to thejoint standing committee of the Legislature havingjurisdiction 
over transportation matters a report summarizing all proposals that the department has determined meet the standards of this subchapter or that 
have been ﬁnally rejected during the previous calendar year. 
12. Rules. The department may adopt rules to implement this subchapter. Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as 
deﬁned in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.
