, . STATE OF MAINE 
., PUBLlC UTlLlTlES COMMISSION 
,1 l‘-tr--*r;m.~ m» .\?=:~{: — ., 
7;‘ Q, 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll ~ 
Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR ‘ 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission
A 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 325, An Act To Require Transparency in Transmission and Distribution Utility 
Advertising Expenditures~~ 
February 16, 2023_ 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for nor 
against LD 325, An Act To Require Transparency in Transmission and Distribution Utility Advertising 
Expenditures on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission (Commission). 
Currently, the Commission has rules regarding advertising and political activities by all public utilities. 
Chapter 83 requires each public utility to ﬁle a report annually with the Commission that describes any 
advertising, political activities, institutional advertising, promotional advertising, or the making of 
promotional allowances by the utility itself, or by another corporation, organization, association, or 
individual on the utility’s behalf. The reports are required to include the expenses associated with each 
of these activities, as well as the total expenditures on these activities, advertising methods used by the 
utility to collect and account for such information, and the methods the utility employs to inform its 
employees and agents of these requirements and how to report on these activities to the utility so it can 
be included in the report submitted to the Commission. 
The rule allows the Commission to review and require alteration of any reporting or accounting 
methods and procedures and it requires the utility to keep copies of all institutional and promotional 
advertising on ﬁle for inspection by the Commission. Utilities are also required to keep a record of all 
expenditures, contributions, expenses and costs directly or indirectly associated, or incurred with 
respect to political activities, advertising and promotional allowances. In addition, utilities are required, 
to the extent possible to identify all contributions, dues, fees and other amounts paid directly or 
indirectly to another corporation, organization, association, or individual used to conduct such activities 
on the utility’s behalf. 
The rule also speciﬁes that a public utility may not recover from any person other than its shareholders 
or other owners any expenditures, contributions, expenses or costs the utility incurred for political _ 
activities, and by any electric or gas utility for institutional and promotional advertising and 
promotional allowances. This prohibition on recovery also extends to all direct or indirect 
expenditures, contributions, expenses, and costs matured by a public utility with respect to political 
activities, through another corporation, organization, association, or individual which engages in 
political activities on behalf of the utility. 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 ' 
MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039 -
PUC Testimony — LD 325 February 16, 2023 
Commission rule, as well as 35 -A M.R.S. § 302 speciﬁes that contributions or gifts to political 
candidates, political parties, political or legislative committees, or to any committees or organizations 
working to inﬂuence referendum petitions or elections, whether paid directly or indirectly, through 
reimbursement or otherwise, incurred by a public utility, may not be included or incorporated in 
operating expenses. __ 
There are exceptions to the rule as it relates to the accounting of these expenditures and rate treatment. 
The rule lists this exceptions and includes advertising and political activities related to providing 
customers with information on energy conservation and energy efficiency, activities required by 
federal or state law or are otherwise requiredor permitted by Commission order, activities that concern 
conditions of service and billing, safety measures or emergency conditions, activities concerning ~ 
employment opportunities with the utility and activities that explain rate schedules or provide notice of 
proposed rate schedules and hearingsi or proceeding concerning the utility. r 
The Commission would like to note that the amendment as proposed, seems to require transmission 
and distribution utilities to report on the political and advertising activities of a related entity, even if 
those activities are not related to the utility. If this amendment was meant to be more narrowly tailored 
to only those political or advertising activities undertaken by the utility, or on behalf of the utility, this 
bill may not be necessary because exiting rules already address these activities. If, on the other hand, 
the sponsor is attempting to codify the Commission ’s existing rules, the Committee may want to 
consider further amending the language to limit it to activities the utility undertakes, or those activities 
undertaken by a related entity on behalf of a utility. 
Lastly, the amended language requires the Commission to adopt major substantive rules to implement 
these requirements. The Commission could require this reporting Without rules, as the language is 
sufficiently clear on what is required. We do envision amending our existing rule in the future, and we 
would incorporate these new requirements into our existing rule to have all reporting requirements in 
one place. 35-A M.R.S.A. § 302-A already speciﬁes that rules adopted by the Commission relating to 
political and advertising activities and promotional allowances are major substantive rules. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session.
2
