OUR POWER LOWER COST ~ LOCAL - RELIABLE 
Testimony in Support of LD 325, An Act to Require Transparency in Transmission and 
Distribution Utility Advertising Expenditures, ” sponsored by Senator Michael Tipping 
February 16, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology: 
My name is Mark Gallagher of Drummond Woodsum and l reside in Kennebunk. l appear today 
on behalf of Our Power in support of LD 325. Our Power is a group of Maine ratepayers, 
business leaders, energy experts, conservationists, and others working to put the Pine Tree 
State’s energy future more firmly back in the hands of Maine people. 
The sponsor's amendment to LD 325 is about updating ratepayer protection and disclosure by 
all public utilities, and we applaud Senator Tipping for bringing it forward. Attached to our 
testimony is alternative language, which we think is a modest improvement. The differences are 
discussed in an attachment to this testimony. 
Maine laws and PUC rules exist to protect utility customers from having to fund political 
influence by utilities, but these laws and rules have not been updated since 1987. They are 
written for a different time. 
ln 1987, our utilities were small, and locally owned. Today‘s complex, global web of affiliated 
companies, holding companies, and other affiliated interests not only didn't exist, but was hard 
to even imagine. It was also a time before the internet, before the Citizens United ruling, and 
before the rise of new and powerful tools to allow dark money to cast a long and corrosive 
shadow of influence. For these reasons, MRSA Sec. 302 and 302-A and the PUC’s Chapter 83 
are badly overdue for an update and overhaul. 
In a nutshell, the NRCMlOur Power amendment to LD 325 would update our disclosure laws 
and customer protections as follows. First, it would prevent political, charitable or public 
education expenditures by a public utility or its affiliate from being included in customer rates, 
except for public education expenditures with prior approval. Second, it would require detailed 
reporting of these expenditures. Third, it would require the commission to update its rules to 
administer the prohibition. 
We also understand the bill sponsor appreciates and supports this approach, with one addition 
that we would also support.V
Why this bill? What is unique about our utilities? Unlike free-market business, "public utilities" 
are given extraordinary powers and privileges. While some are not-for-pro ﬁt, Maine’s for-profit 
public utilities are quasi-governmental in nature: supported by the government, but privately 
managed. These governmental supports include use of eminent domain, use of the public 
rights-of-way, and the unparalleled privilege of a government-granted monopoly. ln return for 
these privileges, utilities are expected to surrender many of the rights most persons enjoy. 
These include rate-setting by state and federal regulators, within bounds established by law, by 
rule, and by the courts. This trade-off is generally known as the regulatory bargain. But 
unfortunately, this compromise can create problems. With no free-market competition for 
customers, the principle means by which powerful utilities are able to protect and grow 
shareholder returns is to exert ever-greater political influence on regulators, on lawmakers, on 
the public, and on the courts. 
This bill is not about campaign spending or lobbying, as regulated by the Maine Ethics 
Commission. These are only one very narrow form of influence. They differ in important ways 
from our laws and rules to protect ratepayers and ensure utility transparency. 
Under Section 302 and 302-A, and Chapter 83, utilities are purportedly expected to disclose all 
political funding in their annual reports. CMP’s most recent annual report barely scratches the 
surface of its political activities. On sheet 17b, “Political Expenses, ” the company lists a total of 
$327,732 for the calendar year. This was the same year when tens of millions were being spent 
by Cl\/|P’s “affiliated interest, ” Avangrid, in relation to the CMP Corridor campaign. 
Today, utilities of all kinds are especially important given that we increasingly depend on them 
for our lives and our livelihoods, and to decarbonize. For these reasons, both customers and 
their rates must be carefully and jealously protected from influence campaigns of any kind. This 
measure, as amended, will provide for a much-needed update to our laws and rules. 
More information is attached. Thank you for your attention, and I am happy to try to answer any 
questions you may have.
Additional Background on LD 325: 
Disclosure at the Maine Ethics Commission does not relate to utility rates, and includes 
only disclosure of lobbying (over 8 hours/month to influence lawmakers), and direct 
campaign advocacy (e.g., ads to vote for X) 
MRSA 35-A Sec. 302, last amended in 1987, prohibits the following from being included 
in rates: “Contributions or gifts to political candidates, political parties, political or 
legislative committees or any committee or organization working to influence referendum 
petitions or elections. ” 
Sec. 302-A further allows the PUC to write rules “concerning promotional advertising; 
promotional allowances, including, but not limited to, the granting of promotional rebates 
or credits; advertising to promote corporate image or goodwill; or political activities by 
public utilities." 
The PUC has adopted Chapter 83, defining and enforcing these. 
These laws and rules DO NOT require disclosure, or ban ratepayer recovery, for many 
types of influence campaigns. For example, MRSA Sec. 302 does not clearly or 
necessarily include the following: 
o Charitable giving, such as sponsorship of public radio, or a large land grant toa 
sportsmen's or veteran's organization, or creation of a nonprofit to influence a 
major statewide ballot question 
0 Educational spending, such as spending on ads, website upgrades, or public 
relations that may seek to burnish a company’s reputation 
0 Lobbying of under 8 hours per month by any individual, such as calls froma 
former Governor on a bill (both of the last two have done this for Avangrid) 
0 Certain work by membership organizations, such as the Edison Electric Institute 
0 Representation of and advocacy for the utility’s views when working on a policy 
working group convened by the Legislature and or Governor (allowed by Ch. 83) 
0 Advocacy for the utility’s position at the PUC, such as supporting a rate hike (this 
work is generally billed to ratepayers) 
Recent national reports have drawn attention to the startlingly widespread use of 
ratepayer money to fund political influence campaigns. An article by the authorgofone 
such report by the Energy Policy Institute, published two weeks ago, is attached to this 
testimony. This bill follows many of the reports’ recommendations to update and clarify 
state-level protections, while stopping short of others such as a complete ban on all 
utility advertising. 
The PUC’s current authority under 302-A does not clearly extend to a utility’s affiliated 
interests, but only to spending “by public utilities ” themselves. As an example, spending 
by Avangrid and by NECEC, LLC on political efforts as well as “goodwill ” donations were 
not disclosed in CMP’s recent annual reports with the PUC.
§ponsor’s Amendment vs. NRCM/Our Power Amendment: 
Unlike the very good amendment circulated earlier this week by the sponsor, the language 
presented by NRCM and Our Power: 
Applies to all public utilities, such as water and natural gas, notjust electric 
transmission & distribution utilities. 
Refers to an existing definition of “affiliated lnterest ” in Title 35-A Section 707 that 
appears to be sufficiently broad and specific, i.e., 10% ownership stakes in parent, 
children and sibling entities, to capture entities that may be indirectly channeling funds to 
influence political affairs in Maine. 
Expands the existing political prohibition under Section 302 to include charitable and 
unapproved educational spending by a utility and affiliated interests, barring those 
expenses from being paid for through rates; and 
Expands the existing disclosure requirements under Section 302% to include 
charitable and educational spending and spending by affiliated interests.
