V. 
Natural Resources Council of Maine »
- 
3 Wade Street e Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 e Fax: (207) 622-4343 Q www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 325, _ 
An Act To Require Transparency in Transmission and Distribution Utility Advertising Expenditures 
' 
By Rebecca Schultz, Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy 
V February 16, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, my name is Rebecca Schultz. I am a Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). NRCM has been working for more than 60 years to protect, 
restore, and conserve Maine's environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and supporters. I am 
here today to testify in support of LD 325, An Act To Require Transparency in Transmission and 
Distribution Utility Advertising Expenditures, with suggested modifications to strengthen the proposed 
bill. 
Maine's 2021 ballot measure (Question 1) on Central Maine Power's (CM P) transmission corridor broke 
all records for political spending. According to the Maine Ethics Commission, CMP and its affiliated 
companies spent more than $54 million in an effort to defeat the referendum? 
Maine people have various views about the CMP corridor, even if 60 percent ‘of voters did cast their 
ballots in support of the measure. Debate is a sign of a healthy democracy. But l hope we can agree on 
the principle that companies given a monopoly franchise with guaranteed returns in exchange for 
providing an essential service to Maine people should not be spending that kind of money to influence 
the outcome of our elections.i 
l'm even more confident we can agree that political influence campaigns should not be charged to 
Maine ratepayers through electric bills they have no choice but to pay. 
Maine's current rules governing the political and advertising activities of our public utilities were last 
updated substantively in 1987. That was a long time ago. That was well before the’2010 Citizen United 
decisionby the U.S. Supreme Court that super-charged corporate spending in politics, and well before 
the proliferationof Political Action Committees (PACs). It was also years before the various acquisitions 
and reorganizations that brought Maine's largest electric utilities under complex structures of 
multinational corporate ownership? These rules are long overdue for an update. For evidence of this, 
1 
CMP spent through two Ballot Measure Committees (Clean Energy Matters and Mainers for Fair Laws). Hydro- 
Quebec spent more than $22 million. Prior to 2021, the most money spent in Maine on a ballot measure campaign 
was $9.4 million in 2017 in a failed effort to get voters to approve a casino in York County, see Ballotpedia» 
available at 
.,.i_i.i ....,.'rf12.2z ‘i@.....€.Zrz.tza§:a-.111%;iaii.ir.§....,*i2§.Li_Z§- 
2 Cl\/[P was acquired by Spanish utility lberdrola in 2007 and reorganized under new U.S. parent Avangrid in 2016. 
Emera was acquired by ENMAX, changed to Versant Power, in 2020. 
ililli§2ZZEEYK ﬁ§§1€2§P1i§1.ii2;}£%f§2§.§l_§iQiitéé ﬁdiiéﬁl{E5ETIELQZiZ_i_§2.:.i.%.l32.0{QItlQ,:_é%}LQ§lT::ii§j>i{.tQ ﬂiiéﬂiﬁiIlttlik.i.§Z§§_é ﬁ§lléi;.EEl_<2§1li@E ’
look to CMP’s annual reports to the Public Utility Commission (PUC), where it acknowledged a mere 
$327,000 in political expenses for 2021.3 
LD 325 takes an important step forward in amending the disclosure requirements related to advertising. 
However, the requirements should apply to all public utilities in Maine, notjust to transmission and 
distribution (T&D) companies. Furthermore, the Committee should take this opportunity to consider 
additional ways to strengthen the law. The following are three no-nonsense revisions we urge the 
Committee to adopt: 
1. The rules barring Maine's public utilities from charging political activities to ratepayers 
should be expanded to include charitable and unapproved education spending. ‘ 
2. The prohibition should be broadened to apply to parent companies and all affiliated 
interests who may be acting on behalf of a public utility in Maine? 
3. The disclosure requirements should be expanded to include charitable and educational 
spending and spending by all affiliated interests, and detailed annual reports should be 
readily accessible to the public.6 
These revisions are in line with recommendations made by the Energy and Policy lnstitute, a non- 
partisan research organization tracking the political activities of public utilities across the United States.7 
ln closing, there is a lot of money being spent by our utilities to influence their political environment, 
and much of it is very hard to track. Our current rules are woefully out ofdate and fail to protect 
consumers. Ahead of what is poised to be another year of record spending to affect the outcome of 
dueling referendum campaigns on the 2023 ballot, Maine people will surely welcome these prudent 
measures to help shine a light on the influence of political spending by our public utilities. I urge the 
Committee to vote ought to pass with these suggested changes._ 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
3 To ﬁnd public utility annual reports, go to then click “View Annual 
Report”; then ﬁll out search terms. 
4 Title 35-A §302, Limitations on rates, available atT 
A _.; _"i,~“’"| ‘ha5 
r-kstJc.>i.l,;.1l=.i3%z. 
5 
Title 35-A §707, Afﬁliated interests, available at Z1 > _/ _i.§_.j_._§j1;t _:g'gi. 
6 Title 35-A §302-A, Rules governing political activities, promotional advertising and institutional advertising, 
available at 
7 
Energy and Policy Institute, January 2023, Getting Politics Out of Utility Bills, report available at 
»'—' ~»' 
<~~~—», ,— ~ ,~, .», =‘ \ 1/» --_-~ vs.-< Ea 1 » ‘» in » -» .1 V ii.s~,~., ~~ v» :<,'§-1\' Y.-~-,=i ‘ -. 
.Q§2Li;i\;&ii£Epi§§:u% 1.22 :s;i_iil_lc--twat =.>t~e<.t~t i1.i"j"f ‘/£435 éuttl>»,.
LD 325: New Title: An Act to Protect Utility Customers and Improve Disclosure of Political and 
Advertising Spending by Public Utilities and Their Affiliates 
§102. Deﬁnitions 
As used in this Title, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following 
meanings. 
1. Commission. "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission. 
1-A. Abutting property. "Abutting property" means, with respect to a parcel of land, another parcel of land 
that shares a common property boundary, except that "abutting property" does not include a parcel of land 
separated from another parcel by a public road or highway. 
1-B. Affiliated interest. "Affiliated interest" has the same meaning as provided in section 707, subsection 
1, paragraph A. 
§302. Limitations on rates 
The following expenses, whether paid directly or indirectly, through reimbursement or otherwise, incurred 
by a public utility or by an afﬁliated interest,__shall be listed and described by date,_payee,_purpose and 
amount in a_public utility’s annual and quarterly f€pO1‘I__'tO the commissionp and shall not be included or 
incorporated in operating expenses: 
l;___Contributions to political groups or candidates. Contributions or gifts to political candidates, political 
parties, political or legislative committees or any committee or organization working to inﬂuence 
referendum petitions or elections. 
2. Tax»deductible contributions. Contributions to a public charity, including but not limited to a charity 
managed or inﬂuenced by the utility or by an affiliated interest. 
3. Unapproved public education. Spending of more than $1,000 per month on public education or 
customer education campaigns, including but not limited to bill inserts,_ advertising by digital, radio, 
television, print or other media, sponsorships, endorsements, public relations and external 
communications, except as approved in advance by the commission for the purpose of sewing a public 
necessity. 
§302-A. Rules governing political activities, promotional advertising and institutional advertising 
Rules adopted by the commission concerning promotional advertising; promotional allowances, including, 
but not limited to, the granting of promotional rebates or credits; advertising to promote corporate image or 
goodwill; or political activities; charitable contributions; and public , education by public utilities or their 
afﬁliate interests are major substantive rules as deﬁned in ,"l _f_it.le 5, chapte1j_3'/'5, subchapter 2-A. Rules on 
these matters in effect on the effective date of this section remain in effect and do not require legislative 
approval but any changes to such rules are subject to review and approval in accordance with '@s __§, 
chapter 375, subchapter 2-A. 
Rulemaking. The commission shall amend its rules to conform with this act. 
Summary: This bill prevents political, charitable or public education expenditures by a public utility or its 
affiliate from being included in customer rates, except for public education expenditures with prior 
approval, It also requires detailed reporting of these ‘_€_)_§_p6l1(lliL1f €S andgreguires the commission to ppdate 
HS, rules to administer the prohibition.
LD 325: New Title: An Act to Protect Utility, Customers and Improve Disclosure of Political and 
Advertising Spending by Public Utilities and Their Affiliates 
§l02. Deﬁnitions 
As used in this Title, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following 
meanings. 
l. Commission. "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission. 
1-A. Abutting property. "Abutting property" means, with respect to a parcel of land, another parcel of land 
that shares a common property boundary, except that "abutting property" does not include a parcel of land 
separated from another parcel by a public road or highway. 
l-B. Affiliated interest. “Affiliated interest" has the same meaning as provided in section 707 , subsection 
l, paragraph A. 
§302. Limitations on rates 
The following expenses, whether paid directly or indirectly, through reimbursement or otherwise, incurred 
by a public utility or by an affiliated interest,_shall be listed and described by date,_payee,_purpose and 
amount in a public utility’s annual and quarterly report to the commission, and shall not be included or 
incorporated in operating expenses: 
_1. ___Contributions to political groups or candidates. Contributions or gifts to political candidates, political 
parties, political or legislative committees or any committee or organization working to inﬂuence 
referendum petitions or elections. 
2. Tax-deductible contributions. Contributions to a public charity, including but not limited to a charity 
managed or influenced by the utility or by an affiliated interest. 
3. Unapproved public education. Spending of more than $1,000 per month on public education or 
customer education campaigns, including but not limited to bill inserts, advertising by digital, radio, 
television, print or other ,media, Wsponsorships, endorsements. public relations and external 
communications, except as approved in advance by the commission for the purpose of serving a public 
necessity. 
§302-A. Rules governing political activities, promotional advertising and institutional advertising 
Rules adopted by the commission concerning promotional advertising; promotional allowances, including, 
but not limited to, the granting of promotional rebates or credits; advertising to promote corporate image or 
goodwill; or political activities; charitable contributions; and public education by public utilities or their 
affiliate interests are major substantive rules as deﬁned in Title 5, chapter _3 __'75, subchapter_2-A. Rules on 
these matters in effect on the effective date of this section remain in effect and do not require legislative 
approval but any changes to such rules are subject to review and approval in accordance with "lemﬁ, 
chapter 375. subchapter 2-A. 
Rulemaking. The commission shall amend its rules to conform with this act. 
Summary: This bill prevents political, charitable or public education expenditures by a public utility or its 
afﬁliate from being included in customer ratest except for public education expenditures witlggprior 
approval. It also requires detailed reporting of these expenditures andgrequires the commission to gpdate 
itsrules to administer the prohibition.
2/15/23, 4:08 PM Getting politics out of utility bills I Utility Dive 
Q UTILITY mvs 
OPINION 
Getting politics out of utility 
bills 
Public utility commissions should explicitly bar utilities 
from spending customers ’ money on politics, using clear 
and common-sense deﬁnitions of political activity. 
Published Feb. 1, 2023 
By David Pomerantz 
David Pomerantz is the executive director of the Energy and 
Policy Institute. 
Larry Householder, the former Ohio Speaker of the House, entered 
a courtroom last week where he’s being tried for his alleged role in 
a brazen $60 million bribery scheme involving the investor-ovvned 
utility FirstEnergy. It’s the largest political corruption case in 
Ohio’s history. 
Prosecutors allege that FirstEnergy funneled money through dark 
money groups to Householder ’s political organization in exchange 
for a bailout of several of the company's unproﬁtable nuclear and 
coal plants that cost ratepayers over $1 billion. 
Based on audits by regulators, it’s clear that at least part of the 
money Householder received came from fees that FirstEnergy 
collected from ratepayers, likely across many states, through their 
monthly bills. 
Unfortunately, utilities charging customers for many of the costs of 
their sprawling political inﬂuence machines is standard operating 
https:Ilwww.utilitydive.comlnewslpolitics-utility-biils-househ0ider-pomerantz~puc-ferc/641716/
2/15/23, 4:08 PM Getting politics out of utility bills I Utility Dive 
procedure across the industry. 
While some cases have led to high—proﬁle criminal charges and 
indictments, utilities regularly exploit a host of more mundane 
legal loopholes to use customers ’ money to try to inﬂuence 
politicians and regulators, all in an effort to grow their proﬁts and 
thwart competition. 
For example, gas utilities use their trade associations to convince 
people that methane isn’t a threat to our climate, and electric 
utilities use customers ’ money to fund slick PR campaigns against 
rooftop solar, or to convince people that rate increases are good for 
them. 
Customers pay ﬁrst for the political inﬂuence tactics, and then 
again via the higher rates and environmental harm that ﬂow from 
them. 
Ratepayers deserve better. 
State and federal policymakers can ensure that no ratepayers ever 
have to pay for a situation like the FirstEnergy-Householder 
corruption scheme again. 
To do so, they should adopt a mix of rules, disclosure and 
enforcement. 
For starters, public utility commissions, or PUCs, which regulate 
investor-owned utilities in all 50 states and the District of 
Columbia, should explicitly bar utilities from spending customers ’ 
money on politics, using clear and common-sense deﬁnitions of 
political activity. 
Rules are hard to enforce without transparency, so it’s also critical 
that PUCs require detailed disclosure of all utility political 
expenses. 
https://vwvw.utiiitydive.com/newslpolitics-utility-biits-householder-pomerantz-puc-ferc/641716/
2/15/23, 4:08 PM Getting politics out of utility bills 1 Utility Dive 
Finally, when utilities violate these rules, PUCs must levy ﬁnes and 
penalties that extend beyond refunds. If the only consequence of 
being caught breaking the rules is that a utility has to refund 
customers without penalty, it would be as if every time the police 
stopped a bank robbery, they simply asked the robber to return the 
money to the vault, and then walk away otherwise unpunished. 
Public utility commissioners aren’t the only state leaders who can 
and should take action to prevent the next FirstEnergy scandal 
from coming to their state. 
State law governs the regulatory authority and responsibilities of 
each public utility commission, providing legislators with the 
ability to write or amend statutes requiring PUCs to take many of 
the above actions in rulemaking, disclosure and enforcement. 
Legislation can remove uncertainty, place an afﬁrmative onus on 
PUCs to act, and guarantee continuity in the face of new PUC 
appointments or elections. Legislators can also appropriately 
budget PUCs to enable better oversight and enforcement, and can 
craft tighter campaign ﬁnance rules for utilities. 
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission also has tools at its 
disposal to protect ratepayers. 
FERC sets the rates for all interstate transmission of electricity and 
gas, which means that FERC has jurisdiction over what costs 
utilities are allowed to recover from their wholesale transmission 
customers. 
FERC also manages the Uniform System of Accounts, or 
USoA, which gives guidance to utilities for how to classify different 
expenditures. Most state PUCs require utilities to use the USoA as 
their accounting system, which means that the accounting system 
has a trickle-down effect beyond FERC’s jurisdiction over 
wholesale transmission rates. 
https://www.utiiitydive.comlnews/politics-utility-biits-householder-pomerantz-puc-ferc/641716/
2/15/23, 4:08 PM Getting politics out of utility bills I Utility Dive 
FERC has long recognized that ratepayers should not be forced to 
pay for their utility’s political activities, which typically beneﬁta 
utility’s shareholders. Yet despite that principle, the nation’s 
ratepayers are currently paying for their utilities ’ efforts to 
inﬂuence policy in the transmission portion of their gas and 
electric bills. 
FERC issued a Notice of Inquiry in 2021 to consider many 
questions related to utilities ’ recovery of political costs from 
customers. In response, consumer advocates and state officials 
alike called on FERC to clarify rules, definitions and standards to 
make explicit that utilities should not be able to charge ratepayers 
for a broad suite of political inﬂuence activities. 
The agency can act with a proposed set of new rules at any time. 
Enacting these reforms will result in lower bills for the nation’s 
energy customers. It will make addressing climate change easier, 
as utilities ’ ratepayer-subsidized political operations often oppose 
climate action. It will strengthen our democratic institutions, by 
reducing the ability of some of the most aggressive spenders on 
politics to do so under cover of darkness. 
State and federal leaders should act now for all these reasons, and 
to prevent the next trial of a ratepayer-funded corruption scheme 
from landing in their state next. 
https://www.utilitydive.com/news/politics~utility-bills-househo|der-pomerantz-puc-ferc/641716/
