MHCA Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff, President and CEO 
Maine Health Care Association 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
April 20, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
In support of LD 1474, Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to 
Expedite Reimbursement of Nursing Facilities 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the 
President & CEO of the Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 
nursing homes, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical 
Institutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
I am here today to provide testimony in support of LD 1474. As drafted, this resolve requires 
DHHS to amend its rules in Chapter 101: MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter Ill, Section 67, 
Principles of Reimbursement for Nursing Facilities, to require the department to reimburse at 
least 75% of a nursing facility's costs pursuant to the facility's cost reports within 90 days of 
receipt. We would respectfully ask that the committee amend the bill to also include the 
principles of reimbursement for residential care facilities, MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter 
lll, Section 97. In addition, we support Senator Stewart's amendment that further clarifies that 
this resolve is referencing 75% of the calculated settlements due to a long term care provider 
as reported on a nursing facility or residential care facility filed cost report to be paid within 90 
days of receipt. 
This bill is straightforward. It would require the Department to pay 75% of receivables based 
upon an as filed cost report. Nursing facilities are heavily regulated, and their cost reports are
subject to review and audit. Unfortunately, this can take the Department several years to 
complete. As you are aware, long term care facilities are struggling financially. We are facing 
the worst workforce crisis the sector has ever experienced, and Bureau of Labor Statistics data 
confirms that our industry lost between 10 and 15% of our workforce during the height of the 
pandemic. 
Furthermore, facilities have had to hire temporary staffing from temporary nurse staffing 
agencies, and the cost of labor has escalated dramatically. Reimbursement rates have not kept 
pace with these skyrocketing costs, resulting in 15 facilities closing their doors over the last 
three years. Part of the financial instability is due to lagging reimbursement rates and poor cash 
flow. Having much-needed funds tied up for several years waiting on the audit review process is 
frustrating for providers who are trying to keep operations going and continue to care for 
residents. 
How big is this problem? In 2019, 41 facilities were due funds from the state totaling 
approximately $3 million. In 2020, that number grew to 66 facilities, and the total balance due 
was approximately $6.2 million- more than double the prior year. As nursing facilities struggle 
to keep their doors open, if the state were to pay at least 75% of their receivables within 90 
days, that could make the difference in a facility's ability to weather the storm until 
supplemental funding is available or reimbursement rates are updated. 
I would also like to make the committee aware of two additional pieces of information that are 
pertinent to our discussion. Per the Principles of Reimbursement, if the Department determines 
that it has overpaid a facility, the facility must pay the total overpayment within 60 days of 
notice or subsequent payments will be reduced. Yet that same timely response isn't true on the 
other end. Moreover, if a long term care facility has to borrow funds from a bank to address 
cash flow problems, they are charged interest on that loan from the lender. The interest that 
accrues while waiting for the settlement process is not an allowable expense per the MaineCare 
rules.
2
Our members inform us that 2019 and 2020 cost reports are being audited now, and in some 
cases, there are cost settlements still pending from more than five years ago. We recognize rate 
reform efforts are underway, but implementation of a new model, and even one that 
eliminates the administratively burdensome audit process, will take time. Unfortunately, time is 
a luxury we don't have, and we ask for the committee's support on this bill. We hope that this is 
one measure that will stem the tide of long term care closures. 
Lastly, this bill would not cost the state any additional funding as LD 1474 only improves the 
timing for a meaningful portion of the settlement. It has no impact on the settlement amount 
itself. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today and I would be happy to answer any 
questions.
3
