 
 
 
Testimony of Wanda Pelkey, CPA 
CFO First Atlantic HealthCare and Board Chair of Maine Healt h Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standine Committee on Health & Human S ervices 
 
April 20, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
 
In support of LD 1474, Resolve, Directing the Department of Healt h and Human Services to 
Expedite Reimbursement of Nursing Facilities 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and di stineuished members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services.   My name is Wanda Pelkey, and I serve as the board 
chair of the MHCA and CFO of First Atlantic HealthCa re.  My company represents 23 nursing 
facility and residential care homes throughout Maine:  Saco, Portland, Freeport, Falmouth, 
Skowhegan, Lewiston, Dexter, Dover-Foxcroft, Bangor, E llsworth, Machias, Lincoln, 
Millinocket, Calais, Houlton, Waterville and Madawaska. 
 
I’m testifyine in support of LD 1474, which would ca use the DHHS to expedite Mainecare cost 
report settlements when amounts are due to our faci lities.  If amended per Aneela Westhoff’s 
recommendation this bill would cause payment of 75% of the calculated settlements as 
reported on a nursine facility or residential care facility filed cost report to be paid within 90 
days of filine the report.  
 
The problem is simple…  swift settlements are one-s ided.  That is, DHHS requires facilities to 
make 100% payment of any amounts owed to the State upon filine of the cost report when the 
report indicates an overpayment.  Unfortunately, th ere is no reciprocal treatment when the 
cost report settlement is a receivable due to the f acility.  Today, receivables are paid to the 
facility only once the cost report has been audited  and final settled by the DHHS Division of 
Audit.  This process usually takes several years.  At times it’s caused my facilities to be awaitine 
 
 
2 
 payment worth several hundred thousand dollars for up to seven years, layerine more financial 
strain in an already financially challeneine time.  
 
If passed, this bill will not cause total Mainecare  reimbursements to be any more or less, but 
simply cause any amounts owed to the facility to be  “interim settled” by partial payment until 
the reports are final settled by DHHS in the usual manner.   
 
If the committee has a concern with inaccurate file d cost reports causine unjust payments, 
please know that facility officers, administrators and cost report preparers certify cost reports 
are true, correct and complete statements with hars h penalties for misrepresentation or 
falsification of information.  I’m sure the Divisio n of Audit could assure you that NFs and 
Residential Care Facilities have a proven track rec ord of hiehly accurate cost report filines.   
Further, an interim settlement worth 75% of the cal culated amount due is meant to buffer any 
adverse cost report adjustments made by DHHS on fin al settlement.   
 
If passed this bill will expedite payments owed to facilities and for that reason I fully support it.  
I appreciate the opportunity to provide information  to you and I’d be happy to answer any 
questions you have.   
