MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer & Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In Support Of 
LD 1222 An Act to Evpazzrl Child Care Services Through an Employer-supporterl Tax Credit 
April 1 1, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation: 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all 
tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA’s 1500 members include lodging, restaurants, 
retail, outdoor recreation, guides, amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates 
on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually 
produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You. I am testifying in support of LD 1222. 
We are all aware of the workforce challenges facing us—this is perhaps felt the most in the tourism and 
hospitality industry. Although many of our businesses have had great success in 2021 and 2022, far too 
many businesses have not fully recovered from pandemic losses. Difficulties in hiring and retaining 
workers continue to slow the recovery and growth of our tourism businesses. According to the U.S. 
Travel Association, nationwide nearly one in seven job openings are in the leisure and hospitality sector. 
Maine’s economy is dependent on a successful tourism industry. According to the Maine Ofﬁce of 
Tourism, 2022 numbers indicate that: 
- Direct tourism expenditures totaled $8.6 billion 
' Without tourism, Maine households would have had to pay an additional $2,172 in state and local taxes 
~ Tourism supported 151,000 Maine jobs 
Maine needs tourism to be successful, not just for the 151,000 people in its jobs and the direct economic 
impact but also for the indirect impact. Tourism businesses utilize contractors, landscapers, plumbers, and 
electricians; and they buy from our farms, fisheries, wineries, and breweries. If tourism businesses can’t 
succeed, these other businesses stiffer as well. Further, tourism touches every corner of our state, 
providing not just jobs but careers and entrepreneurial opportunities in places like J ackman, The Forks, 
Millinocket, and Greenville. 
The challenges that prevent tourism from ﬁlling every job opening are similar to other industries: 
affordable housing, transportation, and affordable child care. The bill authorizes a refundable tax credit of 
up to $3,000 for an employer that pays or provides in-kind resources for child care for the children of its 
employees which will help Maine families afford child care, and enter and stay in the workforce. This can 
also help our employers to recruit and retain qualified workers by increasing the workers’ access to 
reliable child care. This alone Won’t fix all the contributing factors of the workforce shortage but this bill 
can be one very valuable piece of the solution. 
I respectfully ask that you to vote in favor of LD 1222. Thank you for your consideration. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in I922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. I\/ITA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since I933).
