%=0 . 
A M. 
_,A . . 
fh :_§t§‘ 
ma. . -. . 
ainc ¢SSOC‘l8lIlOl‘l ortge
' ~ i 
Education oi Young Children 
Testimony of Heather Mardeng 
On behalf of the Maine Association for the Education of Young Children 
In support of LD 1222: An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer Supported 
Tax Credit 
4/10/2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Taxation, my name is Heather Marden, Co-Executive Director of the Maine Association for the 
Education of Young Children (MaineAEYC). 
MaineAEYC promotes high-quality early learning for each and every child, birth through age 8, 
by connecting practice, policy, and research. We advance a diverse, dynamic early childhood 
profession and support all who care for, educate, and work on behalf of young children. 
Even before the pandemic, inadequate childcare was costing working parents $37 billion a year 
in lost income and employers $13 billion a year in lost productivity. Child care has become more 
of a critical issue in the workplace as employers recognize that absence of child care causes 
disruption in labor force participation. 
As an organization that promotes early care and education, we are happy to see more 
businesses consider how they might play a part in supporting access and affordability of child 
care. However, we also know that Maine is a state with a large number of small businesses who 
can often not afford to invest in child care access for their employees. We see this tax credit as 
an opportunity to not only encourage larger businesses and nonproﬁts to consider investments 
in child care but also give smaller businesses an incentive to think about creative solutions. 
Supporting refundable tax credits would incentive businesses to. consider contracting for child 
care placements in community programs, investing in new or expansion of child care programs 
in their communities, or providing their employees with a child care stipend or beneﬁt. We do 
have models in Maine of businesses and even municipalities partnering to build the child care 
supply. There are businesses who offer to reimburse a portion of child care costs. Some have 
already become part of the solution and we need to bring more Maine businesses into the mix. 
MaineAEYC and partners conducted a parent survey about child care in the spring of 2022. We 
found that parents were on a waitlist for child care tor an average of 7 months. Respondents 
also indicated that they often could not ﬁnd the type of child care that ﬁt their needs often 
resulting in settling for inconvenient care or making tough decisions about their work.
Thirtiring about your youngest child, what did you do it you csultlrft iind the cure you needed? 
23? answered 3 shipped 
“I have land to supplement days 
mo»/O stsewhere. utilize nannies 
90% {expensive}, reduce my hours at 
80% work, coll in sick etc, all to make 
70% it wom. mm/e resigned from 
5 three full tlmejobs over ttlis." 
450% \=
. 
53"/o K ,, eel" 
40"/’-3 
30‘?/o 
29°/Z) 
10% 
O"/*2» 
Xt 
preceg Qgggthgf Negotiated tsmrk Found the child Qﬁygf 
cure, paid more, hours, reduced care needed 
or settled for wﬂfii tlfil-ire». 
incunvienent exieiidﬁﬁ time 
mm sit. or resigned 
We also look at this legislation as a way to draw attention to a big network of employers across 
Maine, our child care businesses themselves. Often we forget that small family child care 
programs all the way through large child care centers are businesses that employ people. They 
employ the workforce behind the workforce. These employees can often struggle to ﬁnd access 
or afford child care themselves. 
To support their employees, many child care businesses and nonproﬁt organizations around 
Maine provide a free or reduced child care tuition rate for their employees. However, we know 
that child care programs operate on razor thin margins, so this benefit comes at a reduction of 
investments in other areas of their businesses such as quality improvements or raising wages 
and beneﬁts. 
With this legislation, we can recognize child care programs as the businesses they are and 
provide them with a refundable tax credit so that they may invest money back into their 
programs. 
LD 1222 is just a part of longer term solutions and l also encourage you to support legislation 
this session that looks to raise child care educator wages while also supporting other initiatives 
to increase access and affordability for families. 
Thank you for your consideration.
