EDUCATE 
MAINE 
The Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Testimony from Jason Judd, Executive Director, Educate Maine, and Member of ReadyNation 
In Support Of 
L.D. # 1222: "An Act To Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer-Supported Tax Credit" 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, distinguished members of the Taxation Committee, my 
name is Jason Judd, Executive Director of Educate Maine. l represent a business-led education 
advocacy organization. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. #1222. 
Educate Maine's mission is to ensure that Maine people are prepared to succeed in education 
and career and that all Maine people reach their highest educational potential. As a member of 
the MaineSpark coalition, we measure this by attainment - the share of adult workers witha 
postsecondaw credential of value in demand by Maine employers. Maine's goal is to reach 60% 
by 2025. 
LD 1222 addresses one part of an issue facing so many Maine families: affordable child care. 
Educate Maine supports this bill because high quality, accessible, and affordable child care in 
Maine is necessary for parents to be part of our workforce. By offering a tax credit to 
businesses and nonprofits to help pay for child care expenses, this bill will help Maine families 
better afford child care. The costs of child care in Maine are often between $10,000 and 
$15,000 per child per year which is often well above the 10% guideline recommended by the 
DHHS of the median household income in Maine. Many families are paying 15% or more of 
their income on child care. This bill will help the average affordability for families and allow 
parents to stay in the workforce. 
We all know how important it is to attract and retain people in our workforce. In 2022, the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce, the Maine Development Foundation, and Educate Maine, 
released Making Maine Work which highlights the priorities of the business community. Three 
of the top six priorities were connected to expanding the workforce. A December 2022 survey 
of working parents indicated that about two-thirds of parents of infants and toddlers reported 
being late to work or having to leave work early because of inadequate child care. According to 
a ReadyNation report, the child care shortage has cost the United States $122 billion in lost 
earnings, productivity, and revenue each year. Affordable child care is directly connected to 
attracting and retaining workers. We have the ability to address these workforce challenges 
through bills like LD 1222. 
482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101 ~ 207~347-8638 ~ info@educatemaine.0rg
As a business —led nonprofit, we often hear from employers about the pressing need for 
affordable and accessible child care to support their employees. This tax credit will help share 
the cost of child care between employers and the state. lt will help employers recruit and retain 
more workers by increasing their access to reliable child care. l am excited to see the broad 
coalition of employers and early childhood advocates working together to strengthen early 
childhood access, affordability, and quality in Maine. If passed, our organization is committed to 
spreading the word about this program so that both families and employers participate widely 
across Maine. 
Your colleagues in the HHS Committee will soon review a bill focused on early childhood 
educator wages. I encourage you to support the variety of bills this session that address high 
quality, accessible, and affordable child care. By working together with educators, families, 
higher education institutions, policymakers, nonprofits, and employers, we have the 
opportunity to help strengthen our child care opportunities in Maine allowing our youngest 
learners to thrive, our educators to remain in the field, and our parents to persist in the 
workforce. I encourage you to support LD 1222. Thank you for your time.
