1 
  
Testimony on the Limitations of Employer -Support ed Tax Credits in Supporting Women and 
Families  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, thank you 
for the opportunity to testify. My name is Kathryn  Menefee , and I am Counsel for the Income 
Security team at the National Women’s Law Center (NWLC) , a nonpartisan, not -for-profit policy 
and advocacy organization located in Washington, D.C.  
 
NWLC fights for gender justice —in the courts, in public policy, and in our society —working 
across the issues that are central to the lives of women and girls. We use the law in all its forms 
to change culture and drive solutions to the gender inequity that shapes our society and to 
break down the barriers that harm all of us —especially women of color, LGBTQ people, and 
women and families with low incomes.   
 
My testi mony today will address the limitations of employer -supported tax credits, which are 
the subject of  LD 1222, “An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer -supported 
Tax Credit.”  
 
Affordable, high -quality child care is critical to the success of children, families, employers, 
communities, and the economy writ large —but even before the pandemic,  child care was out of 
reach for far too many  families . The pandemic laid bare and exacerbated the deep inequities of 
a child care system that re lies on families paying unaffordable sums, early educators being paid 
poverty -level wages, and too many communities across the country lacking sufficient workforce 
or facilities to meet child care demands.   
 
In 2018, o ver half of Americans lived in a child care desert, or a neighborhood with an 
insufficient supply of licensed child care. The pandemic  has worsened child care shortages. A 
Child Care Aware of America report found that nearly 16,000 providers across the U.S. 
permanently closed between Dece mber 2019 and March 2021 in 37 states with data.1 But when 
looking at all 50 states, it’s estimated that 20,000 childcare programs, or up to 10% of the pre -
pandemic industry, have ceased operations according to analysis from the Century Foundation.2 
Over 56,000  child care jobs have not returned , as of March  2023 .3  
 
 

2 
 As Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen put it: “Child care is a textbook example of a broken market.” 
And it has been broken for decades.  We will only be able to  fix the child care system with  
sustaine d and robust public investments to ensure both that  all families can access and afford 
high -quality child care and that child care workers, who are overwhelmingly women and 
disproportionately women of color  and immigrant women , are paid enough to support 
themselves and their families.  
 
The federal government and 21 states currently offer tax credits that incentivize businesses to 
invest in child care for their employees.4 However, research demonstrates that, at both the 
federal and state level, such tax credits are underutilized  and have limited effective ness as an 
incentive  to encourag e employers to provide  child care services to their employees. Importantly, 
research also indicates that to the extent that employer s offer child care  to their employees, 
those employers tend to be larger businesses and those employees tend to be white -collar and 
higher -income . This suggests that employer tax credits are poorly targeted to support the 
businesses and workers most in need of it.  
 
At the federal level, the Employer Provided Child Care Tax Credit (EPCCC) allows employers to 
claim a tax credit of up to 25 percent of qualified child care expenditures, including the cost of 
building and operating on -site child care center s. In 2016, the mo st recent year for which data 
are available,  the IRS estimated that there were only 169 to 278 corporate income tax returns , 
claim ing $15.7 to $18.8 million in EPCCCs. A February 2022 GAO report found that several 
factors limited the credit ’s utility, incl uding the substantial costs and administrative burdens 
associated with providing on -site child care, lack of awareness about the credit, and t he 
relatively small size of the cred it.5 Moreover, the GAO report foun d that smaller employers do  
not usually have the infrastructure or oversight capabilities to build on -site child care programs, 
limiting their ability to claim the EPCCC. While smaller employers could  pay a contracted third -
party to provide child care  and claim the EPCCC , this does  not create new child care facilities or 
capacity.  Finally, even when employers do provide child care, the care will not necessarily be  
available or affordable for all employees. The GAO report  found that some employers only offer 
on-site child care at their corporate headquarters, leaving out non-corporate employees , such 
as those who work in warehouses or retail outlets . Additionally,  the report suggested that  
employer -provided child care  often  has limited capacity and waitlists . 
 
Many  of the state  employer tax  credits have been similarly underutilized . A 2002 NWLC report 
found that in 16 states with employer tax credits and utilization data, five or fewer employers 
claimed the credit in the most re cent tax year for which data were available.6 Additionally, 
between 2002 and 2017, nine states repealed or discontinued their tax credits for employers 
and businesses that provide child care benefits .7 
 
In sum, employer tax credits are unlikely to produc e the  intended effects  of LD 1222 , including 
to “expand child care services .” Instead,  direct child care investments are needed to make child 
care affordable and accessible for all families , and ensure child care is ava ilable to meet families’ 
varied needs, including the need for care during  evenings, nights , and weekends  for parents 
3 
 workin g non -traditional hours . Direct investments would also ensure that child workers receive 
the increased wages, benefits, and improved labor protections they need and deserve.  Such 
investments would have positive and widespread economic effects, reducing los t wages  due to 
lack of child care , increas ing women’s participation in the labor market , and creating new jobs.  
 
If states are determined to address the child care crisis with tax policies , they  can help families 
offset their child care costs by enacting  or expanding refundable child and dependent care tax 
provisions.8 These tax provisions lower the income taxes that families pay and, when 
refundable, give cash refunds to families who do not owe  taxes.  
 
Maine currently offers the Maine Child Care Credit . The credit provides up to  $1,050  to help 
families offset the cost of child care expenses, $500 of which is  refundable.9 However, the fact 
that the credit is not fully refundable  means that families with little to no tax liability cannot 
receive the full value of the credit.  Families with low incomes, including many women -headed 
households and families of color, are therefore largely shut out of the  full credit, despite the fact 
that the costs of child care fall hardest on them. Making the Maine Child Care Cre dit (and the 
related Maine  Adult  Dependent  Care  Credit ) fully refundable could help  families meet the costs 
of child care more equitably . 
 
In addition , tax benefits that provide income support to child care workers —such as have been 
enacted in Colorado and Louisiana10—can play a complementary role.  
 
In conclusion,  significant public investments in child care are needed to support  families, 
providers, a nd child care workers —as well as employers, local communities and economies —
and foster  inclusive  economic growth.  While targeted tax strategies other than employer tax 
credits can help support  women , families , and child care workers , employer -supported tax 
credits like the one proposed in LD 1222 have been proven to be underutilized and largely 
ineffective on both the national and state level .   
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on LD 1222.  I am happy to answer any 
questions you may have about my testimony, and I can be contacted at kmenefee@nwlc.org.  
 
 
1 Child  Care Aware  of America, “ 16,000 childcare providers shut down in the pandemic. It’s a really big deal ” 
(February 9, 2022), http s://info.childcareaware.org/media/16000 -childcare -providers -shut-down -in-the-pandemic. -
its-a-really -big-
deal#:~:text=Nearly%2016%2C000%20childcare%20centers%20and,Child%20Care%20Aware%20of%20America .  
2 Julie Kashen and Rasheed Malick, Century Foundation, “ More Than Three Million Child Care Spots Saved by 
American Rescue Plan Funding ” (March 9, 2022), https://tcf.org/content/commentary/three -million -child -care-
spots -saved -american -rescue -plan -funding/ . 
3 Center for the Study of Child Care Employment , “ Child  Care Sector Jobs: BLS Analysis ” (April 10, 2 023), 
https://cscce.berkeley.edu/publications/brief/child -care-sector -jobs-bls-analysis/ .  
 
4 
  
4 Committee for Economic Development, “State Tax Credits for Child Care,”  https://www.ced.org/child -care-state -
tax-credits .  
5 Government Accountability Office, “ Employer -Provided Child Care Credit : Estimated Claims and Factors Limiting 
Wider Use ” (February 2022 ), https://www.gao.gov/products/gao -22-105264 .  
6 Christina Smith Fitz Patrick and Nancy Duff Camp bell, National Women’s Law Center , “ The Poor Performance of 
Employer Tax Credits for Child Care” (November 2002), https://nwlc.org/resource/little -engine -hasnt -poor -
performance -employer -tax-credits -child -care/ .  
7 National Women’s Law Center , “Employer Child Care Tax Credits are Ineffective at All Levels” (March 2018),  
https://nwlc.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/03/Employer -Child-Care -Tax-Credit.pdf .  
8 National Women’s Law Center , “States Can Make Care Less Taxing: Tax Credits Related to Child Care, Tax Year 
2022” (March 2023), https://nwlc.org/resource/states -can-make -care-less-taxing -tax-credits -related -to-child -care-
tax-year-2022/# .  
9 Me. Stat. tit. 36 § 5218 .  
10 Colo. Rev. Stat. § 39 -22-547; La. Rev. Stat. § 47:6106 .  
