MAINQ 
"~’\ /\ 
“Q L.»Q ODUGT Maine Forest Products Council 
The voice of Maine's forest economy 
Testimony in Support of LD 1222 
“An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through 
an Employer-supported Tax Credit” 
April ll, 2023 
Krysta West, Deputy Director 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Committee on 
Taxation, my name is Krysta West, l am a resident of Readﬁeld and am here 
today to present testimony on behalf of the Maine forest Products Council in 
support of LD 1222, “An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an 
Employer-supported Tax Credit." 
Last fall, the Council did an informal poll of some of our members and quickly found 
that one of the greatest barriers to the forest products industry is the lack of available 
workforce/low workforce participation. This issue is particularly challenging for rural 
businesses where the services required to support a robust workforce are lacking. 
One major gap in service is that of available and affordable child care. Without safe, 
local options, parents are faced with the tough choice of securing employment and 
picking up shifts or caring for children. 
These challenges are not unique to our industry or state. According to a recent i*ei:_gort by 
Ready Nation, the child care shortage is costing the United States $122 billion in lost 
earnings, productivity and revenue each year. The report also found that 85% of parents 
indicated that problems with child care hurt their work effort or their time availability for 
work. Twenty percent of those surveyed reported they had to exit the labor market due to 
child care challenges and more than 1/3 reported that inadequate child care capacity 
restricts their career options, causing them to turn down important opportunities such as 
job offers, education or work-related training. 
Unfortunately, these challenges have only become tougher since the pandemic causeda 
signiﬁcant number of childcare facilities to close and providers to permanently leave the 
industry. 
Some larger employers within the forest industry are taking a proactive approach and are 
working to open new facilities in underserved communities or secure spaces with 
existing daycare providers. To support this trend, and hopefully enable more employers 
to address this pressing issue, the Council has joined a diverse coalition this session to 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330 207-622-9288 www.maineforest.org
support this bill. You will hear from other coalition members today as well. 
In addition to helping address the shortage of available child care, LD 1222 will also help child care become 
more affordable for working families. On average, child care in Maine costs between $10,000-$15,000 per child 
per year. The median household income in Maine is $63,000. According to State DHHS guidelines, the threshold 
of affordability for child care is 10% of household income, so the average affordability rate is about $6,300 per 
year, which is about half of the actual cost. 
As drafted, LD 1222 would make child care more affordable for Maine families by providing a refundable tax 
credit to employers who provide or pay in-kind resources for the care of children of its employees. The annual 
credit would be 50% of the expended amount, with a cap of up to $3,000 per child. 
We feel that this reimbursement rate would be meaningful enough to encourage employers of all sizes to utilize 
this program, and that the $3,000 cap would provide real relief to Maine families, allowing parents to remain (or 
hopefully rejoin) the workforce. 
LD 1222 would forge a meaningful partnership between employers and the State to address one of the most 
signiﬁcant employment barriers of the day. In order for our industry and all sectors of Maine’s economy to 
thrive, we must collectively tackle the real issue of child care shortages head-on. For these reasons, please 
support LD 1222. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have.
2
