' Mailing: PO BOX 437 
_ M a I n Q E n r Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103 
I _ Augusta, ME 04332 
Y.» 1,; ‘ 1 
y mec6P.orB Economic: Pollc 
Testimony in opposition to LD 1222, An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer- 
supported Tax Credit April 11, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Maura Pillsbury and lam an analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am here today to 
testify in opposition to LD 1222, ”An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer- 
supported Tax Credit." 
l want to first convey that we appreciate the effort to tackle important issues that this bill 
represents. We understand the critical value of child care to working families, and in particular the 
vital role it plays in protecting the economic freedom of women in Maine who, in the absence of 
child care, face career disruptions that have long-term, compounding impacts on their lifetime 
earnings and retirement security. However, we do not believe this proposal is an optimal approach 
to improving what ails our child care system. 
The primary issue affecting our lack of child care is low wages and the resulting challenge to attract 
and retain workers in this sector. A 2021 survey by the National Association for the Education of 
Young Children found 85 percent of child care centers in Maine were experiencing staffing 
shortages, with low wages over\/vhelmingly identified as the biggest barrier to recruitment. A survey 
last year found the top challenges for Maine's child care centers were growing waitlists and staff 
shortages. 
Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows the median hourly wage for child care workers in 
Maine is lower than that of retail salespeople and food prep workers. Maine's child care workers on 
average earn less than 60 percent of what kindergarten teachers do, and just over half (53.5 
percent) of what elementary school teachers do. if we want to attract and retain more people intoa 
career that gives workers in every corner of the state the chance to stay in theirjobs, we must do 
better by them. 
In the immediate term, the most impactful step our state can take is to invest in deeper wage 
supplements for child care workers. ln the longer term, Maine should conduct a comprehensive 
cost of care survey to establish what it costs to deliver high quality, dependable child care, and then 
commit the public investments necessary to realize such a system for all working families. Both 
issues are central pieces to Senatorlackson's bill forthcoming child care workforce bill, which we 
think is the model for child care policy. 
Advocates of LD 1222 will assert that by extending tax credits to child care providers who offer free 
or reduced-price care to their employees, it will allow them to raise wages. This may be true, but it 
does so in a poorly targeted way, since the bill applies to all employers across the state, including 
those who already have the resources to offer child care benefits to their workers. lf the credits in 
WKVMWTWﬂfﬂdwwxiwwn W” K ’— 
Board_of Directors W H WW H xx“.K 
*M M’ Barba" ra Chair H 'H_ 
Sandra B-“ 
utler WM" KW K4“ Stacyfhzltchelly WWW 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair lvlaulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
this bill were offered only to employers of child care workers, we would view it in a very different 
light. As we all know, child care workers are poorly compensated, child care centers are under 
resourced, and child care workers and employers alike would benefit from more support to cover 
the cost of benefits. 
Research has shown that employer tax credits at both the state and federal levels are not an 
effective way of expanding access to child care.‘ State programs have seen limited participation, and 
many states have repealed employer tax credits in recent years. The federal Employer-Provided 
child care tax credit has overwhelmingly benefited corporate tax filers in manufacturing, finance 
and insurance." These resources would be better used by expanding and improving our state's child 
tax credit and by directly improving workers’ wages. 
The other major issue families face in accessing child care is its price, which we again applaud this 
bill's supporters for seeking to address. However, providing tax breaks to employers is a less 
efficient and less equitable means of addressing this issue than to provide subsidies directly to 
families that need support. 
Further, this bill does not include some identified best practices for state tax subsidies such as 
including a sunset date so extending the program in the future has to be proactively discussed, and 
goals and evaluation parameters that will be needed for a tax expenditure review by OPEGA. 
As written, this bill would transfer significant resources that could be targeted to lower- and middle- 
income families to our state's most prosperous employers. Many of the employers that would 
maximize the value of this credit are likely either already offering child care benefits to their 
employees or are able to do so. lf this bill became law, workers receiving these benefits may 
become more tied to theirjobs and less likely to seek other opportunities that best suit their talents 
and goals. Furthermore, this bill may disadvantage small businesses and entrepreneurs that lack 
the resources to maximize the child care credit offered in this bill, but which compete for the same 
scarce workers as larger employers. On the other hand, policies that strengthen the entire childcare 
sector benefit employers of all sizes. 
There is not yet a fiscal note and we do not have a cost estimate for this bill, but we suspect it will 
be significant. The refundable nature of this credit means the state could be paying out-of-state 
corporations that are not paying taxes in Maine. The bill's structure would also result in profitable 
corporations getting credits for benefits they are already providing. While we fully agree that 
resolving our child care challenges will require much greater public investment, we believe 
investments to raise the wages of child care workers, and improve and expand our child care 
subsidies are a much more promising and equitable path forward. We respectfully urge caution in 
supporting this bill and instead ask legislators to support other efforts to more directly improve 
child care workers’ wages and household supports. 
‘ 
See "Employer Child Care Tax Credits are Ineffective at All Levels," National Women's Law Center, March 2018, available at 
https://nwlc.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Employer-Child-Care-Tax~Credit.pdf 
" " Employer~Provided Child Care Credit:Estimated Claims and Factors Limiting Wider Use," Government Accountability Office, 
February 2022, available at https://www.ga0.gov/products/gao-22-105264
