TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April I1, 2023 
LD 1222 — “An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer- 
supported Tax Credit” 
.--------------------. --------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1222, “An Act to Expand 
7) 
Child Care Services Through an Employer-supported Tax Credit. 
Expanding access to child care has been, and continues to be, an important 
goal of the Administration. Parents need high quality affordable child care in order 
to go to work and kids need a safe place to learn and grow during the day. 
Towards that goal, the Administration has invested over a $100 million to increase 
access to high-quality care and support for Maine’s child care workforce in line 
with the Office of Child and Family Services ’ Child Care Plan for Maine. In 
addition, the Governor ’s biennial budget proposed investing approximately $240 
million to strengthen Maine’s education and early care system and provide critical 
supports to children, youth and their families. 
In addition to non-tax programs, the State currently provides child care 
benefits through conformity to the federal tax treatment of dependent care Flexible 
Spending Accounts or FSAs, and through the child care tax credit. While the 
Administration supports the goals of the bill, those goals can be better addressed 
Without creating another child care income tax beneﬁt.
1
For tax years beginning on or after January l, 2024, the bill creates the 
refundable employer-supported quality child care credit for employers that provide 
child care services for children of its employees. Providing child care services 
means (l) expenses, or in-kind resources, used to build, furnish, license, staff, 
operate, or subsidize a child care center licensed by the Maine DHHS to provide 
early care and education services to the children of employees at no proﬁt to the 
employer, or to contract with a child care facility licensed by, or registered with, 
the DHHS to provide early care and education services to the children of 
employees; (2) payments made to employees to pay for early care and education 
services under a dependent care assistance program (also known as a dependent 
care Flexible Spending Account or FSA); and (3) the provision of child care 
resources and referral services to employees. The credit, available for individual, 
ﬁduciary, and corporate income tax taxpayers, is equal to the lower of 50% of the 
cost of providing child care services or $3,000 for each child of an employee for 
which the employer is providing child care services. 
The beneﬁt of this credit will primarily accrue to large business that can 
navigate the complexities of both this credit and the provision of dependent care 
beneﬁts. For instance, businesses that can administer a dependent care FSA and 
provide an employer contribution. 
Dependent care F SAs already receive signiﬁcant tax beneﬁts at the federal 
and State level. Employers receive an income tax deduction for their contributions 
and the resulting income is excluded from the employee ’s income. In addition, 
contributions are exempt from both the employer and employee portion of FICA 
(Social Security and Medicare) taxes. Careful consideration should be given 
before allowing additional tax beneﬁts to F SA contributions.
2
The bill also repeals the employer-assisted day care credit. Except for the 
carryover of unused credit amounts, the nonrefundable employer-assisted day care 
credit could be claimed for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 1988 and 
before January 1, 2016 and applied against individual, ﬁduciary, and corporate 
income taxes and the insurance premiums tax. The credit was limited to the lower 
of $5,000, 20% of the costs incurred to provide day care services for children of 
employees, or $100.00 for each child of an employee enrolled in day care services. 
For tax years beginning after 2000, the credit amount was doubled if the day care 
services provided was for quality child care services, as deﬁned by 36 M.R.S.§ 
5219-Q. Unused portions of the credit could be carried forward for up to 15 years 
or carried back for three years. The credit was sunset as part of the 2016-2017 
biennial budget due to lack of use and for tax simpliﬁcation. 
The State’s experience with the employer-assisted day care credit should be 
taken into account when considering this new proposal. VVhile the credit targeted 
an important need of the State, additional child care, the attempt to address the 
issue through the tax code was ultimately unsuccessful, resulting in few, if any, 
employers taking the credit. At the same time, it added additional complexity to an 
already complex State income tax code. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
0 The bill does not provide an application date for the repealed credit. 
0 The bill does not repeal the employer-assisted day care credit for, nor 
does it extend the proposed credit to, employers subject to insurance 
premiums tax under 36 M.R.S., Part 4, Chapter 357.
3
If the bill is intended to coordinate with speciﬁc programs administered 
by DHHS, such as the Help Me Grow Maine Program, the First4l\/IE 
Program, or the Rising Stars for ME Program to be eligible for the credit, 
and or a rating system such as the Quality for ME Program or the Quality 
Rating and Improvement System (QRIS), that coordination should be 
clariﬁed. 
The bill should deﬁne “dependent care assistance program” or cite the 
IRC if it is intended to refer to dependent care FSAS. 
The bill should clarify Whether “children of the employee ” includes 
stepchildren and grandchildren, etc. 
The bill should clarify its application to nonproﬁt and local government 
entities that do not normally ﬁle income tax returns or receive income tax 
credits. 
The carry-over provision is unnecessary because the credit is refundable. 
For purposes of evaluation of the credit, the bill does not detail the public 
policy objective or provide performance measures by which to determine 
Whether the policy objectives have been achieved. 
The bill will provide an additional beneﬁt for employers that have 
claimed the cost of providing child care as an ordinary and necessary 
business expense under IRC Section 162(a). 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is a revenue loss of approximately 
$5 milhon per year. 
The estimated administrative costs are $33,000 in ﬁscal year 2025 for one- 
time computer programing costs to add an additional line to the individual, 
ﬁduciary, and corporate income tax returns to accommodate the credit, update
4
check stub messages and notices, make federal tape changes, and perform system 
testing. 
The Administration looks foiward to working With the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS Will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
