ll. HQSPITALITMY 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
April 11, 2023 
ln Support of LD 1222, ”An Act to Expand Child Care Services Through an Employer-supported Tax Credit" 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Taxation Committee: My name is Nate 
Cloutier, and l am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging 
operators of all sizes across the state. HospitalityMaine supports LD 1222, "An Act to Expand Child Care Services 
Through an Employer —supp0rted Tax Credit.” 
We thank Senator Stewart and the bipartisan cosponsors who support this bill and see this legislation as an opportunity 
to strengthen the workforce and make childcare more affordable for families. In developing our policy agenda at 
HospitaltiyMaine, it was abundantly clear that the biggest hurdle the industry faces is the workforce shortage. Businesses 
continue to tell me that their employees struggle with ﬁnding available and affordable childcare, which makes long-term 
stable employment even more difﬁcult. As you can see today, employers are ecstatic about the opportunity to lift some 
of the burden off families as they struggle to deal with childcare services. 
We have brought together a broad group of supporters today, including HospitalityMaine, Maine Forest Products 
Council, Maine State Chamber of Commerce, Retail Association of Maine, Maine Grocers and Food Producers 
Association, Maine Tourism Association, the YMCA Alliance of Maine, Educate Maine, Ready Nation, Maine Association 
for the Education of Young Children, Maine Community Action Agencies, and more. It is unique and encouraging to see 
childcare providers and experts, and the business community team-up together on this issue and truly underscores the 
seriousness of the problems that this bill aims to address. 
Most estimates show that childcare costs more than $10,000 per child annually. This bill would encourage employers 
who provide or pay in-kind resources for the care of children of its employees, with a credit of 50% of the expended 
amount up to $3,000. After careful consideration and collaboration with the bill sponsor and ﬁeld experts, we feel this 
reimbursement rate strikes a fair balance that incentivizes employers to use this program while delivering meaningful 
ﬁnancial relief to families. We also see this bill as a mechanism that will draw workers back into the workforce and help 
keep those already working employed. 
Like hospitality businesses, childcare providers had to weather the pandemic, and many were unable to remain open as 
the workforce shortage. On top of a loss in total number of providers, these providers cannot attract workers because 
they cannot afford to offer attractive wages, which in-turn often forces providers to raise the cost of care to offer more 
competitive pay. The childcare crisis is a multifaceted problem that will take a multifaceted approach to ﬁx. We recognize 
that this legislation is not the solution to childcare crisis, and there are more elements that need to be addressed 
(including stronger wages for childcare workers), however this legislation is a step in the right direction that will deliver 
tangible relief now and is worthy of your support. 
Thank you for your consideration. Please vote LD 1222 ought to pass. l would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have.
