Berry, Beniamin 
From: Collin Beal <collin.beal@igic.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, April 11, 2023 11:16 AM 
To: Grohoski, Nicole; Chipman, Benjamin; Libby, Jim; Perry, Joe; Carmichael, Meldon; 
Crockett, Ed; Hasenfus, Tavis; Lavigne, Thomas; gov; Matlack, Ann; Quint, Tracy; Rana, 
Ambureen; Shelly.Rudnicki@Legislature.Maine.Gov 
Cc: TAX; Moore, Marianne; Perry, Anne 
Subject: LD-1222 An Act to Expand Child Care Service Through an Employer-Supported Tax 
Credit 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Good Morning Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Taxation Committee. 
My name is Scott Beal. lam the Environmental & Security Manager for Woodland Pulp in Baileyville. On behalf of the 
480 Women and Men at our three member companies (Woodland Pulp LLC, St. Croix Tissue, Inc. and St. Croix Chipping). 
I wanted to I offer my testimony in Support of LD-1222 in the form of this email as I'm unable to attend today's Public 
Hearing or participate remotely. 
The age demographics at our facilities are similar to countless others in our state. Over the past several years, we have 
experienced a large turnover in our employee base largely due to well earned retirements. As we work to replace 
retiring employees with some younger individuals looking to start their careers (and families), our HR department hears 
all too often the difficulties younger workers face with the dearth of available Child Care services. Unfortunately this 
serves as a barrier for some to enter the state's workforce and has an impact on our ability to recruit and retain younger 
members of the state's population segment. 
While this may not serve as the missing link to solving the current situation, we nevertheless believe this will be a very 
important step in helping to remedy it. 
As such, we very much appreciate Senator Stewart, Senator Bennett, Senator Vitelli, President Jackson, Representatives 
Millett and Terry for sponsoring and co-sponsoring this bill. ln closing we are asking for your support in giving this billa 
Unanimous Ought-To-Pass vote out of committee. 
Thank you for considering our position on this legislation. 
Scott Beal 
Woodland Pulp LLC
1
