Bruce MacDonald
Boothbay
LD 1786
 
 
 
Testimony
​​​​​​of the
​​​​Honorable W. Bruce MacDonald
​​​​Neither for nor Against LD 1786
​​​​​     May 5, 2023
 
Senate Chair Joseph Rafferty, House Chair Michael Brennan, and distinguished 
members of the Joint Legislative Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, thank
you for the chance to submit written testimony regard LD 1786, An Act to Repeal and
Replace the Charter of The Boothbay-Boothbay HArbor Community School District. 
I am a former House Chair of this Committee, and currently serve as Vice Chair of 
The Boothbay Boothbay Harbor CSD School Board.
I have long been a proponent of repealing and replacing the outdated 1953 Charter, 
but did not vote in favor of this present initiative when it came before our school 
committee. The reason is the the budget validation referendum language contained in 
Section 6 of this bill. If you look at Section 6, you will see that it proposes a 10 year 
budget validation cycle.
This is in direct contradiction of Maine State Law which requires a three year cycle 
for a school budget validation procedure. If you send this bill, as written, with Section
6 included, to the the full Legislature for their approval, you will be supporting a 
provision which will essentially disenfranchise the citizens of Boothbay and 
Boothbay Harbor from the three year cycle for the format of budget approval which is
available to citizens of all other school districts under the current  provisions of Title 
20-A, Part 2, Chapter 103-A, Subchapter 4, paragraph 1486.
Ironically, the Summary for the bill before you suggests that this effort “aligns 
governance and operations with state law.” In regards to allowing the citizens of 
Boothbay and Boothbay Harbor the same rights under state law to determine how 
they will approve school budgets, rights that all other citizens enjoy, this could not be 
farther from the truth. Therefore I urge you to consider removing section 6 of this bill 
entirely.  Doing so will then in fact better align this bill with existing state law.
​​
