Shorter S poken  Testimony  
My name is Susan Mackenzie Andersen. I am a member of the Boothbay Community School 
District where I attended school through grade 12, graduating in 1966. My parents moved to the region in 1952 to establish a small free enterprise business, Andersen Design, that designed and made ceramics and taught those skills on the job to the women who used to work in the fish packing industry. The original school charter, which is now being repealed and replaced, was 
created in 1953. 
I am also an indepen dent researcher and  have studied the Maine economic development policy 
put into place in 1976, I have been narrating the story of Maine’s incremental transition from a 
Home Rule State in 1969 to a centrally managed corporate state in 2023. I publish the S ubstack 
Newsletter, The Individual vs the Empire . 
 I have submitted a much longer testimony that goes into greater depth about the state laws that this local charter is simply accepting, not just the current state laws but any new state laws enacted in the future. The fact that it is said in so many words that our local school educational charter is governed by state law is to relinquish our home rule authority completely, which even state law, including Title 20 Chapter 105, states that when there is a conflict between private and special law and state law that private and special law takes priority.  
 And yet this school charter is written such that it can be interpreted as private and special law is relinquishing its rights and granting all superior authority to state law. The statements that say that the District School Charter is governed by state law need to be struck out. We do not know how the courts would interpret that.  
 There is also the issue that the inhabitants of the community had no say in approving the school charter as it went straight from the school district committee to submitting it to the legislature. The constitutional Home Rule Amendment says the “ inhabitants of any municipality shall have 
the power to alter and amend their charters on all matters, not prohibited by Constitution or general law, which are local and municipal in character .” and I submit that “inhabitants of the 
community” is a significant choice of words.  
 Without going into full detail about what is objectional in state law, I will s imply point out that 
state law permits our educational system to be funded by conditional gifts, which, I submit it legalized play to play and open to all kinds of corruption, particularly corruption of our home rule authority and in this case, it does not  even defer to state law but goes straight to the will of 
private parties.  
 Finally, Sec. 2. Governance transition . is very peculiar. Never was there a better example of 
intent to say what it means in between the lines, specifically in -between the header “Governance 
transition ” and the next statement that “The district school committee members and the trustees 
of the community school district serving as of the effective date of this Act shall continue in their offices for their respective remaining terms.”  
Isn’t there a paragraph missing between those lines such as explaining why government transition is even in the school charter other than to describe a process of how that is done which the section does not provide. The void in- between the lines begs to be  filled in with what is 
Shorter S poken  Testimony  
happening simultaneously to the repealing and replacing of our local school charter and that is 
the massive new school system that is being pushed on this district and proposed to be funded by conditional gifts, allowing the inhabit ants of the municipality to be replaced with private special 
interests, and begging the question “Is changing the people running our schools one of the donor conditions, which leads to the next question “Why?” and that is a whole other can of worms.  
 
Susan Mackenzie Andersen
Boothbay
LD 1786
My name is Susan Mackenzie Andersen. I am a member of the Boothbay Community 
School District where I attended school through grade 12, graduating in 1966. My 
parents moved to the region in 1952 to establish a small free enterprise business, 
Andersen Design, that designed and made ceramics and taught those skills on the job 
to the women who used to work in the fish packing industry. The original school 
charter, which is now being repealed and replaced, was created in 1953.
I am also an independent researcher and have studied the Maine economic 
development policy put into place in 1976, I have been narrating the story of Maine’s 
incremental transition from a Home Rule State in 1969 to a centrally managed 
corporate state in 2023. I publish the Substack Newsletter, The Individual vs the 
Empire.
I have submitted a much longer testimony that goes into greater depth about the state 
laws that this local charter is simply accepting, not just the current state laws but any 
new state laws enacted in the future. The fact that it is said in so many words that our 
local school educational charter is governed by state law is to relinquish our home 
rule authority completely, which even state law, including Title 20 Chapter 105, states
that when there is a conflict between private and special law and state law that private
and special law takes priority.
And yet this school charter is written such that it can be interpreted as private and 
special law is relinquishing its rights and granting all superior authority to state law. 
The statements that say that the District School Charter is governed by state law need 
to be struck out. We do not know how the courts would interpret that.
There is also the issue that the inhabitants of the community had no say in approving 
the school charter as it went straight from the school district committee to submitting 
it to the legislature. The constitutional Home Rule Amendment says the “inhabitants 
of any municipality shall have the power to alter and amend their charters on all 
matters, not prohibited by Constitution or general law, which are local and municipal 
in character.” and I submit that “inhabitants of the community” is a significant choice 
of words. 
Without going into full detail about what is objectional in state law, I will simply 
point out that state law permits our educational system to be funded by conditional 
gifts, which, I submit it legalized play to play and open to all kinds of corruption, 
particularly corruption of our home rule authority and in this case, it does not even 
defer to state law but goes straight to the will of private parties.
Finally, Sec. 2. Governance transition. is very peculiar. Never was there a better 
example of intent to say what it means in between the lines, specifically in-between 
the header “Governance transition” and the next statement that “The district school 
committee members and the trustees of the community school district serving as of 
the effective date of this Act shall continue in their offices for their respective 
remaining terms.”
Isn’t there a paragraph missing between those lines such as explaining why 
government transition is even in the school charter other than to describe a process of 
how that is done which the section does not provide. The void in-between the lines 
begs to be filled in with what is happening simultaneously to the repealing and 
replacing of our local school charter and that is the massive new school system that is 
being pushed on this district and proposed to be funded by conditional gifts, allowing 
the inhabitants of the municipality to be replaced with private special interests, and 
begging the question “Is changing the people running our schools one of the donor 
conditions, which leads to the next question “Why?” and that is a whole other can of 
worms.
