/’2;i;_1 ‘\~\g 6., 
_~_,.4 ,5 ., 
, ..,,-~» 51»... ///' ._\ 
MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Oﬂicer and Director of Government Affairs, 
on Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 903, An Act to Establish Parity in Typing Laws forRestaurant Workers 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing: 
My name is Alison Sucy and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs 
for the Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association is a non-proﬁt association and 
the state’s largest tourism organization. MTA has been promoting Maine and supporting members in 
every type of tourism business such as lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, guides, tour 
operators, amusements, and historical and cultural attractions for over 100 years. I am testifying 
Neither For Nor Against LD 903. 
Currently Maine law states that tip pooling arrangements may be made “only among service 
employees ” (26 M.R.S. §664 (2-A)). This bill would change that provision to be consistent with the 
federal law regarding tip pooling whereby the employer pays employees the minimum wage (i.e. not 
taking the tip credit) and requires tipped employees, such as servers, to share tips with non-tipped 
employees, such as kitchen staff. 
Although only a small minority of restaurants choose to have a tip pooling arrangement, the intent of 
this bill is for such arrangements to be a choice by the employer, as they are now. Employers may 
wish to utilize this tip pooling arrangement to help recruit workers in non-tipped positions. Kitchen 
staff is one of the biggest workforce challenges as these positions are chronically understaffed and 
have a lot of turnover. Conversely, employers may not want to utilize this arrangement as it is seen 
as detrimental to servers and thus be less appealing for those hires. 
Due to the mixed opinions and the pros and cons of this proposal, MTA is Neither For Nor Against. 
We did want to provide this information for your consideration. As long as tip pooling in whatever 
form remains an option, not a mandate, and the tip credit option stays intact, MTA has no strong 
objections to or support for this proposal. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of our testimony. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA 
members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, 
amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information 
Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state’s ofﬁcial travel plamier, 
Maine Invites You (since 1933).
