 1  
Charles Skold  
59 State Street, Apt. 67  
Portland, ME 04101  
 Phone: (207) 329 -3838  
Charles.Skold@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 
 
 
 
 
March 1 6, 2023  
 
Testimony of Rep. Charles Skold presenting  
LD 903 - An Act to Establish Parity in Tipping Laws for Restaurant Workers  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing , I am Charles Skold, representing part of Portland in House 
District 119. As a member of this committee, I am especially honored to be here to present LD 
903, An Act to Establish  Parity in Tipping Laws for Restaurant Workers.  
 
This bill is rather simple: it will give Maine restaurants the ability to pool together  tips collected 
from food servers and share that pool of tips with the cooks who prepared the food and other 
back of hou se employees. Currently, Maine restaurants are allowed to pool tips among service 
staff, but are not allowed to share tip pools with back of house staff.  
 
Federally, restaurants around the country are allowed to share pooled  tips with back of house 
employees. Maine law currently includes an exception to the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act 
that excepts employees who do not typically receive tips from sharing  in tip pools. This bill 
would remove that exception, and allow Maine restaurants the option of pooling tips and sharing 
a portion of those tips with back of house staff.  
 
Why would a restaurant want to share tips with back of house staff? For some, it cou ld be about 
retaining talented line cooks, chefs, and other back of house staff, by being able to increase take -
home pay for those staff. For some, it could be about equity, as wage gaps between front and 
back of house staff contribute to the racial pay ga p in the industry as a whole. For some, it could 
be that their restaurant innovates with  new models of food service that break down the clear 
distinctions between front and back of house staff  altogether . For some, it could be a desire to 
direct a portion of tips on takeout food back to the kitchen. For others, it could just be  the idea 
that tips received at restaurants are meant for the server and also meant for everyone else who 
had a hand in bringing the plate from the kitchen to that table.  
 

 2 Whatever re ason a restaurant may have for wanting to share tips with back of house staff, I hope 
we can agree that they should be allowed  that option. Tip pooling probably won’t be the right 
choice for every restaurant, but it doesn’t need to be. Some restaurants wil l share tips in this way 
and some will not, and they should  be clear in their hiring process about this decision so that 
potential employees, either servers or cooks, can choose to work at a restaurant that incorporates 
the tip -sharing policy they prefer.  
 
So the first important point in this bill is that it would be individual restaurants’ choice whether 
or not to adopt this practice. Additionally, I would like to point out that adopting this practice 
would come with these  two important safeguards, consist ent with the Fair Labor Standards Act:  
 
1) Tip -pools may not be shared with restaurant owners or managers. With the exception I believe 
of when managers are actively working a shift as servers or bartenders, and not on the clock in 
the role of manager. This bill is not a way for restaurant owners to dip -in to the tips received by 
restaurant servers.  
 
2) If a restaurant chooses to share pooled tips with back of house staff, then they cannot claim 
the tip credit for their servers. This means that if a server’ s tips are being pooled and a portion is 
being shared with back of house staff, then that server must be paid the relevant local minimum 
hourly wage, at a minimum. That means the Maine state minimum, or the local minimum wage 
if higher than the state.  
 
These two safeguards are important to my intent in this bill. If the Department of Labor feels that 
additional language is needed to clarify this intent, then I welcome amendments to add that 
clarifying language.  
 
Restaurants and their workers, both servers a nd cooks, play a crucial role in Maine’s local 
communities and in our tourism economy. For some restaurants, being able to pool tips and share 
those tips with back of house staff might be what keeps them going. If a restaurant wants to 
include  tip-pooling in their  pay structure because it  makes sense for their business model, we 
should give them the ability to do it.  
 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
