Jake Stevens
Leeward
LD 903
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Jake Stevens. I am a resident of 
Gorham and the owner of Leeward restaurant in Portland. I am writing in SUPPORT 
of LD 903.
If passed this bill will bring Maine state law in-line with the federal Fair Labor 
Standards Act regarding tip pooling. I fully support the inclusion of Back of House 
employees in a tip pool. This will help narrow the wage gap between front of house 
and back of house workers.
There have been previous attempts at both the state and city level to eliminate the tip 
credit wage. These attempts included no fix to include cooks and dishwashers in the 
tip pool. If successful, these attempts would have only furthered the wage gap 
between the front and back of house. It would have raised the base wages for front of 
house workers only. Most of whom are already making significantly more than back 
of house workers. 
The passage of LD 903 would be a great compromise in that it would allow an 
employer to discontinue use of the tip credit wage (thereby raising wages for 
employees who previously were paid the tip credit wage and raising wages for BOH 
employees by adding tips) while at the same time helping to offset some financial 
burden of of payroll taxes (by the mechanism of raising BOH employees wages with 
tips rather than base pay).
Furthermore, this bill would help address the constantly evolving nature of hospitality
businesses. Since the pandemic, the lines between front of house and back of house 
workers has blurred substantially. Many establishments have switched to counter 
service or hybrid models, wherein the person who takes your order or busses your 
table or brings you your food may also be the person cooking your meal or washing 
your dishes. It no longer makes sense to mandate that only "employees who 
customarily and regularly receive tips" be allowed to participate in a tip pool.
There is also no need to worry about a tip pooling agreement being abused as the 
FLSA contains provisions restricting owners and managers from being part of the 
pool.
Passage of LD 903 is a step in the right direction to bring Maine in-line with federal 
regulations and address inequality in the way that service and hospitality workers are 
compensated. I urge the committee to vote "ought to pass" on LD 903
