Joe  McLaughlin
Lincolnville 
LD 903
Chairs Tipping and Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is Joe McLaughlin, I’m a resident of Lincolnville.    I’d like to start by 
telling you that I’m a lifetime restaurant worker, my family has owned establishments
in Lincolnville for decades.  I’ve been a dishwasher, a waiter, a bartender, a manager 
and finally owner in this industry over the last two decades.    
I’m writing you today in opposition to LD903.    To many, this bill might seem to 
make sense, as it looks like it’s just bringing our State in line with national standards. 
But it could inadvertently destroy the livelihoods of thousands of front of house 
workers due to the unique nature of Maines seasonal tourism.     
The summer of a seasonal restaurant worker typically starts in May or June, the 
money is always painfully slow in the beginning.  Then, as the weather starts to get 
warmer and schools start their summer breaks, things pick up.   The $100 or less a day
in tips you were making as you did endless side work turns into upwards of 
$500-$600 per day or more and You spend the next 8-12 weeks moving as fast as you
can, waiting on thousands of people trying to sell as much lobster as possible.  Most 
days you get home late barely able stand because you just walked 15 miles non stop.  
What you put in for that 12 weeks feels like a years worth of work, and just like that 
it’s over in the fall.       This is how we like it, it’s an opportunity for a lot of us to 
make the kind of money we need to get ahead.   I’ve worked with college students 
who do this to pay for their educations, teachers who supplement their income and 
countless people who just prefer or need to make their money seasonally so they 
aren’t stuck in hourly wage jobs.     
What does this have to do with LD903?    It’s a moral standard and the industry standard that 
you don’t take your servers tips to pay for business expenses.    The current law protects our 
incomes by preventing restaurants from using our tips to pay back of house staff.   In todays 
climate especially, it’s not hard to imagine businesses taking advantage of servers by taking 
their tips and paying them minimum wage.     
We’ve had multiple attempts to eliminate the tip credit in recent years and Maine voters have 
rejected it each time.   Portland also had a similar measure on their ballot which was rejected 
in November.      LD903 is essentially a back door elimination of the tip credit.   
 
In closing, I respectfully ask that you take into account that the entire industry has already 
made it clear we’re against this type of legislation and that you protect our jobs and 
livelihoods.  Thank you for your time and consideration.  
