». 
STATE OF MAINE‘ 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION I 5%.,» _; 
,1f€~5>“£+'<w§,' AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Janet T. Mills L“““‘ A- F°“'“““ 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor , 
Neither for Nor Against LD 903 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, l\/larch 16,2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members ofthe Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
l\/laine Department of Labor. l'm here today to testify neither for nor against LD 903, An Act to 
Establish Parity in Tipping Laws for Restaurant Workers.- 
l\/laine law currently prohibits the distribution of tips to employees not classified as service employees. 
This bill would bring Maine into alignment with recent changes in federal regulations regarding tip 
pooling among various types of employees including ”bacl<-of-the-house" workers such as dishwashers 
and cooks; Specifically, an employer who pays the full minimum wage to each worker in a group would 
be permitted to include non-service workers in a tip pooling arrangement, as is now allowed under 
federal wage and hour law. »* 
In addition to removing existing confusion between state and federal law, we believe such a change 
can benefit both employers and employees while disadvantaging neither, by providing options to each 
not currently available under Maine law. 
The Bureau and its Wage and Hour Division will be able to implement these changes without additional 
resources. if we have any concern, it is only that the language resulting from the proposed . 
amendment might make it difficult for some to interpret the statute. ‘ We understand that the sponsor 
may propose additional language to help clarify the intent of the amended statute. 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to serving Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
moms; (207) 623-1900 TTY users call Maine Relay 111 FAX’ : (201) 201-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
