ls-l@SPlTALlTY 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
March 16, 2023 
Neither for Nor Against LD 903, ‘Mn Act to Establish Parity in Tipping Laws for Restaurant 
Workers” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine neither for nor 
against LD 903. HospitalityMaine represents more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes 
across the state. 
LD 903 would permit Maine restaurant owners who pay the full minimum wage to institute full “tip pooling” 
or “tipping out." This would establish a tipping system that requires tips to be divided amongst front of the 
house and back of the house employees. Maine's current tip pooling law allows employers who do not take 
the tip credit the option to pay the prevailing minimum wage to its employees where front of the house 
staff split tips. 
HospitalityMaine has been steadfast in its support of protecting tipping laws that both support our small 
business owners and allow employees to flourish in their roles. There have been several attempts in recent 
years to change Maine's tipping laws in ways that would have been detrimental to the industry. It is worth 
noting that service workers throughout the state (thousands collectively) have made the case over the 
years to this Committee and at the ballot box that they like the state's tipping laws as they are and want 
lawmakers to stop trying to change the current structure. 
The last survey (approx. 2018) of our membership showed nearly 90% of restaurateurs utilize the tip credit, 
citing its mutual beneﬁts for employers and employees as reasons for using it. Given that, you may question 
the necessity of this bill if only 10% of restaurant businesses would be affected. We have not heard from 
business owners or restaurant workers asking for the changes proposed in this bill. 
I would like to point out that HospitalityMaine would oppose this legislation if the option were not voluntary 
for the employer or if it went further to amend Maine tipping laws. If the Committee chooses to move 
forward with this bill it should be clear that this be in line with the Fair Labor Standards Act Rules (updated 
2020 ) regarding tips remaining with employees (not management or owners) as well as this change not 
applying to employers who use the tip credit. 
Our restaurants play a vital role in the success of Maine's tourism economy. We like to think visitors of the 
state come for the sights and stay for the hospitality. We urge you to please carefully and thoughtfully 
consider any changes you make to tipping laws, and to consider the impacts that changes may haveon
our front-line workers. We rely on a happy, healthy, and strong workforce to meet peak seasonal demands 
and we cannot have anything inhibit that. Thank you for your attention. Iwould be happy to answer any 
questions.
