Pliny Reynolds
Portland
LD 903
My name is Pliny Reynolds, I opened my first restaurant in Portland Maine in 2015. I 
opened it because I had a passion for food and bringing folks together. It was a small 
40 seat restaurant that had a good reputation and a steady flow of customers. I worked
primarily in the Back of House prepping food by day and working the line by night. 
There was always a great camaraderie with the BOH team as we sweat through a busy
service and woke up to do it again the next day. Unfortunately, our efforts didn’t 
always translate to great pay. As a business, we paid what we could. We were often 
check to check and making our weekly payroll was not always a given. I was new to 
the business and and didn’t have a sense of the financial realities of a small business 
like ours. 
This struggle wasn’t the case for many of our Front of House employees that relied on
customer tips for their income. It was not uncommon for a bartender or a server to be 
making 4 or 5 times as much as a line cook during a busy service. It was not 
uncommon for a inexperienced server to be making twice the amount of our Head 
Chef. This pay divide often manifests itself with an us vs them dichotomy that is not 
healthy or sustainable. This disparity has plagued our industry for far too long. 
Allowing a restaurant to incorporate BOH employees in a common tip pool would 
create better parity and fairness for a historically underserved part of our industry. 
When a restaurant is cranking on a Saturday night, tickets are flying out of the printer,
the line is hot and our cooks are holding it down, there should be a legal mechanism 
that allows these team members, line cooks, prep cooks and dishwashers to benefit 
like their FOH counterparts. Federally, they can participate in tip pools, in Maine they
cannot.
A quick example, if a customer places an order online. The ticket goes directly to the 
kitchen where it is prepared and packaged and place by the door for a customer to 
pick up. There is no interaction with a FOH employee. The tip that that customer 
leaves has no current legal path to the BOH individual who did 100% of the work. 
Updating the MDOL interpretation of current federal labor laws would allow for that 
BOH employee to share in that tip.
Better pay for BOH would mean the ability to afford to live in an increasingly 
unaffordable city. It would mean a better working environment and a sense of 
teamwork with all employees. 
It would also encourage retention and the return of workers to an industry that many 
have fled because of poor pay and working conditions. 
Our industry depends on workers who have a passion for food and restaurants should 
be a shared mission. A shared tip pool would help to bring balance and fairness into 
an industry that lacks the mechanics to change. This law would undoubtedly help.
