“c 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
g-2 AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Wmiam‘ Bridge0 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
100 Fairview Avenue 
Augusta, ME 04330 
William.Bridgeo@legislature.maine.gov 
M-arch 8, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Bill Bridgeo introducing 
LD 55, An Act to Move the Headquarters for the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Bill Bridgeo and I represent House District #60 — the east side of 
Augusta. 
I'm here today to encourage your support for LD 55 which, if it becomes law, will ensure that when 
Maine gets a new, much needed headquarters building for our Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife it will be sited at a location beﬁtting the cherished status that Maine has always granted its 
prized hunting, ﬁshing and related outdoor heritage activities. 
I grew up in Aroostook County, hunting and ﬁshing from the time I was a young boy. My ﬁrst city 
manager's job took me to Calais, where I lived on Keene's Lake —~ an idyllic spot if there ever was one. 
Since the 1990's, friends and I annually head north to ﬁsh in the spring and bird hunt in the fall and in 
the process restore our spirits and savor the bounty of Maine's great outdoors — still available in 
abundance throughout our state. 
The agency that we charge with preserving and protecting our ﬁsh and wildlife resources is slated to 
have a new headquarters building in the near future, and I believe passionately that there exists a once 
in a lifetime opportunity to situate that new facility on the --banks of the Kermebec River here in the 
Capital City. 
The rules say that I can't display a big artist's rendering of what an iconic structure — built on the 
preserved concrete foundation of an old paper mill building on the water's edge on the Kennebec's east 
bank -— would look like, but you can certainly let your imagination inform you to the potential thata 
twenty acre site with almost a mile of river frontage at the head of tide would olfer. 
Over the years, the City of Augusta, utilizing resources of the Maine DEP and U.S. EPA, has 
remediated that entire property and is now happy to transfer ownership of it to the State for a dollar for 
this purpose. 
Department leadership has in the past shown enthusiasm for this concept, and I'll wager the people of 
District 60: Part of Augusta
Maine would love it also. 
I'm advised that you all have already met with AFA related to the IF&W departmental budget and that 
as part of that discussion, the Department of Finance and Administrative Services has advised that you 
authorize a $39.5 million bond issue to allow the new facility to be built on the East Side campus. 
DAF S has cited a number of concerns about the City-owned site on the river, which they believe— 
taken in the aggregate — make the river site impractical. However, I believe that if you examine each of 
those concerns discreetly it is not as daunting as it may appear. 
Up until the time I retired as Augusta city manager in September of 2021, I worked diligently for many 
months — with the full approval of the City Council — to bring the concept of IF &W to the riverfront to 
reality. From that experience, I am conﬁdent of the following: 
0 That the former railroad line that runs parallel to the east side of the subject riverfront 
property will not pose an insurmountable obstacle to alternate egress and access. It is not an 
active line. In fact, the railroad pulled up the tracks from where their line began at the old 
rail trestle south of the site to far above the site years ago. If a crossing would be needed at 
all, it would likely only be for emergency purposes. 
¢ The twenty-acre former mill site is a fully remediated brownﬁeld site granted VRAP status 
by the DEP. It is ready for redevelopment. I made sure when I was overseeing the site's 
clean-up as city manager that when the old buildings were demolished that intact concrete 
foundations at the river's edge were preserved so that someday a prospective reuse - like the 
one proposed today ~ could take advantage of them and still be in compliance with shore 
land zoning regulations. 
0 The property immediately south of the mill site — the former O'Connor scrapyard now 
owned by the A.I.M. Corporation — is indeed something that presents a challenge as it would 
be necessary to acquire it to enable a new, direct access road to the mill site. Here, I believe, 
is one of the relatively rare occasions where the State's power to take a property by eminent 
domain is warranted. When AIM, a foreign corporation, acquired the property, its intention 
was to use it as a staging area for shipping scrap metal out of the area. At the time, there was 
rail access — a basic part of their business model. When the rail went away, the property was 
no longer of use to them for recycling and they expressed interest in selling it- 
unfortunately for a price way above fair market value. In the meantime, they had hireda 
reputable enviromnental assessment ﬁrm to initiate the VRAP process and that stalled when 
DEP mandated that AIM clean-up a section of the property where O'C0mror had stored old 
car batteries. AIM has neglected to do so, and they are now under a DEP enforcement order 
to make that happen. Estimates vary, but the price tag appears to be in the range of $500k. 
So, right now a stalemate exists. My four decades as a city manager leads me to believe that 
a likely outcome is that eventually AIM is going to walk away from the property - because 
no one is going to pay their asking price - and they will stop paying the property taxes. 
0 Ordinarily, that would mean that the City of Augusta would end up owning the land via tax 
foreclosure, but I can assure you that the City will execute the necessary legal paperwork to 
prevent that automatic foreclosure from happening. When that happens with a property with 
known environmental issues, anywhere in Maine, the property becomes an orphan and it 
falls to the DEP to step in and remediate the contaminant problems at the taxpayers ’ 
expense. So, again in my opinion, this is one of those rare circumstances where the State is 
more than justified in exercising its power of eminent domain to both resolve an 
District 60: Part of Augusta
environmental concern AND advance a legitimate public purpose. 
0 Eminent domain does not preclude the former property owner — in this case AIM — from 
realizing a fair market dollar settlement (though any costs associated with a DEP clean up 
will be deducted from that amount). It only breaks an untenable stalemate. We're not talking 
about taking someone's home or a viable commercial or industrial business. Instead, we are 
sidestepping what is eventually likely to be a nuisance property issue down the road. 
0 There is also the issue of the cost of a new IF&W facility on the river versus the cost of one 
on the State's East Side campus. I'm not privy to the cost projections for the East Side 
campus option, or for that matter, early State Facilities Master Plan estimates for an IF&W 
facility at the riverfront site which the Plan consultants initially looked at until they were 
advised by the State that it was not a viable site and to focus on the East Side campus. What 
I do know is that the Administration has proposed a $39.5 million Governmental Facilities 
Authority bond issue to cover the cost of the new IF&W headquarters. 
0 I also know that the City of Augusta is in the process of constructing a new Police 
Department headquarters building of over 25,000 square feet, built to demanding federal 
Category Four safety and strength construction standards for $23 million, and within that 
project budget there's $2+ million for property acquisition, money for demolition of an old 
Hannaford supermarket and expensive relocation of a large sanitary sewer main. It seems to 
me that within a budget of almost $40 million, any costs associated with acquisition, access, 
site preparation and construction of a ﬁrst class home for IF &W could be achieved. 
I believe that every once in a while an opportunity comes along for government to do something 
ennobling — something that inspires generations of our citizens young and old and that testifies to the 
respect we have for our most treasured resources. 
The site on the Kennebec is about as rich in Maine history as anywhere in the state. Before European 
settlers arrived, the indigenous people of the Abenaki nation called the area Cushnoc (head of tide) and 
lived and traded here. In the early 1600's, English settlers from the Plymouth Colony sailed up the river 
and began robust trading - establishing a trading post in 1628. In 1754, the British built Fort Western to 
supply Fort Halifax upriver in Winslow. Later that century, Fort Western was a staging area for 
Benedict Arnold's expedition to Quebec City. 
In 1999, the 164-year-old Edwards Dam — which powered the paper mill complex - was removed, 
opening up sixteen more miles of historic spawning grounds for the nine species of anadromous ﬁshI 
native to the river - the only river, I'd add, on the eastern seaboard with all nine known species. 
The abundance of ﬁsh and riverine wildlife is a treasure and one of the reasons this site is so 
compelling as a future home for IF&W. 
Others will speak more about this. For now, I thank you for your attention and I'm happy to answer any 
questions. 
District 60: Part of Augusta
