City of Augusta testimony in support of LD 55 
An Act to Move the Headquarters for the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
DATE OF HEARING: Wednesday March 8, 2023, 1:00 pm 
Honorable Senator LaFountain, Honorable Representative Landry, Distinguished Members of 
the Committee on the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife: 
I am Mark O’Brien, Mayor of the City of Augusta, and I am here to again enthusiastically speak in 
support of the construction of a new headquarters facility for the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife on the banks of the Kennebec River at a location that is the head of tide in the Kennebec 
River. 
This is a very special location that presents tremendous opportunity to the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife. This is a place teeming with fish and wildlife including bald eagles, osprey, 
great blue herons, and other birds fishing in the rich waters of the river. These birds can be watched 
every day especially at low tide spring, summer and fall from the property IFW would occupy. 
Enormous schools of several species of fish can be obsen/ed swimming up river during several 
months each year. Six- to eight-foot-long Atlantic sturgeon are commonly seen jumping in this 
section of the Kennebec River. This is nearly a mile of riverfront property offering the Department 
unparalleled access for Maine’s public to a rich natural resource in the heart of Augusta and barelya 
stone’s throw from the State House. 
Augusta is the proud seat of State Government and is excited for this new opportunity that will bring 
not just an office to the city, but programed space along the Kennebec for bird watchers, fishing 
enthusiasts, kayakers and boaters, walking trails along the riverbank, and even opportunities for 
department staff to run various classes promoting outdoor activities. All of this can occur on the large 
Kennebec Lockes property and the additional AIM property. The fact that these two sites were once 
the home to a metal recycling site and a paper mill give both the state and the city an opportunity to 
show that a once intense industrial site in the heart of a downtown can be redeveloped and 
transformed into an outdoor enthusiasts dream. The site can easily be connected to the Kennebec 
River Rail Trail via the city sidewalk network and possibly a footbridge over the Kennebec on the 
unused railroad trestle or granite piers. It can also easily connect to and possibly become part of the 
East Coast Greenway Trail that connects Maine to Florida. And of course, the proximity to downtown 
and the restaurants there will serve the visitors to the new site, while also being a site that is close 
enough to other state offices that IFW staff will remain well connected to the rest of state government. 
City of Augusta staff and City Council members have spent substantial time working with IFW staff 
and the Commissioner on this opportunity and we enthusiastically support this project. We look 
forward to working with IFW and other state agencies as this project moves fon/vard and becomes 
part of the transformation of Augusta's downtown and east side.
