Testimony in support of LD 55 
An Act to Move the Headquarters for the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
» 
Hearing Date: Wednesday March 8, 2022, 1:00 p.m. 
JOINT COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
MARCH 8, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Other Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife: 
My name is Susan Robertson. l serve as the City Manager of the City of Augusta and I am here to speak 
in support of the construction of a new headquarters facility for the Department of Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife on the banks of the Kennebec River.l 
This is a unique opportunity for the citizens of Maine to locate a much needed State building at a place 
that will be, by its very location, an asset to the State beyond that of an office building. 
The proposed site, which is the location of the former Statler Tissue Company mill, provides an 
opportunity to demonstrate how an environmental asset can be created from the removal of industrial 
contamination. Sturgeon jumping and eagles flying past, both of which occur in that area, will 
underscore that message. 
Fort Western, which is also on the Kennebec River a short distance down the road from the proposed 
site, is a destination for visitors from all over Maine, the country, and the world. in 2022 alone, the 
Fort received 4,405 visitors which came from every state in the union but one as well as 22 other 
countries. Because of the nearby location, it is very likely that some of these visitors will participate in 
the demonstration and educational programming that will take place at the new headquarters site. 
This will expose new people to the beauty and resources of Maine and may rekindle interest in 
activities like fishing and hunting in those that have participated in those activities previously. I think it 
is reasonable to expect that there will be some future tourism benefit to our State as a result. 
Finally, while both sites that are being considered have outdoor space that employees ofthe 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife can enjoy on their lunch breaks, the Statler Tissue site will 
provide direct access to the river such that employees could fish or kayak. It is also a much closer walk 
to downtown Augusta as well as eastside eateries. Amenities such as these help make it easier to 
recruit employees particularly in today's competitive job market. 
In closing, I urge you to take advantage of this opportunity and support LD 55. Thank you for your 
consideration.
