Testimony of the Environmental Priorities Coalition 
In support of LD 1246 
An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in 
the Deﬁnition of "Significant Wildlife Habitat” 
Under the Natural Resources Protection Act 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
April 5, 2023 _ 
Good afternoon Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Beth Aheam andI 
offer testimony on behalf of the Environmental Priorities Coalition (EPC). The 
EPC is a partnership of thirty-seven conservation, environmental, and public health 
organizations who unify around a common agenda every year. The EPC represents 
over 120,000 members in Maine vvho want to protect the good health, good jobs, 
and quality of life that depend upon a healthy enviromnent. LD 1246, “An Act to 
Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Deﬁnition of 
"Signiﬁcant Wildlife Habitat" Under the Natural Resources Protection Act” 
Thank you to Rep. Gramlieh for sponsoring this priority legislation, which would 
help to preserve biodiversity by minimizing development impacts to endangered 
and threatened species habitat in Maine. 
The World is experiencing a biodiversity crisis, and Maine is no exception. 
The Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIFW) has proposed 
adding eight new species to Maine’s Endangered Species Act this year, with more 
additions expected in the coming years. Habitat loss and habitat degradation are the 
leading causes of wildlife population decline and species loss. Currently and 
surprisingly, the majority of proposed development reviewed by the Maine 
Department of Environmental Protection (MDEP) does not consider potential 
impacts to Maine’s most vulnerable species before being permitted.
Conserving wildlife habitat is the leading strategy to protect species and 
biodiversity, but Maine’s review process does not employ this strategy. 
Maine is experiencing unprecedented development pressure, which is degrading 
and sometimes eliminating wildlife habitat. There is a jurisdictional gap between 
Maine’s natural resource agencies that often prevents the consideration of impacts 
to endangered and threatened species habitat in the review of applications for 
development on less than 20 acres. Lawmakers (you!) can close this gap by 
modifying the Natural Resource Protection Act (NRPA) to ensure endangered and 
threatened species habitat is treated as a “Signiﬁcant Wildlife Habitat, ” just as 
lawmakers modiﬁed NRPA to better conserve vernal pools, waterfowl and wading 
bird habitat, and shorebird habitat approximately l5 years ago. 
Maine must consider potential impacts to endangered and threatened species 
habitat during the permit review process for all projects, not just those over 20 
acres. This bill will help expand the circumstances in which the MDEP, Maine’s 
primary enviromnental permitting agency, consults with the MDIFW on strategies 
to avoid or minimize impacts to endangered and threatened species habitat. 
Often, small modiﬁcations to how or when a speciﬁc project is designed or built 
can result in more favorable outcomes for vulnerable species in the area, while still 
allowing the development to proceed. It is extremely rare for a permit to be denied 
based on these reviews. 
The EPC supports the sponsor’s amendment, which limits review of endangered 
and threatened species impacts to projects that seek a DEP permit due to impacts 
on other protected natural resources AND extends the review to Site Law, 
"excavation" and "quarry" permits, too. 
Please help conserve endangered and threatened species by minimizing habitat 
impacts from development.
