 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources regarding LD 
1246: An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of “Significant 
Wildlife Habitat” Under the Natural Resources Protection Act. 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in favor of the amended LD 1246. 
My name is David Bilski. I live in New Harbor. I submit this testimony on behalf of the Maine 
Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network (MUUSAN) – a faith-based organization of nearly 
thirty congregations across the state of Maine advocating for legislation that reflects our values. 
The aim of conserving endangered and threatened species by protecting their habitat is an 
imperative that arises from at least a couple of ways of thinking about our environment: 
 First, various religious traditions, employing somewhat different vocabularies, tell us that the 
life around us is “sacred”, or “created by God”, or “contains a spark of the divine”. The 
underlying emphasis is on the absolute intrinsic value of all species as a function of their sacred 
or divine connection, regardless of their usefulness (or lack thereof) to humans. 
Second, the discipline of ecology focuses on the interrelations of species and their environment 
-- how balances are maintained or lost, and how they affect the integrity of their life-sustaining 
communities. So, in addition to relatedness, the significance of interdependence is highlighted. 
The pragmatic upshot that these two different perspectives share is the imperative of species 
preservation. The loss of biodiversity represents both a spiritual and a functional degradation of 
the world. 
The wording of the Unitarian Universalist principle of “respect for the interdependent web of all 
existence of which we are a part” underscores mankind’s place within this realm of sacred 
connectedness and interdependence. We all are fully aware of the outsized human role in the 
reshaping of our environment, especially its destructive trajectory.  

Science is now telling us that, globally, up to a million species are vulnerable to extinction as a 
function of human activity, including habitat encroachment, pollution, and climate change. We 
must now respond with an outsized sense of responsibility, if only to acknowledge that a 
degraded environment most certainly entails a degraded humanity. We must do what we can, 
with urgency. The species appearing on Maine’s Dept. of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife’s 
“endangered and threatened wildlife” lists are effectively our “canaries in the coalmine”.  
With the amended LD 1246, we have an opportunity to strengthen our resolve to care for each 
other and to care for our sacred planet. A reasonable and modest step that we can surely all get 
behind, LD 1246 may yet yield significant positive outcomes in the face of our biodiversity crisis. 
Let’s give it a try by recommending it with an “ought to pass as amended” endorsement. 
Thank you very much. 
Respectfully submitted, 
David Bilski 
Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network 
