MAINEQ AU[)UI3()N 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
% Legislative Information Office 
l00 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
April 5, 2023 
RE: LD 1246, An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of 
"Signiﬁcant Wildlife Habitat" Under the Natural Resources Protection Act 
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD I246, An Act to Include 
Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Deﬁnition of “Signiﬁcant Wildlife Habitat” Under 
the Natural Resources Protection Act, on behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members and 
supporters. 
The world is experiencing a biodiversity crisis. Scientists at NatureServe1 estimate that abouta 
third of all U.S. species are at risk of extinction. That percentage translates to more than 8,500 of our 
country’s best-known plant and animal species. Notably, only 20 percent of the country’s more than 
200,000 identiﬁed species have been evaluated for extinction risk, so the true total might be much 
higher. Maine is no exception. This legislative session, the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife (DIFW) proposed to add eight new species to Maine’s Endangered Species Act and expects to 
add more in the coming years.2 
Habitat loss and degradation are the leading causes of U.S. species decline, including wetlands 
destruction, damming and disrupting waterways, and development of terrestrial habitats. There are many 
different policy strategies for addressing habitat loss, including land conservation, land use planning, 
and climate resiliency work. This bill addresses one critically important strategy: Mitigating impacts to 
endangered and threatened species habitat from individual projects or development, such as 
subdivisions, roads, or other actions that require an enviromnental permit.' 
LD 1246 will amend the deﬁnition of “Signiﬁcant Wildlife Habitat” under the Natural Resources 
Protection Act to more comprehensively include endangered and threatened species habitat. A Natural 
Resources Protection Act (NRPA) permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection 
(DEP) is required when an “activity ” is located in, on, or in some cases adjacent to a “protected natural 
1 
NatureServe, Inc. is a U.S_-based non-profit organization that provides wildlife conservation-related data, tools, 
and services to private and government clients, partner organizations, and the public. 
2 See LD 57, An Act to Amend Maine's Endangered and Threatened Species List. 
:21) (,,i‘llSi11il(lif?ii ‘1Il Road, i+‘aluu>uti1, ltiiaémr <>t<;.§.<t>§; (:.2§>"7)1FZ:%ir:.2;.;;1;0 maineaudubon.o.rg;
7C 
resource’ . ‘ Activity ” includes dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation, or 
other materials; draining or dewatering; ﬁlling; and any construction, repair, or alteration of any 
permanent structure. “Protected natural resource ” includes coastal sand dune systems, coastal wetlands, 
fragile mountain areas, freshwater wetlands, great ponds, rivers, streams, brooks, and signiﬁcant wildlife 
habitat. Notably, “signiﬁcant wildlife habitat” does not, for all intents and purposes, include endangered 
and threatened species habitat. 
Under current law, endangered and threatened species habitat is included within signiﬁcant 
wildlife habitat “to the extent that [it has] been mapped by the Department of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife or [is] within any other protected natural resource. ” See 38 M.R.S.A. § 
480-B, 10, A (2009). In this case, mapping refers to maps that have gone through the Administrative 
Procedures Act mlemaking process. To date, DIFW has not done any of this mapping - and for good 
reason. Static maps do not reﬂect the dynamic nature of wildlife and habitat. More often than not, 
habitat maps are dated the moment they are adopted because, for example, forest characteristics change 
due to tree growth. 
“Other protected natural resource[s] ” , such as freshwater wetlands, occasionally do contain 
endangered and threatened species habitat, such as habitat for Spotted Turtle or Rapids Clubtail (a 
dragonﬂy species), but are not inclusive of all endangered and threatened species habitat. Notably, 
upland habitats are not a “protected natural resource ” . Upland habitats are critical for the New England 
Cottontail (a rabbit) or Blanding's Turtle, which nest and migrate in uplands. This, combined with no 
administratively adopted maps, means that for all intents and purposes, endangered and threatened 
species habitat is excluded from the deﬁnition of signiﬁcant wildlife habitat under NRPA and does not 
receive the protections afforded by the Act. 
LD 1246 would amend NRPA by deﬁning endangered and threatened species habitat within the 
deﬁnition of “signiﬁcant wildlife habitat” using a deﬁnition from DIFW and criteria from DEP, which 
would be adopted through major substantive rulemaking. This would negate the need for an 
administratively approved, static map and instead would rely on standards and criteria adopted by 
natural resource experts at DIFW and DEP. The Maine Legislature made a very similar change for 
vernal pool, waterfowl and Wading bird, and shorebird habitats within the deﬁnition of “significant 
wildlife habitat” approximately 15 years ago. The change was well received and has resulted in 
increased protections for those vulnerable habitats, as we believe it will for endangered and threatened 
species habitat. 
By more comprehensively including endangered and threatened species habitat within the 
deﬁnition of “signiﬁcant wildlife habitat, ” the DEP will more frequently consider and mitigate impacts 
to these habitats during permitting. Thankfully, saying “no” to proposed development activity is rarely 
the answer to mitigating impacts. More often than not, mitigation is achieved by recommending 
adjustments such as larger culverts so that species are not blocked by roadways; shifting building 
Lit} (iii:-;ia;;<l Farrn RG2/Hi. l*'almt>:: €l>, f‘*:'iz¥lFE €" <>.»;§§;>;/ ‘g {1;<*>f/ ‘; fit-it N g ff; maineatzrltioonor
footprints to avoid habitats; recommending that septic systems be located on a particular side ofa 
building; or avoiding outdoor lighting at night. These steps are often not costly, are actionable, and have 
a positive impact on these vulnerable populations. 
When it comes to endangered and threatened species, supporting individuals or populations is 
key to protecting the species as a whole. For example, worldwide, there are approximately 60 to 70 
Ringed Boghaunter populations. Ringed Boghaunters are small, black and orange ringed dragonﬂies. 
Maine has 10 to 12 conﬁrmed populations, meaning we have an outsized responsibility for conserving a 
large portion of the species. These populations could be wiped out without an adequate buffer around 
wetlands where they breed or ﬁlling those wetlands, for example. This bill would give DEP the 
regulatory authority to issue a NRPA permit with conditions that would avoid or mitigate impacts to 
these habitats - authority that the DEP does not currently have. Moreover, this bill would give DEP the 
regulatory authority to consider impacts to endangered or threatened species habitats that are squarely 
outside of their current jurisdiction, such as upland habitats that species like Black Racer snakes, Upland 
Sandpipers, and Grasshopper Sparrows rely on. Each of these species are “area sensitive ” and require 
dry, large, contiguous, upland habitats to thrive. Recommending that building footprints be located at the 
edge of these habitats (as opposed to in the middle, bisecting the habitat) could make all the difference 
for populations ’ survival. 
Finally, Maine Audubon supports the sponsor’s amendment, which was distributed to the 
Committee and to interested parties on Friday, March 28. The amendment modiﬁes the bill so that this 
important initiative will not unduly burden DEP or landowners. As a result of the amendment, the bill 
would only apply to circumstances in which a landowner is already seeking a permit from DEP. In other 
words, it would not require that the landowner be aware of the presence of endangered or threatened 
species habitat in their project area. Instead, that fact would become apparent in existing consultation 
with the DEP. This amendment also has the effect of allowing the DEP to implement this legislation 
using existing resources. 
Biodiversity conservation is of critical importance. In addition to the moral implication of 
species declines, human beings depend on functioning ecosystems for food, clean water, and even 
safety. Ecosystems are made up of individual species. When those species disappear, the systems that 
support humans can unravel. Maine Audubon strongly encourages this Committee to support this bill as 
an important strategy for conserving biodiversity. 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq. 
Director of Advocacy 
:.;1<> (]}ilsiau<l iiziriri Roa(i,l"2aln10ull1, l\!'l21lit£? 1)/..;2€3:3f‘>' (1.» .’(}’Q2’i}’/'i‘f"3t'L7Z(l _Zj§(.‘1 * 
H1&l11(>.?rU{lUl3(}!i.()lfl,
