Jim Briggs
North Yarmouth
LD 1246
Dear Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich, and
Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:
Thank you for giving me the opportunity today to express my wholehearted support 
for
 
LD 1246:  An Act to include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the 
Definition of “Significant Wildlife Habitat” Under the Natural Resources Protection 
Act.
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (MDEP) is currently required to 
consult with Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIFW) on 
strategies to avoid and minimize the impacts to endangered and threatened species 
only on proposed developments of more than 20 acres.  A jurisdictional gap between 
the agencies often prevents the consideration of these impacts in the review of 
applications for the smaller projects that make up the majority of development 
applications.
Lawmakers can close this gap by modifying the Natural Resource Protection Act 
(NRPA) to ensure endangered and threatened species habitat is treated as a 
“Significant Wildlife Habitat,” just as lawmakers modified NRPA to better conserve 
vernal pools, waterfowl and wading bird habitat, and shorebird habitat approximately 
15 years ago.
Growing up in Damariscotta I used to fish on the Sheepscot River, where Atlantic 
Salmon migrated.  I never caught one and sadly, that opportunity no longer exists.  
My college degree is in Earth Science, and I am aware that, according to the fossil 
record, there have been 5 great extinction events.  The current rate of species 
extinction suggests to many that the earth is headed for a 6th, human driven, great 
extinction.  LD 1246 is a modest and reasonable step to try to diminish the negative 
human impact on our ecosystems.
It is important for Maine to be proactive in seeking greater protections for species 
biodiversity.  Providing greater habitat for endangered species is a meaningful and 
worthwhile step in that direction.
I strongly urge the Environment and Natural Resources Committee to vote in favor 
of, and strongly support LD 1246:  An Act to include Endangered and Threatened 
Species Habitat in the Definition of “Significant Wildlife Habitat” Under the Natural 
Resources Protection Act.
Thank you for your attention to this issue.
Jim Briggs
