STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GOVERNOR  COMMISSIONER  
 
 
 
 
HARLOW BUILDING  PHONE : (207)  287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE FAX: (207)  287-2400  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  WW W.MAINE .GOV/DACF    TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES  
 
IN SUPPORT OF  LD 1246  
 
An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of "Significant 
Wildlife Habitat" Under the Natural Resources Protection Act  
 
  April 5 , 2023  
 
Senator  Brenner , Representative  Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Environment and Natural  Resources , my name is Stacie Beyer , and I am the Executive Director of the 
Land Use Planning  Commission  (LUPC) . I am speaking  in support of LD 1246 , An Act to Include 
Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of "Significant Wildlife Habitat" Under 
the Natural Resources Protection Act , for the reasons outlined below.  
 
The original bill language  amends the Natural Resources Protection Act  (NRPA)  by revising  the 
definition of "significant wildlife habi tat" to change how the habitat for species appearing on the 
official state list of endangered and threatened animal species  is addressed  in that definition . This bill 
also requires the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (DIFW) to define "habitat f or state 
endangered and state threatened species" by major substantive rules.  
 
Under the NRPA, a permit is required state -wide for alterations in, on, or over any protected natural 
resource (and adjacent to water bodies and certain wetlands). A "protected natural resource " is defined 
as: 
[C]oastal sand dune systems, coastal wetlands, significant wildlife habitat , fragile mountain 
areas, freshwater wetlands, community public water system primary protection areas, great 
ponds or rivers, streams  or brooks, as these terms are defined in this article.   
 
The NRPA delegates to LUPC permit granting authority under that statute for projects located wholly 
within its service area.  The NRPA also delegates permit granting authority to the Maine Forest Se rvice 
(MFS) for timber harvesting activities.  
 
The definition of "significant wildlife habitat " already includes habitat for species appearing on the 
official state or federal list of endangered or threatened animal species (E&T species). However, the 
definition only includes E&T species habitats that are defined and mapped  by the D IFW or are within 
 
 
 any other protected natural resource. DIFW must adopt maps through a rulemaking process for E&T 
species habitats to meet the definition of "significant wildlife  habitat ." 
 
We have been in conversation with other natural resource agencies (DEP, DIFW) and are aware of the 
amendment that address es concerns with LD 1246 , as initially  drafted . 
 
Our understanding of t he current amendment proposal is  as follows : 
 (4) Ha bitat for species appearing on the official state list of endangered or threatened animal 
species when any portion of the habitat is located within another protected natural resource or 
contained within the boundaries of a project site  that requires approval from:  
(a) The department pursuant to Title 38, Chapter 3, Articles 5 -A, 6, 7 and 8 -A, except 
for activities or development taking place on a residential lot that is not part of a 
proposed multi -lot housing development; or,  
(b) The L and Use Planning Commission pursuant to Title 38, Chapter 3, Article 5 -A or 
Title 12, Chapter 206 -A for subdivisions and non -residential uses.  
If the amendment proposal is adopted, the impact on LUPC resources will be minimal. Most of these 
projects are already sent out to review to MDIFW by LUPC , and any impacts to E&T species would be 
considered under the Commission 's "no undue adverse impact s tandard ." Maine Forest Service 
permitting for “forest management activities” would remain unaffected.  
Without the amendment, the impact on LUPC would be considerable, requiring extra staff time and 
delay in permit processing time s. 
Thank  you for considering  this issue . We will be available to answer questions at the work session . 
 
