Apr“ 5' 2023 
Th@Nature 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director Cgnggfvancy 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine M he 
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org 3' 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
RE: LD 1246 — An Act to include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of 
“Significant Wildlife Habitat” Under the Natural Resources Protection Act 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am the Government Relations 
Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of 
LD 1246 - An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of 
“Significant Wildlife Habitat" Under the Natural Resources Protection Act. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to conserving the 
lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on-the-ground 
solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We usea 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the private sector, and other 
partners. The Nature Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and 
is the 12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We also work 
across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine to rebuild 
groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to address our changing climate. 
As our state and our planet faces a biodiversity crisis, we must act to avoid and minimize impacts to 
rare, threatened, and endangered species. TNC has long advocated for protections and measures to 
reduce habitat loss and habitat degradation, and earlier this session we supported the Maine‘ 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIFW) in their efforts to add eight new species to the 
Maine Endangered Species Act list. 
LD 1246 will ensure that all development projects will consider habitat for state listed threatened and 
endangered species alongside the protected natural resources that are already considered within 
Natural Resources Protection Act (NRPA) review: wetlands, streams, signiﬁcant vernal pool habitat, 
waterfowl and wading bird habitats, and shorebird nesting, feeding, and staging areas. 
Due to a regulatory gap, current law only requires projects proposed for development that are over 20 
acres to consult with MDIFW on strategies to avoid and minimize impacts on endangered and 
threatened species. LD 1246 would create consistency by modifying NRPA to ensure smaller projects 
under 20 acres would also have this required review and consultation with MDIFW for impacts to 
endangered and threatened species and the habitats on which they depend, resulting in better 
outcomes for these vulnerable species. 
We urge this committee to support LD 1246. Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
14 Maine St., Suite 401Brunswick, Maine 04011nature.org/maine
