4/2/2023 
 
Maine State Chapter of The Wildlife Society 
 
Testimony for Bill LD1246 in Maine’s Legislature 
 
  
 To all whom it may concern, 
 
My name is Kyle Smelter, and I am the committee chair of the Maine Chapter of the 
Wildlife Society’s Conservation Affairs Network. The Conservation Affairs Network enhances 
the communication and collaboration between units, with a goal of bringing the perspectives of 
biologists into the policy process. The Maine Chapter was established in 1976 and is a local 
membership branch of the Wildlife Society. This organization is an international non-profit and 
educational association dedicated to excellence in wildlife stewardship through rigorous science 
and public outreach. The membership itself includes 120 wildlife professionals from both private 
and public sectors as well as others outside the natural resources realm who are concerned about 
conservation of Maine’s wild species.  
We are currently in the midst of what scientists are calling the 6th great mass extinction 
event. Maine unfortunately is no exception to this biodiversity crisis with habitat loss and 
fragmentation as leading drivers of species extinction. I am writing today in support of LD1246, 
a bill that will expand the coverage of the Natural Resources Protection Act (hereafter NRPA) 
and minimize the impacts of development on imperiled species in Maine. This forward-thinking 
piece of legislation would call for review of development projects by Maine’s Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife on everything greater than 20 acres. This allows the state's wildlife 
management agency to check for impacts and mitigate threats on threatened and endangered 
species in the state. This cooperation between the organizations would create a system in which 
the state's imperiled species would always be considered.  
This bill would also define the habitat of the state’s threatened and endangered species as 
“Significant Wildlife Habitat.” This would provide a framework for protection and management 
of habitat for the species that need it most! 
Legislation like LD1246 is critical to the future of wildlife conservation and management 
in the state. 15 years ago lawmakers made an adjustment to modify the NRPA to account for 
protection of the habitats for shorebirds, waterfowl, amphibians (vernal pools) and wading birds. 
Now, we have an opportunity to act again and take a stand for threatened and endangered 
species. I urge that we do so. 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Kyle Smelter 
