Matthew Chatfield
Bangor, Maine
LD 1246
My name is Dr. Matthew Chatfield and I am an Assistant Professor in the School of 
Biology and Ecology at the University of Maine in Orono. My background is in 
ecology and conservation biology, and I have considerable experience working with 
globally imperiled taxonomic groups, namely amphibians and reptiles. My work in 
Maine has focused largely on frog population stressors, such as disease and habitat 
modification, and the ecology and management of wood turtles, which are a Species 
of Greatest Conservation Need in the most recent Maine Wildlife Action Plan.
I am submitting this written testimony in support of LD1246 as I believe this bill is 
extremely important and will go a long way towards ensuring our policies align with 
the needs of our State threatened and endangered species. Protecting the habitat of 
these species is of fundamental importance to their survival, and without such 
protections their continued existence is not guaranteed. My work on amphibians and 
reptiles – as well as that of countless other researchers and conservation practitioners 
in Maine, around the country, and across the world – have demonstrated time and 
again that basic habitat needs of species must be met if we are to halt the extinction 
crisis.
Upon moving to Maine many years ago, I started the wood turtle project to 
understand the ecology and habitat requirements of this charismatic species that is 
emblematic of the Great North Woods. Maine is still considered a stronghold for this 
species, although our work suggests this distinction might be slipping. My colleagues 
and I are especially interested in how wood turtles fare in working landscapes, such as
those used for logging, sand and gravel extraction, and agriculture. These working 
lands are important to Mainers and our goal is to help identify ways that land use 
practices can be made compatible with the needs of turtles and, by extension, other 
species of conservation need. 
Amphibians and reptiles, like so many other species, are part of Maine’s unique 
natural heritage. I share the dedication of so many Mainers who value and respect this
heritage, who work and play in the outdoors, and believe that legislation should strive 
to protect species of conservation need by protecting their habitat.
