 
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1246 ,  
An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of "Significant 
Wildlife Habitat" Under the Natural Resources Protection Act  
April 5 , 2023  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources , I am Melanie Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine ( NRCM)  and I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in 
support of  LD 1246 . 
 
LD 1246 would  help  protect threatened and endangered species habitat from development. Currently, 
most proposed development reviewed by the Department of Environmental Protection  (DEP ) does not 
include consideration of endangered and threatened species habitat impacts . This bill  seeks to close that 
gap by modifying the Natural Resources Protection Act  (NRPA)  to ensure threatened and endangered  
species habitat is treated as “signifi cant wildlife habitat ”, requiring DEP to review endangered and 
threatened species impacts in consultation with the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife . We 
understand the sponsor’s amendment changes the  exact  circumstances under which DEP would be 
required to do this consultation, and we are supportive of that amendment.  
 
Habitat  loss and  habitat  degradation are leading threats to  wildlife species, and development is one of 
the root causes of these issues. Mai ne is  experiencing immense development pressure, especially in the 
southern part of the state , on the coast, and i n rural areas , such as in the Rangeley Lakes and 
Moosehead Lake region s. For that reason, species  declines and biodiversity loss  are not something that  
is only happening elsewhere in the world , they are  an acute problem  occurring in our state right  now . 
The decline and loss of species often happens slowly  as habitat becomes fragmented and degraded over 
time, which is why the approach  in LD 1246  of addressing development permits is a practical  one. Small 
changes can add up to have a big impact . Simply changing  when and how a project is developed  – an 
example of what may change should this bill become law – can make a difference  for species protection.  
Because wildlife means so much to Mainers throughout the state for recreational, cultural, and 
economic reasons, this bill would have a positive impact beyond its ecological benefits.  
 
At its core , we believe this bill is forward -looking and would help the state better balance conservation 
of cherished species with economic and population growth , all of which are important to the future of 
Maine and its people .  
 
I respectfully urge the Committee t o vote Ought to Pass on LD 1246 . Thank you for your time and 
consideration of this issue, and I would be glad to answer any questions you may have.  
 
