Testimony in favor of LD 1246 
Maine Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon. My name is Nat Wheelwright. I am a recently retired ecology professor from Bowdoin 
College and I am grateful to the Environment and Natural Resources Committee for the opportunity to 
testify in support of LD 1246. 
I would like to illustrate why it is important to protect wildlife habitat beyond what we might think is 
necessary by describing a personal experience l had when I was doing field work for my PhD 
dissertation. l\/Iy study did not take place in Maine — it was based in Central America - but the principles 
apply to environmental problems right here. 
I was studying a bird called the Resplendent Quetzal. Its iridescent green color almost reminds you ofa 
gigantic hummingbird. It is such a magnificent, charismatic, resplendent species that entire reserves had 
been established to safeguard it. 
There was a problem, however. When I studied the bird closely, I discovered that it required many 
different types of habitats at different times of year. To find fruits to eat, it had to migrate from the 
highlands to the lowlands and then back again. To my and everyone else's surprise, for nearly half the 
year it was entirely absent from some of the parks that were meant to protect it. 
When biologists started to look at other animals in Central America, they found that butterflies and 
moths also migrated up and down mountain slopes, and so did their predators and parasites! Picture for 
a moment what that looks like, as entire faunas shift from the lowlands to the highlands and back, like 
waves on a beach. 
You might be wondering what this has to do with animals in Maine, and with this bill? The answer is 
that, just as in Central America and anywhere else, virtually every animal species in Maine needs several 
different kinds of habitats during its life. We just don't always know what they are. That's why it's 
prudent to have policy tools that protect notjust the obvious habitats but upland and other norl'-76$ 
protected natural resources as well. 
l'd like to end by pointing out that this legislation will also protect species that today are not listed as 
endangered or threatened, but which one day might well be. When I was a kid, I assumed that whip- 
poor-wills and rusty blackbirds and upland sandpipers would always be with us, but now we understand 
that even common species need protection. 
Thank you for your attention. l'd be happy to answer any questions if you have any. 
Nathaniel T. Wheelwright 
67 Spy Rock Rd. 
Harpswell, ME 04079 
nwheelwr@bowdoin.edu
