TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 1246 
An Act to Include Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of 
"Significant Wildlife Habitat" Under the Natural Resources Protection Act 
Presented by Representative GRAMLICH of Old Orchard Beach. 
Cosponsored by Senator BRENNER of Cumberland and Representatives: BELL of 
Yarmouth, CAMPBELL of Orrington, CLUCHEY of Bowdoinham, DOUDERA of Camden, 
LANDRY of Farmington, O'NElL of Saco, SOBOLESKI of Phillips, Senator: BENNETT of 
Oxford. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. I am Phillip deMaynadier, a wildlife 
biologist and Group Leader speaking on behalf of the Department of Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife in support of L.D. 1246 as amended by Rep. Gramlich within the proposed 
amendment circulated prior to the public hearing. 
The bill, as amended would require the Department of Environmental Protection to 
review a proposed project for potential impacts to state Endangered and Threatened 
species, though only in cases where the activity or development is otherwise required to 
obtain a permit under the Natural Resources Protection Act (NRPA) or the Site Location 
of Development Act (Site Law). Furthermore, it provides an exemption from this review 
for single lot residential development when not part of a larger housing development 
and an exemption for forest management activities. The DEP already sends Site Law 
applications to DIFW for review of impacts to state Endangered and Threatened species 
habitat, and the amended bill would extend such consideration to projects that require 
a NRPA application. ”Habitat for state endangered and state threatened species” would 
be defined by DIFW through major substantive rulemaking. 
Maine is home to over 16,000 species of inland (nonmarine) wildlife species, of which 51 
(<0.5%) are currently listed as state Endangered or Threatened. An "Endangered 
species" is defined as a species of fish or wildlife that has been determined by the 
commissioner of DIFW to be in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant
I
portion of its range in Maine, and a "Threatened species" is one that is likely to become 
endangered within the foreseeable future barring successful recovery interventions. 
Only those species that have undergone a rigorous assessment process are considered 
for Endangered or Threatened status by DIFW, requiring an analysis of quantitative 
survey data and standardized threat criteria broadly accepted by the international 
scientific community. Additionally, Maine is one of the few states that requires 
legislative approval for the designation of any inland fish and wildlife as Endangered or 
Threatened. 
By definition, most Endangered and Threatened species are rare, often occupying only 
small patches of specialized habitat such as pine barrens, saltmarshes, islands, and 
mountain tops, which in turn only cover a small proportion of land area in Maine. 
Some of the state's listed species are well known, such as the Peregrine Falcon and 
Atlantic Puffin, while others are more cryptic such as the Spotted Turtle and Hessel's 
Hairstreak butterfly. All of Maine's Endangered and Threatened species are part of the 
state's natural heritage and serve potentially important roles in our natural ecosystems. 
Maine's Endangered and Threatened species face a variety of threats to their existence 
including pollution, disease, predation, illegal collection, and climate change. Among 
these, the most important threat affecting the greatest number of species is habitat loss 
and fragmentation, usually due to land use conversion from natural and working lands 
to residential and commercial development. The current bill, as amended, would help 
close a regulatory gap in the current environmental review process by directing inter- 
agency consultation (DEP or LUPC with DIFW) during an otherwise active NRPA permit 
review, thereby permitting DIFW to offer recommendations, when warranted, for 
avoiding and minimizing impacts to state—listed species. 
Thank you, I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work 
session.
2
