Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Committee Members, 
In this age of climate warming, dramatically changing weather patterns, rapidly declining biodiversity, 
and ecological perturbations that are likely to have catastrophic implications for human society, Maine is 
uniquely positioned to set an example for other states to follow by taking proactive steps to guide 
development with an eye to conserving habitat for threatened and endangered species. As a professor 
emeritus of biology and environmental science of the University of Maine System, I’ve spent most of my 
career working on conservation initiatives in Maine.  I strongly support LD 1246: An Act to Include 
Endangered and Threatened Species Habitat in the Definition of "Significant Wildlife Habitat" Under the 
Natural Resources Protection Act, as a critical piece of legislation that would conserve Maine’s natural 
resources and promote economic sustainability. 
Forest products, agriculture, fisheries, aquaculture, recreation, and tourism are the primary drivers of 
our state's economy, and they all depend on a healthy environment.  But the world is changing.  The 
weather extremes we have witnessed this year in the U.S. will likely become the new normal, as the 
long-predicted impacts of global warming rapidly becoming increasingly evident.  To better buffer 
Maine’s environment against these changes, we must ensure that development proceeds in a fashion 
that is sustainable in terms of conserving the natural environment that is so critical to our lives and 
economy. 
Some will argue that any additional attempts to regulate development will impede economic progress in 
the state.  But the data indicate otherwise.  Along with many others, a National Fish and Wildlife 
Foundation study shows that every dollar invested in conservation results in a four-fold economic 
return. This is especially true in a state with an economy so heavily dependent on its natural resources.  
By expanding the definition of "significant wildlife habitat" to include endangered and threatened 
species habitat, this bill will help to ensure that these crucial areas are given protection.  But equally 
important, conserving these habitats will also conserve habitat for many other species in those same 
habitats that are not listed.  Thus, guiding development in an environmentally sustainable fashion 
promotes the health and stability of both our natural resource base and our economy. This is a win-win 
action for Maine. 
Therefore, I strongly urge the Maine legislature to pass LD 1246, recognizing the significance of the 
habitats of endangered and threatened species, while working towards securing the ecological 
sustainability of Maine's natural resources and promoting informed economic development. 
 
