24 Cambei! Shore Rd. 
Gray Maine ~O~’r»C)39 
dettingghigh%g¢ ‘it_hcats@dmaii.corn/ §i§fii!'i9y@§ ‘1iéiQ,!m3l{iQ,QlfC1 
March 3rd 2023, Public! Written Testimony ,/ 
to 555 (HP36O) 
An Act to Increase the Number of Mature 
P/ants A/lowed for the Home Cultivation of 
Cannabis 
I, and 34 medical patients are in SUPPORT of LD 555 with hope of some 
clarications 
Good after Chair Senator Hickmann, and Chair Representative Supica, and 
other respected members of the \/LA board, 
My name is Derek Shirley, l live in Gray Maine, l am a medical cannabis patient 
today here representing 34 medical patients! We support LD 555 with some 
clarifications but overall we would like to thank Rep. Boyer for this bill! 
While we are absolutely for all and any mature plant count increases medical 
or personal use. But let's think about this for a second: we all know that the 
ORlGlNAl_ number for mature plant count was 6 when it was originally written 
back in 2016. Instead, it got hacked to 3 at the last minute. Here we are in 
2023 now “fixing it” . How many times do we have to come back and “fix”a 
plant count? It's a plant. At what point does “plant count” become outdated 
and aribatary? lnstead of settling with what we thought was good in 2016 let‘s 
be a nationwide home cultivation state standard leader. l_et’s free this plant! 
EVEN if your WORST fear happens; a minor getting into a mature cannabis 
plant for example, what would happen? You can't even smoke a mature 
cannabis plant until it's been dried for 7-14ish clays in a pretty climate 
controlled environment.And the wrong drying environment/general handling 
can affect harvest cannabis THC percentage drastically. Also, let's say a minor 
eats the mature cannabis plant raw for whatever reason. Would the child get 
high? Short answer No. (Links/Articles provided at bottom) Let's free this darn 
plant already! Even at the mature stages, the plant isn't huiting anyone.. 
If LD 555 passes as written , We ask then it's only ethical and morally correct 
to adjust the medical patient plant count. We think medical cannabis plants 
that patients grow,han/est and use for their own medicine use could/should Derek J Shirley


