Maine 2023: LB 555, Testimony in Support of Expanding Home Cultivation
My name is Jax James, and I serve as the State Policy Manager for the National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML). I would like to thank the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
for considering LD 555/HP 360. NORML supports cannabis legalization, decriminalization, and
regulation, as well as protecting cannabis consumers from an unregulated cannabis market.
Currently, Mainers can grow cannabis for personal use. As many as three mature, 12 immature plants,
and an unlimited number of seedlings are allowed per resident that is 21 years of age or older. These
restrictions do not apply to the cultivation of cannabis for medical use by a qualifying patient, caregiver,
registered caregiver, or registered dispensary via the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.
This bill increases the number of cannabis plants that can be grown by Mainers to
6 mature cannabis
plants
, up to 12 immature cannabis plants, and an
unlimited number of seedlings per resident that is
21 years of age or older.
Never in modern history has there existed greater public support for repealing the nation's nearly
century-long experiment with marijuana prohibition. In 2016, Mainers approved the initiation of
establishing a fully legal state. In the last year, sales have doubled, and the state has sold over $11
billion of legal products.
Permitting limited home cultivation permits the ability for patients to have reliable, affordable, and
consistent access to the medicine they rely on. Patients deserve the option to legally grow a botanical
product that is objectively safer than the litany of pharmaceutical drugs it could replace, including those
that may not be able to afford it or do not live within a reasonable distance from a retail outlet.
NORML urges Maine lawmakers to thoughtfully consider, and support, LD 555 to increase the number
of mature cannabis plants allowed for home cultivation from 3 to 6.
1420 K Str eet NW | Suite 350 | W ashingt on, DC 20005 | 202-483-5500 | norml.or g

