 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition To  
LD 555, An Act t o Increase the Number of Mature Plants Allowed for the Home Cultivation of 
Cannabis  
 
March 3,  2023 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert , and I am providing testimony in opposition to  LD 555 
on behalf of Maine Municipal Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC). For reference, t he LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and 
establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.    
Current law allows for the cultivation of three mature cannabis plants for personal use. 
Likewise, individuals over the age of 21 are allowed to possess up to 2.5 ounces of processed 
cannabis flower. According to leafly.com, the estimated production for a healthy, mature plant 
grown indoors is  a ¼ pound or 4 ounces of cannabis flower , and the estimated production for a 
healthy, mature plant grown outdoors, is doubled at a ½ pound or 8 ounces. The website stresses 
that these are merely estimates and that, especially when grown outdoors without space 
restrictions, have the potential to produce m uch more  flower .  
Home cultivation presents additional challenges for municipalities with respect to odor in 
more densely populated areas and  the related  impacts to neighborhoods. Increasing the mature 
plant limit to 6 plants per individual over the age of 21 would  exacerbate these challenges, 
particularly when you have multiple individuals in the same  household growing the maximum 
number of plants.   
Given that current law allows for home cultivation , the fact that  three mature plants 
would produce an amount of cannabis that exceeds the allowable possession limits, and due to 
the increased challenges pertaining to  odor and neighborhood impact, the LPC strongly urges the 
committee to vote ought not to pass on LD 555.  
Thank you for  your time and for  considering the  municipal perspective on this issue.  
 
 

