- '»"*i 
fl}, 
. :' ‘-"»‘' 
.|=,. h 1 -_' .»A ii?
W ’“"t:-,3?‘ -12! .. 
~Z.:>§..~*- _ -';.’-15¢‘ 
{fi 5 Y.{~;;;.:;'f?. ‘-::‘i‘_ 
STATE OF MAINE 
Department of Public Safety 
Maine State Police 
Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Unit 
State House Station 20 
Augusta, Maine 
04333-0020 JANET T. MILLS ACT. COL. WILLIAM ROSS GOVERNOR 
CHIEF 
MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK LT. COL. BRIAN P. SCOTT COMMISSIONER 
mzrtrrv cmar 
Testimony of Lt. Aaron Hayden 
IN OPPOSITION or LD 534 
An Act to Allow Commercial Driver's License Holders Who Are 18 to 
20 Years of Age to Haul Hazardous Materials Intrastate 
Senator Chipman, Rep. Williams, and distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation. My name is Lt. Aaron Hayden, and I am the Commanding Officer of the State Police Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Unit. I am here today to testify on behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police in opposition of LD534. 
This bill is to allow for drivers between the age of 18-20 and who have obtained a commercial driver’s license to move hazardous material in Maine. 
Hauling hazardous materials is dangerous. These materials can cause damage and often pose a health risk to people, animals, and the environment, and so it’s no surprise that the government requires drivers transporting these materials to have additional qualiﬁcations. One of those qualiﬁcation is age. This allows a driver time to obtain the necessary skills and maturity needed to haul material that can be catastrophic if released into Maine’s environment. Yes, there are certainly young men and women that have that maturity at 18 years old but again statistically crash numbers do not support that thought process as a whole. In 2022 almost a 31“ of the fatal commercial vehicle accidents in Maine involved drivers under 26 years of age. 
INTEGRITY * FAIRNESS * COMPAS SION * EXCELLENCE 
Offices located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine (207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624-8945 (Fax)
The Maine State Police is the lead agency for the Motor Carrier Safety 
Administrative Plan (MCSAP). We apply for this grant on a yearly basis and based on the amount appropriated from the US congress, Maine received 2.4 million dollars in funding (2022). Maine also has outstanding awards for 
upgrades to our Weigh stations and upgrades to BMV’s IFFA and IRP systems that exceed an additional million dollars. Those grants all fall under the MCSAP umbrella. A State may be subject to the withholding of MCSAP funds for non- 
compliance. The F MCSA may withhold funds based on increasing percentages 
during the ﬁscal year(s) of noncompliance with up to 5% for the ﬁrst ﬁscal year of 
noncompliance, up to 10% for the second ﬁscal year of noncompliance, up to 25% for the third ﬁscal year of noncompliance and not more than 50% for the fourth 
and subsequent ﬁscal years. Current regulatory requirements remain in effect; 
however, any ﬁndings related to items within 49 CFR § 350.211 listed below may immediately subject a State to a written notice of proposed determination of 
nonconformity: 1. A State’s failure to adopt laws and regulations that are compatible with the FMCSRs (broadly) and the HMRs (any deviation) 
(49 CFR § 350.211(a). 
Maine HAS adopted the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations broadly and have not deviated from the hazardous material regulations or passenger 
carry regulation maintaining a good balance in meeting the needs for our state. In 
looking at LD 534 numerous changes would need to be made in other places of 
our own Maine Statues. When Maine adopted the Federal regulations, it 
stipulated that the bureau (MSP) may not adopt any rule that exempts motor carriers, vehicles or drivers transporting hazardous materials of a type or 
quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded in accordance with 
49 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 172. This would require this committee to 
open the books on not only Maine’s adoptions but an overhaul of the CDL licensing among other things. 
Maine is one of the safest states in the country to operate a commercial vehicle in. This is a fact my agency is extremely proud of, and it takes great 
partnerships to include our industries. These partnerships include the ability to offer waivers speciﬁcally to the heating industry that allow for relief from the 
regulations when it is needed. Moving hazardous materials in Maine is serious 
business. In the event of a crash like we have seen in Arizona and Ohio recently, 
the impact goes far beyond just those directly involved in the crash. This is about safety and keeping our roadways as safe as possible. 
For these reasons, we urge you to vote against of LD534. 
On behalf of the Department of Public Safety and the Maine State Police, I thank 
you for your time and would be happy to try and answer any questions that you might have. 
INTEGRITY * F AIRNESS * COMPASSION * EXCELLENCE 
Ofﬁces located at: 36 Hospital Street, Augusta Maine 
(207) 624-8939 (Voice) (888) 524-7900 (TDD) (207) 624~8945 (Fax)
