HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES' 
>e~§§;' 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
~ ' 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
James Lee White MAINE RELAY 711 
306 \l\'l1arlT Road 
Ciuilford. l\'lE U-H-13 
.lames.Wliiteinflegislature.maine_go\ 
Cell: (207) 564-73054 
Testimony on 
L.D. 534, “An Act to Allow Commercial Driver's License Holders 
Who Are 18 to 20 Years of A ge to Haul Hazardous Materials 
Intrastate" 
Presented by 
Representative James Lee White 
District 30 
Transportation Committee 
Tuesday, March 21, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and fellow members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation: 
I am State Representative James Lee White, and I proudly represent District 30. It is an 
honor to appear before you today for the purpose of introducing L.D. 534, “An Act to Allow 
Commercial Driveris License Holders Who Are 18 to 20 Years of Age to Haul 
Hazardous Materials Intrastate," which seeks to allow individuals 18 to 20 years of age 
who currently hold a commercial driver's license (CDL), and go through the 
appropriate background checks, to be permitted for intrastate transport of hazardous materials. 
I understand that the ﬁrst thing that comes to mind is an inexperienced 18-year-old ina 
100,000 lb. vehicle hauling gasoline or some other dangerous substance; though, that image is 
not reality. Even as the industry stands currently, insurance companies regulate this sort of 
thing much more strictly than the law allows. For instance, when I owned trucks, my insurance 
company would not allow me to even consider putting someone in a propane transport without 
two years of veriﬁable interstate tractor-trailer experience, and then an extensive training 
process. 
Over; please 
District 30 Abbot, Beaver Cove, Bowerbank, Cambridge, Greenville, Greenville Junction, Guilford, Monson, Parkman, 
Sangerville, Sebec, Shirley, VVellington and Willimantic, Plantations of; Kingsbury Plantation and Brighton Plantation, the 
unorganized territories of; Barnard Township, Elliottsville Township, Big Moose Township, Bowdoin College Grant East 
Township, Chesuncook Township, Cove Point Township, Days Academy Grant Township, Frenchtown Township, Harfords 
Point Township , Kineo Township, Lily Bay Township, Moosehead Junction Township, Northeast Carry Township, Shawtown 
Township, Sugar Island Township, Williamsburg Township, Blanchard, Northeast Piscataquis and Northwest Piscataquis 
Primed on recycled paper
What this change in age prohibition would truly accomplish is to allow men and women that 
are 18 to 20 years of age to have the opportunity necessary for many professions that are 
currently restricted from them now. A few that come to mind are technicians for heating oil 
companies who quite often perform tasks, such as replacing a 275-gallon heating oil tank. 
Though the old tank is empty, it cannot be transported from the homeowner's location back to 
the company shop without someone who has a hazmat endorsement on his or her 
license because of the residue in the tank. Even the simple transportation of 
restaurant supplies -- if a restaurant customer orders a barrel of sanitizing liquid for the kitchen, 
whereas the amount of the hazardous material is not sufficient to placard the vehicle, it must 
be listed on the bill of laden and the driver must be licensed to haul hazardous material. Other 
simple items, such as a case of nail polish remover or a pallet of charcoal being delivered toa 
convenience store, are still mandated to be delivered by a driver at least 21 years of age witha 
hazmat endorsement. 
While talking with people in the industry and through my own experience, I know that 
companies spend many thousands of dollars training young people that show promise, 
especially in trades that involve hauling hazardous material. They are quite often frustrated 
that the window of opportunity to recruit a young man or woman into these trades is hampered 
by the fact that they cannot lay dormant for three years while they are waiting to become of 
age to hold the licensing requirements necessary to perform the tasks in which they are 
capable. The men and women of our armed forces perform these same duties, including and 
exceeding what most would be asked to do within the civilian world. I have witnessed National 
Guard members between 18 and 20 years of age who haul fuel through the streets of Bangor 
or Augusta, while they are on duty; however, during the winter, while laid off from driving a 
dump truck during the summer, cannot ﬁll the much-needed driving positions at local heating 
oil companies. I think each one of you would agree that the arbitrary age restriction of 21 in 
this case seems foolish. Restricting a 20-year-old that drives a dump truck all summer from 
working the winter as a heating oil delivery driver is simply wrong. 
I know that there is a large fear of losing highway funds due to the federal guidelines on 
this matter. I am currently working with Senator Susan Collins‘ staff to address this issue and 
hope to get it resolved prior to this bill being heard in the work session. We had a very similar 
challenge when going against the federal guidelines by allowing 16-year—olds to continue to 
hold CDI5 in this state. We were successful in not being penalized for that, and we havea 
much more robust group of young people coming into the industry. Their safety records and 
success is evidenced by the large percentage of this demographic that is still working in the 
industry and excelling. Most of my previous students are making far above average wages and 
having very successful lives by the time they are in their mid-20s. 
By every matrix, the trades in this state, and across the country, are very short-handed and 
are cutting 18 to 20-year-olds out of this opportunity just for the arbitrary age makes no sense. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have 
at this time.
